Seattle is one of the five rainiest major U.S. cities as measured by the number of days with precipitation, and it receives some of the lowest amounts of annual sunshine among major cities in the lower 48 states, along with some cities in the Northeast, Ohio and Michigan.
For the five years beginning in 2010, Seattle gained an average of 14,511 residents per year, with the growth strongly skewed toward the center of the city, as unemployment dropped from roughly 9 percent to 3.6 percent.
In June 2014 the city passed a local ordinance to increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour on a staged basis from 2015 to 2021.
Summers are sunny, dry and warm, with August, the warmest month, with high temperatures averaging , and reaching  on 3.1 days per year.
In late fall and early winter, atmospheric rivers (also known as "Pineapple Express" systems), strong frontal systems, and Pacific low pressure systems are common.
It rose again with Boeing's growing dominance in the commercial airliner market.
Seattle celebrated its restored prosperity and made a bid for world recognition with the Century 21 Exposition, the 1962 World's Fair.
Microsoft (#35) is located in Redmond.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of ,  of which is land and , water (41.16% of the total area).
Seattle is considered the first major American city to elect a female mayor, Bertha Knight Landes.
Since the middle 1990s, Seattle has experienced significant growth in the cruise industry, especially as a departure point for Alaska cruises.
Seattle is also home to several colleges and universities, most notably the University of Washington, located in the University District northeast of downtown.
Support for issues such as same-sex marriage and reproductive rights are largely taken for granted in local politics.
In 2013, however, the magazine ranked Seattle No.
The break in the ridge between First Hill and Beacon Hill is man-made, the result of two of the many regrading projects that reshaped the topography of the city center.
As prosperity began to return in the 1980s, the city was stunned by the Wah Mee massacre in 1983, when 13 people were killed in an illegal gambling club in the International District, Seattle's Chinatown.
Major redevelopment of the South Lake Union neighborhood is underway, in an effort to attract new and established biotech companies to the city, joining biotech companies Corixa (acquired by GlaxoSmithKline), Immunex (now part of Amgen), Trubion, and ZymoGenetics.
Conversely, the northeastern portion of the Olympic Peninsula, which lies east of the Olympic Mountains is located within the Olympic rain shadow and receives significantly less precipitation than its surrounding areas.
Seattle has seen local developments of modern paramedic services with the establishment of Medic One in 1970.
Its largest division is still headquartered in nearby Renton, and the company has large aircraft manufacturing plants in Everett and Renton, so it remains the largest private employer in the Seattle metropolitan area.
The Seattle metropolitan area is the 15th largest metropolitan area in the United States with over 3.7&nbsp;million inhabitants.
The jazz scene developed the early careers of Ray Charles, Quincy Jones, Bumps Blackwell, Ernestine Anderson, and others.
The Seattle Underground Tour is an exhibit of places that existed before the Great Fire.
The University of Washington's athletic program, nicknamed the Huskies, competes in the Pac-12 Conference, and Seattle University's athletic program, nicknamed the Redhawks, competes in the Western Athletic Conference.
The highest point within city limits is at High Point in West Seattle, which is roughly located near 35th Ave SW and SW Myrtle St. Other notable hills include Crown Hill, View Ridge/Wedgwood/Bryant, Maple Leaf, Phinney Ridge, Mt.
Authorities declared martial law and federal troops arrived to put down the disorder.
Seattle is located between the saltwater Puget Sound (an arm of the Pacific Ocean) to the west and Lake Washington to the east.
Sixty miles (95&nbsp;km) to the south of Seattle, the state capital Olympia, which is out of the Olympic Mountains' rain shadow, receives an annual average precipitation of .
Seattle also has a number of smaller private universities including Seattle University and Seattle Pacific University, the former a Jesuit Catholic institution, the latter Free Methodist; universities aimed at the working adult, like City University and Antioch University; colleges within the Seattle Colleges District system, comprising North, Central, and South; seminaries, including Western Seminary and a number of arts colleges, such as Cornish College of the Arts, Pratt Fine Arts Center, and The Art Institute of Seattle.
State Route 99 runs through downtown Seattle on the Alaskan Way Viaduct, which was built in 1953.
The boom lasted well into the early part of the 20th century and funded many new Seattle companies and products.
On July 14, 1897, the ''S.S.
This left an extensive network of privately owned buses (later public) as the only mass transit within the city and throughout the region.
Both streams of air originate over the Pacific Ocean; airflow is split by the Olympic Mountains to Seattle's west, then reunited to the east.
Violence during the Maritime Strike of 1934 cost Seattle much of its maritime traffic, which was rerouted to the Port of Los Angeles.
Over the years, a number of songs have been written about Seattle.
Conversely, the city receives some of the lowest precipitation amounts of any large city from June to September.
This concentration of hospitals resulted in the neighborhood's nickname "Pill Hill".
About 90% of Seattle's electricity is produced using hydropower.
Yet another boom began as the city emerged from the Great Recession.
In 2007, Seattle's racial tie-breaking system was struck down by the United States Supreme Court, but the ruling left the door open for desegregation formulae based on other indicators (e.g., income or socioeconomic class).
The city was further shaken by the Mardi Gras Riots in 2001, and then literally shaken the following day by the Nisqually earthquake.
This moderate snow event was officially the 12th snowiest calendar day at the airport since 1948 and snowiest since November 1985.
After a difficult winter, most of the Denny Party relocated across Elliott Bay and claimed land a second time at the site of present-day Pioneer Square, naming this new settlement ''Duwamps''.
Rock musicians such as Jimi Hendrix, Duff McKagan, and Nikki Sixx spent their formative years in Seattle.
Seattle is a charter city, with a Mayor–Council form of government.
Oftentimes an area devoid of cloud cover can be seen extending out over the Puget Sound to the north and east of Sequim.
After rejecting a roads and transit measure in 2007, Seattle-area voters passed a transit only measure in 2008 to increase ST Express bus service, extend the Link light rail system, and expand and improve Sounder commuter rail service.
King County Metro provides frequent stop bus service within the city and surrounding county, as well as a South Lake Union Streetcar line between the South Lake Union neighborhood and Westlake Center in downtown.
In the same election, an overwhelming majority of Seattleites also voted to approve the legalization of the recreational use of cannabis in the state.
In addition, the 900-seat Romanesque Revival Town Hall on First Hill hosts numerous cultural events, especially lectures and recitals.
However, due to damage sustained during the 2001 Nisqually earthquake the viaduct will be replaced by a tunnel.
Seattle has the 8th worst traffic congestion of all American cities, and is 10th among all North American cities.
The theaters he built for Pantages in Seattle have been either demolished or converted to other uses, but many other theaters survive in other cities of the U.S., often retaining the ''Pantages'' name; Seattle's surviving Paramount Theatre, on which he collaborated, was not a Pantages theater.
The century-old Seattle Symphony Orchestra is among the world's most recorded and performs primarily at Benaroya Hall.
Charles Terry and John Low remained at the original landing location and reestablished their old land claim and called it "New York", but renamed "New York Alki" in April 1853, from a Chinook word meaning, roughly, "by and by" or "someday".
Official weather and climatic data is collected at Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, located about  south of downtown in the city of SeaTac, which is at a higher elevation, and records more cloudy days and fewer partly cloudy days per year.
In the 2012 U.S. general election, an overwhelming majority of Seattleites voted to approve Referendum 74 and legalize gay marriage in Washington state.
Other Fortune 500 companies popularly associated with Seattle are based in nearby Puget Sound cities.
Seattle also has many online news media websites.
Seattle has "around 100" theatrical production companies and over two dozen live theatre venues, many of them associated with fringe theatre; Seattle is probably second only to New York for number of equity theaters (28 Seattle theater companies have some sort of Actors' Equity contract).
The month of January 1950 was particularly severe, bringing  of snow, the most of any month along with the aforementioned record cold.
Logging was Seattle's first major industry, but by the late-19th century, the city had become a commercial and shipbuilding center as a gateway to Alaska during the Klondike Gold Rush.
There are also many successful independent artisanal espresso roasters and cafés.
The Seahawks have advanced to the Super Bowl three times: 2005, 2013 and 2014.
Three of Seattle's largest medical centers are located on First Hill.
Seattle was mildly prosperous in the 1920s but was particularly hard hit in the Great Depression, experiencing some of the country's harshest labor strife in that era.
It became the second wettest event in Seattle history when a little over  of rain fell on Seattle in a 24-hour period.
The company's credit union for employees, BECU, remains based in the Seattle area, though it is now open to all residents of Washington.
Thus extreme heat waves are rare in the Seattle area, as are very cold temperatures (below about 15 F).
In November, Seattle averages more rainfall than any other U.S. city of more than 250,000 people; it also ranks highly in winter precipitation.
His activities soon expanded, and the thrifty Greek went on and became one of America's greatest theater and movie tycoons.
The Puget Sound Convergence Zone is an important feature of Seattle's weather.
In 1907, 19-year-old James E. Casey borrowed $100 from a friend and founded the American Messenger Company (later UPS).
, Seattle has one major daily newspaper, ''The Seattle Times''.
In 1851, a large party led by Luther Collins made a location on land at the mouth of the Duwamish River; they formally claimed it on September 14, 1851.
Seattle also has large lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender populations.
Seattle also boasts a strong history in collegiate sports.
The city lies on several hills, including Capitol Hill, First Hill, West Seattle, Beacon Hill, Magnolia, Denny Hill, and Queen Anne.
Other strong quakes occurred on January 26, 1700 (estimated at 9&nbsp;magnitude), December 14, 1872 (7.3 or 7.4), April 13, 1949 (7.1), and April 29, 1965 (6.5).
The Sehawks also held the NFL playoffs at the Kingdome in 1983, 1984 and 2000.
According to the 2007 American Community Survey, 18.6% of Seattle residents used one of the three public transit systems that serve the city, giving it the highest transit ridership of all major cities without heavy or light rail prior to the completion of Sound Transit's Central Link line.
Few of those working men found lasting wealth, however; it was Seattle's business of clothing the miners and feeding them salmon that panned out in the long run.
A major gateway for trade with Asia, Seattle is the third largest port in North America in terms of container handling .
9 on its list of the Best Places for Business and Careers.
Amazon.com moved its headquarters from North Beacon Hill to South Lake Union and began a rapid expansion.
From 1869 until 1982, Seattle was known as the "Queen City".
Alaska Airlines, operating a hub at Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, maintains its headquarters in the city of SeaTac, next to the airport.
The NBA All-Star Game was also held in Seattle twice: the first in 1974 at the Seattle Center Coliseum and the second in 1987 at the Kingdome.
Seattle Sounders FC has played in Major League Soccer since 2009, sharing CenturyLink Field with the Seahawks, as a continuation of earlier teams in the lower divisions of American soccer.
In September 2005, King County adopted a "Ten-Year Plan to End Homelessness", one of the near-term results of which is a shift of funding from homeless shelter beds to permanent housing.
Like Rome, the city is said to lie on seven hills; the lists vary but typically include Capitol Hill, First Hill, West Seattle, Beacon Hill, Queen Anne, Magnolia, and the former Denny Hill.
Seattle experiences its heaviest rainfall during the months of November, December and January, receiving roughly half of its annual rainfall (by volume) during this period.
Seattle is also the birthplace of rock musician Jimi Hendrix and the alternative rock subgenre grunge.
A study by ''Newsweek International'' in 2006 cited the University of Washington as the twenty-second best university in the world.
In 2008, a record total of 886,039 cruise passengers passed through the city, surpassing the number for Vancouver, BC, the other major departure point for Alaska cruises.
The sea, rivers, forests, lakes, and fields surrounding Seattle were once rich enough to support one of the world's few sedentary hunter-gatherer societies.
In 2005, ''Forbes'' ranked Seattle as the most expensive American city for buying a house based on the local income levels.
There is also the ''Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce'', and the University of Washington publishes ''The Daily'', a student-run publication, when school is in session.
Arthur A. Denny and his group of travelers, subsequently known as the Denny Party, arrived from Illinois via Portland, Oregon, on the schooner ''Exact'' at Alki Point on November 13, 1851.
To the west, beyond Puget Sound, are the Kitsap Peninsula and Olympic Mountains on the Olympic Peninsula; to the east, beyond Lake Washington and the eastside suburbs, are Lake Sammamish and the Cascade Range.
Other Seattle companies founded during this period include Nordstrom and Eddie Bauer.
Thirteen days later, members of the Collins Party on the way to their claim passed three scouts of the Denny Party.
Seattle-based online magazines Worldchanging and Grist.org were two of the "Top Green Websites" in 2007 according to TIME.
Seattle's population historically has been predominantly white.
11.8% of the population and 6.9% of families are below the poverty line.
Of people living in poverty, 13.8% are under the age of 18 and 10.2% are 65 or older.
Industry collections are at the Center for Wooden Boats and the adjacent Northwest Seaport, the Seattle Metropolitan Police Museum, and the Museum of Flight.
The war dispersed the city's numerous Japanese-American businessmen due to the Japanese American internment.
The first streetcars appeared in 1889 and were instrumental in the creation of a relatively well-defined downtown and strong neighborhoods at the end of their lines.
Other areas influenced by the Olympic rain shadow include Port Angeles, Port Townsend, extending as far north as Victoria, British Columbia.
Single calendar-day snowfall of six inches (15&nbsp;cm) or greater has occurred on only 15 days since 1948, and only once since February 17, 1990, when  of snow officially fell at Sea-Tac airport on January 18, 2012.
It is cloudy 201 days out of the year and partly cloudy 93 days.
Rails on city streets were paved over or removed, and the opening of the Seattle trolleybus system brought the end of streetcars in Seattle in 1941.
Unfortunately, due to issues with the worlds largest tunnel boring machine (TBM), which is nicknamed "Bertha" and is  in diameter, the projected date of completion has been pushed back to 2017.
In 1855, nominal land settlements were established.
They defeated the Denver Broncos 43-8 to win their first Super Bowl championship in Super Bowl XLVIII, but lost 24-28 against the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XLIX.
According to a 2006 study by UCLA, 12.9% of city residents polled identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
From January 31 to February 2, 1916, another heavy snow event occurred with  of snow on the ground by the time the event was over.
Regional history collections are at the Loghouse Museum in Alki, Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park, the Museum of History and Industry, and the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.
That same year, the Seattle Mariners tied the all-time single regular season wins record with 116 wins.
Members of the Denny Party claimed land on Alki Point on September 28, 1851.
The corporate seal of the City of Seattle carries the date "1869" and a likeness of Chief Sealth in left profile.
In February 2010, the city government committed Seattle to becoming North America's first "climate neutral" city, with a goal of reaching zero net per capita greenhouse gas emissions by 2030.
The second and most dramatic boom and bust resulted from the Klondike Gold Rush, which ended the depression that had begun with the Panic of 1893; in a short time, Seattle became a major transportation center.
The ''Seattle Post-Intelligencer'', known as the ''P-I'', published a daily newspaper from 1863 to March 17, 2009, before switching to a strictly on-line publication.
Prevailing airflow from the west is forced to cool and compress when colliding with the mountain range, resulting in high levels of precipitation within the mountains and its western slopes.
Winters are cool and wet with December, the coolest month, averaging , with 28 annual days with lows that reach the freezing mark, and 2.0 days where the temperature stays at or below freezing all day; the temperature rarely lowers to .
The city of Bremerton, about  west of downtown Seattle on the other side of the Puget Sound, receives  of precipitation annually.
The Seattle area was previously inhabited by Native Americans for at least 4,000 years before the first permanent European settlers.
In 2001, ''Time'' magazine selected Seattle Central Community College as community college of the year, stating the school "pushes diverse students to work together in small teams".
From 1918 to 1951, nearly two dozen jazz nightclubs existed along Jackson Street, from the current Chinatown/International District, to the Central District.
The city has over  of parkland.
Seattle Public Schools desegregated without a court order but continue to struggle to achieve racial balance in a somewhat ethnically divided city (the south part of town having more ethnic minorities than the north).
The Port of Seattle, which also operates Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, is a major gateway for trade with Asia and cruises to Alaska, and is the 8th largest port in the United States in terms of container capacity.
Former Seattle Mayor Greg Nickels announced a desire to spark a new economic boom driven by the biotechnology industry in 2006.
In 2015, the Washington Global Health Alliance counted 168 global health organizations in Washington state, many are headquartered in Seattle.
The SuperSonics relocated to Oklahoma City and became the Oklahoma City Thunder for the 2008–09 season.
By 1910, Seattle was one of the 25 largest cities in the country.
While some see the new development as an economic boon, others have criticized Nickels and the Seattle City Council for pandering to Allen's interests at taxpayers' expense.
The city has two official slogans or mottos: "The City of Flowers", meant to encourage the planting of flowers to beautify the city, and "The City of Goodwill", adopted prior to the 1990 Goodwill Games.
Ed Murray is currently serving as mayor.
Seattle has a noteworthy musical history.
Prior to moving its headquarters to Chicago, aerospace manufacturer Boeing (#30) was the largest company based in Seattle.
One such event occurred on December 2–4, 2007, when sustained hurricane-force winds and widespread heavy rainfall associated with a strong Pineapple Express event occurred in the greater Puget Sound area and the western parts of Washington and Oregon.
Growth returned during and after World War II partially due to the local Boeing company, which established Seattle as a center for aircraft manufacturing.
The 1965 quake caused three deaths in Seattle directly and one more by heart failure.
The city has also been described by Bert Sperling as the fourth most walkable U.S. city and by Walk Score as the sixth most walkable of the fifty largest U.S. cities.
Seattle also hosted the 2001 national Poetry Slam Tournament.
B. Marcus Priteca, the Scottish-born and Seattle-based architect, built several theaters for Pantages, including some in Seattle.
The jazz scene developed the early careers of Ray Charles, Quincy Jones, Ernestine Anderson, and others.
The earliest Chinese-Americans that came in the late 19th and early 20th centuries were almost entirely from Guangdong Province.
Seattle is also referred to informally as the "Gateway to Alaska" for being the nearest major city in the contiguous US to Alaska, "Rain City" for its frequent cloudy and rainy weather, and "Jet City" from the local influence of Boeing.
Seattle is considered the home of grunge music, having produced artists such as Nirvana, Soundgarden, Alice in Chains, Pearl Jam, and Mudhoney, all of whom reached international audiences in the early 1990s.
Autumn, winter, and early spring are frequently characterized by rain.
Like most parts of the United States, government and laws are also run by a series of ballot initiatives (allowing citizens to pass or reject laws), referenda (allowing citizens to approve or reject legislation already passed), and propositions (allowing specific government agencies to propose new laws/tax increases directly to the people).
On January 14, 1865, the Legislature of Territorial Washington incorporated the Town of Seattle with a board of trustees managing the city.
The 5th Avenue Theatre, built in 1926, stages Broadway-style musical shows featuring both local talent and international stars.
The Sounders have not won the MLS Cup but have, however, won the MLS Supporters' Shield in 2014 and the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup on four occasions: 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2014.
Four companies on the 2013 Fortune 500 list of the United States' largest companies, based on total revenue, are headquartered in Seattle: Internet retailer Amazon.com (#49), coffee chain Starbucks (#208), department store Nordstrom (#227), and freight forwarder Expeditors International of Washington (#428).
Early popular musical acts from the Seattle/Puget Sound area include the collegiate folk group The Brothers Four, vocal group The Fleetwoods, 1960s garage rockers The Wailers and The Sonics, and instrumental surf group The Ventures, some of whom are still active.
Many of the hilliest areas are near the city center, with Capitol Hill, First Hill, and Beacon Hill collectively constituting something of a ridge along an isthmus between Elliott Bay and Lake Washington.
Since the region's water comes from mountain snow packs during the dry summer months, El Niño winters can not only produce substandard skiing but can result in water rationing and a shortage of hydroelectric power the following summer.
Lack of adaptation to the heavy rain contributed to five deaths and widespread flooding and damage.
From 1911 to 2013, Seattle's nine city councillors were elected at large, rather than by geographic subdivisions.
Though it was affected by the Great Recession, Seattle has retained a comparatively strong economy, and remains a hotbed for start-up businesses, especially in green building and clean technologies: it was ranked as America's No.&nbsp;1 "smarter city" based on its government policies and green economy.
The University of Washington is consistently ranked among the country's top leading institutions in medical research, earning special merits for programs in neurology and neurosurgery.
Finance company Washington Mutual, for example, was founded in the immediate wake of the fire.
Thunderstorms are rare, as the city reports thunder on just seven days per year.
The University of Washington and Seattle University are  NCAA Division I schools.
Light rain & drizzle are the predominant forms of precipitation during the remainder of the year; for instance, on average, less than  of rain falls in July and August combined when rain is rare.
Although the Seattle Fault passes just south of the city center, neither it nor the Cascadia subduction zone has caused an earthquake since the city's founding.
The surrounding area lends itself well to sailing, skiing, bicycling, camping, and hiking year-round.
According to the 2000 U.S. Census interim measurements of 2004, Seattle has the fifth highest proportion of single-person households nationwide among cities of 100,000 or more residents, at 40.8%.
It is estimated that King County has 8,000 homeless people on any given night, and many of those live in Seattle.
Baker Ridge, and Highlands/Carkeek/Bitterlake.
According to a 2012 HistoryLink study, Seattle's 98118 ZIP code (in the Columbia City neighborhood) was one of the most diverse ZIP Code Tabulation Areas in the United States.
Seattle cable viewers also receive CBUT 2 (CBC) from Vancouver, British Columbia.
The Seattle City Council later voted to relax height limits on buildings in the greater part of Downtown, partly with the aim to increase residential density in the city centre.
The city was listed as the most literate of the country's 69 largest cities in 2005 and 2006, the second most literate in 2007 and the most literate in 2008 in studies conducted by Central Connecticut State University.
Those who spoke Asian languages other than Indo-European languages made up 10.2% of the population, Spanish was spoken by 4.5% of the population, speakers of other Indo-European languages made up 3.9%, and speakers of other languages made up 2.5%.
Still, very large companies dominate the business landscape.
For the 2015 election, this changed to a hybrid system of seven district members and two at large members as a result of a ballot measure passed on November 5, 2013.
The  Alaskan Way Viaduct replacement tunnel was originally scheduled to be completed in December 2015 at a cost of US$4.25&nbsp;billion.
The city has a reputation for heavy coffee consumption; coffee companies founded or based in Seattle include Starbucks, Seattle's Best Coffee, and Tully's.
The public school system is supplemented by a moderate number of private schools: five of the private high schools are Catholic, one is Lutheran, and six are secular.
The per capita income for the city was $30,306.
In 1993, the movie Sleepless in Seattle brought the city further national attention.
In 2006, after growing by 4,000&nbsp;citizens per year for the previous 16 years, regional planners expected the population of Seattle to grow by 200,000&nbsp;people by&nbsp;2040.
In 1999, the median income of a city household was $45,736, and the median income for a family was $62,195.
It has also elected an openly gay mayor, Ed Murray, and a socialist councillor, Kshama Sawant.
Seattle is also well served by television and radio, with all major U.S. networks represented, along with at least five other English-language stations and two Spanish-language stations.
The Seattle-Tacoma area is also home to one of the largest Cambodian communities in the United States, numbering about 19,000 Cambodian Americans, and one of the largest Samoan communities in the mainland U.S., with over 15,000 people having Samoan ancestry.
From 1967 to 2008 Seattle was also home to an National Basketball Association (NBA) franchise: the Seattle SuperSonics, who were the 1978–79 NBA champions.
The Seattle area developed as a technology center beginning in the 1980s, with companies like Microsoft becoming established in the region.
Like much of the American West, Seattle saw numerous conflicts between labor and management, as well as ethnic tensions that culminated in the anti-Chinese riots of 1885–1886.
In addition, Seattle has a relatively high number of people living alone.
Closer to downtown, Boeing Field is used for general aviation, cargo flights, and testing/delivery of Boeing airliners.
With an estimated 684,451 residents , Seattle is the largest city in both the state of Washington and the Pacific Northwest region of North America.
Seattle remained the corporate headquarters of Boeing until 2001, when the company separated its headquarters from its major production facilities; the headquarters were moved to Chicago.
