* Victoria: Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE) or Victorian Certificate of Applied Learning (VCAL)
Short-cycle Tertiary Education
Secondary education includes all of the general, vocational and technical education institutions that provide at least four years of education after primary school.
*Gymnázium - designed for students going to university/college and finishes with a ''maturita'' exam.
As a result, the course was changed after and called ''colegial'', also divided, with the first three years were the same for everyone and anyone who would subsequently make the old ''normal'' and ''clássico'', had to do another year.
Private schools in England and Wales generally still refer to years 7-11 as 1st-5th Form, or alternatively privates schools refer to Year 7 as IIIrds (Thirds), Y8 as LIV (Lower Four), Y9 as UIV (Upper Four), Y10 as LV (Lower Fifth), Y11 as UV (Upper Fifth) and then Sixth-Form.
Fourth Year (Secondary 4)
The division into groups is deemed necessary, as until 2014, students who wishes to go to college had to take a University Entrance exam covering three subjects according to those listed groups.
''Technische Hoogeschool''''Rechtshoogeschool''''Geneeskundige Hoogeschool''''Faculteit der Letteren en Wijsbegeerte'' ''Faculteit der Landbouwwetenschap''
In ever-increasing numbers since the 1990s some students also undertake more vocational courses at college such as a BTEC or other such qualification.
The difference between Special and Express is that the former takes higher mother tongue, which can be used as a first language in exams instead of the subject "mother tongue" that Express students take.
Year 14 Post 16 Upper Sixth
There is a choice between upper secondary school (''lukio'', ''gymnasium'') and vocational school (''ammatillinen oppilaitos'', ''yrkesinstitut'').
Their approval depends only on their final grade on each subject.
There are currently around 90 gymnasiums and some 300 vocational schools in Croatia.
Gymnasium school usually starts at 16, and is not mandatory.
* Northern Territory: Senior Secondary Studies Certificate / Northern Territory Certificate of Education (NTCE)
* Basic group: All subjects are in basic level.
The public secondary schools are under the jurisdiction of regional government, the counties.
The secondary education system of Hong Kong, just as other East Asian countries, is examination-oriented.
A handful of 8-12 middle schools, and 12-16 or 18 secondary schools still exist.
* Group D: Mathematics, Literature and Foreign language are in advanced level.
Private schools accounted for 0.3% of elementary school enrolment in 2005 and 0.5% in 2005.
Reforms are being instituted with the goal of bringing the education system in line with the global community.
There are also entry exams to all these programmes.
Optional ones depend on the type of school (such as mathematics, physics, or accounting).
Also with two mandatory subjects, Czech language and world literature, and one other language or math.
As its name indicates, every Spanish citizen must, by law, attend secondary education when they arrive at the defined age.
Students failing the academic requirement in UPSR are required to read an additional year called the Remove (''Peralihan'') year before they are allowed to proceed to Form 1.
The curriculum leading to the Abitur degree were recently reduced from 13th grade to 12th grade (ages 17 to 18 - "G8," eight years of ''Gymnasium'').
Pupils who start at a high school are around age  12.
In the second year (grade 11) of high school (SMA), students can choose one of three majors, namely Natural Science, Social Science and Literature.
To continue tertiary level education, students must pass all end-of-year exams at the end of Grade 9.
Unlike other countries, Brazilian students don't have a final test to conclude studies.
The study is four years long and requires passing an entrance exam (Czech language and mathematics or physics, varies with the type of school).
The next stage (three years), upper-secondary education or preparation school (''preparatoria''), has been compulsory since 2012.
After 2.5–3 years students are able to apply for jobs.
Their curricula include a wide range of subjects that should deliver a broad general knowledge.
They end with a vocational leaving examination and allow pupils to study at vocational or professional colleges.
Parents have the final say about which school their child will attend.
After the basic school the majority of pupils between ages 15–19 usually choose to go through the three-year "Gymnasium", which is university-preparatory or high school.
The leaving exam course is a one-year programme, intended for vocational leaving exam graduates.
This is an unusually specialised curriculum for this age group by international standards, and recently some moves have been made to increase the number of subjects studied.
), finished with a certificate
At age 16, after Standard Grades or Intermediates, some students leave to gain employment or attend further education colleges,  but most students study for Highers, of which five are usually chosen.
Automatic promotion up to Form 5 has been in place since 1996.
The subjects taught, however, are conceived by the ''Ministério da Educação'' (Ministry of Education) which emphasises the hard sciences.
Successfully completing a particular stream grants access to different levels of tertiary education.
As part of education in the United States, the definition of secondary education varies among school districts but generally comprises grades 6, 7, 8, and 9 through 12; grade 5 is sometimes also included.
As of October 2004, there has been heated discussion on proposed changes in the education system, which includes (amongst others) reduction of the duration of secondary education from seven years to six years, and merging the two exams HKCEE and HKALE into one exam, Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education (HKDSE).
At age 14, students choose which subjects they wish to study with certain compulsory subjects such as English and Mathematics for S3 and S4.
Secondary schools may be called ''high schools'', ''gymnasia'', ''lyceums'', ''middle schools'', ''sixth-form'', ''sixth-form colleges'', ''vocational schools'', or ''preparatory schools'', and the exact meaning of any of these varies between the countries.
Year 11 (Fifth Form)
Schedules vary from school to school.
At age 17 some students decide to apply for university or stay on for 6th year, where other Highers are gained, or Advanced Highers are studied.
Upon successful completion of this examination, they are awarded a Secondary School Certificate (SSC).
After VMBO, a pupil can continue training at the MBO ("middle-level applied education").
Only with a VWO graduation, a pupil can enter a research university.
The choice for a particular stream is made based on the scores of an aptitude test (most commonly the CITO test), the advice of the grade 6 teacher, and the opinion of the pupil's parents or caretakers.
Independent secondary schools generally take pupils at age 13.
* Group C: Literature, History and Geography are in advanced level.
''Europeesche Lagere School''''Hollandsch-Chineesche School''''Hollandsch-Inlandsche School''
Students typically take 6-8 subjects.
*Střední odborná škola (SOŠ) - designed for students going into a profession and finishes with the ''maturita'' as an exit exam.
After completing leaving exam course, they take the leaving examination, which makes the eligible for university education.
Secondary education is often referred to as high school education, since the schools are called lyceum (''lise'').
Students have 12 compulsory subjects to learn, including but not limited to, Literature, Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics, Biology, History, Geography, and Foreign language.
The Normal stream is a four-year course leading up to a Singapore-Cambridge GCE "Normal" - "N" level examination, with the possibility of a 5th year followed by a Singapore-Cambridge GCE "Ordinary" - "O" level examination.
This is locally called the "matriculation certificate" or "matric".
declares "The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to
Secondary education in Vietnam is optional under the law, however most children choose to receive secondary education, since the school fee is affordable for most working families.
Education is compulsory up until the end of year 13 (the last Friday in June in the academic year a person turns 18).
GCE O Level, IGCSE and GCE AS/A Levels are managed by British examination boards of CIE of the Cambridge Assessment and Edexcel of the Pearson PLC.
The HKALE and HKCEE results will be considered by universities for admission.
There is an optional year in many secondary schools in Ireland known as Transition Year, which some students choose to take after completing the Junior Certificate, and before starting the Leaving Certificate.
It is the last phase to basic education.
Students begin attending secondary schools in the year they turn 13, after sitting for the UPSR (Ujian Pencapaian Sekolah Rendah or Primary School Assessment Examination) at the end of primary school.
This does the strong but controversial post-school tutorial education industry a favor.
Its highest value over the past 42 years was 7 years in 2012, while its lowest value was 5 years in 1970.
Those who stay at school enter Years 12 and 13 (Years 13 and 14 in Northern Ireland).
The school system is free and mandatory until age 15.
Within Scotland, there are only two types of state-run schools, Roman Catholic or non-denominational.
Secondary school starts in the seventh year, or Form One, of formal education, after Primary Six.
Due to historic reasons, the Czech school system is almost the same as the German school system.
The vocational course is a one-year programme provided to upper secondary school students who, for various reasons, do not want to continue their education.
The ''Hauptschule'' has been subject to significant criticism, as it tends to segregate the children of low-income families and migrants.
* Tasmania: Tasmanian Certificate of Education (TCE)
Universities are also divided into public and private.
In the OECD's international assessment of student performance, PISA, Finland has consistently been among the highest scorers worldwide; in 2003, Finnish 15-year-olds came first in reading literacy, science, and mathematics; and second in problem solving, worldwide.
Optional subjects vary, usually between humanistic and science.
Science and mathematics subjects are taught in English since 2003, but Malay will be reintroduced in stages from 2012.
* Group A: Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry are in advanced level.
It concludes with a final examinations, qualifying the applicants for a selected occupation.
The exam allows for a limited degree of specialization in either natural sciences or social sciences.
* Western Australia: Western Australian Certificate of Education (WACE)
Government schools are free although most schools charge what are known as "voluntary contributions" or "tax levies", while independent schools, both religious and secular, charge fees as well as levies.
Many vocational schools also offer night classes to adults.
Enem, a non-mandatory national exam, evaluates high school students in Brazil and is used to rank both private and public schools.
In the United Kingdom secondary schools offer secondary education covering the later years of schooling.
Year 10 (Fourth Form)
Academies (previously known as city academies) are a new type of school introduced in 2000 by the New Labour government of Tony Blair.
In addition to the main school system, Ireland has a parallel system of vocational schools, which place less focus on academic subjects and more on vocational and technical skills - around 25% of students attend these.
General secondary education covers the education of children between 15-18 for at least four years after primary education.
Both of them complete with a final examination.
The main defect of such a system that it depends on the final written exam to determine the student's higher education regardless of any activities.
Students sit for a standardised test at the end of both stages; Penilaian Menengah Rendah (PMR) for Lower Secondary, and Sijil Pelajaran Malaysia (SPM, equivalent to the O-Level examination) for Upper Secondary.
After the ''Grundschule'' (primary/elementary school lasting four to six years), teachers recommend each pupil for one of three different types of secondary education.
They all last for four years and conclude with a compulsory leaving examination (''matura'') that is a prerequisite for studying at universities.
In Brazil, since 1996 high school is officially called ''Ensino Médio'' (formerly ''Segundo Grau'').
Year 9 (Third Form)
Upon completion of grade 10, students are expected to take a standardised test administered by a regional Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education (BISE).
Starting from tertiary school (grade 10), each of the above-mentioned subject has two levels of study: Basic and Advanced.
In some schools, Form Six and Form Seven are also called Lower Six and Upper Six respectively.
They must, however, provide at least 200 days of classes per year.
The German school system is free and compulsory until 9th grade.
Formerly known as Forms 3 to 7, these grades are now known as Years 9 to 13.
Technical high schools last for four years and cover a wide range of disciplines.
* Australian Capital Territory: ACT Year 12 Certificate
In Paraguay, secondary education is called ''educación media''.
Vocational and technical secondary education includes technical education schools for boys, technical education schools for girls, trade and tourism schools, religious education schools, multi-program high schools, special education schools, private education schools and health education schools.
After the ''Základní škola'' (elementary school) at age 15, students are directed to three different optional secondary education schools:
New Zealand also has intermediate schools, but these cover the last two years of primary education (years 7 and 8) and are not secondary schools.
Lower-secondary education (three years) is considered part of basic education in Mexico and is compulsory.
It is split into "Normal (Academic)" and "Normal (Technical)" where in the latter students take subjects that are technical in nature, such as design and technology.
These two forms of secondary education last three years, and are usually located in the same campus called ''colegio''.
The first and second years of secondary school (abbreviated to S1 and S2) continues the "Curriculum for Excellence" started in primary school.
The World Economic Forum ranks Finland's tertiary education #1 in the world.
''Sekolah Menengah Kejuruan''
There is also a prominent movement known as Gaelscoileanna where every subject is taught through the Irish language, and these are growing fast in number.
The graduation is an important and formal family event, like christenings, weddings, and funerals.
For entry, students are required to have successfully completed six years of primary education.
The high schools are part of the ''voortgezet onderwijs'' (literally: "continued education").
It is divided into two levels, secondary (grades 6-9) and tertiary (grades 10-12).
In Ireland secondary school starts at the age of 12, and lasts three or optionally five or six years.
More than 80% of students who complete the Junior Certificate continue to the Leaving Certificate.
Year 11 (Fourth Form)
In Denmark it is mandatory to receive education answering to the basic school syllabus until the 10th year of school education, which likewise extends to compulsory pre-schooling since 2009.
Most secondary schools in England and Wales are comprehensive schools.
Dutch Colonial Education
It is uncommon, but sometimes secondary schools (particularly in South West Wales) can also be split into 'Upper' (ages 13–16) and 'Lower' secondary schools (ages 11–13).
School is compulsory in Australia between the ages of five/six to fifteen/sixteen/seventeen, depending on the state, with, in recent years, over three-quarters of people staying on until their thirteenth year in school.
Year 13 Post 16 Lower Sixth
Students with special needs (physical and mental condition) are assigned to ''Förderschule''.
The second level education is not compulsory, but an overwhelming majority attends.
An alternative for tertiary education is institutes of vocational training (''trung cấp nghề'').
Forms 1 to 3 are known as Lower Secondary (''Menengah Rendah''), while Forms 4 and 5 are known as Upper Secondary (''Menengah Tinggi'').
Other qualifications include IGCSE which replaces SSC.
Since 2015, the Ministry of Education has started an experimental program to merge the Graduation Exam and University Entrance exam into one.
Year 13/Upper Sixth/A2/Second Year College
5,000 advanced learning schools specializing in foreign languages, mathematics etc., 2,300 advanced general-purpose schools.
However, if some Express students can cope with higher mother tongue, they are allowed to use it as a first language in exams too.
Alternative qualifications in Pakistan are also available but not maintained by the BISE but by other examination boards.
It has three pathways: general upper-secondary, technical professional education, and technological upper-secondary.
Traditionally the five years of compulsory secondary schooling from ages 11 to 16 were known as "first year" through to "fifth year," (and still are in the private sector) but from September 1990 these years were renumbered Year 7 through to Year 11 (Year 8 to Year 12 in Northern Ireland) with the coming of the National Curriculum.
At this level, public ones are considered excellent and their vestibular exam is highly competitive (the exam for med school in UNICAMP may hit 300 candidates per place).
After the second year of a secondary school course, students are typically streamed into a wide range of course combinations, making the total number of subject they have to sit for in "O" level six to ten subjects.
In Scotland, students usually transfer from primary to secondary education at 12 years old, one year later than in the rest of the UK.
Each state and territory has its own format of Year 12 matriculation:
The system is designed so that approximately the lowest scoring 5% fails and also 5% get the best grade.
Both the Special and Express are four-year courses leading up to a Singapore-Cambridge General Certificate of Education (GCE) "Ordinary" or "O level" examination.
At the end of the sixth form, students sit for the Sijil Tinggi Pelajaran Malaysia or the Malaysian Higher School Certificate (equivalent to the A levels).
* South Australia: South Australian Certificate of Education (SACE)
Year 8 (Second Form)
Due to the nature of schooling in Scotland, undergraduate honours degree programmes are four years long as matriculation is normally at the completion of Highers in S5 (age 17), which compares with three years for the rest of the UK from age 18.
In a few parts of the UK there are middle schools for ages 9 to 13 (similar to American middle schools), and upper schools for ages 13–18.
In post-Soviet countries it is also known as '''general education''' or general middle education.
Government schools educate about two-thirds of Australian students, with the other third in independent schools.
The proposed changes will take effect in 2009.
In New Zealand students attend secondary school from the ages from about 13 to 18 (though it is possible to be 12).
Until the year 1971, ''ensino médio'' had three different names: ''curso científico'', ''curso normal'' and ''curso clássico'' ("classic").
Most common alternative is the General Certificate of Education (GCE), where SSC and HSC are replaced by Ordinary Level (O Level) and Advanced Level (A Level) respectively.
* New South Wales: Higher School Certificate (HSC)
Forms Four and Five students prepare for the Hong Kong Certificate of Education Examination (HKCEE), which takes place after Form Five.
Typically a student will sit exams in 9 to 11 subjects; English (L1), Irish (L2) and Mathematics are compulsory.
The Ninety-third Amendment Bill, 2002, renumbered as the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002, passed on 12 December 2002.
The system for being accepted to a high school changes almost every year.
Year 9 (Second Form)
fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine."
The exit exam consists of two compulsory and two optional subjects.
Upper secondary schools (''gimnazije'') are the most elite and the most difficult high-school programmes, intended for the best students who wish to pursue university education.
''Universitas''''Politeknik''''Sekolah Tinggi''
Students obtaining a satisfactory grade will be promoted to Form Six.
Upon completion of grade 12, they again take a standardised test which is also administered by the regional boards.
Year 10 (Third Form)
Secondary education aims to give students a good level of common knowledge, and to prepare them for higher education, for a vocation, for life and for business in line with their interests, skills and abilities.
Most school students, whether in government or independent school, usually wear uniforms, although there are varying expectations and a few school exceptions.
In the Netherlands, high school is called ''middelbare school'' (literally "middle-level school") and starts right after the 6th grade of primary school (group 8).
Students then enter a college and complete grades 11 and 12.
In the case of the 6 (8) years one, the pupils finish elementary school two (four) years earlier and this two (four) years has harder studying programme on gymnasium.
Historically, in Brazil, is called secondary what is now the second part of primary school (from the sixth year to the ninth year), plus high school.
AP exams are monitored by a North American examination board, the College Board, and can only be given under supervision of centers which are registered with the College Board, unlike GCE O/AS/A Level and IGCSE which can also be given privately.
Vocational high schools come in two varieties: the dual and in school-based programme.
NCEA is the Government-supported school qualification.
If not, they must wait for a year to retake the test.
Adolescents not attending the Gymnasium most commonly attend vocational training.
Grammar schools have been retained in some counties in England.
After nine years of ''educación escolar básica'' (primary school), a  student can choose to go to either a ''bachillerato técnico'' (vocational school) or a ''bachillerato científico'' (high school); both are part of the ''educación media'' system.
After attaining the relevant A Level qualifications the student can enter university.
First Year (Secondary 1)
Senior High education is not included in the compulsory government program, only the 6-years primary education and junior high education are, even though since 2005 there is en effort to make high school education compulsory in some areas, for example in the Bantul Regency of Yogyakarta.
