However, relations with the Byzantine Empire were mixed, and reinforcements from Europe were sparse after the disaster of the Second Crusade.
In the event of war, the ''ahdath'' militias, based in the cities under the command of the ''ra’is'' (chief), and who were usually ethnic Arabs, were called upon to increase the number of troops.
The cost of raising and training a ''mamluk'' was about 30 ''dinars'' (by contrast, a good horse in Syria went for about 100 ''dinars'').
Damascus, ruled by the Burid Dynasty, later allied with King Fulk when Zengi besieged the city in 1139 and 1140; the alliance was negotiated by the chronicler Usamah ibn Munqidh.
Joscelin had also quarreled with the Count of Tripoli and the Prince of Antioch, leaving Edessa with no powerful allies.
In Germany, further preaching was done by Adam of Ebrach, and Otto of Freising also took the cross.
At Speyer, Conrad III of Germany and his nephew, Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, received the cross from the hand of Bernard.
This was to help bring about more Christian victories in the future decades.
The main Western Christian source, Odo of Deuil, and Syriac Christian sources claim that the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos secretly hindered the crusaders' progress, particularly in Anatolia, where he is alleged to have deliberately ordered Turks to attack them.
The principal Islamic commander was Mu'in al-Din Anur, the ''atabeg'' of Damascus from 1138 to 1149.
For all his overmastering zeal, Bernard was by nature neither a bigot nor a persecutor.
They followed Otto of Freising's route, moving closer to the Mediterranean coast, and they arrived at Ephesus in December, where they learned that the Turks were preparing to attack them.
The king led one of these, which was almost totally destroyed by the Seljuqs on 25 October 1147 at the second battle of Dorylaeum.
Louis and Conrad and the remnants of their armies reached Jerusalem and participated in 1148 in an ill-advised attack on Damascus.
Bad weather forced the ships to stop on the Portuguese coast, at the northern city of Porto on 16 June 1147.
The camp followers who had been taken prisoner and sold into slavery by the Turks were not so lucky.
In the East the situation was much darker for the Christians.
The crusade in the east was a failure for the crusaders and a great victory for the Muslims.
He was supposedly poisoned by Raymond II of Tripoli, the nephew who feared his political aspirations in the county.
The ''ra'is'' of Damascus and commander of the ''ahdath'' milita Mu'ayad al-Dawhal Ibn al-Sufi feel that since his ''ahdath'' had played a major role in defeating the Second Crusade that he deserved a greater share of the power, and within two months of Anur's death was leading a rebellion against Abaq.
Anur sought help from the Zangid rulers of Aleppo and Mosul (who were normally his rivals), though forces from these states did not arrive in time to see combat outside of Damascus.
They arrived at Daraiya on 23 July.
In December 1148, he captured Tortosa after a five-month siege again with the help of French, Anglo-Normans and Genoese crusaders.
In the end, the decision was made to attack the city of Damascus, a former ally of the Kingdom of Jerusalem that had shifted its allegiance to that of the Zengids, and attacked the Kingdom's allied city of Bosra in 1147.
While the Saxons affirmed their possession of Wagria and Polabia, pagans retained control of the Obodrite land east of Lübeck.
The French crusaders had departed from Metz in June 1147, led by Louis, Thierry of Alsace, Renaut I of Bar, Amadeus III, Count of Savoy and his half-brother William V of Montferrat, William VII of Auvergne, and others, along with armies from Lorraine, Brittany, Burgundy and Aquitaine.
Louis and other French leaders openly accused the Emperor Manuel I of colluding with Turkish attacks on them during the march across Asia Minor.
With Nur ad-Din in the field it was impossible to return to their better position.
Meanwhile, the Byzantine alliance ended with the death of emperor Manuel I in 1180, and in 1187, Jerusalem capitulated to Saladin.
The army was almost entirely destroyed, either by the Turks or by sickness.
Louis VII had also been considering a new expedition independently of the Pope, which he announced to his Christmas court at Bourges in 1145.
In the Holy Land, the Second Crusade had disastrous long-term consequences for Jerusalem.
Byzantium had just been invaded by Roger II of Sicily, and all of Manuel's army was needed in the Peloponnese.
The Saxon army under Henry the Lion withdrew after the pagan chief, Niklot, agreed to have Dobin's garrison undergo baptism.
At Worms, Louis joined with crusaders from Normandy and England.
The bull was reissued on 1 March 1146, and Eugene authorized Bernard to preach the news throughout France.
The basis of the military system in the Islamic Middle East was the ''iqta''' system of fiefs, which supported a certain number of troops in every district.
There was a brief skirmish with some of the more unruly Germans near Philippopolis and in Adrianople, where the Byzantine general Prosouch fought with Conrad's nephew, the future emperor Frederick.
The following day, the Muslims were prepared for the attack and constantly attacked the army advancing through the orchards outside Damascus.
Bernard then passed into Germany, and the reported miracles which multiplied almost at his every step undoubtedly contributed to the success of his mission.
Louis was welcomed by Eleanor's uncle Raymond of Poitiers.
This mutual distrust would linger for a generation due to the defeat, to the ruin of the Christian kingdoms in the Holy Land.
In May 1147, the first contingents of crusaders left from Dartmouth in England for the Holy Land.
It was recorded by some that Unur had bribed the leaders to move to a less defensible position, and that Unur had promised to break off his alliance with Nur ad-Din if the crusaders went home.
Many of the French nobles distrusted the land route, which would take them through the Byzantine Empire, the reputation of which still suffered from the accounts of the First Crusaders.
The Greeks were encouraged by rumours that the Germans had captured Iconium (Konya), but Manuel refused to give Louis any Byzantine troops.
In France, Abbot Suger and Count William II of Nevers were elected as regents while the king would be on crusade.
When the armies from Savoy, Auvergne and Montferrat joined Louis in Constantinople, having taken the land route through Italy and crossing from Brindisi to Durazzo, the entire army was shipped across the Bosporus to Asia Minor.
As in the First Crusade, the preaching inadvertently led to attacks on Jews; a fanatical French monk named Rudolf was apparently inspiring massacres of Jews in the Rhineland, Cologne, Mainz, Worms and Speyer, with Rudolf claiming Jews were not contributing financially to the rescue of the Holy Land.
Raymond expected him to help defend against the Turks and to accompany him on an expedition against Aleppo, the Muslim city that was the gateway to Edessa, but Louis refused, preferring instead to finish his pilgrimage to Jerusalem rather than focus on the military aspect of the crusade.
The claim that Raymond had poisoned Alphonso caused much of the Provençal force to turn back and go home.
Of the 113 individuals known by name to have been involved in the Crusade, 22 died, 42 returned home while the fate of the last 49 is a mystery.
Muslim forces in this period comprised small bodies of professional troops, which were augmented by volunteers and conscripts in times of war.
Relations within Byzantine territory were also grim, and the Lorrainers, who had marched ahead of the rest of the French, also came into conflict with the slower Germans whom they met on the way.
Louis eventually arrived in Antioch on  March 19 after being delayed by storms;  Amadeus of Savoy had died on Cyprus along the way.
Some of the French were outraged by Manuel's truce with the Seljuqs and called for an alliance with Roger II and an attack on Constantinople, but they were restrained by Louis.
On 10 September, however, they arrived at Constantinople, where relations with Manuel were poor, resulting in a battle, after which the Germans were convinced that they should cross into Asia Minor as quickly as possible.
In the spring of 1147, the Pope authorized the expansion of the crusade into the Iberian peninsula, in the context of the Reconquista.
Damascus no longer trusted the crusader kingdom and was taken by Nur ad-Din after a short siege in 1154.
The historian David Nicolle described Anur as an able general and diplomat, also well known as a patron of the arts.
Bernard considered it his duty to send an apology to the Pope and it is inserted in the second part of his ''Book of Consideration''.
There he explains how the sins of the crusaders were the cause of their misfortune and failures.
The ''ahdath'' militia, though less well trained than the Turkish professional troops, were often very strongly motivated by religion, especially the concept of ''jihad''.
Most of the crusaders settled in the newly captured city, but some of them set sail and continued to the Holy Land.
Within the empire itself, the crusade was remembered as a triumph of diplomacy.
There they were convinced to meet with King Afonso I of Portugal.
They followed Conrad's route fairly peacefully, although Louis came into conflict with king Geza of Hungary when Geza discovered Louis had allowed an attempted Hungarian usurper to join his army.
Zengi, already seeking to take advantage of Fulk's death in 1143, hurried north to besiege Edessa, which fell to him after a month on 24 December 1144.
Conrad took the knights and the best troops with himself to march overland while sending the camp followers with Otto of Freising to follow the coastal road.
The Slavic inhabitants also lost much of their methods of production, limiting their resistance in the future.
The nobility of Jerusalem welcomed the arrival of troops from Europe, and it was announced that a council should meet to decide on the best target for the crusaders.
The majority of Otto's force were either killed in battle or captured and sold into slavery.
The crusaders were pushed back from the walls into the orchards, where they were prone to ambushes and guerrilla attacks.
When his attempt to call a new crusade failed, he tried to disassociate himself from the fiasco of the Second Crusade altogether.
They are seen as pivotal battles of the wider Reconquista, which would be completed in 1492.
"it seems well worth while and quite in harmony with the present history that the names of the nobles who were present at the council...should be recorded here for the benefit of posterity."
Unlike Conrad, the image of Louis was improved by the Crusade with many of the French seeing him as a suffering pilgrim king who quietly bore God's punishments.
The French fended off another Turkish ambush at the Meander River.
The Saxons also received tribute from Chief Niklot, enabled the colonization of the Bishopric of Havelberg, and freed some Danish prisoners.
Since Anur was clearly the weaker of the two Muslim rulers, it was believed that it was inevitable that Nur ad-Din would take Damascus sometime in the near future, and thus it was better for the Crusaders to hold that city rather than the Zangids.
The forces attacking Dobin included those of the Danes Canute V and Sweyn III, Adalbert II, Archbishop of Bremen and Duke Henry the Lion of Saxony.
The fleet that had stopped at Lisbon arrived around this time, as well as the Provençals who had left Europe under the command of Alfonso Jordan, Count of Toulouse.
Joscelin II continued to rule the remnants of the county from Turbessel, but little by little the rest of the territory was captured by Muslims or sold to the Byzantines.
The only Christian success of the Second Crusade came to a combined force of 13,000 Flemish, Frisian, Norman, English, Scottish, and German crusaders in 1147.
Approving of the Saxons' plan, Eugenius issued a papal bull known as the ''Divina dispensatione'' on 13 April.
Jerusalem was able to make further advances into Egypt, briefly occupying Cairo in the 1160s.
Count Baldwin II and future count Joscelin of Courtenay were taken captive after their defeat at the Battle of Harran in 1104.
When some crusaders advocated ravaging the countryside, others objected by asking, "Is not the land we are devastating our land, and the people we are fighting our people?"
The Second Crusade was started in response to the fall of the County of Edessa the previous year to the forces of Zengi.
More recently, historians such as David Nicolle have defended the decision to attack Damascus, arguing that Damascus was the most powerful Muslim state in southern Syria, and that if the Christians held Damascus, they would have been in a better position to resist the rising power of Nur ad-Din.
Travelling from England, by ship, to the Holy Land, the army stopped and helped the smaller (7,000) Portuguese army in the capture of Lisbon, expelling its Moorish occupants.
A force from Provence, led by Alphonse of Toulouse, chose to wait until August, and to cross by sea.
Because the Burid dynasty was displaced in 1154 by the Zangid dynasty, Anur's role in repulsing the Second Crusade has been largely erased with historians and chroniclers loyal to the Zangids giving the credit to Anur's rival, Nur ad-Din Zangi, the amir of Aleppo.
His successor Joscelin II was forced into an alliance with the Byzantine Empire, but in 1143 both the Byzantine emperor John II Comnenus and the King of Jerusalem Fulk of Anjou died.
Louis no longer wanted to continue by land, and it was decided to gather a fleet at Adalia and sail for Antioch.
Eleanor enjoyed her stay, but her uncle implored her to remain to enlarge family lands and divorce Louis if the king refused to help what was assuredly the military cause of the Crusade.
Conrad underestimated the length of the march against Anatolia, and anyhow assumed that the authority of Emperor Manuel was greater in Anatolia than was in fact the case.
Both Zengi and King Baldwin II turned their attention towards Damascus; Baldwin was defeated outside the great city in 1129.
The north German Saxons were reluctant.
The largest of the Muslim states at the time, the Turkish Great Seljuk Sultanate, which ruled most of what is modern Iran and Iraq had about 10,000 full-term soldiers.
Meanwhile, Otto of Freising and the remnant of his troops arrived in Jerusalem early in April, and Conrad soon after.
The Germans had already decided to travel overland through Hungary, as the sea route was politically impractical because Roger II, King of Sicily, was an enemy of Conrad.
Eugene did not control Rome and lived instead at Viterbo, but nevertheless the Second  Crusade was meant to be more organized and centrally controlled than the First: the armies would be led by the strongest kings of Europe and a route would be planned beforehand.
Meanwhile, Nur ad-Din and Saif ad-Din had by now arrived.
Louis consulted Bernard of Clairvaux, who referred him back to Eugene.
Despite the distaste for the memory of the Second Crusade, the experience of the crusade had notable impact on German literature, with many epic poems of the late 12th century featuring battle scenes clearly inspired by the fighting in the crusade.
Meanwhile, the Seljuq Zengi, Atabeg of Mosul, had added to his rule in 1128 Aleppo, the key to power in Syria, contested between the rulers of Mosul and Damascus.
Baldwin and Joscelin were both captured a second time in 1122, and although Edessa recovered somewhat after the Battle of Azaz in 1125, Joscelin was killed in battle in 1131.
By now Louis would have definitely heard about the papal bull, and Eugene enthusiastically supported Louis' crusade.
They reached the already Christian city Stettin, whereupon the crusaders dispersed after meeting with Bishop Adalbert of Pomerania and Prince Ratibor I of Pomerania.
The discord also extended to the marriage of Louis and Eleanor, which had been falling apart during the course of the Crusade.
Bernard then found Rudolf in Mainz and was able to silence him, returning him to his monastery.
After crossing Byzantine territory into Anatolia, both armies were separately defeated by the Seljuk Turks.
According to William of Tyre, on 27 July the crusaders decided to move to the plain on the eastern side of the city, which was less heavily fortified but had much less food and water.
Meanwhile, Conrad fell sick and returned to Constantinople, where Manuel attended to him personally, and Louis, paying no attention to the warnings of a Turkish attack, marched out from Ephesus with the French and German survivors.
Louis himself, according to Odo of Deuil, climbed a rock and was ignored by the Turks, who did not recognize him.
The memory of the Second Crusade was to color French views of the Byzantines for the rest of the 12th and 13th centuries.
To compensate for their quantitative  weaknesses, the Muslim states sought qualitative superiority.
Louis remained behind in Jerusalem until 1149.
Since the original negotiations between Louis and Manuel I, Manuel had broken off his military campaign against the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm, signing a truce with his enemy Sultan Mesud I.
After the First Crusade and the minor Crusade of 1101 there were three crusader states established in the east: the Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Principality of Antioch and the County of Edessa.
In 1171, Saladin, nephew of one of Nur ad-Din's generals, was proclaimed Sultan of Egypt, uniting Egypt and Syria and completely surrounding the crusader kingdom.
He lists these and numerous others; "to name each one individually would take far too long."
The Roman chronicler John Kinnamos wrote "the French are particularly capable of riding horseback in good order and attacking with the spear, and their cavalry surpasses that of the Germans in speed.
The Saxons achieved largely token conversions at Dobin, as the Slavs resorted to their pagan beliefs once the Christian armies dispersed.
A new plan was made to attack Ascalon and Conrad took his troops there, but no further help arrived, due to the lack of trust that had resulted from the failed siege.
While it was the first Crusader state to be founded, it was also the first to fall.
According to Bernard of Clairvaux, the goal of the crusade was to battle the pagan Slavs "until such a time as, by God's help, they shall either be converted or deleted".
In July their armies assembled at Tiberias and marched to Damascus, around the Sea of Galilee by way of Banyas.
Bishop Hugh of Jabala reported the news to Pope Eugene III, who issued the bull ''Quantum praedecessores'' on 1 December of that year, calling for a second crusade.
Louis and his associates claimed the ships for themselves, while the rest of the army had to resume the long march to Antioch.
This was done so that Manuel would be free to concentrate on defending his empire from the Crusaders, who had gained a reputation for theft and treachery since the First Crusade and were widely suspected of harbouring sinister designs on Constantinople.
The cultural impact of the Second Crusade was even greater in France, with many troubadours fascinated by the alleged affair between Eleanor and Raymond, which helped to feed the theme of courtly love.
Roger II was offended and refused to participate any longer.
In Germany, the Crusade was seen as a huge debacle with many monks writing that it could only have been the work of the Devil.
In 1149, the ''atabeg'' Anur died, at which point the amir Abu Sa'id Mujir al-Din Abaq Ibn Muhammad finally began to rule.
Even Conrad was wounded in a skirmish with them.
Hugh also told the Pope of an eastern Christian king, who, it was hoped, would bring relief to the crusader states: this is the first documented mention of Prester John.
The armies of the two kings marched separately across Europe.
He did not pursue an attack on the remaining territory of Edessa, or the Principality of Antioch, as was feared.
Nevertheless, it was decided to follow Conrad, and to set out on 15 June.
Later they also helped to conquer Sintra, Almada, Palmela and Setúbal, and they were allowed to stay in the conquered lands, where they settled down and had offspring.
After quitting Ascalon, Conrad returned to Constantinople to further his alliance with Manuel.
Elsewhere on the Iberian peninsula, almost at the same time, Alfonso VII of León, Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, and others led a mixed army of Catalans, Leonese, Castilians and French crusaders against the rich port city of Almería.
Conrad III was considered to be a brave knight, though often described as indecisive in moments of crisis.
He also authorized Alfonso VII of León and Castile to equate his campaigns against the Moors with the rest of the Second Crusade.
However, he was assassinated by a slave in 1146 and was succeeded in Aleppo by his son Nur ad-Din.
When the Second Crusade was called, many south Germans volunteered to crusade in the Holy Land.
Damascus was supposedly ruled by the Burid amirs of Damascus, but Anur, who commanded the military, was the real ruler of the city.
Relations between the Eastern Roman Empire and the French were badly damaged by the Crusade.
Zengi himself was praised throughout Islam as "defender of the faith" and ''al-Malik al-Mansur'', "the victorious king".
In battle, the Turks used their typical tactic of pretending to retreat, and then returning to attack the small force of German cavalry which had separated from the main army to chase them.
Conrad began a slow retreat back to Constantinople, and his army was harassed daily by the Turks, who attacked stragglers and defeated the rearguard.
This bull stated that there was to be no difference between the spiritual rewards of the different crusaders.
To make matters worse, some of the German soldiers were killed in a flood at the beginning of September.
The Germans planned to set out at Easter, but did not leave until May.
However, the crusade failed to achieve the conversion of most of the Wends.
It is debatable whether Louis was planning a crusade of his own or in fact a pilgrimage, as he wanted to fulfil a vow made by his dead brother Philip to go to the Holy Land.
Events in Mosul compelled him to return home, and he once again set his sights on Damascus.
In late 1144, Joscelin II allied with the Ortoqids and marched out of Edessa with almost his entire army to support the Ortoqid army against Aleppo.
Both the Germans and French therefore entered Asia without any Byzantine assistance, unlike the armies of the First Crusade.
In the tradition set by his grandfather Alexios I, Manuel also had the French swear to return to the Empire any territory they captured.
Edessa was the most northerly of these, and also the weakest and least populated; as such, it was subject to frequent attacks from the surrounding Muslim states ruled by the Ortoqids, Danishmends and Seljuq Turks.
With support from a Genoese–Pisan navy, the city was occupied in October 1147.
The Pope commissioned Bernard to preach the Second Crusade, and granted the same indulgences for it which Pope Urban II had accorded to the First Crusade.
The Turks were indeed waiting to attack, but in a small battle outside Ephesus, the French were victorious.
It would ultimately have a key influence on the fall of Jerusalem and give rise to the Third Crusade at the end of the 12th century.
Those who volunteered to crusade against the Slavs were primarily Danes, Saxons and Poles, although there were also some Bohemians.
He would die in 1153.
Louis quickly left Antioch for Tripoli with Eleanor in arrest.
They reached Laodicea on the Lycus early in January 1148, around the same time Otto of Freising's army had been destroyed in the same area.
Ramon Berenger then invaded the lands of the Almoravid taifa kingdom of Valencia and Murcia.
Bernard, the Archbishop of Cologne and the Archbishop of Mainz were vehemently opposed to these attacks, and so Bernard traveled from Flanders to Germany to deal with the problem and quiet the mobs.
Back in Europe, Bernard of Clairvaux was humiliated by the defeat.
The Siege of Lisbon lasted from 1 July to 25 October 1147 when, after four months, the Moorish rulers agreed to surrender, primarily due to hunger within the city.
The news of the fall of Edessa was brought back to Europe first by pilgrims early in 1145, and then by embassies from Antioch, Jerusalem and Armenia.
Much of the authority of the Byzantine Empire in the western provinces of Asia Minor was more nominal than real, with much of the provinces being a no-man's land controlled by Turkish nomads.
The '''Second Crusade''' (1147–1149) was the second major crusade launched from Europe as Catholic ('Latin') holy war against Islam.
On 16 February 1147, the French crusaders met at Étampes to discuss their route.
The German crusaders, accompanied by the papal legate and cardinal Theodwin, intended to meet the French in Constantinople.
The local crusader lords refused to carry on with the siege, and the three kings had no choice but to abandon the city.
Nevertheless, Manuel's relations with the French army were somewhat better than with the Germans, and Louis was entertained lavishly in Constantinople.
It is probable that Louis had made this decision independently of hearing about ''Quantum Praedecessores''.
Each of the Christian forces felt betrayed by the other.
This was the most spectacular meeting of the Court in its existence.
Resuming the march, the vanguard under Amadeus of Savoy became separated from the rest of the army at Mount Cadmus, and Louis’ troops suffered heavy losses from the Turks.
Ottokar III of Styria joined Conrad at Vienna, and Conrad's enemy Géza II of Hungary allowed them to pass through unharmed.
In response to the arrival of the Crusaders, the regent of Damascus, Mu'in ad-Din Unur, started making feverish preparations for war, strengthening the fortifications of Damascus, ordering troops to his city and having the water sources along the road to Damascus destroyed or diverted.
They told St Bernard of their desire to campaign against the Slavs at an Imperial Diet meeting in Frankfurt on 13 March 1147.
Historians have long seen the decision to besiege Damascus rather than Edessa as "an act of inexplicable folly".
The in-fighting within Damascus was to lead to the end of the Burid state within five years.
The Second Crusade was announced by Pope Eugene III, and was the first of the crusades to be led by European kings, namely Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany, with help from a number of other European nobles.
After being delayed for a month by storms, most of the promised ships did not arrive at all.
The county had been founded during the First Crusade (1096–1099) by King Baldwin of Boulogne in 1098.
Louis VII of France, his wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine, and the princes and lords present prostrated themselves at the feet of Bernard to receive the pilgrims' cross.
The crusaders agreed to help the King attack Lisbon, with a solemn agreement that offered to them the pillage of the city's goods and the ransom money for expected prisoners.
The preliminary Wendish Crusade achieved mixed results.
Further support came from Turkoman and Kurdish auxiliaries, who could be called upon in times of war, though these forces were prone to indiscipline.
The professional soldiers of the Muslim states, who were usually ethnic Turks, tended to be very well-trained and equipped.
There were perhaps 50,000 troops in total.
