Special Officers when not on a particular assignment are regarded as private citizens and have no Police Power.
'One massive resource, filled with significant numbers of personnel, armed with a wide array of technology, and directed by professionals who have spent their entire adult lifetimes learning how to prevent and reduce crime, has not been tapped by governments in the fight against criminality.
Security officers must undergo three weeks of training and internship.
Security officers may issue fixed penalty tickets for violation of parking regulations in designated areas and for passengers on public transportation without a valid pass.
In 2013, due to a high number of rapes and violent robberies, the city of Oslo (Oslo Kommune) hired a private security company (Metro Garda) to patrol the downtown immigrant areas.
Although security guards (also called  security officers)  differ greatly from police officers, military personnel, federal agents/officers, and the like, Australia and the United States have a growing proportion of security personnel that have former police or military experience, including senior management personnel.
Security officers serving on ships sailing in areas of high piracy risk may be equipped with firearms.
Security Guards in Hong Kong do not have special powers of arrest above that of the ordinary citizen, i.e.
Uniforms or badges that may be confused with a police officer are prohibited.
Similarly, in Canada, various acts specifically prohibits private security personnel from using the terms ''Probation Officer'', ''law enforcement'', ''police'', or ''police officer''.
The Security Officer's Level III and IV will also have the same expiration date regardless of date issued.
There is a marked difference between persons performing the duties historically associated with watchmen and persons who take a more active role in protecting persons and property.
Bouncers use the title Crowd Controllers, and Store Detectives use the title Loss Prevention or Asset Protection Officers.
; Non Commissioned Security Officer (Level II) : A Non Commissioned Security Officer is unarmed and must wear a distinctive DPS approved uniform.
However, anyone who carried a firearm or other "lethal weapon" in the course and scope of their employment must be trained as a "Certified Agent" and successfully complete a 40-hour training course (including shooting range time) in order to be certified to carry weapons while on duty under the Lethal Weapons Training Act (commonly referred to as Act 235 certification).
Strict requirements are laid down as to the type of uniform and badge used by security companies.
The term "agent" is also used in other industries, such as banking agents, loan agents and real estate agents.
Those who handle K-9s, work as dispatchers, alarm responders, private investigators, instructors, bounty hunters, armored car couriers and Executive Protection Specialists are other categories of training regulated by DCJS with additional training requirements.
Now guards working in private security must be checked annually.
Security personnel enforce company rules and can act to protect lives and property, and they often have a contractual obligation to provide these actions.
of detecting or recording- (Amended 25 of 2000 s. 2)
Every two years the card must be renewed, by completing an in-service with a certified instructor.
As far as weapons, British Columbia law severely restricts their use by security guards.
These eleven jurisdictions require that companies that provide security guard services and their employees be licensed.
California security officers are also required to complete 8 hours of annual training on security-related topics, in addition to the initial 40 hours of training.
* Guarding any person or place for the purpose of preventing or detecting the occurrence of any offence; (Replaced 25 of 2000 s. 2)
Private Security personnel initially outnumbered police.
the Bureau of Security and Investigative Services in California has requirements that a license for ''each'' item listed must be carried while on duty).
The certification is good for five years at which time an eight-hour refresher course must be taken or the certification is revoked.
; Commissioned Security Officer (Level III) :  A Commissioned Security Officer openly carries a handgun  and may also carry a baton, chemical dispensing device (OC), Taser, etc.
Firearms endorsements must be renewed annually by completing an in-service and passing a firearms qualification.
The term 'security professional' began to surface and large private security companies like Blackwater, USA began offering training services for the private security industry that approached the level of training provided by the military.
The Service Employees International Union (SEIU) has also sought to represent security employees, although its efforts have been complicated by the Taft-Harley Act because the SEIU also represents janitors, trash collectors, and other building service employees.
A private security officer's primary duty is the prevention and deterrence of crime.
Recent changes to the act have also introduced restrictions on uniform and vehicle colours and markings to make private security personnel clearly distinctive from police personnel.
Some officers are required to complete police certification for special duties.
* South Australia—(Consumer & Business Affairs) Security and Investigation Agents Act 1995
As taxpayer resistance has limited government budgets, and as the demand for secure homes in gated communities has grown, these trends have continued in the 1990s and 2000s (decade).
This course may only be taught by a licensed Level IV instructor working under a state licensed Level IV security training school.
All companies providing security guarding services are also required to have a valid license from the Ministry of the Interior.
There are two classifications for an officer: armed and unarmed.
In 2007 several guards from the Securitas AB company were arrested for brutality against a robber they apprehended on the main street of Oslo.
Armed security officers are frequently contracted to respond as law enforcement until a given situation at a client location is under control and/or public authorities arrive on the scene.
The legislation requires that guards must be at least 19 years old, undergo a criminal background check, and successfully complete a training course.
'''New Mexico'''—As of 2008 all security guards must undergo FBI background checks and a certified training program.
Using behavior analysis, computers can detect threats more quickly with fewer errors in judgement.
The event moved corporate threat concerns to the top of the priority list for most security guard contracts started being awarded based on professionalism.
Also, there was no regulation of people whom may perform installation of security systems.
'''Notable companies operating in Norway:'''
Special Officers may make arrest for felony or misdemeanor offenses on the property or area they are to protect, patrol, or in relation to their direct assignment.
So the terms "private homicide police" or "special agent" would be unlawful for a security licensee to use in California.
* Tasmania—(Police) *Security and Investigation Agents Act 2002
Uniforms should not resemble police worn attire, but some uniforms do.
In the past, only personnel that worked for contract security, that is, security companies, were regulated in British Columbia.
Different requirements have to be completed before applying for this job.
Two of the largest security unions are the Security, Police, and Fire Professionals of America (SPFPA) and the United Government Security Officers of America (UGSOA).
The Owner, Qualified Manager, or a designee of the Qualified Manager may teach the course.
Every uniformed security guard in the Netherlands must have the V symbol on his or her uniform to advise the public they are dealing with a private guard; this rule is mandated by the Ministry of Justice.
Many security guards in Canada are unionized.
This license requires the previous Level II and Level III courses to be completed first.
Typically, these are sworn law enforcement personnel whose duties primarily involve the security of a government installation, and are also a special case.
from a variety of hazards (such as waste, damaged property, unsafe worker behaviour, criminal activity, etc.)
The primary unions which represent security guards in Canada are the United Food and Commercial Workers (UFCW), Local 333, and the Canadian branch of the United Steelworkers (USW).
Just as with the police profession, training requirements for the private security industry have evolved over time.
The board is totally fee funded and is staffed by departmental employees directed on a daily basis by the Director, who is appointed by the Attorney General.
In June 1947, the United States Congress passed the Taft-Hartley Act placing many restrictions on labor unions.
Virginia also allows security officers to attend additional 40 hours of training to become certified as Conservators of the Peace (Special Police) for the company employing them.
The Section 101 in the Criminal Procedure Ordinance addresses that arrest of an offender by a private citizen is allowed in certain circumstances if the offender is attempting an arrestable offense.
Armed guarding and guarding with a weapon are illegal.
Each of the six states and two territories of Australia have separate legislation that covers all security activities.
* Installing, maintaining or repairing a security device;
Any person who conducts a business or is employed in a security-related field within Australia is required to be licensed.
They may also be specially authorized by the State Law Enforcement Division (SLED) to issue Uniform Traffic Tickets to violators.
Police are called in when a situation warrants a higher degree of authority to act upon reported observations that security does not have the authority to act upon.
A security officer may only search (frisk) a person to prevent the use of or confiscate any type of weapon or anything that can be used as a weapon.
However, as of September 1, 2009, in-house security guards and private investigators came under the jurisdiction of the Security Services Act and Security Services Regulation.
In a very few cases, such as the Northern Ireland Security Guard Service, security guards may be attested as Special Constables.
In Canada, private security falls under the jurisdiction of Canada's ten provinces and three territories.
Alberta and Ontario prohibit the use of the term ''Security Officer'', which has been in widespread use in the United States for many decades.
The main purpose of this type of officer is to actively prevent and deter crime.
They are allowed to work for six months after one week of the introduction course.
Instead, the wealthy pay to provide their own premium services, through voluntary, exclusive associations.
In Norway security officers are called "Vektere".
The crime was captured with a mobile camera by pedestrians and created a public outcry, with many objecting to the way the security guards took the law into their own hands.
Security Officers may  carry firearms, handcuffs or batons where their role requires them to do so and then only when working and have the appropriate sub-class accreditation to their license.
This is done every two years.
However, as in other parts of Canada, armoured car guards are permitted to carry firearms.
* Guarding any property;
The Special Officer when making an arrest may pat down the arrested subject for weapons.
State and local governments sometimes regulate the use of these terms by law—for example, certain words and phrases that "give an impression that he or she is connected in any way with the federal government, a state government, or any political subdivision of a state government" are forbidden for use by California security licensees by Business and Professions Code Section 7582.26.
These personnel are sometimes referred to as "private police officers".
A patrol vehicle may not look like a police striped vehicle.
'''Virginia'''—Since the 1980s, Security Officers in Virginia are required to be certified by DCJS (Department of Criminal Justice Services, the same agency that certifies law enforcement officers).
The first is 8 hours of BSIS-designed instruction on powers to arrest and weapons.
Some jurisdictions do commission or deputize security officers and give them limited additional powers, particularly when employed in protecting public property such as mass transit stations.
As a result of this episode, the police said that they would be more careful when conducting criminal background checks for security guards.
Before 1 October 1996, private security personnel were regulated by the ''Watchmen Ordinance'' (Chapter 299).
The detainee must be released or handed over to the authorities within 4 hours of the arrest.
Qualification for security guards vary from country to country.
'''Pennsylvania'''—No licensing requirements to be an unarmed security guard.
Security officers are generally uniformed to represent their lawful authority on private property.
In 2012 Norwegian media reported that off-duty police officers and Home Guard soldiers had contracts of armed employment on civilian ships in the Aden bay, and police leaders were planning sanctions against the use of police officers.
This has not always been the case and the introduction of this requirement is expected to regulate the educational standards and knowledge base so that the particular job can be competently performed.
by securing the scene to prevent further loss or damage, summoning emergency responders to the incident, helping to redirect foot traffic to safe locations, and by documenting what happened on an incident report to give their client an idea of how to prevent similar situations from occurring.
St. Louis County security officer training is a two-day class and yearly renewal class.
The 40-hour course allows the carrying of a fixed-length baton and handcuffs, separate training and license is required for the security guard to carry pepper spray, extendable baton or a firearm.
The title "agent" can be confused with bail enforcement agents, also known as "bounty hunters", who are sometimes regulated by the same agencies which regulate private security.
Rehearse of weapons usage is mandatory every year and is regulated by the Ministry of The Interior, to ensure the safe handling of pepper spray and such.
They may be part of an independent, "security-only" union, not affiliated with any coalition of other types of labor unions such as the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO).
By the 1990s, this union had evolved to include many other types of security officers and changed its name to the SPFPA.
Additionally, security officers may also be called upon to act as an agent of law enforcement if a police officer, sheriff's deputy, etc.
In recent years, due to elevated threats of terrorism, most security officers are required to have bomb-threat training and/or emergency crisis training, especially those located in soft target areas such as shopping malls, schools, and any other area where the general public congregate.
A special chair appeared in Europe sometime in the late Middle Ages, called the watchman's chair; this unupholstered wooden chair had a forward slanting seat to prevent the watchman from dozing off during duty.
These employees tend to take pride in the title "Security Officer" or "Protection Officer" and disdain the label of "guard".
Some sources feel that some of these restrictions are put in place to satisfy the Canadian Police Association.
All training and licensing is regulated by the Department of Public Safety's Private Security Bureau.
The certificate can also be obtained by private security officers who have had a minimum of 5 years working experience.
The police in Norway were widely criticized for not checking guards properly, and even when they encounter an issue with a guard, the guard can still work for months before anything is done.
Using specific algorithms, a computer can now detect aggressive and defensive body language, which triggers an alert to security or proper authorities depending on the event.
Security guard companies began paying enough to attract people with significant backgrounds in law enforcement and the military, often in special operations.
The police have around 10,000 employees in total.
The training for this license consists of classroom based learning, defense tactics, handcuffing, and firearms training.
Later, it came to light that the thief first attacked the security guards when they approached him, so the brutality charges were dropped.
These special regulations arose after events in the 1990s when bouncers had a bad reputation, especially in Oslo, for being too brutal and rough with people.
New Orleans Municipal Code 17-271 MCS 30-1122 states It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an armed guard unless he is a Peace Officer.
At the completion of the course the candidate must pass a firearms proficiency test and a multiple choice exam.
'''Arizona'''—Licensed security companies are required to provide eight hours of pre-assignment training to all persons employed as security guards before the employee acts in the capacity of a security guard.
This license requires the previous Level II course to be completed first.
In Finland, a security guard has the right to detain a person "red-handed", or seen committing a crime and the right to search the detained individual for harmful items and weapons.
That changed drastically on September 11, 2001 when radical  terrorists attacked the United States.
The three types of licenses are
Patrolling is usually a large part of a security officer's duties, as most incidents are prevented by being looked for instead of waiting for them to occur.
The training and exam may be administered by any private patrol operator or by any of a large number of certified training facilities.
'''North Carolina'''—Security Officers in North Carolina are required to register and become certified with the Private Protective Services Board (PPSB), the private security authority body under the North Carolina Department of Justice.
40:1379.1 (b) states the Special Officer, when performing those tasks requiring a Special Officer's commission, shall have the same powers and duties as a Peace Officer.
* Background Check: FBI background check and electronic fingerprint imaging
The former, often called "guards", are taught the mantra "observe and report", are minimally trained, and not expected to deal with the public or confront criminals.
No individual shall do, agree to do, or hold himself/herself out as doing, or as available to do, security work for another person unless he/she does so-
As a result, the Hong Kong Government enacted a wholly new law, the ''Security and Guarding Services Ordinance'' (Chapter 460), to replace the ''Watchmen Ordinance''.
There are two different types of vekterethe normal uniformed or civil-clothing officers who watch over private and semi-public properties, and government-hired vektere who work in public places, such as the Parliament.
Finally, within 6 months of getting their license, they must receive an additional 16 hours of training on various mandatory and elective courses.
The responsibilities of security guards in the United States are expanding in scope.
* Psychological Testing: In addition to the training and background check a PPO must also submit an MMPI (psychological test) administered by a Texas licensed Psychologist.
Once arrested, the suspect must be delivered to a police office as soon as possible.
Since 2009, private security guards companies as Mikud have also replaced official security forces at some checkpoints inside and on the border of the West Bank, as well as the crossings to Gaza.
Special Officers or to honor all subpoenas on arrest made and appear in court to testify.
Then, within 30 days of getting the individual officers license, they must receive 16 hours of training on various mandatory and elective courses.
No security personnel are allowed to search other person, nor are they allowed to get personal information from other people, with the exception of some specific circumstances.
All security officers are also required to go through additional training mandated by the state for the carrying of weapons such as batons, firearms, and pepper spray (e.g.
If the trainee does not pass he is not allowed to work anymore until he completes his training with a positive result.
No security officer may carry pepper spray, batons or any other kind of weapon.
* Renewal: Submission of renewal fee and proof of completion of a 6-hour re-qualification class taught by a Level III instructor under a Level III training school.
However, Special Officers still may make an arrest for a felony, whether in or out of his presence, while not on a particular assignment, under Louisiana Law CCRP art.214 Arrest by private person; when lawful.
For a high risk or high value property, the discount can often exceed the money being spent on its security program.
Additionally a narrow security vetting is required.
and to assist in serious emergencies (medicals, fires, crime, etc.)
There are no pre requisites to this course or license.
* New South Wales—(Police) Security Industry Act 1997 & Security Industry Regulation 2007
This certificate makes it easier to get a job, with slightly higher pay.
They typically work in plainclothes (without a uniform), and are usually highly trained to act lawfully in direct defense of life or property.
The security industry is regulated through the New Mexico Regulation and Licensing Division.
All of this legislation was intended to enhance the integrity of the private security industry.
''Security work'' means any of the following activities-
handguns) anywhere outside of his or her home.
This restricts the ability of security employees to join any union that also represents other types of employees.
More money was invested in security so more money became available for training of security guards.
* Required Training: Level IV/ Personal Protection Officer requires a 15 hours course teaching additional law, defense tactics, considerations for personal protection of a client, and OC training.
Until recently the most commonly used form used to be mechanical clock systems that required a key for manual punching of a number to a strip of paper inside with the time pre-printed on it.
The police of Oslo report that Ordensvakter are now helping the police identify crimes that otherwise would not be reported.
PPO's in plain clothes MUST conceal their firearm, and they are also the only license type able to conceal their firearm at all.
A security officer, or any other person, may detain or arrest anyone that violates any law, as long as the violation carries a punishment of mimimum six (6) months imprisonment and a fine.
Some security officers do have reserve police powers and are typically employed directly by governmental agencies.
Regular patrols are, however, becoming less accepted as an industry standard, as it provides predictability for the would-be criminal, as well as monotony for the security officer on duty.
* Renewal: Submission of renewal fee every two years.
Applicants must be at least 18 years old, undergo a criminal history background check through the California Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and complete a 40-hour course of required training.
'''Oregon'''—Department of Public Safety, Standards and Training
It is also possible to choose Security as a high school major, which requires two years of school and two years of trainee positions at private companies, resulting in a certificate from the government.
However, there were many problems with that system of regulation—for example, there were no restrictions as to whom may establish private security service companies to provide security services to a client.
Security guards are common: they perform entrance checks at shopping malls, transportation terminals, government and other office buildings, and many stores.
'''Texas'''—There are three types of Security Officer license types in the state of Texas.
After a positive result a new ID can be issued and is valid for three years, after which the guard must undergo a background check by the local police again.
citizen's arrest, also known locally as the "101 arrest power".
Observe and report is now a secondary function and the officer is to actively protect the clients and property in accordance with clients procedures as well as state/federal law.
Certified armed security officers are authorized under state code to arrest for any offense committed in their presence while they are on duty at the location they are hired to protect.
The number of jobs is expected to grow in the U.S., with 175,000 new security jobs expected before 2016.
All positions require State Police and FBI background checks.
While an unarmed officer is required to take a 16-hour class of training and instruction to become certified, an armed officer must take additional hours of classroom training as well as qualify on a gun range with the firearm which will be carried on duty.
* Designing for any particular premises or place a system incorporating a security device.
However, handcuffs may be used.
The latter are often highly trained, sometimes armed depending on contracts agreed upon with clientele, and are more likely to interact with the general public and to confront the criminal element.
This training can be in the classroom or online.
Licenses are valid for three years and require the holders to undergo formal training, and are also to pass mandatory Criminal Records Bureau checks.
Peninsular Malaysia allows for the use of Nepalese security guards whereby East Malaysian immigration policy does not allow the use of foreign workers to be in employed in the security industry.
Many locations with a high number of visitors, such as the Jerusalem Central Bus Station, employ X-ray machines to check passenger's bags; in other places, they are opened and visually inspected.
The municipalities in Norway are not allowed to form their own "police".
The police have the authority to withdraw a company's licence if the company does not submit lists of employees to the police.
This course may only be taught by a licensed Level III instructor working under a state licensed Level III security training school.
Also, the use of the titles 'Security Police' or 'Private Detective' are unacceptable.
This course may be taught by any licensed company directly to new hires.
A '''security guard''', '''security officer''', or protective agent is a private person who is paid to protect an organization's assets (property, people, money, etc.)
