The sequence of beds that characterizes sedimentary rocks is called bedding.
Sedimentary rocks are only a thin veneer over a crust consisting mainly of igneous and metamorphic rocks.
A shell consisting of calcite can, for example, dissolve while a cement of silica then fills the cavity.
On a larger time-scale, cyclic changes in climate and sea level are caused by Milankovitch cycles: cyclic changes in the orientation and/or position of the Earth's rotational axis and orbit around the Sun.
Among the three major types of rock, fossils are most commonly found in sedimentary rock.
In the case of silica cements, the process is called lithification.
The lithostatic pressure in the rock increases due to the weight of the overlying sediment.
Iron(II) oxide (FeO) only forms under low oxygen (anoxic) circumstances and gives the rock a grey or greenish colour.
Both the cement and the clasts (including fossils and ooids) of a carbonate sedimentary rock can consist of carbonate minerals.
The precipitated minerals form a cement and make the rock more compact and competent.
Sedimentary rocks are also important sources of natural resources like coal, fossil fuels, drinking water or ores.
Thick sequences of red sedimentary rocks formed in arid climates are called red beds.
Most authors presently use the term "mudrock" to refer to all rocks composed dominantly of mud.
This form of fossilisation is called carbonisation.
Rift basins are elongated, narrow and deep basins.
These are often elongated structures and can be used to establish the direction of the flow during deposition.
In the same way, precipitating minerals can fill cavities formerly occupied by blood vessels, vascular tissue or other soft tissues.
The dissolved material precipitates again in open pore spaces, which means there is a net flow of material into the pores.
Dead organisms in nature are usually quickly removed by scavengers, bacteria, rotting and erosion, but sedimentation can contribute to exceptional circumstances where these natural processes are unable to work, causing fossilisation.
Coal is considered a type of sedimentary rock.
Organic materials in a sediment can leave more traces than just fossils.
Cross-bedding forms when small-scale erosion occurs during deposition, cutting off part of the beds.
Such faulting can also occur when large masses of non-lithified sediment are deposited on a slope, such as at the front side of a delta or the continental slope.
Tidal flats and shoals are places that sometimes dry because of the tide.
Sometimes multiple sets of layers with different orientations exist in the same rock, a structure called cross-bedding.
In many cases facies changes and other lithological features in sequences of sedimentary rock have a cyclic nature.
The scientific discipline that studies the properties and origin of sedimentary rocks is called sedimentology.
Apart from continental sediments, rift basins normally also have part of their infill consisting of volcanic deposits.
When the sediment is transported from the continent, an alternation of sand, clay and silt is deposited.
A bed is defined as a layer of rock that has a uniform lithology and texture.
On the other hand, when the pore fluid pressure in a sand layer surpasses a critical point, the sand can break through overlying clay layers and flow through, forming discordant bodies of sedimentary rock called sedimentary dykes.
These represent periods where no new sediments were laid down, or when earlier sedimentary layers were raised above sea level and eroded away.
Imprints of organisms made while they were still alive are called trace fossils, examples of which are burrows, footprints, etc.
This burrowing is called bioturbation by sedimentologists.
However, a red colour does not necessarily mean the rock formed in a continental environment or arid climate.
Sedimentary structures can indicate something about the sedimentary environment or can serve to tell which side originally faced up where tectonics have tilted or overturned sedimentary layers.
In the quiet water of swamps, lakes and lagoons, fine sediment is deposited, mingled with organic material from dead plants and animals.
Coastlines can shift in the direction of the sea when the sea level drops, when the surface rises due to tectonic forces in the Earth's crust or when a river forms a large delta.
The statistical distribution of grain sizes is different for different rock types and is described in a property called the sorting of the rock.
In this way, loose clasts in a sedimentary rock can become "glued" together.
The fossil, in the end, consists of a thin layer of pure carbon or its mineralized form, graphite.
Unlike textures, structures are always large-scale features that can easily be studied in the field.
The rate at which sediment is deposited differs depending on the location.
The subducting plate bends and forms a fore-arc basin in front of the overriding plate&mdash;an elongated, deep asymmetric basin.
Differences between successive layers indicate changes to the environment over time.
The infilled sections formed vertical inclusions in the horizontally deposited layers of the Touchet Formation, and thus provided evidence of the events that intervened over time among the forty-one layers that were deposited.
However, in some cases, a certain mineral dissolves and does not precipitate again.
The grain size of a rock is usually expressed with the Wentworth scale, though alternative scales are sometimes used.
The resistance of rock forming minerals to weathering is expressed by Bowen's reaction series.
When a piece of lithosphere that was heated and stretched cools again, its density rises, causing isostatic subsidence.
Besides transport by water, sediment can in continental environments also be transported by wind or glaciers.
The longer flank of such ripples is on the upstream side of the current.
When these organisms die, their skeletons sink to the bottom, forming a thick layer of calcareous mud that may lithify into limestone.
The nature of a sedimentary rock, therefore, not only depends on the sediment supply, but also on the sedimentary depositional environment in which it formed.
Iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3) in a richer iron environment is often found in the form of the mineral hematite and gives the rock a reddish to brownish colour.
In a desert, for example, the wind deposits siliciclastic material (sand or silt) in some spots, or catastrophic flooding of a wadi may cause sudden deposits of large quantities of detrital material, but in most places eolian erosion dominates.
In this series, quartz is the most stable, followed by feldspar, micas, and finally other less stable minerals that are only present when little weathering has occurred.
Finer, less pronounced layers are called laminae, and the structure it forms in a rock is called lamination.
Sedimentary dykes can also be formed in a cold climate where the soil is permanently frozen during a large part of the year.
Chemical sedimentary rocks have a non-clastic texture, consisting entirely of crystals.
Most trace fossils are burrows of molluscs or arthropods.
The same process can form mud volcanoes on the surface where they broke through upper layers.
The amount of sediment that can be deposited in a basin depends on the depth of the basin, the so-called accommodation space.
The most common minerals involved in permineralization are cements of carbonates (especially calcite), forms of amorphous silica (chalcedony, flint, chert) and pyrite.
On the other hand, when a rock layer with a certain age is followed laterally, the lithology (the type of rock) and facies eventually change.
Such erosional material of a growing mountain chain is called molasse and has either a shallow marine or a continental facies.
The type of sediment transported depends on the geology of the hinterland (the source area of the sediment).
Such structures are commonly found at tidal flats or point bars along rivers.
The form of the clasts can reflect the origin of the rock.
The size and form of clasts can be used to determine the velocity and direction of current in the sedimentary environment that moved the clasts from their origin; fine, calcareous mud only settles in quiet water while gravel and larger clasts are moved only by rapidly moving water.
Sedimentary rocks can be subdivided into four groups based on the processes responsible for their formation: clastic sedimentary rocks, biochemical (biogenic) sedimentary rocks, chemical sedimentary rocks, and a fourth category for "other" sedimentary rocks formed by impacts, volcanism, and other minor processes.
A channel in a tidal flat can see the deposition of a few metres of sediment in one day, while on the deep ocean floor each year only a few millimetres of sediment accumulate.
The resulting structures in the rock are syn-sedimentary folds and faults, which can be difficult to distinguish from folds and faults formed by tectonic forces acting on lithified rocks.
The facies of all rocks of a certain age can be plotted on a map to give an overview of the palaeogeography.
The shallow, warm water is an ideal habitat for many small organisms that build carbonate skeletons.
The water movements in such environments have a generally higher energy than that in deep environments, as wave activity diminishes with depth.
Mudcracks are a bed form caused by the dehydration of sediment that occasionally comes above the water surface.
Coral for example only lives in warm and shallow marine environments and fossils of coral are thus typical for shallow marine facies.
Larger, heavier clasts in suspension settle first, then smaller clasts.
However, the origin of the minerals in a sedimentary rock is often more complex than in an igneous rock.
This fourth miscellaneous category includes rocks formed by Pyroclastic flows, impact breccias, volcanic breccias, and other relatively uncommon processes.
Unlike most igneous and metamorphic rocks, sedimentary rocks form at temperatures and pressures that do not destroy fossil remnants.
Instabilities in such sediments can result in the deposited material to slump, producing fissures and folding.
Density contrasts can also cause small-scale faulting, even while sedimentation progresses (synchronous-sedimentary faulting).
Sedimentation is the collective name for processes that cause mineral and/or organic particles (detritus) to settle in place.
Sedimentary rocks are often saturated with seawater or groundwater, in which minerals can dissolve, or from which minerals can precipitate.
Relatively small changes in the orientation of the Earth's axis or length of the seasons can be a major influence on the Earth's climate.
The color of a sedimentary rock is often mostly determined by iron, an element with two major oxides: iron(II) oxide and iron(III) oxide.
Facies determined by lithology are called lithofacies; facies determined by fossils are biofacies.
Every environment has a characteristic combination of geologic processes and circumstances.
Laminae are usually less than a few centimetres thick.
As sediment deposition builds up, the overburden (lithostatic) pressure rises, and a process known as lithification takes place.
In many cases, sedimentation occurs slowly.
That new rock layers are above older rock layers is stated in the principle of superposition.
* ''Surface texture'' describes the amount of small-scale relief of the surface of a grain that is too small to influence the general shape.
Some biochemical processes, like the activity of bacteria, can affect minerals in a rock and are therefore seen as part of diagenesis.
Differences in laminations are generally caused by cyclic changes in the sediment supply, caused, for example, by seasonal changes in rainfall, temperature or biochemical activity.
Sole markings, such as tool marks and flute casts, are groves dug into a sedimentary layer that are preserved.
Calcareous sediment that sinks below the lysocline dissolves, as a result no limestone can be formed below this depth.
Under anoxic circumstances, however, organic material cannot decay and leaves a dark sediment, rich in organic material.
Climate change can influence the global sea level (and thus the amount of accommodation space in sedimentary basins) and sediment supply from a certain region.
Secondary sedimentary structures are those which formed after deposition.
A distinction can be made between normal sedimentation and sedimentation caused by catastrophic processes.
Precipitating minerals reduce the pore space in a rock, a process called cementation.
Erosion removes most deposited sediment shortly after deposition.
While the clastic bed is still fluid, diapirism can cause a denser upper layer to sink into a lower layer.
In carbonate based rocks such as limestone or chalk, chert or flint concretions are common, while terrestrial sandstones can have iron concretions.
Sediment transported by wind is called aeolian and is always very well sorted, while sediment transported by a glacier is called glacial till and is characterized by very poor sorting.
Deep marine usually refers to environments more than 200&nbsp;m below the water surface.
Behind the beach, there can be dunes (where the dominant deposition is well sorted sand) or a lagoon (where fine clay and organic material is deposited).
They are often cross-cut by gullies, where the current is strong and the grain size of the deposited sediment is larger.
Although graded bedding can form in many different environments, it is a characteristic of turbidity currents.
Sedimentation may also occur as minerals precipitate from water solution or shells of aquatic creatures settle out of suspension.
A beach, where sand and gravel is deposited, is usually bounded by a deeper marine environment a little offshore, where finer sediments are deposited at the same time.
Deltas are dominantly composed of clastic sediment (in contrast to chemical).
In some environments, beds are deposited at a (usually small) angle.
Although the Dott classification scheme is widely used by sedimentologists, common names like greywacke, arkose, and quartz sandstone are still widely used by non-specialists and in popular literature.
Secondary structures can also form by diagenesis or the formation of a soil (pedogenesis) when a sediment is exposed above the water level.
It can be a valuable indicator of the biological and ecological environment that existed after the sediment was deposited.
Organic material is formed from dead organisms, mostly plants.
Examples of bed forms include dunes and ripple marks.
Such structures form by chemical, physical and biological processes within the sediment.
Graded bedding is a structure where beds with a smaller grain size occur on top of beds with larger grains.
An example of a diagenetic structure common in carbonate rocks is a stylolite.
When all clasts are more or less of the same size, the rock is called 'well-sorted', and when there is a large spread in grain size, the rock is called 'poorly sorted'.
Turbidity currents are sudden disturbances of the normally quite deep marine environment and can cause the geologically speaking instantaneous deposition of large amounts of sediment, such as sand and silt.
Shallow marine environments exist adjacent to coastlines and can extend to the boundaries of the continental shelf.
A complex diagenetic history can be studied by optical mineralogy, using a petrographic microscope.
Where rivers enter the body of water, either on a sea or lake coast, deltas can form.
There are usually some gaps in the sequence called unconformities.
Density contrasts between different sedimentary layers, such as between sand and clay, can result in flame structures or load casts, formed by inverted diapirism.
However, some sedimentary rocks, such as evaporites, are composed of material that form at the place of deposition.
This preserves the form of the organism but changes the chemical composition, a process called permineralization.
The type of sediment that is deposited is not only dependent on the sediment that is transported to a place, but also on the environment itself.
During compaction, this interstitial water is pressed out of pore spaces.
Environments where the current is in one direction, such as rivers, produce asymmetric ripples.
* 'Grain form' describes the three dimensional shape of the grain.
Examples of continental environments are lagoons, lakes, swamps, floodplains and alluvial fans.
Erosional cracks were later infilled with layers of soil material, especially from aeolian processes.
Aeolian deposits can be quite striking.
At 4&nbsp;km depth, the solubility of carbonates increases dramatically (the depth zone where this happens is called the lysocline).
Eventually, small changes in astronomic parameters can cause large changes in sedimentary environment and sedimentation.
In sag basins, the extra weight of the newly deposited sediments is enough to keep the subsidence going in a vicious circle.
The amount of sedimentary rock that forms is not only dependent on the amount of supplied material, but also on how well the material consolidates.
With regression, shallower facies are deposited on top of deeper facies, a situation called offlap.
Burial of rocks due to ongoing sedimentation leads to increased pressure and temperature, which stimulates certain chemical reactions.
After deposition, physical processes can deform the sediment, producing a third class of secondary structures.
To describe such a texture, only the average size of the crystals and the fabric are necessary.
Sedimentary rocks contain important information about the history of the Earth.
Sedimentary rocks can contain fossils because, unlike most igneous and metamorphic rocks, they form at temperatures and pressures that do not destroy fossil remains.
Sometimes, density contrasts can result or grow when one of the lithologies dehydrates.
An example of a rock formed of silica skeletons is radiolarite.
Their formation can be the result of localized precipitation due to small differences in composition or porosity of the host rock, such as around fossils, inside burrows or around plant roots.
The coast is an environment dominated by wave action.
There are a number of Milankovitch cycles known, lasting between 10,000 and 200,000 years.
The typical rock formed in a certain environment is called its sedimentary facies.
In the second case, the mineral precipitate can have grown over an older generation of cement.
Typically sediments depositing on the ocean floor are fine clay or small skeletons of micro-organisms.
When the lithosphere keeps subsiding, new accommodation space keeps being created.
Such structures can be used as climate indicators as well as way up structures.
As a part of a sedimentary or metamorphic rock, fossils undergo the same diagenetic processes as does the containing rock.
The same process is responsible for the formation of fossil fuels like lignite or coal.
Structures in sedimentary rocks can be divided into 'primary' structures (formed during deposition) and 'secondary' structures (formed after deposition).
The sedimentary rock cover of the continents of the Earth's crust is extensive, but the total contribution of sedimentary rocks is estimated to be only 8% of the total volume of the crust.
At the same time, tectonic uplift forms a mountain belt in the overriding plate, from which large amounts of material are eroded and transported to the basin.
Calcite concretions in clay are called septarian concretions.
Where the lithosphere moves downward (tectonic subsidence), a basin forms and sedimentation can take place.
* ''rounding'' describes the general smoothness of the shape of a grain.
An example is the reactions by which organic material becomes lignite or coal.
A sedimentary rock formed on land has a continental sedimentary environment.
Often these fossils may only be visible under magnification.
A marine environment means that the rock was formed in a sea or ocean.
A type of basin formed by the moving apart of two pieces of a continent is called a rift basin.
They can be indicators of circumstances after deposition.
When the convergent movement of the two plates results in continental collision, the basin becomes shallower and develops into a foreland basin.
The basin type resulting from this subsidence is called a back-arc basin and is usually filled by shallow marine deposits and molasse.
Catastrophic processes can see the sudden deposition of a large amount of sediment at once.
Sedimentary rocks are deposited in layers as strata, forming a structure called bedding.
Beds form by the deposition of layers of sediment on top of each other.
The term diagenesis is used to describe all the chemical, physical, and biological changes, exclusive of surface weathering, undergone by a sediment after its initial deposition.
The chance of fossilisation is higher when the sedimentation rate is high (so that a carcass is quickly buried), in anoxic environments (where little bacterial activity occurs) or when the organism had a particularly hard skeleton.
In the subsurface, such geographic shifts of sedimentary environments of the past are recorded in shifts in sedimentary facies.
Regression is the situation in which a coastline moves in the direction of the sea.
Sedimentary environments usually exist alongside each other in certain natural successions.
Most authors use "shale" as a term for a fissile mudrock (regardless of grain size) although some older literature uses the term "shale" as a synonym for mudrock.
When sedimentary strata accumulate through time, the environment can shift, forming a change in facies in the subsurface at one location.
There are two types of ripples: symmetric and asymmetric.
The opposite of cross-bedding is parallel lamination, where all sedimentary layering is parallel.
This causes compaction, a process in which grains mechanically reorganize.
Between the clasts, the rock can be composed of a matrix (a cement) that consists of crystals of one or more precipitated minerals.
The presence of organic material can colour a rock black or grey.
Sedimentology is part of both geology and physical geography and overlaps partly with other disciplines in the Earth sciences, such as pedology, geomorphology, geochemistry and structural geology.
A sequence of maps for different ages can give an insight in the development of the regional geography.
In most sedimentary rocks, mica, feldspar and less stable minerals have been reduced to clay minerals like kaolinite, illite or smectite.
The rock sequence formed by a turbidity current is called a turbidite.
The setting in which a sedimentary rock forms is called the sedimentary environment.
The situation in which coastlines move in the direction of the continent is called transgression.
This cyclic nature was caused by cyclic changes in sediment supply and the sedimentary environment.
Dark rocks, rich in organic material, are therefore often shales.
Especially in warm climates, shallow marine environments far offshore mainly see deposition of carbonate rocks.
