With continuing maturation the cells enlarge in the outer integument.
Linseed oil is used in paints.
Plants producing berries are called baccate.
The mature inner integument has a palisade layer, a pigmented zone with 15-20 layers, while the innermost layer is known as the fringe layer.
Other less obvious terms include '''discoid''' (resembling a disc or plate, having both thickness and parallel faces and with a rounded margin), '''ellipsoid''', '''globose''' (spherical), or '''subglobose''' (Inflated, but less than spherical), '''lenticular''', '''oblong''', '''ovoid''', '''reniform''' and '''sectoroid'''.
*'''Chemical dormancy''' considers species that lack physiological dormancy, but where a chemical prevents germination.
The maturing ovule undergoes marked changes in the integuments, generally a reduction and disorganisation but occasionally a thickening.
This chemical can be leached out of the seed by rainwater or snow melt or be deactivated somehow.
If the seeds remain moist after dispersal, germination can be delayed for many months or even years.
Seeds are produced in several related groups of plants, and their manner of production distinguishes the angiosperms ("enclosed seeds") from the gymnosperms ("naked seeds").
The nature of this material is used in both describing and classifying seeds, in addition to the embryo to endosperm size ratio.
Many herbaceous plants from temperate climate zones have physiological dormancy that disappears with drying of the seeds.
The seed coat in the mature seed can be a paper-thin layer (e.g.
Within the seed, there usually is a store of nutrients for the seedling that will grow from the embryo.
For seeds planted in gardens, running water is best—if soaked in a container, 12 to 24 hours of soaking is sufficient.
Microorganisms are often effective in breaking down hard seed coats and are sometimes used by people as a treatment; the seeds are stored in a moist warm sandy medium for several months under nonsterile conditions.
This is given as a percent of germination over a certain amount of time, 90% germination in 20 days, for example.
Some terrestrial orchid seedlings, in fact, spend the first few years of their lives deriving energy from the fungi and do not produce green leaves.
The exotesta may consist of one or more rows of cells that are elongated and pallisade like (e.g.
The endosperm is called 'horny' when the cell walls are thicker such as date and coffee, or 'ruminated'  if mottled, as in nutmeg, palms and Annonaceae.
They usually give a seedling a faster start than a sporeling from a spore, because of the larger food reserves in the seed and the multicellularity of the enclosed embryo.
Embryo descriptors include small, straight, bent, curved and curled.
The '''endotegmen''' is derived from the inner epidermis of the inner integument, the '''exotegmen''' from the outer surface of the inner integument.
The following types of seed dormancy do not involve seed dormancy, strictly speaking, as lack of germination is prevented by the environment, not by characteristics of the seed itself (see Germination):
Sometimes each sperm fertilizes an egg cell and one zygote is then aborted or absorbed during early development.
Here the hypocotyl is a rudimentary axis between radicle and plumule.
While some seeds are edible, others are harmful, poisonous or deadly.
Small seeds are quicker to ripen and can be dispersed sooner, so fall blooming plants often have small seeds.
Examples of plant families where morphological dormancy occurs are Apiaceae, Cycadaceae, Liliaceae, Magnoliaceae and Ranunculaceae.
The presence of light or the absence of light may trigger the germination process, inhibiting germination in some seeds buried too deeply or in others not buried in the soil.
In different seeds the seed embryo or the endosperm dominates and provides most of the nutrients.
bloodroot, trilliums, acacias, and many species of Proteaceae).
'''Seed vigor''' is a measure of the quality of seed, and involves the viability of the seed, the germination percentage, germination rate and the strength of the seedlings produced.
The emergence of the seedling above the soil surface is the next phase of the plant's growth and is called seedling establishment.
(1) The embryo must be alive, called seed viability.
In rye seeds, the reduction of DNA integrity due to damage is associated with loss of seed viability during storage.
Angiosperm seeds are produced in a hard or fleshy structure called a fruit that encloses the seeds, hence the name.
In other species, the embryo is differentiated but not fully grown (underdeveloped) at dispersal, and embryo growth up to a species specific length is required before germination can occur.
All gymnosperm seeds are albuminous.
Other seeds that contain poisons include annona, cotton, custard apple, datura, uncooked durian, golden chain, horse-chestnut, larkspur, locoweed, lychee, nectarine, rambutan, rosary pea, sour sop, sugar apple, wisteria, and yew.
Rain and melting snow naturally accomplish this task.
Before germination can take place, both differentiation and growth of the embryo have to occur.
This dispersal relationship is an example of mutualism, since the plants depend upon the ants to disperse seeds, while the ants depend upon the plants seeds for food.
It involves the reactivation of the metabolic pathways that lead to growth and the emergence of the radicle or seed root and plumule or shoot.
The '''germination rate''' is the length of time it takes for the seeds to germinate.
The ants carry such seeds back to their nest, where the elaiosomes are eaten.
For some seeds, imbibing too much water too quickly can kill the seed.
*Cottonseed meal used as animal feed and fertilizer.
A more recent system distinguishes five classes: morphological, physiological, morphophysiological, physical and combinational dormancy.
Shoot Apical Meristem 7.
In the majority of flowering plants, the zygote's first division is transversely oriented in regards to the long axis, and this establishes the polarity of the embryo.
Anatropous ovules have a portion of the funiculus that is adnate (fused to the seed coat), and which forms a longitudinal ridge, or '''raphe''', just above the hilum.
Please see the category plant toxins for further relevant articles.
In species with thin seed coats, light may be able to penetrate into the dormant embryo.
these cells which are broader on their inner surface are called '''palisade''' cells.
He causeth the living to issue from the dead, and He is the one to cause the dead to issue from the living.
Many seeds are used as birdseed.
* The '''hypocotyl''', the embryonic axis below the point of attachment of the cotyledon(s), connecting the epicotyle and the radicle, being the stem-root transition zone.
In addition to the three basic seed parts, some seeds have an appendage, an '''aril''', a fleshy outgrowth of the funicle (funiculus), (as in yew and nutmeg) or an oily appendage, an '''elaiosome''' (as in ''Corydalis''), or hairs (trichomes).
Seeds also provide most cooking oils, many beverages and spices and some important food additives.
(Some fruits have layers of both hard and fleshy material).
The mechanisms of secondary dormancy are not yet fully understood, but might involve the loss of sensitivity in receptors in the plasma membrane.
Children, being smaller than adults, are more susceptible to poisoning by plants and seeds.
Plants generally produce ovules of four shapes: the most common shape is called '''anatropous''', with a curved shape.
The age of the seed affects its health and germination ability: since the seed has a living embryo, over time cells die and cannot be replaced.
Particularly in developing countries, a major constraint faced is the inadequacy of the marketing channels to get the seed to poor farmers.
Some plants do not produce seeds that have functional complete embryos, or the seed may have no embryo at all, often called empty seeds.
As a result, plants have evolved many ways to disperse their offspring by dispersing their seeds (see also vegetative reproduction).
The surface varies from highly polished to considerably roughened.
The terms "double dormancy" and "two-year seeds" are used for species whose seeds need two years to complete germination or at least two winters and one summer.
Elaiosomes are soft, fleshy structures that contain nutrients for animals that eat them.
In angiosperms, the process of seed development begins with double fertilization, which involves the fusion of two male gametes with the egg cell and the central cell to form the primary endosperm and the zygote.
Other seeds need cool soils to germinate, while others, such as celery, are inhibited when soil temperatures are too warm.
The seed coat forms from the two integuments or outer layers of cells of the ovule, which derive from tissue from the mother plant, the inner integument forms the '''tegmen''' and the outer forms the '''testa'''.
The Quran speaks about seed germination:
Monocotyledonous plants have two additional structures in the form of sheaths.
The '''endotesta''' is derived from the inner epidermis of the outer integument, and the outer layer of the testa from the outer surface of the outer integument is referred to as the '''exotesta'''.
Over a 20-year period, for example, forests composed of loblolly pine and shortleaf pine produced from 0 to nearly 5 million sound pine seeds per hectare.
Some seeds can live for a long time before germination, while others can only survive for a short period after dispersal before they die.
These photoblastic seeds need a period of darkness or light to germinate.
For example, the gluten of wheat, important in providing the elastic property to bread dough is strictly an endosperm protein.
At dormancy break, a specialized structure, the ‘water gap’, is disrupted in response to environmental cues, especially temperature, so water can enter the seed and germination can occur.
The testae of both monocots and dicots are often marked with patterns and textured markings, or have wings or tufts of hair.
A plant DNA ligase that is involved in repair of single- and double-strand breaks during seed germination is an important determinant of seed longevity.
The seeds of many legumes, including the common bean (''Phaseolus vulgaris''), contain proteins called lectins which can cause gastric distress if the beans are eaten without cooking.
The seeds are released, but need to have a lower moisture content before germination can begin.
In addition, seeds containing amygdalin—apple, apricot, bitter almond, peach, plum, cherry, quince, and others—when consumed in sufficient amounts, may cause cyanide poisoning.
As the cells enlarge, and starch is deposited in the outer layers of the pigmented zone below the outer epidermis, this zone begins to lignify, while the cells of the outer epidermis enlarge radially and their walls thicken, with nucleus and cytoplasm compressed into the outer layer.
Depending on the species, physical dormancy can be broken before or after physiological dormancy is broken.
When fruits do not open and release their seeds in a regular fashion, they are called indehiscent, which include the fruits achenes, caryopsis, nuts, samaras, and utricles.
Root Apical Meristem 8.
'''Stratification''', also called moist-chilling, breaks down physiological dormancy, and involves the addition of moisture to the seeds so they absorb water, and they are then subjected to a period of moist chilling to after-ripen the embryo.
(2) Any dormancy requirements that prevent germination must be overcome.
'''Campylotropous''' ovules have a curved megagametophyte often giving the seed a tight "C" shape.
Other seeds can imbibe and lose water a few times without causing ill effects, but drying can cause secondary dormancy.
*'''Morphophysiological dormancy''' includes seeds with underdeveloped embryos, and also have physiological components to dormancy.
Predators and pathogens can damage or kill the seed while it is still in the fruit or after it is dispersed.
Many seeds are edible and the majority of human calories comes from seeds, especially from cereals, legumes and nuts.
There may be one (Monocotyledons), or two (Dicotyledons).
Thus DNA damages that accumulate during dormancy appear to be a problem for seed survival, and the enzymatic repair of DNA damages during germination appears to be important for seed viability.
Other seed appendages include the raphe (a ridge), wings, '''caruncles''' (a soft spongy outgrowth from the outer integument in the vicinity of the micropyle), spines, or tubercles.
Thus the use of farmer-retained seed remains quite common.
Environmental conditions affecting seed germination include; water, oxygen, temperature and light.
The term "seed" also has a general meaning that antedates the above—anything that can be sown, e.g.
*Nematicide from milkweed seeds.
And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after its kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after its kind: and God saw that it was good.
When the fruits open and release their seeds in a regular way, it is called dehiscent, which is often distinctive for related groups of plants; these fruits include capsules, follicles, legumes, silicles and siliques.
Under natural conditions, seed coats are worn down by rodents chewing on the seed, the seeds rubbing against rocks (seeds are moved by the wind or water currents), by undergoing freezing and thawing of surface water, or passing through an animal's digestive tract.
The commonest colours are brown and black, other colours are infrequent.
Sometimes fruits are harvested while the seeds are still immature and the seed coat is not fully developed and sown right away before the seed coat become impermeable.
Also, in Arabidopsis seeds, the activities of the DNA repair enzymes Poly ADP ribose polymerases (PARP) are likely needed for successful germination.
The seed coat develops from the maternal tissue, the integuments, originally surrounding the ovule.
Reported lethal doses are anywhere from two to eight seeds,
According to Bewley and Black (1978), Brazil nut storage is in hypocotyl, this place of storage is uncommon among seeds.
* The '''cotyledons''', the seed leaves, attached to the embryonic axis.
In gymnosperms, no special structure develops to enclose the seeds, which begin their development "naked" on the bracts of cones.
A seed must somehow "arrive" at a location and be there at a time favorable for germination and growth.
Seeds have been considered to occur in many structurally different types (Martin 1946).
After many generations of selective pressure by plant breeders and gardeners, dormancy has been selected out.
The rate of imbibition is dependent on the permeability of the seed coat, amount of water in the environment and the area of contact the seed has to the source of water.
In some cases, these compounds simply taste bad (such as in mustard), but other compounds are toxic or break down into toxic compounds within the digestive system.
*Seeds once used as weights for balances.
Many garden plant seeds will germinate readily as soon as they have water and are warm enough; though their wild ancestors may have had dormancy, these cultivated plants lack it.
Usually parts of the testa or tegmen form a hard protective mechanical layer.
There is great variation amongst plants and a dormant seed is still a viable seed even though the germination rate might be very low.
These seeds, therefore, require a dormancy-breaking treatments, as well as a period of time to develop fully grown embryos.
This classification is based on three characteristics: embryo morphology, amount of endosperm and the position of the embryo relative to the endosperm.
The shape of the ovules as they develop often affects the final shape of the seeds.
Exogenous dormancy is caused by conditions outside the embryo, including:
The suspensor absorbs and manufacturers nutrients from the endosperm that are used during the embryo's growth.
Dormancy of the radicle (seedling root)is broken during the first winter after dispersal while dormancy of the shoot bud is broken during the second winter.
Plants and seeds often contain chemical compounds to discourage herbivores and seed predators.
The '''germination percentage''' is simply the proportion of seeds that germinate from all seeds subject to the right conditions for growth.
(3) The proper environmental conditions must exist for germination.
'''Striate''' seeds are striped with parallel, longitudinal lines or ridges.
By contrast the outer epidermis becomes tanniferous.
Unlike animals, plants are limited in their ability to seek out favorable conditions for life and growth.
The seeds of the strychnine tree are also poisonous, containing the poison strychnine.
The seed is composed of the embryo (the result of fertilization) and tissue from the mother plant, which also form a cone around the seed in coniferous plants such as pine and spruce.
The surface may have a variety of appendages (see Seed coat).
Often, seed dormancy is divided into four major categories: exogenous; endogenous; combinational; and secondary.
Abscisic acid is usually the growth inhibitor in seeds, and its production can be affected by light.
In areas where these ants have invaded, the numbers of ''Mimetes'' seedlings have dropped.
Some seeds germinate best after a fire.
Liquid smoke is often used by gardeners to assist in the germination of these species.
In endospermic seeds the cotyledons are thin and papery.
Fabaceae), hence 'palisade exotesta'.
And the evening and the morning were the third day.
However, the latter three are also poisonous.
However, the nature of the seed coat determines how rapidly water can penetrate and subsequently initiate germination.
Endogenous dormancy is caused by conditions within the embryo itself, including:
This true dormancy or innate dormancy is therefore caused by conditions within the seed that prevent germination.
It is usually triploid, and is rich in oil or starch, and protein.
The endosperm may be considered to be farinaceous (or mealy) in which the cells are filled with starch, as for instance cereal grains, or not (non-farinaceous).
Dormancy is typically broken at cool wet, warm wet or warm dry conditions.
peanut) or something more substantial (e.g.
In South Africa, the Argentine ant (''Linepithema humile'') has invaded and displaced native species of ants.
The storage proteins of the embryo and endosperm differ in their amino acid content and physical properties.
A deadly poison, ricin, comes from seeds of the castor bean.
thick and hard in honey locust and coconut), or fleshy as in the sarcotesta of pomegranate.
Over this period, there were six bumper, five poor, and nine good seed crops, when evaluated in regard to producing adequate seedlings for natural forest reproduction.
Often, thermodormancy requirements disappear as the seed ages or dries.
**'''Drying''', in some plants, including a number of grasses and those from seasonally arid regions, is needed before they will germinate.
Amongst the barriers may be the presence of lignified sclereids.
The common bean and many others, including the soybean, also contain trypsin inhibitors which interfere with the action of the digestive enzyme trypsin.
Plants that produce smaller seeds can generate many more seeds per flower, while plants with larger seeds invest more resources into those seeds and normally produce fewer seeds.
In gymnosperms, such as conifers, the food storage tissue (also called endosperm) is part of the female gametophyte, a haploid tissue.
'''Leaching''' or the soaking in water removes chemical inhibitors in some seeds that prevent germination.
In most monocotyledons (such as grasses and palms) and some ('''endospermic''' or '''albuminous''') dicotyledons (such as castor beans) the embryo is embedded in the endosperm (and nucellus, which the seedling will use upon germination.
This is the basis for their nomenclature – naked seeded plants (gymnosperms).
'''Scarification''' allows water and gases to penetrate into the seed; it includes methods to physically break the hard seed coats or soften them by chemicals, such as soaking in hot water or poking holes in the seed with a pin or rubbing them on sandpaper or cracking with a press or hammer.
Many seeds have been used as beads in necklaces and rosaries including Job's tears, Chinaberry, rosary pea, and castor bean.
Seeds protect and nourish the embryo or young plant.
Not all seeds undergo a period of dormancy.
Different groups of plants have other modifications, the so-called stone fruits (such as the peach) have a hardened fruit layer (the endocarp) fused to and surrounding the actual seed.
In the '''non-endospermic''' dicotyledons the endosperm is absorbed by the embryo as the latter grows within the developing seed, and the cotyledons of the embryo become filled with stored food.
The endosperm may also be referred to as 'fleshy' or 'cartilaginous' with thicker soft cells such as coconut, but may also be oily as in ''Ricinus'' (castor oil), ''Croton'' and Poppy.
Oil from jojoba and crambe are similar to whale oil.
Environmental conditions like flooding or heat can kill the seed before or during germination.
In the fruit of grains (caryopses) the single monocotyledon is shield shaped and hence called a '''scutellum'''.
* The '''epicotyl''', the  embryonic axis above the point of attachment of the cotyledon(s).
*'''Thermodormancy''' is seed sensitivity to heat or cold.
'''Myrmecochory''' is the dispersal of seeds by ants.
The description in 2004 of the proto-seed ''Runcaria heinzelinii'' in the Givetian of Belgium is an indication of that ancient origin of seed-plants.
In the inner epidermis the cells also enlarge radially with plate like thickening of the walls.
"seed" potatoes, "seeds" of corn or sunflower "seeds".
*'''Physiological dormancy''' means the embryo, due to physiological causes, cannot generate enough power to break through the seed coat, endosperm or other covering structures.
In the case of sunflower and corn "seeds", what is sown is the seed enclosed in a shell or husk, whereas the potato is a tuber.
These are based on a number of criteria, of which the dominant one is the embryo-to-seed size ratio.
Unlike the native ant species, Argentine ants do not collect the seeds of ''Mimetes cucullatus'' or eat the elaiosomes.
The inner integument may consist of eight to fifteen layers.
Right after fertilization, the zygote is mostly inactive, but the primary endosperm divides rapidly to form the endosperm tissue.
Seeds with hard seed coats can be soaked in hot water to break open the impermeable cell layers that prevent water intake.
For some seeds, once water is imbibed the germination process cannot be stopped, and drying then becomes fatal.
Soaking longer, especially in stagnant water, can result in oxygen starvation and seed death.
This tissue becomes the food the young plant will consume until the roots have developed after germination.
Seed dormancy has two main functions: the first is synchronizing germination with the optimal conditions for survival of the resulting seedling; the second is spreading germination of a batch of seeds over time so a catastrophe (e.g.
''Gossypium'' described here) both inner and outer integuments contribute to the seed coat formation.
Some plants with morphophysiological dormancy, such as ''Asarum'' or ''Trillium'' species, have multiple types of dormancy, one affects radicle (root) growth, while the other affects plumule (shoot) growth.
In the latter example these hairs are the source of the textile crop cotton.
