The region was ethnically diverse, consisting of Greek cities, a Persian aristocracy and indigenous peoples.
Most likely the story is merely propaganda by Seleucus, who presumably invented the story to present himself as the natural successor of Alexander.
No sources mention this, however.
Also, Agathocles of Sicily declared himself king around the same time.
It was said Antiochus told his son before he left to battle the Persians with Alexander that his real father was actually the god Apollo.
When questioned, the priests admitted their deed.
During Seleucus' escape to Egypt, Macedonia was undergoing great turmoil.
The two leaders ultimately reached an agreement, and through a treaty sealed in 305 BC, Seleucus ceded a considerable amount of territory to Chandragupta in exchange for 500 war elephants, which were to play a key role in the forthcoming battles, particularly at Ipsus.
Before his death, Seleucus tried to deal with the administration of Asia Minor.
According to other writers, however, all these territories, are reckoned as belonging to the country of the Aria.
Troy) advises priests to sacrifice to Apollo, the ancestor of Antiochus' family.
The Babylonian war finally ended in Seleucus' victory.
When Seleucus left for Europe, the organizational rearrangement of Asia Minor had not been completed.
In the final story, Seleucus reportedly slept in the temple of Sarapis in the hope that Alexander's health might improve.
Seleucus had prepared his return to Babylon well.
Seleucus, being Macedonian, had the ability to gain the trust of the Macedonians among his troops, which was not the case with Eumenes.
Babylon was one of the wealthiest provinces of the empire, but its military power was insignificant.
The city was built on the shore of the Tigris probably in 307 or 305 BC.
He escaped to Media, but his opponents did not follow him and rather returned to Susiana.
Alexander's unborn child (Alexander IV) was also named his father's successor.
It is said by Arrian that when Alexander crossed the  Hydaspes river on a boat, he was accompanied by Perdiccas, Ptolemy I Soter, Lysimachus and also Seleucus.
Antigonus and Eumenes had two encounters during 316 BC, in the battles of Paraitacene and Gabiene.
The assassination of Seleucus destroyed Seleucid prospects in Thrace and Macedon, and paved the way for Ptolemy Ceraunus to absorb much of Lysimachus' former power in Macedon.
Several anecdotes of Seleucus' life became popular in the classical world.
He understood Syria to encompass the region from the Taurus mountains to Sinai, but Ptolemy had already conquered Palestine and Phonicia.
According to Strabo, the ceded territories bordered the Indus:
*to the river Ioames (Yamuna) as much: and some copies add 5 miles more therto
However, after the outbreak of the Wars of the Diadochi in 322, Perdiccas' military failures against Ptolemy in Egypt led to the mutiny of his troops in Pelusium.
The geographical position of the tribes is as follows: along the Indus are the Paropamisadae, above whom lies the Paropamisus mountain: then, towards the south, the Arachoti: then next, towards the south, the Gedroseni, with the other tribes that occupy the seaboard; and the Indus lies, latitudinally, alongside all these places; and of these places, in part, some that lie along the Indus are held by Indians, although they formerly belonged to the Persians.
He showed himself in front of the soldiers and removed his helmet, revealing his identity.
Lysimachus' old officer Philetairos ruled Pergamon independently.
Philip defeated the invaders and only a few years later utterly subdued them under Macedonian rule.
The Babylonian priesthood had great influence over the region.
Seleucus also transferred the mint of Babylon to his new city.
The main reason was that he did not have enough Greek and Macedonian troops.
Seleucus took his future wife, the Sogdian princess Apama (daughter of Spitamenes), with him as his mistress into India, where she gave birth to his eldest son and successor Antiochus I Soter (325 BC).
At the same time he started the siege of Tyros, Antigonus allied with Rhodes.
After the defeat of Nikanor's army, there was no force in the east that could have opposed Seleucus.
Antigonus' troops slept without their equipment.
The relationship between the two soon turned cold, however.
Archon waged war against him, but fell in battle.
On the other hand, he knew that at least two eastern provinces did not have a satrap.
Eumenes decided to march to Susa in the spring of 316 BC.
No Seleucid coins were struck in India thereafter and confirm the reversal of territory west of the Indus to Chandragupta.
Seleucus obtained knowledge of most of northern India, as explained by Pliny the Elder through his numerous embassies to the Mauryan Empire:
Cassander, Seleucus and Lysimachus defeated Antigonus and Demetrius in the battle of Ipsus.
Meanwhile, the empire was once again in turmoil.
Peithon, son of Agenor, whom Antigonus had nominated as the new satrap of Babylon, fell in the battle.
Other Babylonian sources state that Seleucus arrived in Babylon in October or November 320 BC.
The events of the Second War of the Diadochi revealed Seleucus' ability to wait for the right moment.
Demetrius was finally imprisoned in Apameia and died a few years later in captivity.
Just a year before his birth (if the year 358 BC is accepted as the most likely date), the Paeonians invaded the region.
The city flourished until AD 165, when the Romans destroyed it.
Seleucus had a birthmark shaped like an anchor.
The whole region from Phrygia to the Indus was subject to Seleucus.
It is unknown what exactly happened.
Seleucus hid his armies in the marshes that surrounded the area where Nicanor was planning to cross the Tigris and made a surprise attack during the night.
Finally, Seleucus addressed Demetrius personally.
In a short time he conquered Media and Susiana.
Alexander III 'the Great' of Macedon took these away from the Arians and established settlements of his own, but Seleucus Nicator gave them to Sandrocottus Chandragupta, upon terms of intermarriage and of receiving in exchange five hundred elephants.
Babylon was soon left in the shadow of Seleucia, and the story goes that Antiochus, the son of Seleucus, moved the whole population of Babylon to his father's namesake capital in 275 BC.
Meanwhile, Eumenes and his army had arrived at Cilicia, but had to retreat when Antigonus reached the city.
His army had about 17,000 soldiers.
Antioch became his chief seat of government.
Ptolemy, Lysimachus, Cassander and Seleucus soon followed.
On the other hand, he was accepted  by other satraps of the eastern provinces.
On the other hand, based on their names, Seleucus apparently founded a number of new cities in Asia Minor.
Seleucus and Menelaos began to besiege Kition.
Several other powerful men supported Perdiccas, including Ptolemy, Lysimachus, Peithon and Eumenes.
After the battle, Syria was placed under Seleucus' rule.
But almost immediately, the wars between the Diadochi resumed and Antigonus forced Seleucus to flee Babylon.
The validity of this story is also questionable, as the Graeco-Egyptian Sarapis had not been invented at the time.
He opened the flood barriers of the river, but the resulting flood did not stop Eumenes.
He also tried to get the former ''hypasiti'' of the Argyraspides to join him, but this did not happen.
His title during this period was Seleucus ''Soter'' ("savior").
It was his duty to select the satraps.
Seleucus, however, did not manage to enlarge his kingdom to the west.
— Pliny, Natural History VI, 23
When Antigonus finally invaded Babylon, Seleucus' army was much bigger than before.
Peithon arrived at Babylon in the autumn or winter of 317 BC.
After Alexander's death (323 BCE), when the other senior Macedonian officers unloaded their "Susa wives" ''en masse'', Seleucus was one of the very few who kept his, and Apama remained his consort (later Queen) for the rest of her life.
Cornelius Nepos mentions that Seleucus also took part in this conspiracy, but this is not certain.
Polyaenus reports that the troops of Seleucus and Antigonus fought for a whole day, but when night came the battle was still undecided.
The armies of Eumenes and his allies were at breaking point.
His Persian wife, Apama, may have helped him implement his rule in Bactria and Sogdiana.
The locals had rebelled against Archon and supported Docimus.
From 312 BC, Seleucus ruthlessly expanded his dominions and eventually conquered the Persian and Median lands.
*and so to the mouth of the Ganges where he falleth into the sea 638 miles.
Eumenes was defeated and executed.
Sibyrtius, satrap of Arachosia, saw the situation as hopeless and returned to his own province.
In the first of these episodes, Alexander's diadem was blown off his head and landed on some reeds near the tombs of Assyrian kings.
*And to the confluent of the rivers Iomanes and Ganges, where both meet together, 225 miles, and many put thereto 13 miles more
It seems certain, however, that the Babylon priesthood was against Seleucus.
Ptolemy, nephew of Antigonus, attacked Asander.
It was customary for all male offspring of noble families to first serve in this position and later as officers in the king's army.
Peithon, the satrap of Media, assassinated Philip, the satrap of Parthia, and replaced him with his brother Eudemus as the new satrap.
Seleucus did not reach Bactria and Sogdiana.
His intervention in the west was solicited by Ptolemy Keraunos, who, on the accession to the Egyptian throne of his brother Ptolemy II (285 BC), had at first taken refuge with Lysimachus and then with Seleucus.
Eumenes marched his army 300 stadions away from Babylon and tried to cross the Tigris.
In Lemnos he was celebrated as a liberator and a temple was built to honour him.
Seleucus nominated his son Antiochus I as his co-ruler and viceroy of the eastern provinces in 292 BC, the vast extent of the empire seeming to require a double government.
Alexander IV, still a young child, and his mother Roxane were held guarded at Amphipolis and died under mysterious circumstances in 310 BC, probably murdered at the instigation of Cassander to allow the diadochs to assume the title of kingship.
Stratonice was also the daughter of Antipater's daughter Phila.
Nicanor was the new satrap of Media and the ''strategos'' of the eastern provinces.
At the Partition of Triparadisus in 321 BC, Seleucus was appointed Satrap of Babylon under the new regent Antipater.
Seleucus conquered Babylon with great speed and the fortress was also quickly captured.
But upon arriving in Thrace in 281 BC, Seleucus was assassinated by Ptolemy Ceraunus, who had taken refuge at the Seleucid court with his sister Lysandra.
Seleucus punished one of Antigonus' officers without asking permission from Antigonus.
Seleucus also founded six smaller cities.
After hearing this, Antigonus sent soldiers after Seleucus, who had however first escaped to Mesopotamia and then to Syria.
To cement his position, Perdiccas tried to marry Alexander's sister Cleopatra.
Cassander reclaimed Macedon the following year at Pydna and then had her killed.
Seleucus, thus, did not need to garrison the area to keep the locals from revolting.
According to one of them, he had in a dream seen Alexander standing beside him.
Peithon was finally defeated in a battle waged in Parthia.
Perhaps Chandragupta defeated Seleucus in battle.
A great majority of his own troops were from these provinces.
The historical accuracy of the story is questionable.
Seleucus was chosen to command the Companion cavalry (''hetairoi'') and appointed first or court chiliarch, which made him the senior officer in the Royal Army after the regent and commander-in-chief Perdiccas.
It has also been suggested that Ptolemy (son of Seleucus) was actually the uncle of Seleucus.
Ptolemy however captured the body and took it to Alexandria.
To demonstrate his power, Seleucus also invaded the city of Erythrai.
Always lying in wait for the neighboring nations, strong in arms and persuasive in council, he Seleucus acquired Mesopotamia, Armenia, 'Seleucid' Cappadocia, Persis, Parthia, Bactria, Arabia, Tapouria, Sogdia, Arachosia, Hyrcania, and other adjacent peoples that had been subdued by Alexander, as far as the river Indus, so that the boundaries of his empire were the most extensive in Asia after that of Alexander.
Antigonus was forced to retreat west.
Seleucus spread different stories among the provinces and the soldiers.
In Babylon, Pethon's commander, Diphilus, barricaded himself in the city's fortress.
Seleucus apparently minted coins during his stay in India, as several coins in his name are in the Indian standard and have been excavated in India.
He had left Patrocles to defend the city.
Seleucus may have received help from Cossaians, whose ancestors were the ancient Kassites.
From this, it seems that Seleucus surrendered the easternmost provinces of Arachosia, Gedrosia, Paropamisadae and perhaps also Aria.
The two rulers seem to have been on very good terms, as classical sources have recorded that following their treaty, Chandragupta sent various presents such as aphrodisiacs to Seleucus.
The struggle between the Diadochi reached its climax when Antigonus, after the extinction of the old royal line of Macedonia, proclaimed himself king in 306 BC.
Seleucus was only able to return to Babylon in 312 BC with the support of Ptolemy.
The fleet was too small to defeat Rhodes, but it was big enough to force Asander, the satrap of Caria, to ally with Ptolemy.
He left Seleucus with a small number of troops to prevent Eumenes from reaching the Mediterranean.
The news about the death of Evagoras spread among the soldiers, who started to surrender ''en masse''.
The alliance between Chandragupta and Seleucus was affirmed with a marriage (Epigamia).
Only short extracts remain of Megasthenes' description of the journey.
All cities in Asia Minor sent embassies to their new ruler.
Antigonus refused and went to Syria, where he planned to attack Ptolemy in the spring of 314 BC.
In the "Partition of Babylon" however, Perdiccas effectively divided the enormous Macedonian dominion among Alexander's generals.
*from thence (the Hydaspes) to the Hesudrus 168 miles
Under the leadership of Peucestas the other satraps of the region brought together an opposing army of their own.
John Malalas tells us Seleucus had a sister called Didymeia, who had sons called Nicanor and Nicomedes.
Antigenes, satrap of Susiana and commander of the Argyraspides, was allied with Eumenes.
This battle is only mentioned in ''Stratagems in War'' by Polyaenus.
Demetrius' troops, however, were tired and had not received their payment.
In order to enlarge his army, Seleucus tried to attract colonists from mainland Greece by founding four new cities—Seleucia Pieria and Laodicea in Syria on the coast and Antioch on the Orontes and Apameia in the Orontes River valley.
In the west Antigonus and Eumenes waged war against each other.
His plans were disturbed, however, by Ptolemy, who made a surprise attack in Cilicia.
Seleucus ruled not only  Babylonia, but the entire enormous eastern part of Alexander's empire:
In 294 BC Stratonice married her stepson Antiochus.
Lysimachus ruled Macedonia, Thracia and Asia Minor.
Antiochus founded the cult of his father.
It had two strong fortresses, in which Seleucus had left his garrisons.
Few of the letters Seleucus sent to different cities and temples still exist.
Perhaps Nicanor had not told him that Selucus now had at least 20,000 soldiers.
Seleucus may have founded a navy in the Persian Gulf and in the Indian Ocean.
Antigonus spent the winter of 316 BC in Media, whose ruler was once again Peithon.
Seleucus' victories against Antigonus and Lysimachus left the Seleucid dynasty virtually unopposed in Asia and in Anatolia.
After the death of Antipater in 319 BC, the satrap of Media began to expand his power.
Seleucus blocked the roads leading south from Cilicia and urged Demetrius' troops to join his side.
The fleet of Demetrius managed to destroy Ptolemy's fleet and thus Seleucus did not need to fight him.
Historian Junianus Justinus claims that Antiochus was one of Philip II of Macedon's generals, but no such general is mentioned in any other sources, and nothing is known of his supposed career under Philip.
War soon broke out between Perdiccas and the other Diadochi.
During the battle of Ipsus, he had less infantry than Lysimachus.
*from thence to Ganges 112 miles
305 BC), the new capital of the Seleucid Empire, a foundation that eventually depopulated Babylon.
By the time of the Indian campaigns beginning in late in 327 BC, he had risen to the command of the élite infantry corps in the Macedonian army, the "Shield-bearers" (''Hypaspistai'', later known as the "Silvershields").
Simultaneously he tried to evade battle with Demetrius.
Antigonus was now the most powerful of the ''Diadochi'', and the others would soon ally against him.
Seleucus' wars took him as far as India, where, after two years of war (305-303 BC), he made peace with the Indian Emperor Chandragupta Maurya, and exchanged his eastern satrapies in the Indus River Valley for a considerable force of 500 war elephants, which would play a decisive role against Antigonus at the Battle of Ipsus in 301 BC and against Lysimachus at the Battle of Corupedium in 281 BC.
Soon after Seleucus' return, the supporters of Antigonus tried to get Babylon back.
One inscription found in Ilion (i.e.
Seleucus now held the whole of Alexander's conquests except Egypt and moved to take possession of Macedonia and Thrace.
This is most likely propaganda on Seleucus' part to make him seem comparable to Alexander.
During his invasion of Egypt, Perdiccas sent Docimus along with his detachments to Babylon.
She held great respect among the Macedonian army but lost some of this when she had Philip III and his wife Eurydice killed as well as many nobles whom she took revenge upon for supporting Antipater during his long reign.
He then superseded Peucestas as satrap of Persia.
It seems certain that after taking Macedonia and Thracia, Seleucus would have tried to conquer Greece.
Babylon was defended in an unusual way.
Demetrius invaded and easily conquered Cilicia in 286 BC, which meant that Demetrius was now threatening the most important regions of Seleucus' empire in Syria.
It seems that the scale of Nicanor's defeat was not clear to all parties.
The new Seleucia was supposed to become his new naval base and a gateway to the Mediterranean.
Seleucus and Antigonus, however, managed to prevent this.
Antigonus executed Blitor, the new satrap of Mesopotamia, for helping Seleucus.
Despite the presumed battle, Docimus was able to escape.
He is also not mentioned as holding any major independent position during the battle, unlike, for example, Craterus, Hephaistion, Peithon and Leonnatus – each of whom had sizable detachments under his control.
Megasthenes lived with Sibyrtius, satrap of Arachosia, and speaks of his often visiting Sandracottus, the king of the Indians.
Antigonus did not know Seleucus had conquered the majority of the eastern provinces and perhaps cared little about the eastern parts of the empire.
Most geographers, in fact, do not look upon India as bounded by the river Indus, but add to it the four satrapies of the Gedrose, the Arachotë, the Aria, and the Paropamisadë, the River Cophes thus forming the extreme boundary of India.
After arriving in Egypt, Seleucus sent his friends to Greece to inform Cassander and Lysimachus, the ruler of Thracia, about Antigonus.
The satrap of the former was Stasanor, who had managed to remain neutral during the conflicts.
His general Perdiccas became the regent of all of Alexander's empire, while Alexander's physically and mentally disabled half-brother Arrhidaeus was chosen as the next king under the name Philip III of Macedon.
Seleucus perhaps tried to defeat Cappadocia, but failed.
Ancient sources  mention Seleucus three times before the death of Alexander.
The story of the dinner party of Medeios may be true, but the plot to poison the King is unlikely.
Seleucus' friends who had stayed in Babylon were released from captivity.
After the death of Alexander, Archon of Pella was chosen satrap of Babylon.
Seleucus' Babylon was surrounded by Peucestas, the satrap of Persis; Antigenes, the new satrap of Susiana and Peithon of Media.
