Selenium poisoning of water systems may result whenever new agricultural runoff courses through normally dry, undeveloped lands.
The regulation of lead in drinking water applications with the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 made a reduction of lead in brass necessary.
The most stable and dense form of selenium is gray and has a hexagonal crystal lattice consisting of helical polymeric chains, where the Se-Se distance is 237.3&nbsp;pm and Se-Se-Se angle is 130.1°.
Unlike the other allotropes, it is insoluble in CS2.
Selenium reacts with fluorine to form selenium hexafluoride:
Because of its similarity to tellurium, named for the Earth, Berzelius named the new element after the Moon.
Marine fishes and vertebrate thyroid glands have the highest concentration of selenium and iodine.
The glutathione peroxidase family of enzymes (GSH-Px) catalyze certain reactions that remove reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide and organic hydroperoxides:
:2 GSH + H2O2----GSH-Px → GSSG + 2 H2O
These materials are semiconductors.
Se compounds confer a red color to glass.
Ocean water contains significant amounts of selenium.
The selenium content in the human body is believed to be in the 13–20 milligram range.
It has an approximate composition of SeS2, with individual rings varying in composition, such as Se4S4 and Se2S6.
Selenium, especially in the II oxidation state, forms stable bonds to carbon, which are structurally analogous to the corresponding organosulfur compounds.
Selenous acid is bubbled with sulfur dioxide (reduction step) to give elemental selenium.
Selenium may inhibit Hashimoto's disease, in which the body's own thyroid cells are attacked as alien.
The thyroid gland and every cell that uses thyroid hormone use selenium, which is a cofactor for the three of the four known types of thyroid hormone deiodinases, which activate and then deactivate various thyroid hormones and their metabolites; the iodothyronine deiodinases are the subfamily of deiodinase enzymes that use selenium as the otherwise rare amino acid selenocysteine.
By contrast, selenates and selenites have an oxidant mode of action similar to that of arsenic trioxide and are very toxic.
Copper indium gallium selenide is a material used in solar cells.
About 200 million years ago, new selenoproteins were developed as mammalian GSH-Px enzymes.
It resists oxidation by air and is not attacked by nonoxidizing acids.
Hence, Berzelius's first letter to Alexander Marcet stated that this was a tellurium compound.
It rarely occurs in its elemental state or as pure ore compounds in the Earth's crust.
Selenium compounds commonly exist in the oxidation states −2, +2, +4, and +6.
Iodides of selenium are not well known.
For other applications, a red color may be desired, produced by mixtures of CdSe and CdS.
The pyrite from the Falun mine created a red precipitate in the lead chambers which was presumed to be an arsenic compound, so the pyrite's use to make acid was discontinued.
A number of correlative epidemiological studies have implicated selenium deficiency (measured by blood levels) in a number of serious or chronic diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, and tuberculosis.
Cancer patients receiving daily oral doses of selenothionine may achieve very high plasma and urine selenium concentrations.
Exceeding the Tolerable Upper Intake Level of 400 micrograms per day can lead to selenosis.
Illustrative selenides include mercury selenide (HgSe), lead selenide (PbSe), zinc selenide (ZnSe), and copper indium gallium diselenide (Cu(Ga,In)Se2).
Ruminants are particularly susceptible.
Selenium forms several allotropes that interconvert with temperature changes, depending somewhat on the rate of temperature change.
A previous sharp increase was observed in 2004 from 4–5 to $27/lb.
Certain solids are selenium-rich, and selenium can be bioconcentrated by some plants.
In the 1970s, it was shown to be present in two independent sets of enzymes.
Anthropogenic sources of selenium include coal burning, and the mining and smelting of sulfide ores.
Selenium is most commonly found as an impurity, replacing a small part of the sulfur in sulfide ores of many metals.
Cadmium selenide was an important component in quantum dots.
However, the lack of tellurium compounds in the Falun mine minerals eventually led Berzelius to reanalyze the red precipitate, and in 1818 he wrote a second letter to Marcet describing a newly found element similar to sulfur and tellurium.
Zinc selenide was the first material for blue LEDs, but gallium nitride is dominating the market now.
It dissolves in water to form selenous acid, H2SeO3.
The demand for selenium by the electronics industry is declining, despite a number of continuing applications.
Selenium's semiconductor properties found numerous other applications in electronics.
Analysis of blood levels of inorganic compounds in the supplement indicated the selenium concentrations were ten to fifteen times higher than normal in the blood samples, and 15 to 20 times higher than normal in the liver samples.
These lasted in commercial applications until the 1970s, following which they were replaced with less expensive and even more efficient silicon rectifiers.
:Se8 + 24 F2 → 8 SeF6
Its use as a photoconductor in plain-paper copiers once was a leading application, but in the 1980s, the photoconductor application declined (although it was still a large end-use) as more and more copiers switched to organic photoconductors.
On 19 April 2009, 21 polo ponies died shortly before a match in the United States Polo Open.
Unlike sulfur, which forms a stable trioxide, selenium trioxide is thermodynamically unstable and decomposes to the dioxide above 185&nbsp;°C:
In solution it ionizes to HSe−.
Selenium is used in the toning of photographic prints, and it is sold as a toner by numerous photographic manufacturers.
However, in randomized, blinded, controlled prospective trials in humans, selenium supplementation has not succeeded in reducing the incidence of any disease, nor has a meta-analysis of such selenium supplementation studies detected a decrease in overall mortality.
Whereas other Se forms are insulators, gray Se is a semiconductor showing appreciable photoconductivity.
This led to its use as a cell for sensing light.
:8 KCN + Se8 → 8 KSeCN
From about 500 million years ago, freshwater and terrestrial plants slowly optimized the production of "new" endogenous antioxidants such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C), polyphenols (including flavonoids), tocopherols, etc.
The red α, β, and γ forms are produced from solutions of black selenium by varying the evaporation rate of the solvent (usually CS2).
For every tonne of manganese, an average 2&nbsp;kg selenium oxide is used.
Selenium enzymes are involved in the small reducing molecules glutathione and thioredoxin.
The recoding mechanism was worked out first in bacteria and then in mammals (see SECIS element).
Consistent with trends indicated by the double bond rule, selenoketones, R(C=Se)R, and selenaldehydes, R(C=Se)H, are rarely observed.
The selenium compound kills the scalp fungus ''Malassezia'', which causes shedding of dry skin fragments.
Berzelius and Gahn wanted to use the pyrite and they also observed that the red precipitate gave off a smell like horseradish when burned.
Though once widely used, selenium rectifiers have mostly been replaced (or are being replaced) by silicon-based devices.
It is a nonmetal with properties that are intermediate between the elements above and below in the periodic table, sulfur and tellurium.
During the 1980s,  selenocysteine was shown to be encoded by the codon UGA.
In 1873, Willoughby Smith found that the electrical resistance of grey selenium was dependent on the ambient light.
Some of the selenium oxyhalides, such as selenium oxyfluoride (SeOF2) and selenium oxychloride (SeOCl2) have been used as specialty solvents.
Selenium came to medical notice later because of its toxicity to human beings working in industries.
In these compounds, selenium plays a role analogous to that of sulfur.
Sheets of amorphous selenium convert X-ray images to patterns of charge in xeroradiography and in solid-state, flat-panel X-ray cameras.
Hot, concentrated selenic acid can react with gold to form gold(III) selenate.
The largest commercial use of Se, accounting for about 50% of consumption, is for the production of glass.
The minimum distance between chains is 343.6&nbsp;pm.
It is a strongly odiferous, toxic, and colorless gas.
The packing is most dense in the α form.
Evidence suggests that the molecular mechanisms of mercury toxicity includes the irreversible inhibition of selenoenzymes that are required to prevent and reverse oxidative damage in brain and endocrine tissues.
Both chemists owned a chemistry plant near Gripsholm, Sweden, producing sulfuric acid by the lead chamber process.
Commercially, selenium is produced as a byproduct in the refining of these ores, most often during production.
During the electro winning of manganese, the addition of selenium dioxide decreases the power necessary to operate the electrolysis cells.
In the Se8 rings, the Se-Se distance is 233.5 pm and Se-Se-Se angle is 105.7°.
Salts of selenous acid are called selenites.
These species are structurally analogous to the corresponding disulfur dichloride.
Neonate ruminants at risk of WMD (white muscle disease) may be administered both selenium and vitamin E by injection; some of the WMD myopathies respond only to selenium, some only to vitamin E, and some to either.
Selenium deficiency is rare in otherwise healthy, well-nourished individuals.
In 1954, the first hints of specific biological functions of selenium were discovered in microorganisms.
With highly electropositive metals, such as aluminium, these selenides are prone to hydrolysis:
In comparison with its sulfur counterpart (sulfur hexafluoride), selenium hexafluoride (SeF6) is more reactive and is a toxic pulmonary irritant.
Selenium is most commonly produced from selenide in many sulfide ores, such as those of copper, nickel, or lead.
), woody asters (''Xylorhiza'' sp.
In fact, the angiosperms (the dominant type of plant today) and most of their antioxidant pigments evolved during the late Jurassic period.
In general, absorption of dietary selenium is lower in ruminants than other animals, and is lower from forages than from grain.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.2&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.
various regions within North America) where low selenium soil levels lead to low concentrations in the plants, some animal species may be deficient unless selenium is supplemented with diet or injection.
Much below that level, young salmon die from deficiency; much above, they die from toxic excess.
selenium, vanadium, magnesium, copper, and zinc, may have been lacking in some terrestrial mineral-deficient areas.
The selenocysteine-containing form occurs in species as diverse as green algae, diatoms, sea urchin, fish, and chicken.
See also ''Selenium-79'' for recent changes in the measured half-life of 79Se, which are important for the dose calculations in the geological disposal of long-lived radioactive waste.
In soils, selenium most often occurs in soluble forms such as selenate (analogous to sulfate), which are leached into rivers very easily by runoff.
Selenium disulfide consists of 8-membered rings.
Ruminants grazing certain forages, e.g., some white clover varieties containing cyanogenic glycosides, may have higher selenium requirements, presumably because cyanide is released from the aglycone by glucosidase activity in the rumen and glutathione peroxidases is deactivated by the cyanide acting on the glutathione moiety.
Although New Zealand soil has low levels of selenium, adverse health effects have not been detected in the residents.
When rapidly melted, it forms the black, vitreous form, usually sold commercially as beads.
These include silver selenite (Ag2SeO3) and sodium selenite (Na2SeO3).
The only stable chloride is selenium monochloride (Se2Cl2), which might be better known as selenium(I) chloride; the corresponding bromide is also known.
This changes the availability of selenium because only a comparably small part of the selenium in the ore is leached with the copper.
It can occur in patients with severely compromised intestinal function, those undergoing total parenteral nutrition, and in those of advanced age (over 90).
Selenium intensifies and extends the tonal range of black-and-white photographic images and improves the permanence of prints.
This was followed by the discovery of selenocysteine in proteins.
Increased dietary selenium reduces the effects of mercury toxicity, although it is effective only at low to modest doses of mercury.
Extreme cases of selenosis can exhibit cirrhosis of the liver, pulmonary edema, or death.
In plants, it occurs as a bystander mineral, sometimes in toxic proportions in forage (some plants may accumulate selenium as a defense against being eaten by animals, but other plants, such as locoweed, require selenium, and their growth indicates the presence of selenium in soil).
The chief commercial uses for selenium today are glassmaking and pigments.
Alkali metal selenides react with selenium to form polyselenides, , which exist as chains.
The consumption in 2010 was divided as follows: metallurgy – 30%, glass manufacturing – 30%, agriculture – 10%, chemicals and pigments – 10%, and electronics – 10%.
Another selenium-bearing enzyme in some plants and in animals (thioredoxin reductase) generates reduced thioredoxin, a dithiol that serves as an electron source for peroxidases and also the important reducing enzyme ribonucleotide reductase that makes DNA precursors from RNA precursors.
Marine organisms retained and sometimes expanded their selenoproteomes, whereas the selenoproteomes of some terrestrial organisms were reduced or completely lost.
Like lead and sulfur, selenium improves the machinability of steel at concentrations around 0.15%.
Three days later, a pharmacy released a statement explaining that the horses had received an incorrect dose of one of the ingredients used in a vitamin/mineral supplement compound that had been incorrectly compounded by a compounding pharmacy.
From about three billion years ago, prokaryotic selenoprotein families drive the evolution of selenocysteine, an amino acid.
Selenium does not exhibit the changes in viscosity that sulfur undergoes when gradually heated.
Hydrogen sulfide reacts with aqueous selenous acid to produce selenium disulfide:
One family of selenium-bearing molecules (the glutathione peroxidases) destroys peroxide and repairs damaged peroxidized cell membranes, using glutathione.
Selenium is still used in a few types of DC power surge protectors and one type of fluorescent quantum dot.
Although it is toxic in large doses, selenium is an essential micronutrient for animals.
Selenium also occurs in organic compounds, such as dimethyl selenide, selenomethionine, selenocysteine and methylselenocysteine, all of which have high bioavailability and are toxic in large doses.
It is also found in three deiodinase enzymes, which convert one thyroid hormone to another.
Selenium requirements in plants differ by species, with some plants requiring relatively large amounts and others apparently requiring none.
Gray Se is formed by mild heating of other allotropes, by slow cooling of molten Se, or by condensing Se vapor just below the melting point.
Selenium produces the same machinability improvement in copper alloys.
About 2,000 tonnes of selenium were produced in 2011 worldwide, mostly in Germany (650 t), Japan (630 t), Belgium (200 t), and Russia (140 t), and the total reserves were estimated at 93,000 tonnes.
A few of these appeared more recently, in the last 50–200 million years, in fruits and flowers of angiosperm plants.
'''Selenium''' is a chemical element with symbol '''Se''' and atomic number&nbsp;34.
A reduction of 21% on TPO antibodies is reported with the dietary intake of 0.2&nbsp;mg of selenium.
The main selenium indicator plants are ''Astragalus'' species (including some locoweeds), prince's plume (''Stanleya'' sp.
It was discovered to be essential for mammalian life in 1957.
Some analytical techniques are capable of distinguishing organic from inorganic forms of the element.
Selenium can be refined from these muds by a number of methods.
Selenium is a component of the unusual amino acids selenocysteine and selenomethionine.
Also, selenium interacts with other minerals, such as zinc and copper.
High doses of Se supplements in pregnant animals might disturb the Zn:Cu ratio and lead to Zn reduction; in such treatment cases, Zn levels should be monitored.
Selenium interacts with other nutrients, such as iodine and vitamin E. The effect of selenium deficiency on health remains uncertain, particularly in relation to Kashin-Beck disease.
They are, thus, involved in thyroid-hormone regulation, participating in the protection of thyrocytes from damage by H2O2 produced for thyroid-hormone biosynthesis.
Industrial production of selenium usually involves the extraction of selenium dioxide from residues obtained during the purification of copper.
In X-ray crystallography, incorporation of one or more selenium atoms in place of sulfur helps with multiple-wavelength anomalous dispersion and single wavelength anomalous dispersion phasing.
Certain species of plants are considered indicators of high selenium content of the soil becauses they require high levels of selenium to thrive.
Selenium is found in metal sulfide ores, where it partially replaces the sulfur.
Selenium occurs naturally in a number of inorganic forms, including selenide, selenate, and selenite, but these minerals are rare.
It is a component of the antioxidant enzymes glutathione peroxidase and thioredoxin reductase (which indirectly reduce certain oxidized molecules in animals and some plants).
Common production from the residue then begins by oxidation with sodium carbonate to produce selenium dioxide, which is mixed with water and acidified to form selenous acid (oxidation step).
Selenium trioxide may be synthesized by dehydrating selenic acid, H2SeO4, which is itself produced by the oxidation of selenium dioxide with hydrogen peroxide:
The ingredient is also used in body lotions to treat tinea versicolor due to infection by a different species of ''Malassezia'' fungus.
Selenium dichloride is an important reagent in the preparation of selenium compounds (e.g.
Selenium trioxide is produced in the laboratory by the reaction of anhydrous potassium selenate (K2SeO4) and sulfur trioxide (SO3).
Selenium (Greek σελήνη ''selene'' meaning "Moon") was discovered in 1817 by Jöns Jakob Berzelius and Johan Gottlieb Gahn.
At levels of 1&nbsp;mg/m3, selenium is immediately dangerous to life and health.
China is the dominant consumer of selenium at 1,500–2,000 tonnes/year.
In addition, selenium supplementation has been found to be a chemopreventive for some types of cancer in some types of rodents.
It is prepared by treating selenium with sulfuryl chloride (SO2Cl2).
The price was relatively stable during 2004–2010 at about US$30 per pound (in 100-pound lots) but increased to $65 /lb in 2011.
Selenium deficiency, defined by low (<60% of normal) selenoenzyme activity levels in brain and endocrine tissues, occurs only when a low selenium level is linked with an additional stress, such as high exposures to mercury or increased oxidant stress from vitamin E deficiency.
This smell was not typical of arsenic, but a similar odor was known from tellurium compounds.
The first commercial products using selenium were developed by Werner Siemens in the mid-1870s.
82Se is stable, for all practical purposes.
Upon heating, it softens at 50&nbsp;°C and converts to gray selenium at 180&nbsp;°C; the transformation temperature is reduced by presence of halogens and amines.
See more on plant nutrition below.
Selenium was also recognized as an important veterinary toxin, which is seen in animals that have eaten high-selenium plants.
This coal was shown to have selenium content as high as 9.1%, the highest concentration in coal ever recorded.
It is a polymeric solid that forms monomeric SeO2 molecules in the gas phase.
The deiodinase isoenzymes constitute another family of eukaryotic selenoproteins with identified enzyme function.
In living systems, selenium is found in the amino acids selenomethionine, selenocysteine, and methylselenocysteine.
:SeO2 + H2O2 → H2SeO4
Another naturally occurring organoselenium compound is dimethyl selenide.
Selenium salts are toxic in large amounts, but trace amounts are necessary for cellular function in many organisms, including all animals.
:3 Se + 4 HNO3 + H2O → 3 H2SeO3 + 4 NO
Selenoprotein families of GSH-Px and the deiodinases of eukaryotic cells seem to have a bacterial phylogenetic origin.
The structure of black selenium is irregular and complex and consists of polymeric rings with up to 1000 atoms per ring.
Further studies are needed to conﬁrm these interactions.
), and false goldenweed (''Oonopsis'' sp.)
Representatives of selenides, diselenides, and selenols include respectively selenomethionine, diphenyldiselenide, and benzeneselenol.
The substance loosely called selenium sulfide (approximate formula, SeS2) is the active ingredient in some anti-dandruff shampoos.
:2 SeO3 → 2 SeO2 + O2 (ΔH = −54&nbsp;kJ/mol)
Applications in electronics, once important, have been mostly supplanted by silicon semiconductor devices.
Electrolytic metal refining is particularly productive of selenium as a byproduct, obtained from the anode mud of copper refineries.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (Permissible exposure limit) for selenium in the workplace at 0.2&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.
These findings suggest that, with the exception of vertebrates, aquatic life supports selenium use, whereas terrestrial habitats lead to reduced use of this trace element.
Selenous acid can also be made directly by oxidizing elemental selenium with nitric acid:
It is more acidic than H2S.
Trace elements involved in GSH-Px and superoxide dismutase enzymes activities, i.e.
(Only the deiodinase, iodotyrosine deiodinase, which works on the last breakdown products of thyroid hormone, does not use selenium.)
Selenium is a semiconductor and is used in photocells.
The common mineral selenite is not a selenium mineral, and contains no selenite ion, but is rather a type of gypsum (calcium sulfate hydrate) named like selenium for the moon well before the discovery of selenium.
Selenium is incorporated into several prokaryotic selenoprotein families in bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes as selenocysteine, where selenoprotein peroxiredoxins protect bacterial and eukaryotic cells against oxidative damage.
The chronic toxic dose of selenite for humans is about 2400 to 3000 micrograms of selenium per day.
The selenium cell was used in the photophone developed by Alexander Graham Bell in 1879.
The 1992 study actually found the maximum safe dietary Se intake to be approximately 800 micrograms per day (15 micrograms per kilogram body weight), but suggested 400 micrograms per day to avoid creating an imbalance of nutrients in the diet and to accord with data from other countries.
Also, people dependent on food grown from selenium-deficient soil are at risk.
Selenium was later confirmed to be the toxic factor.
