However, it also would mean the de facto end of self-determination of national groups.
It promotes the abolition of war among states as well as increased individual liberty within states, and holds the expansion of global markets and cross-border cooperation diminishes the significance of territorial integrity, allowing for somewhat greater recognition of greater self-determination of peoples.
Black nationalists have argued that, by virtue of slaves' unpaid labor and the harsh experiences of African Americans under slavery and Jim Crow, African Americans have a moral claim to the black belt region of the American South.
A Boundary Commission was established to consider re-drawing it.
Korea was specifically granted independence but the receiver of various other areas was not stated in the Treaty of San Francisco, giving Taiwan ''de facto'' independence although its political status continues to be ambiguous...
This, it is claimed, applies to situations where the territorial integrity of a state had been disrupted by colonisation, so that the people of a territory subject to a historic territorial claim are prevented from exercising a right to self-determination.
The original purpose of Paragraph 6 was "to ensure that acts of self-determination occur within the established boundaries of colonies, rather than within sub-regions".
As of January 2014, Washington has not taken action to address the results of this plebiscite.
A number of states have laid claim to territories, which they allege were removed from them as a result of colonialism.
The Netherlands retained Dutch New Guinea, but Indonesia threatened to invade and annex it.
The 1918 Constitution of the Soviet Union acknowledged the right of secession for its constituent republics.
The 2003 draft of the European Union Constitution allowed for the voluntary withdrawal of member states from the union, although the State wanted to leave could not be involved in the vote deciding whether or not they can leave the Union.
Such groups often pursued independence and sovereignty over territory, but sometimes a different sense of autonomy has been pursued or achieved.
In 1912, the Republic of China officially succeeded the Qing Dynasty, while Outer Mongolia, Tibet and Tuva proclaimed their independence.
(possible answers were yes or no) and, in case the answer to this question is yes, "do you want Catalonia to be an independent State?"
In determining international borders between sovereign states, self-determination has yielded to a number of other principles.
Its efforts led to the creation of a separate Nagaland state within India in 1963.
It considered as increase in faith of Kashmiri people in democratic process of India.
Decolonization in the world was contrasted by the Soviet Union's successful post-war expansionism.
They also supported the right of all nations, including colonies, to self-determination."
Indonesia gained independence from the Netherlands in 1949 after the latter failed to restore colonial control.
Self-determination is referred to in the Falkland Islands Constitution and is a factor in the Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute.
After the American Civil War and with increasing capability, the United States government did not accept self-determination as a basis during its Purchase of Alaska and attempted purchase of the West Indian islands of Saint Thomas and Saint John in the 1860s, or its growing influence in the Hawaiian Islands, that led to annexation in 1898.
Similarly, there are reports that presidential elections in May 2014 were prevented from taking place in the two regions after armed gunmen took control of polling stations, kidnapped election officials, and stole lists of electors, thus denying the population the chance to express their will in a free, fair, and internationally recognised election.
Also Germany lost land after WWI: Northern Slesvig voted to return to Denmark after a referendum.
For more information on past movements see list of historical autonomist and secessionist movements and lists of decolonized nations.
The Parti Québécois has asserted Quebec's "right to self-determination. "
On the other hand, she finds that secession within a single state is a domestic matter not covered by international law.
Since the early 1990s, the legitimatization of the principle of national self-determination has led to an increase in the number of conflicts within states, as sub-groups seek greater self-determination and full secession, and as their conflicts for leadership within groups and with other groups and with the dominant state become violent.
It was eliminated in the 1974 constitution of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma (officially the "Union of Myanmar").
The self-determination of the West Papuan people has been violently suppressed by the Indonesian government since the withdrawal of Dutch colonial rule under the Netherlands New Guinea in 1962.
The American public, organized associated groups, and Congressional resolutions, often supported such movements, particularly the Greek War of Independence (1821–29) and the demands of Hungarian revolutionaries in 1848.
There is an active secessionist movement based on the self-determination of the residents of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine, allegedly against the instability and corruption of the Ukrainian government.
On 14 December 1960, the United Nations General Assembly adopted United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) under titled Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which supported the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples in providing an inevitable legal linkage between self-determination and its goal of decolonisation, It postulated a new international law-based right of freedom also in economic self-determination.
The name is derived from the ancient Tamil name for Sri Lanka, Eelam.
To monitor the implementation of Resolution 1514, in 1961 the General Assembly created the Special Committee referred to popularly as the Special Committee on Decolonization to ensure decolonization complete compliance with the principle of self-determination in General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV), 12 Principle of the Annex defining free association with an independent State, integration into an independent State, or independence as the three legitimate options of full self-government compliance with the principle of self-determination.
The groups range from those seeking territorial units similar to Indian reservations under the United States, with the least amount of independent control, to the Hawaiian sovereignty movement, which is projected to have the most amount of independence.
Many current U.S. state, regional and city secession groups use the language of self-determination.
In cases where people lack representation by a state's government, the unrepresented become a separate people.
In "anarcho-capitalist" theory only landowners have the right to secede.
The Korean War shifted the focus of the Cold War from Europe to Asia, where competing superpowers took advantage of decolonization to spread their influence.
9% of the Nagas wanted an independent Naga country according to a referendum conducted by it.
In January 1918 Wilson issued his Fourteen Points of January 1918 which, among other things, called for adjustment of colonial claims, insofar as the interests of colonial powers had equal weight with the claims of subject peoples.
Phizo's group, the Naga National Council (NNC), claimed that 99.
Since the late 20th century, some states periodically discuss desires to secede from the United States.
This implies a people should be free to choose their own state and its territorial boundaries.
Inside those new republics, four major areas have claimed their own independence, but not received widespread international recognition.
The new People's Republic of China had gained control of mainland China in the Chinese Civil War.
Nationalism emerged as a uniting ideology not only between competing powers, but also for groups that felt subordinated or disenfranchised inside larger states; in this situation, self-determination can be seen as a reaction to imperialism.
Vita Gudeleviciute holds that in cases of non-self-governing peoples and foreign military occupation the principle of self-determination trumps that of territorial integrity.
In none of these areas were the opinions of affected people consulted, or given significant priority.
The Chinese Communist Party followed the Soviet Union in including the right of secession in its 1931 constitution in order to entice ethnic nationalities and Tibet into joining.
The Patriotic Union of Kurdistan which currently holds the Iraqi presidency and the Kurdistan Democratic Party which governs the Kurdistan Regional Government both explicitly commit themselves to the development of Kurdish self-determination, but opinions vary as to the question of self-determination sought within the current borders and countries.
Japan joined the Allied Powers in World War I and attacked German colonial possessions in the Far East, adding former German possessions to its own empire.
The Kuomintang-led Republic of China government retreated to Taipei, its jurisdiction now limited to Taiwan and several outlying islands.
In 1989 – 90, the communist regimes of Soviet satellite states collapsed in rapid succession in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Bulgaria, Romania, and Mongolia.
Although satellite states were independent and possessed sovereignty, the Soviet Union violated principles of self-determination by suppressing the Hungarian revolution of 1956 and the Prague Spring Czechoslovak reforms of 1968.
Independence was not accepted by the government of China.
In 1949, the Communists won the civil war and established the People's Republic of China in Mainland China.
When the blank votes are counted as anti-statehood votes, the statehood option would have received less than 50% of all ballots received.
The population has existed for over nine generations, continuously for over 175 years.
In Asia, Japan became a rising power and gained more respect from Western powers after its victory in the Russo-Japanese War.
The employment of imperialism, through the expansion of empires, and the concept of political sovereignty, as developed after the Treaty of Westphalia, also explain the emergence of self-determination during the modern era.
This desire for independence is particularly stressed among leftist Basque nationalists.
The overall result was 80,76% in favor of both questions, 11% in favor of the first question but not of the second questions,4,54% against both and the rest were classified as "other answers".
With its victory in the Spanish–American War in 1899 and its growing stature in the world, the United States supported annexation of the former Spanish colonies of Guam, Puerto Rico and the Philippines, without the consent of their peoples, and it retained "quasi-suzerainty" over Cuba, as well.
The ratification of the United Nations Charter in 1945 at the end of World War II placed the right of self-determination into the framework of international law and diplomacy.
The right of nations to '''self-determination''' (from ) is a cardinal principle in modern international law (commonly regarded as a ''jus cogens'' rule), binding, as such, on the United Nations as authoritative interpretation of the Charter’s norms.
They believe this area should be the basis of forming an independent state of New Afrika, designed to have an African-American majority and political control.
However, the charter and other resolutions did not insist on full independence as the best way of obtaining self-government, nor did they include an enforcement mechanism.
The Spanish government denies that Gibraltarians have the right to self-determination, considering them to be "an artificial population without any genuine autonomy" and not "indigenous".
Historical records dispute this and whilst acknowledging the garrison was expelled note the existing civilian population remained at Port Louis and there was no attempt to colonise the islands until 1841.
Unilateral secession against majority rule is justified if the group allows secession of any other group within its territory.
In the 1990s indigenous populations of the northern two-thirds of Quebec province opposed being incorporated into a Quebec nation and stated a determination to resist it by force.
The Nigerian Civil War was fought between Biafran secessionists of the Republic of Biafra and the Nigerian central government.
After the 2012 Catalan march for independence, in which more than 1.
The 1947 Constitution of the Union of Burma contained an express state right to secede from the union under a number of procedural conditions.
The principle does not state how the decision is to be made, nor what the outcome should be, whether it be independence, federation, protection, some form of autonomy or full assimilation.
In order to accommodate demands for minority rights and avoid secession and the creation of a separate new state, many states decentralize or devolve greater decision-making power to new or existing subunits or autonomous areas.
According to the Helsinki Final Act of 1975, the UN, ICJ and international law experts, there is no contradiction between the principles of self-determination and territorial integrity, with the latter taking precedence.
However, despite boycott calls by separatist leaders, 2014 Jammu and Kashmir Assembly elections saw highest voters turnout in last 25 years since insurgency has erupted.
In December 1991, Gorbachev resigned as president and the Soviet Union dissolved relatively peacefully into fifteen sovereign republics, all of which rejected communism and most of which adopted democratic reforms and free-market economies.
5 million citizens marched, the President of Catalonia, Artur Mas, called for new parliamentary elections on 25 November 2012 to elect a new parliament that would exercise the right of self-determination for Catalonia.
Unlike in Singapore, however, no referendum was ever conducted in Sarawak and North Borneo.
A 2008 Zogby International poll revealed that 22% of Americans believe that "any state or region has the right to peaceably secede and become an independent republic. "
However, their movement was hijacked by the Islamist terrorist group Ansar Dine.
The NNC collapsed after Phizo got his dissenters killed or forced them to seek refuge with the Government.
The United Nations team largely confirmed these findings, which were later accepted by the General Assembly, and both territories subsequently wish to form the new Federation of Malaysia.
In a referendum that took place in November 2012, a majority of Puerto Rican residents voted to change the territory's relationship with the United States, with the statehood option being the preferred option.
Once groups exercise self-determination through secession, the issue of the proposed borders may prove more controversial than the fact of secession.
It also sifted through 1600 letters and memoranda submitted by individuals, organisations and political parties.
The traditional homeland of the Tuareg peoples was divided up by the modern borders of Mali, Algeria and Niger.
During the 1920s and 1930s there were some successful movements for self-determination in the beginnings of the process of decolonization.
The French Revolution was motivated similarly and legitimatized the ideas of self-determination on that Old World continent.
However, the number of insurgency-related deaths in the state had fallen sharply since the start of a slow-moving peace process between India and Pakistan.
Nevertheless, justified by the language of self-determination, between 1946 and 1960, thirty-seven new nations in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East gained independence from colonial powers.
Pavković explores how national self-determination, in the form of creation of a new state through secession, could override the principles of majority rule and of equal rights, which are primary liberal principles.
Pavkovic and Radan describe three theories of international relations relevant to self-determination.
The Parliament of Catalonia voted to hold a 'referendum or consultation' in the next four-year legislature in which the people of Catalonia would decide on becoming a new independent and sovereign state.
However, many in the international community assert that referendums held there in 2014 regarding independence from Ukraine were illegitimate and undemocratic.
This interpretation is rejected by many states, who argue that Paragraph 2 of UN Resolution 1514(XV) states that "all peoples have the right to self-determination" and Paragraph 6 cannot be used to justify territorial claims.
The insurgency in Kashmir, the most notable one, has existed in various forms.
Within the New World during the early 19th century, most of the nations of Spanish America achieved independence from Spain.
Or the definition may be simply that a people is a group of individuals who unanimously choose a separate state.
Cobbold concluded that around two thirds of the population favoured to the formation of Malaysia while the remaining third wanted either independence or continuing control by the United Kingdom.
Woodrow Wilson revived America's commitment to self-determination, at least for European states, during World War I.
This encompassed basic local government functions, ranging from land dealings and management of community centres to road maintenance and garbage collection, as well as setting education programmes and standards in their local schools.
Each of these tribes lived in a sovereign village before the arrival of the British, but developed a common identity as the area was Christianized.
As of 1996 the constitutions of Austria, Ethiopia, France, and Saint Kitts and Nevis have express or implied rights to secession.
The Ottoman Empire, Austrian Empire, Russian Empire, Qing Empire and the new Empire of Japan maintained themselves, often expanding or contracting at the expense of another empire.
However, the UK government differs with the Gibraltarian government in that it considers Gibraltarian self-determination to be limited by the Treaty of Utrecht, which prevents Gibraltar achieving independence without the agreement of Spain, a position that the Gibraltarian government does not accept.
In 1947, India gained independence from the British Empire.
There are also arguments, that the de facto separation of Eastern Ukraine from the rest of the country is not in fact an expression of self-determination, but rather an invasion by neighbouring Russia, with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko reporting to MPs on the 4th June 2015 that up to nine thousand Russian soldiers were deployed in Ukraine.
Since the 19th century, Basque nationalism has demanded the right of some kind of self-determination.
Soviet actions were contained by the United States which saw communism as a menace to its interests.
In 2007 the Decolonization Subcommittee called for the United Nations General Assembly to review the political status of Puerto Rico, a power reserved by the 1953 Resolution.
In January 1942 twenty-six states signed the Declaration by United Nations, which accepted those principles.
National self-determination appears to challenge the principle of territorial integrity (or sovereignty) of states as it is the will of the people that makes a state legitimate.
A widespread armed insurgency started in Kashmir against India rule in 1989 after allegations of rigging by the Indian government in the 1987 Jammu and Kashmir state election.
Iraqi Kurdistan has to date achieved the largest degree of self-determination through the formation of the Kurdistan Regional Government, an entity recognised by the Iraqi Federal Constitution.
It would comprise the Southwestern United States, historic territory of indigenous peoples and their descendants, as well as colonists and later settlers under the Spanish colonial and Mexican governments.
The United States supported that status, as policy in the hemisphere relative to European colonialism, with the Monroe Doctrine.
In the Statute of Westminster the United Kingdom granted independence to Canada, New Zealand, Newfoundland, the Irish Free State, the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Union of South Africa after the British parliament declared itself as incapable of passing laws over them without their consent.
Tuva and several regional states in Eastern Europe, the Baltic, and Central Asia had been fully annexed by the Soviet Union during World War II.
French-speaking Quebec nationalism and support for maintaining Québécois culture would inspire Quebec nationalists, many of whom were supporters of the Quebec sovereignty movement during the late-20th century.
To date two separate Kurdish republics and one Kurdish Kingdom have declared sovereignty.
The Naga People's Convention (NPC), another major Naga organization, was opposed to the secessionists.
In the United States Abraham Lincoln acknowledged that secession might be possible through amending the United States Constitution.
However, as the consultation was not a proper referendum, these answers were just suggestions and other answers were also accepted and catalogued as "other answers" instead as null votes.
To achieve this, a variety of means was implemented, including the orchestration of coups, sponsoring of anti-communist countries and military interventions.
Thousands of lives have been lost since 1989 due to the intensification of both the insurgency and the fight against it.
There is debate on under which conditions would this right be realized.
It states that nations, based on respect for the principle of equal rights and fair equality of opportunity, have the right to freely choose their sovereignty and international political status with no interference.
This was essentially the model Japan followed as it invaded other areas in Asia and established the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
Since 1972, the U.N. Decolonization Committee has called for Puerto Rico's 'decolonization' and for the U.S. to recognize the island's right to self-determination and independence.
This principle can be traced to the Atlantic Charter, signed on 14 August 1941, by Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, and Winston Churchill, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who pledged The Eight Principal points of the Charter.
As per the Indian government, it recorded more than 65% of voters turnout which was more than usual voters turnout in other state assembly elections of India.
After decades of civil war, Indonesia finally recognized the independence of East Timor in 2002.
When the Bolsheviks came to power in Russia in November 1917, they called for Russia's immediate withdrawal as a member of the Allies of World War I.
Other efforts were unsuccessful, like the Indian independence movement.
In many Third World countries, communism became an ideology that united groups to oppose imperialism or colonization.
A vote was supposedly taken under the UN sponsored Act of Free Choice to allow West New Guineans to decide their fate, although many dispute its veracity.
In liberal constitutional democracies the principle of majority rule has dictated whether a minority can secede.
By the Treaty of Kyakhta (1915) Outer Mongolia recognized China's sovereignty.
And Italy, Japan and Germany all initiated new efforts to bring certain territories under their control, leading to World War II.
* Eastern Asia: colonies and various spheres of influence were established, largely to the detriment of the Qing Empire.
Only after the forced removal of the Greek Cypriots from the North of Cyprus did they form a local majority.
Turkish Cypriots and their former leader, Fazıl Küçük said that Turkish Cypriots had the right of self-determination, as well as Greek Cypriots.
The derived autonomous regime for the BAC was approved by Spanish Parliament and also by the Basque citizens in referendum.
Certain Chicano nationalist groups seek to "recreate" an ethnic-based state to be called Aztlán, after the legendary homeland of the Aztecs.
However, there are far more self-identified nations than there are existing states and there is no legal process to redraw state boundaries according to the will of these peoples.
Karl Marx supported such nationalism, believing it might be a "prior condition" to social reform and international alliances.
There is an active movement based on the self-determination of the Sahrawi people in the Western Sahara region.
East and West Germany united, Czechoslovakia peacefully split into Czech Republic and Slovakia, while in 1990 Yugoslavia began a violent break up into its former 6 sub-unit republics.
Kosovo, which was previously an autonomous unit of Serbia declared independence in 2008, but has received less international recognition.
Under Dzhokhar Dudayev, Chechnya declared independence as the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, using self-determination, Russia's history of bad treatment of Chechens, and a history of independence before invasion by Russia as main motives.
In 1914 Vladimir Lenin wrote: "It would be wrong to interpret the right to self-determination as meaning anything but the right to existence as a separate state. "
''Euskadi Ta Askatasuna'' or ETA (; pronounced ), is an armed Basque nationalist, separatist and terrorist organization.
This is justified by reference to Paragraph 6 of UN Resolution 1514(XV), which states that any attempt "aimed at partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter".
An attempt sponsored by Spain and Argentina to qualify the right to self-determination in cases where there was a territorial dispute was rejected by the UN General Assembly, which re-iterated the right to self-determination was a universal right.
* Liberal internationalism has become an alternative since that time.
As noted, self-determination movements remain strong in some areas of the world.
The conclusions of both the Cobbold Commission and the United Nations team were arrived at without any referendums self-determination being held.
they sought to consolidate several of the previous ruled entities then there was Manila Accord, an agreement between the Philippines, Federation of Malaya and Indonesia on 31 July 1963 to abide by the wishes of the people of North Borneo and Sarawak within the context of United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV), Principle 9 of the Annex taking into account referendums in North Borneo and Sarawak that would be free and without coercion.
Argentina states the principle of self-determination is not applicable since the current inhabitants are not aboriginal and were brought to replace the Argentine population, which was expelled by an 'act of force', forcing the Argentinian inhabitants to directly leave the occupied islands.
The border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Free State was based on the borders of existing counties and did not include all of historic Ulster.
The impact of the right to self-determination of Gibraltarians was seen in the 2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum, where Gibraltarian voters overwhelmingly rejected a plan to share sovereignty over Gibraltar between the UK and Spain.
It also is derived from principles espoused by President Woodrow Wilson following World War I, after which some new nation states were formed, or previous states were revived after the dissolution of empires.
More limited measures might include restricting demands to the maintenance of national cultures or granting non-territorial autonomy in the form of national associations which would assume control over cultural matters.
Libertarians who argue for self-determination distinguish between the voluntary nation (the land, the culture, the terrain, the people) and the state, the coercive apparatus, which they have a right to choose or self-determine.
* Chapter 1, Article 1, part 2 states that purpose of the UN Charter is: "To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace. "
(possible answers again yes or no).
Also see list of autonomous areas by country and list of territorial autonomies and list of active autonomist and secessionist movements.
The empire was in decline but adapted to these circumstances by creating the British Commonwealth—since 1949 the Commonwealth of Nations—which is a free association of equal states.
He explores five contemporary theories of secession.
Burma also gained independence from the British Empire, but declined membership in the Commonwealth.
Since Turkey's invasion and continued occupation of Cyprus in 1974, following ethnic clashes and turmoil on the island, an administration recognized by Turkey only was declared in 1983 – the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
Russia has restored control over Chechnya, but the separatist government functions still in exile, though it has been split into two entities: the Akhmed Zakayev-run secular Chechen Republic (based in Poland, the UK and the USA), and the Islamic Caucasus Emirate.
It invaded Afghanistan to support a communist government assailed by local tribal groups.
Meanwhile, in Europe itself there was a rise of nationalism, with nations such as Greece, Hungary, Poland and Bulgaria seeking or winning their independence.
In the 1930s, Japan gained significant influence in Inner Mongolia and Manchuria after it invaded Manchuria.
After its fall, the Empire of Japan renounced control over many of its former possessions including Korea, Sakhalin Island, and Taiwan.
Many expressly forbid it.
Votes are cast because the people want stable governance of the state, and this cannot be mistaken as an endorsement of Indian rule.
In an issue of ''Macquarie University Law Journal'' Associate Professor Aleksandar Pavkovic and Senior Lecturer Peter Radan outlined current legal and political issues in self-determination.
This would be available only to groups that abandoned secessionist demands and the territorial state would retain political and judicial control, but only if would remain with the territorially organized state.
The referendum took place on October 20, 1945, with (according to official numbers) 100% of the electorate voting for independence.
This also triggered the Indonesian confrontation because Indonesia opposed the violation of the agreements.
After the peace process failed in 2008, militancy has emerged again.
The League of Nations was proposed as much as a means of consolidating these new states, as a path to peace.
The territoriality issue inevitably would lead to more conflicts and independence movements within many states and challenges to the assumption that territorial integrity is as important as self-determination.
However, three factions of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) continue to seek an independent country which would include parts of India and Burma.
The secessionst violence declined considerably after the Shillong Accord of 1975.
Thus, self-determination grants individuals the right to form "a people," which then has the right to establish an independent state, as long as they grant the same to all other individuals and peoples.
This section of the constitution was one of the negotiated settlements during the handing over of political power in 1994.
Burma still allows "local autonomy under central leadership. "
The British Parliament in 1933 held that Western Australia only could secede from Australia upon vote of a majority of the country as a whole; the previous two-thirds majority vote for secession via referendum in Western Australia was insufficient.
This policy was pursued by the major powers during the Cold War.
Later, Portugal relinquished control over East Timor in 1975, at which time Indonesia promptly invaded and annexed it.
In Asia, the Soviet Union had already converted Mongolia into a satellite state but abandoned propping up the Second East Turkestan Republic and gave up its Manchurian claims to China.
