Obsessively using the self-portrait as a personal and introspective artistic expression was Horst Janssen, who produced hundreds of self-portraits depicting him a wide range of contexts most notably in relation to sickness, moodyness and death.
In ''The Prodigal Son in the Tavern'' (c1637), one of the earliest self-portraits with family, the painting probably includes Saskia, Rembrandt's wife, one of the earliest depictions of a family member by a famous artist.
Image:Rembrandt - Self-Portrait - WGA19206.jpg|A young Rembrandt, c. 1628, when he was 22.
Another method involves setting the camera or capture device upon a tripod, or surface.
One particular type in the medieval and Renaissance periods was the artist shown as Saint Luke (patron saint of artists) painting the Virgin Mary.
Many in the scholar gentleman tradition are quite small, depicting the artist in a large landscape, illustrating a poem in calligraphy on his experience of the scene.
The Van Eyck painting may have inspired Diego Velázquez to depict himself in full view as the painter creating ''Las Meninas'' (1656), as the Van Eyck hung in the palace in Madrid where he worked.
File:Gustave Courbet - Self-Portrait with Black Dog - WGA05480.jpg|Gustave Courbet, 1842
Image:Duerer01.jpg| Dürer's last self-portrait, 1500—unmistakably Christ-like
File:Édouard Vuillard 001.jpg|Édouard Vuillard, ''Self-portrait'', 1889
The speed of creating photographic self-portraits allowed for a range of images with more of a "play" atmosphere than traditional methods.
The Madrid self-portrait (1498, Prado) depicts Dürer as a dandy in fashionable Italian dress, reflecting the international success he had achieved by then.
With new media came a chance to create different kinds of self-portraits besides simply static painting or photographs.
A famous large view of the artist in his studio is ''The Artist's Studio'' by Gustave Courbet (1855), an immense "Allegory" of objects and characters amid which the painter sits.
Image:Self-portrait_in_a_Straw_Hat_by_Elisabeth-Louise_Vigée-Lebrun.jpg|Élisabeth Vigée-Lebrun painted several self-portraits that were hugely successful in the Paris Salons, and was influential in pioneering an "informal" fashion style at the end of the Ancien Régime.
This was a decision all 18th-century self-portraitists needed to make, although many painted themselves in both formal and informal costume in different paintings.
Most of Rembrandt's self-portraits before 1660 show only one hand – the painting hand is left unpainted.
Besides Diego Velázquez, (in his painting Las Meninas), Rembrandt Van Rijn, Jan de Bray, Gustave Courbet, Vincent van Gogh, and Paul Gauguin other artists whose self-portraits reveal complex narratives include Pierre Bonnard, Marc Chagall, Lucian Freud, Arshile Gorky, Alice Neel, Pablo Picasso, Lucas Samaras, Jenny Saville, Cindy Sherman, Andy Warhol and Gilbert and George.
File:Portrait of a Man by Jan van Eyck-small.jpg|Jan van Eyck, ''Portrait of a Man in a Turban'' (actually a ''chaperon''), 1433, National Gallery, generally regarded as a self-portrait, which would make it the earliest Western panel portrait after antiquity.
A German religious artist and the first woman to enter the Academy of Munich.
Image:Paula Modersohn-Becker 018.jpg|Paula Modersohn-Becker (1906), was a German painter and one of the most important representatives of early expressionism.
Another tradition, associated with Zen Buddhism, produced lively semi-caricatured self-portraits, whilst others remain closer to the conventions of the formal portrait.
Leonardo da Vinci may have drawn a picture of himself at the age of 60, in around 1512.
Another artist who painted interestingly personal and revealing self-portraits throughout his career was Pierre Bonnard.
File:Edgar Degas self portrait 1855.jpeg|Edgar Degas, ''Self-portrait'', 1855
Image:Meckenem.jpg|Israhel van Meckenem and his wife, engraving c. 1490, the earliest portrait print.
Note the pulled-up sleeve on the arm holding the brush.
See also the Gallery of Women painters above.
Image:François Desportes 001.jpg|François Desportes, a specialist animal painter, ''Self-portrait as Hunter'', 1699.
Thereafter, one can say that most significant painters left us at least one self-portrait, even after the decline of the painted portrait with the arrival of photography.
Image:Hokusai portrait.jpg|Another Hokusai, Louvre
Or is Van Dyck the sun the flower turns to?
Although self-portraits have been made since the earliest times, it is not until the Early Renaissance in the mid-15th century that artists can be frequently identified depicting themselves as either the main subject, or as important characters in their work.
Selbstinszenierung, Eros, Tod" (Schiele, Janssen: Self-dramatisation, Eros, Death) at the Leopold Museum in Vienna paralleled the works of Egon Schiele and Horst Janssen, both heavily drawing on sujets of erotica and death in combination with relentless self-portraiture.
One such example is Frances Benjamin Johnson's ''Self-Portrait, c. 1896'', an image which demonstrates the photo-portrait's ability to play with gender roles.
c. 950 (cropped at bottom).
Image:Carl Ludwig Jessen Selbstporträt.jpg|Carl Ludwig Jessen, ''Self-portrait'', 1857
In the 17th century,  Flemish and Dutch artists painted themselves far more often; by this date most successful artists had a position in society where a member of any trade would consider having their portrait painted.
Many also include their families, again following the normal practice for the middle-classes.
Rembrandt was the most frequent self-portraitist, at least until the self-obsessed modern period, also often painting his wife, son and mistress.
Image:Self-portrait_at_13_by_Albrecht_Dürer.jpg| Dürer at thirteen, silverpoint, Albertina, 1484
In the 19th century, Goya painted himself numerous times.
Image:James Abbot McNeill Whistler 002.jpg|James McNeill Whistler, ''Self-portrait'',  1872
Still others use blogs or create personal web pages to create a space for self-expression and self-portraiture.
The 2004 exhibition "Schiele, Janssen.
Images of artists at work are encountered in Ancient Egyptian painting, and sculpture and also on Ancient Greek vases.
The size of single-sheet mirrors was restricted until technical advances made in France in 1688 by Bernard Perrot.
Many artistic media have been used; apart from paintings, drawings and prints have been especially important.
Image:Motoori Norinaga self portrait.jpg|Motoori Norinaga, late 18th century, Japan
It is mostly not on view for general visitors, although some paintings are shown in the main galleries.
Image:Hokusai selfportrait.jpg|Hokusai, early 19th century, Japan
He is at the extreme right of a crowded composition.
Image:Anthonyvandyckselfportrait.jpeg|Van Dyck with sunflower, representing his patronage by Charles I, whose medal he holds up to the flower.
Image:Self-portrait_c.1747-9_by_Joshua_Reynolds_(2).jpg|Joshua Reynolds, National Portrait Gallery, 1748.
Image:Ivan Kramskoi Self Portrait.png|Ivan Kramskoi, ''Self-portrait'', 1867
She also proposes a more detailed taxonomy: (1) the "insertable" self-portrait, where the artist inserts his or her own portrait into, for example, a group of characters related to some subject; (2) the "prestigious, or symbolic" self-portrait, where an artist depicts him- or herself in the guise of a historical person or religious hero; (3) the "group portrait" where artist is depicted with members of family or other real persons; (4) the "separate or natural" self-portrait, where the artist is depicted alone.
Image:Filippino Lippi 007.jpg|Filippino Lippi as a figure in his ''Martyrdom of Saint Peter'', fresco, 1481–82, Brancacci Chapel, Florence.
File:Rimbaud in Harar.jpg|Arthur Rimbaud, ''Self-portrait in Harar, Ethiopia'', 1883
Often Picasso's self-portraits depicted and revealed complicated psychological insights, both personal and profound about the inner state and well being of the artist.
The great Italian painters of the Renaissance made comparatively few formal painted self-portraits, but often included themselves in larger works.
In these works, the artist usually appears as a face in the crowd or group, often towards the edges or corner of the work and behind the main participants.
File:Courbet LAtelier du peintre.jpg|Gustave Courbet, ''The Artist's Studio (L'Atelier du peintre): A Real Allegory of a Seven Year Phase in my Artistic and Moral Life'', 1855, Musée d'Orsay
Image:Rembrandt Harmensz.
Flesh and bone, life and death are contrasted here.
File:Enrique Simonet - Autorretrato - 1910.jpg|Enrique Simonet, ''Self-portrait with a Palette'', 1910
van Rijn 144.jpg|Rembrandt in 1632, when he was enjoying great success as a fashionable portraitist in this style.
Many of the medieval portraits show the artist at work, and Jan van Eyck (above) his chaperon hat has the parts normally hanging loose tied up on his head, giving the misleading impression he is wearing a turban, presumably for convenience whilst he paints.
Both contain many figures, but are firmly centred on the heroic figure of the artist.
One might then set the camera's timer, or use a remote controlled shutter release.
Image:Rembrandt aux yeux hagards.jpg|Etching, c. 1630.
Image:Yosai-Kikuchi.jpg|Kikuchi Yōsai, 1856-7, Japan.
With better and cheaper mirrors, and the advent of the panel portrait, many painters, sculptors and printmakers tried some form of '''self-portraiture'''.
Women artists are notable producers of self-portraits; almost all significant women painters have left an example, from Caterina van Hemessen to the prolific Elisabeth Vigée-Lebrun, and Frida Kahlo, as well as Alice Neel, Paula Modersohn-Becker and Jenny Saville who painted themselves in the nude.
Bonnard also painted dozens of portraits of his wife Marthe throughout her life as well.
Image:Albrecht-self.jpg| Albrecht Dürer ''Self-portrait'' 1493. oil, originally on vellum Louvre, Paris.
Notably, the earliest self-portrait painted in England, other than in a manuscript, is the miniature painted in oils on panel by the German artist Gerlach Flicke, 1554.
His oil paintings trace the progress from an uncertain young man to the dapper and very successful portrait-painter of the 1630s to the troubled but massively powerful portraits of his old age.
An example from the 21st century is Arnaud Prinstet,  an otherwise little-known contemporary artist who has generated good amounts of publicity by undertaking to paint his self-portrait every day.
Image:Rembrandt Harmensz.
File:RobertCornelius.jpg|The first photographic portrait ever made was a self-portrait by Robert Cornelius, 1839.
Image:Marie Ellenrieder Selbstbildnis 1819.jpg|Marie Ellenrieder, ''self portrait'',  1819.
Image:Rembrandt Harmensz.
In all of these self-portraits one is struck that the gaze of the painter is seldom directed at us; even when it is a fixed gaze, he seems to look elsewhere.
Image:Francesco Solimena 001.jpg|Francesco Solimena, c. 1715.
File:Parmigianino Selfportrait.jpg|Parmigianino, ''Self-portrait in a mirror'' c. 1524, is itself painted on a convex surface, like that of the mirrors of the period
Image:Peter parler.jpg|Peter Parler, late fourteenth century, from Prague Cathedral, where he was master architect and sculptor.
The earliest is a silverpoint drawing created when he was thirteen years old.
French self-portraits, at least after Nicolas Poussin tend to show the social status of the artist, although Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin and some other instead showed their real working costume very realistically.
Titian's ''Allegory of Prudence'' (c. 1565–70) is thought to depict Titian, his son Orazio, and a young cousin, Marco Vecellio.
Image:Chen hongshou selfportrait,1635.jpg|Chen Hongshou, China, 1635
He later re-used the face in a religious engraving of, revealingly, the Veil of Veronica, Christ's own "self-portrait" (B.25).
Image:Självporträtt av Anders Zorn 1896.jpg|Anders Zorn, ''Self-portrait with a Model'', 1896
Other important collections are housed at the National Portrait Gallery (United Kingdom) in London (with various satellite outstations elsewhere), and the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C..
Image:Lovis Corinth 010.jpg|Lovis Corinth, 1896.
Image:Weyden madonna 1440.jpg|Rogier van der Weyden, as Saint Luke, makes a drawing for his painting of the Virgin.
The self-portrait supposes in theory the use of a mirror; glass mirrors became available in Europe in the 15th century.
Image:Bellini selfportrait.jpg|Gentile Bellini, black chalk, 1496 or earlier, Berlin
The first mirrors used were convex, introducing deformations that the artist sometimes preserved.
He probably depicted himself more often than any artist before him, producing at least twelve images, including three oil portraits, and figures in four altarpieces.
Image:Judith_with_the_Head_of_Holofernes_by_Cristofano_Allori.jpg|Cristofano Allori, ''Judith with the Head of Holofernes'', 1613.
Image:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 059.jpg|Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, ''Self portrait'', 1882–1883
83&nbsp;×&nbsp;87&nbsp;mm.
File:Vincent van Gogh - Zelfportret als schilder (1888).jpg|Vincent van Gogh, ''Self-Portrait as a Painter'', December 1887 - February 1888
Probably an exercise in capturing facial expressions for larger paintings.
The artist has travelled to the South of France (in the vanishing coach), to meet the collector Alfred Bruyas, for whom this was painted.
Titian also painted a late self-portrait in 1567; apparently his first.
Many famous artists have not been able to resist an invitation to donate a self-portrait to the collection.
Most common is the artist at work, showing themselves in the act of painting, or at least holding a brush and palette.
Image:Eakins, Thomas (1844-1916) - 1883 ca.
This is among the earliest known formal self-portraits.
File:Rembrandt - Zelfportret 1640.jpg|1640, wearing a costume in the style of  over a century earlier.
Image:Eugene delacroix.jpg|Eugène Delacroix, 1837
A self-portrait may be a portrait of the artist, or a portrait included in a larger work, including a group portrait.
He appears to have bought a larger mirror in about 1652, after which his self-portraits become larger.
Image:William Orpen, Self-Portrait,.jpg|William Orpen, c. 1910
Eleazar Langman photographed his reflection on the surface of a nickel-plated teapot.
Fourteenth-century sculpted portrait busts of and by the Parler family in Prague Cathedral include self-portraits, and are among the earliest such busts of non-royal figures.
Such paintings were not intended publicly to depict the actual persons as themselves, but the facts would have been known at the time to artist and patron, creating a talking point as well as a public test of the artist's skill.
Her 55-odd self-portraits include many of herself from the waist up, and also some nightmarish representations which symbolize her physical sufferings.
Image:George Desmarées 001.jpg|George Desmarées and his daughter, 1750, Munich.
Image:Gustave Courbet 010.jpg|Gustave Courbet, 1854, ''Bonjour, Monsieur Courbet''.
File:Kirchner 1919 portrait.jpg|Ernst Kirchner, ''self-portrait'', 1919
Finally, the head of Goliath held by David (1605–10, Galleria Borghese) is Caravaggio's own.
Image:PolierMartinWombwellZoffany.jpg|Johann Zoffany specialised in group portraits, often "conversation pieces" with gentle narrative content, and spent some years in India.
The artist's focus on her work, away from the viewer, highlights the drama of the Baroque period, and the changing role of the artist from craftsperson to singular innovator.
Image:Serov Self.jpg|Valentin Serov, 1887
Image:Ghiberti.png|Lorenzo Ghiberti on the ''Gates of Paradise'',  Baptisterio, Florence ''self portrait'', early 15th century
File:Henri Matisse, 1918, Portrait du peintre (Autoportrait, Self-portrait), oil on canvas, 65 x 54 cm, Matisse Museum (Le Cateau).jpg|Henri Matisse, ''Self-portrait'', 1918, Matisse Museum (Le Cateau)
Two methods of obtaining photographic self-portraits are widespread.
Image:P03jigazou.jpg|Miyamoto Musashi, Samurai, writer and artist, c. 1640.
So Austrian artist Egon Schiele depicted himself so occupied in one of his self-portraits.
Gustave Courbet (see below) was perhaps the most creative self-portraitist of the 19th century, and ''The Artist's studio'' and ''Bonjour, Monsieur Courbet'' are perhaps the largest self-portraits ever painted.
From the young unknown "Yo Picasso" period to the "Minotaur in the Labyrinth" period, to the "old Cavalier" and the "lecherous old artist and model" periods.
The number of surviving works attributed to her varies between fewer than 20 and about 35.
Many people, especially teens, use social networking sites to form their own personal identity on the internet.
This practice was especially common for women artists, whose inclusion of their families was often a deliberate attempt to mitigate criticism of their profession causing distraction from their "natural role" as mothers.
In his last self-portrait, sold or given to the city of Nuremberg, and displayed publicly, which very few portraits then were, the artist depicted himself with an unmistakable resemblance to Jesus Christ (Munich, Alte Pinakothek).
In 1658 a large mirror in a wood frame broke whilst being transported to his house; nonetheless, in this year he completed his Frick self-portrait, his largest.
Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, Egon Schiele and Horst Janssen in particular made intense (at times disturbingly so) and self-revealing self-portraits throughout their careers.
File:Pieter Bruegel the Elder - The Painter and the Buyer, 1565 - Google Art Project.jpg|Pieter Brueghel the Elder, ''The Painter and The Buyer'', c.1565, pen and ink on brown paper, presumed to be a self-portrait.
Partly an exercise in chiaroscuro.
One of the most famous and most prolific of self-portraitists was Vincent van Gogh, who drew and painted himself more than 43 times between 1886 and 1889.
Vigée-Lebrun painted a total of 37 self-portraits, many of which were copies of earlier ones, painted for sale.
This use of the mirror often results in right-handed painters representing themselves as left-handed (and vice versa).
File:Edvard Munch - Edvard Munch at the Beach in Warnemünde - Google Art Project.jpg|Edvard Munch, ''self-portrait at the beach in Warnemünde,'' 1907.
File:Serebryakova SefPortrait.jpg|Zinaida Serebriakova, ''At the Dressing-Table'' (1909), was among the first female Russian painters of distinction.
Rather like Rembrandt, but more successful.
Image:Self-portrait as the Allegory of Painting (La Pittura) - Artemisia Gentileschi.jpg|Artemisia Gentileschi, ''Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting'', 1630s, Royal Collection.
van Rijn 132.jpg|Vienna c. 1655, oil on walnut, cut down in size.
In the 17th century, Rembrandt painted a range of self-portraits.
File:Gilbert Stuart Selfportrait.jpg|Gilbert Stuart, Self-portrait, 1778
Northern artists continued to make more individual portraits, often looking very much like their other bourgeois sitters.
One of the first self-portraits was made by the Pharaoh Akhenaten's chief sculptor Bak in 1365 BC.
Image:Ren Xiong Self Portrait.jpeg|Ren Xiong, a member of the Shanghai school, c.1850
- Autoritratto con John Laurie Wallace.jpg|Thomas Eakins, ''Self-portrait with John Laurie Wallace,'' circa 1883
Sofonisba Anguissola painted intricate miniatures which served as advertisements for her skill as well as novelty items, considered such because the rarity of successful women painters provided them with an oddity quality.
Image:Hakuin Ekaku.jpg|Hakuin Ekaku was a Zen monk, who painted many self-portraits of himself as sages of the past, 1764, Tokyo.
Caravaggio painted himself in ''Bacchus'' at the beginning of his career, then appears in the staffage of some of his larger paintings.
Frida Kahlo, who following a terrible accident spent many years bedridden, with only herself for a model, was another painter whose self-portraits depict great pain, in her case physical as well as mental.
Often, the viewer wonders if the clothes worn were those they normally painted in, as the elaborate nature of many ensembles was an artistic choice to show her skill at fine detail.
His largest self-portrait, for which a new mirror may have been used.
File:Edgar Degas Foto.jpg|Edgar Degas, ''Self-portrait'', 1895
File:Maurice Quentin de La Tour - Self-Portrait - WGA12361.jpg|Maurice Quentin de La Tour, pastel, 1750–60.
This culminated in the 17th century with the work of Jan de Bray.
Rembrandt made his living principally from portrait-painting during his most successful period, and like Van Dyck and Joshua Reynolds, many of his portraits were certainly intended to advertise his skills.
From the later 20th century on, video plays an increasing part in self-portraiture, and adds the dimension of audio as well, allowing the person to speak to us in their own voice.
She was born in Bologna, the daughter of Prospero Fontana, who was a painter of the School of Bologna.
In Spain, there were self-portraits of Bartolomé Estéban Murillo and Diego Velázquez.
Image:Paul Gauguin 111.jpg|Paul Gauguin, 1893
File:Jean-Honoré Fragonard 023.jpg|Jean-Honoré Fragonard, ''Self-Portrait with Palette and Brushes'', 1769
Image:Brjullov.jpg|Karl Bryullov, 1848
File:Johannes gumpp.jpg|Johannes Gumpp, 1646, shows how most self-portraits were painted
File:ZOLA 1902B.jpg|Émile Zola, ''self-portrait'', 1902
A painting by Parmigianino in 1524 ''Self-portrait in a mirror'', demonstrates the phenomenon.
Dutch Golden Age painter.
Image:Bashkirtseff.jpg|Marie Bashkirtseff ''self-portrait'', 1880 was a Russian born artist who died at twenty-five.
Mary Beale, Anthony van Dyck and Peter Paul Rubens gave us numerous images of themselves, the latter also often painting his family.
Image:Self-portrait-with-a-pillow-1103-mid.jpg| Dürer at about twenty, 1491–92, drawing, Metropolitan
Francisco de Zurbarán represented himself in Luke the Evangelist at the feet of Christ on the cross (around 1635).
Image:Possible Self-Portrait of Leonardo da Vinci.jpg|Probable self-portrait by Leonardo da Vinci, c. 1512–1515
Image:Edward S. Curtis self portrait 1899.jpg|Edward S. Curtis, ''self-portrait'', 1898
One of the most distinguished, and oldest, collections of self-portraits is in the Vasari Corridor of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence.
However, for earlier artists, with no other portrait to compare to, these descriptions are necessarily rather speculative.
Throughout his long career, Pablo Picasso often used self-portraits to depict himself in the many different guises, disguises and incarnations of his autobiographical artistic persona.
These paintings vary in intensity and color and some portray the artist with bandages; representing the episode in which he severed one of his ears.
Image:Auto-retrato de Castro Alves (1847-1871).jpg|Castro Alves, ''self portrait'', 18--.
Russian sexologist Igor Kon in his article about masturbation notes that a habit of masturbating may be depicted in works of art, particularly paintings.
Image:Henri Fantin-Latour 001.jpg|Henri Fantin-Latour, ''Self-portrait'', 1859
Image:Jean Fouquet.png|Jean Fouquet, c. 1450, a very early portrait miniature, and if the Van Eyck above is excluded, the oldest individual Western painted self-portrait.
There is a portrait by Pietro Perugino of about 1500 (Collegio del Cambio of Perugia), and one by the young Parmigianino showing the view in a convex mirror.
Image:Rembrandtselfportraitweb.jpg|Role-playing in ''Self-portrait as an oriental Potentate with a Kris'', etching, 1634.
About 80&nbsp;cm, or two and a half feet, seems to have been the maximum size until then – roughly the size of the palace mirror in ''Las Meninas'' (the convex mirror in the ''Arnolfini Portrait'' is considered by historians impractically large, one of Van Eyck's many cunning distortions of scale).
Rubens's ''The Four Philosophers'' (1611–12) is a good example.
A large number of Bashkirtseff's works were destroyed by the Nazis during World War II.
A woodcut of a bathhouse and a drawing show virtually nude self-portraits.
The genre is venerable, but not until the Renaissance, with increased wealth and interest in the individual as a subject, did it become truly popular.
Portraits and self-portraits have a longer continuous history in Asian art than in Europe.
Image:Eakins selfportrait.jpg|Thomas Eakins, ''Self-portrait'', 1902
Sometimes the narrative resembles fantasy, roleplaying and fiction.
Creations of Schiele are analyzed by other researchers in terms of sexuality, and particularly pedophilia.
