Aging of whole organisms is therefore a complex process that can be defined as "a progressive deterioration of physiological function, an intrinsic age-related process of loss of viability and increase in vulnerability."
The experimental elimination of senescent cells from transgenic progeroid mice and non-progeroid, naturally-aged mice led to greater resistance against aging-associated diseases.
Different parts of the body may age at different rates.
the three major types of cellular senescence, namely replicative senescence, oncogene-induced senescence and DNA damage-induced senescence are distinct because induction of replicative senescence (RS) and oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) were found to be accompanied by epigenetic aging of primary cells but senescence induced by DNA damage was not, even though RS and OIS activate the cellular DNA damage response pathway.
More individuals survive to later ages, so the force of selection against late-acting deleterious mutations is stronger.
In addition, aging is believed to have evolved because of the increasingly smaller probability of an organism still being alive at older age, due to predation and accidents, both of which may be random and age-invariant.
Discovery of senolytic drugs was based on a hypothesis-driven approach: the investigators leveraged the observation that senescent cells are resistant to apoptosis to discover that pro-survival pathways are up-regulated in these cells.
Instead it passes to one of the cells leaving the other cell pristine.
Damaged proteins and lipids accumulate in lysosomes as lipofuscin.
Organisms of some taxonomic groups (''taxa''), including some animals, even experience chronological decrease in mortality, for all or part of their life cycle.
Some even exhibit "negative senescence", in which mortality falls with age, in disagreement with the Gompertz–Makeham "law".
This concept of higher accumulation of deleterious mutations for older organisms came to be known as the selection shadow.
Thus, harmful biological changes in old age may result from selection for pleiotropic genes that are beneficial early in life but harmful later on.
With successive generations the cell population becomes a mosaic of cells with half ageless and the rest with varying degrees of senescence.
Mutations that affect insulin-like signaling in worms, flies, and the growth hormone/IGF1 axis in mice are associated with extended lifespan.
It has been shown to activate Sir2 and therefore mimics the effects of calorie restriction, if one accepts that caloric restriction is indeed dependent on Sir2.
Sufferers exhibit symptoms resembling accelerated aging, including wrinkled skin.
So, even an immortal population, whose fertility does not decline with time, will have fewer individuals alive in older age groups.
The major testable prediction made by this model is that species that have high extrinsic mortality in nature will age more quickly and have shorter intrinsic lifespans.
The mutations may not be selected against, therefore, and may spread over evolutionary time into the population.
Reliability theory suggests that biological systems start their adult life with a high load of initial damage.
There is evidence that sugar damage is linked to oxidant damage in a process termed ''glycoxidation''.
Chemical damage to structural proteins can lead to loss of function; for example, damage to collagen of blood vessel walls can lead to vessel-wall stiffness and, thus, hypertension, and vessel wall thickening and reactive tissue formation (atherosclerosis); similar processes in the kidney can lead to renal failure.
Whether senescence as a biological process itself can be slowed down, halted or even reversed, is a subject of current scientific speculation and research.
The explanation is that bats have fewer predators, and therefore low extrinsic mortality.
It is further theorized that it will eventually be possible to genetically engineer all cells in the human body to have this capability by employing gene therapy and, therefore, stop or reverse aging, effectively making the entire organism potentially immortal.
Albeit indirectly, senescence is by far the leading cause of death (other than in the trivially accurate sense that cerebral hypoxia, ''i.e.
Williams suggested the following example: Perhaps a gene codes for calcium deposition in bones, which promotes juvenile survival and will therefore be favored by natural selection; however, this same gene promotes calcium deposition in the arteries, causing negative atherosclerotic effects in old age.
If a genetic disaster... happens late enough in individual life, its consequences may be completely unimportant".
There are a number of hypotheses as to why senescence occurs; for example, some posit it is programmed by gene expression changes, others that it is the cumulative damage caused by biological processes.
There is also the extremely rare and poorly understood "Syndrome X," whereby a person remains physically and mentally an infant or child throughout one's life.
They have less predation pressure than ground-dwelling mammals.
Recently, a kind of early senescence has been alleged to be a possible unintended outcome of early cloning experiments.
Reliability theory allows to specify conditions when organisms die according to the Weibull distribution: Organisms should be relatively free of initial flaws and defects.
Sugars such as glucose and fructose can react with certain amino acids such as lysine and arginine and certain DNA bases such as guanine to produce sugar adducts, in a process called ''glycation''.
Even if environmental factors do not cause aging, they may affect it; in such a way, for example, overexposure to ultraviolet radiation accelerates skin aging.
These ERCs replicate and preferentially segregate to the mother cell during cell division, and are believed to result in cellular senescence by titrating away (competing for) essential nuclear factors.
Hence senescence is a route by which cells exit prematurely from the natural course of cellular ageing.
In a 2007 analysis it was shown that, when modern statistical methods for correcting for the effects of body size and phylogeny are employed, metabolic rate does not correlate with longevity in mammals or birds.
Extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA) has been found in worms, flies, and humans.
Another evolutionary theory of aging was proposed by George C. Williams and involves antagonistic pleiotropy.
In culture, fibroblasts can reach a maximum of 50 cell divisions before becoming senescent.
All such species have no "post-mitotic" cells; they reduce the effect of damaging free radicals by cell division and dilution.
On the other extreme are accelerated aging diseases, rare in humans.
The antagonistic plietropy theory states that strategies which result in a higher reproductive rate at a young age, but shorter overall lifespan, result in a higher lifetime reproductive success and are therefore favoured by natural selection.
Of the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds — 100,000 per day — die of age-related causes; in industrialized nations, moreover, the proportion is much higher, reaching 90%.
However, the epigenetic clock analysis of senescence suggests that cellular senescence is a state that cells are forced into as a result of external pressures such as DNA damage, ectopic oncogene expression and exhaustive proliferation of cells to replenish those eliminated by external/environmental factors.
Haldane assumed that, in human prehistory, few survived until age 45.
Since complex and interacting systems of maintenance and repair comprise the homeodynamic space of a biological system, aging is considered to be a progressive shrinkage of homeodynamic space mainly due to increased molecular heterogeneity.
A nicotinamidase found in humans, known as PBEF, may serve a similar function, and a secreted form of PBEF known as visfatin may help to regulate serum insulin levels.
Two organisms of the same species can also age at different rates, so that biological aging and chronological aging are quite distinct concepts.
These genetic differences affect a variety of physiological processes, including the efficiency of DNA repair, antioxidant enzymes, and rates of free radical production.
The science of biological aging is biogerontology.
Differences in maximum life span among species correspond to different "rates of aging."
In the absence of senescent cells, the mice’s tissues showed a major improvement in the usual burden of age-related disorders.
Senescence of the organism gives rise to the Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality, which says that mortality rate accelerates rapidly with age.
Somatic cells that have divided many times will have accumulated DNA mutations and would therefore be in danger of becoming cancerous if cell division continued.
These adducts can further rearrange to form reactive species, which can then cross-link the structural proteins or DNA to similar biopolymers or other biomolecules such as non-structural proteins.
When examining the body-size vs. lifespan relationship, one also observes that predatory mammals tend to live longer than prey mammals in a controlled environment, such as a zoo or nature reserve.
The process of senescence is complex, and may derive from a variety of different mechanisms and exist for a variety of different reasons.
Because of the accumulated infirmities of old age, bioethicist Ezekiel Emanuel, opines that the pursuit of longevity via the compression of morbidity hypothesis is a "fantasy" and that human life is not worth living after age 75; longevity then should not be a goal of health care policy.
For example, inherited differences in the rate of aging make a mouse elderly at 3 years and a human elderly at 80 years.
Similarly, metabolic rate is a poor predictor of lifespan for birds, bats and other species that, it is presumed, have reduced mortality from predation, and therefore have evolved long lifespans even in the presence of very high metabolic rates.
The cause of Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome was reported in the journal ''Nature'' in May 2003.
It is commonly believed that cellular senescence underlies organismal senescence.
Fewer late-acting deleterious mutations equates to slower aging and therefore a longer lifespan.
This phenomenon is known as "replicative senescence", or the Hayflick limit.
There is a correlation among mammals between body size and lifespan, such that larger species live longer than smaller species under controlled/optimum conditions, but there are notable exceptions.
Gene expression is imperfectly controlled, and it is possible that random fluctuations in the expression levels of many genes contribute to the aging process as suggested by a study of such genes in yeast.
The claim that Dolly's early death involved premature senescence has been vigorously contested, and Dolly's creator, Dr.&nbsp;Ian Wilmut has expressed the view that her illness and death were probably unrelated to the fact that she was a clone.
The discovery, in 1934, that calorie restriction can extend lifespan 50% in rats, and the existence of species having  negligible senescence and potentially immortal species such as ''Hydra'', have motivated research into delaying and preventing senescence and thus age-related diseases.
'', lack of oxygen to the brain, is the immediate cause of all human death).
The oft-quoted evolutionary theorist George Williams wrote, "It is remarkable that after a seemingly miraculous feat of morphogenesis, a complex metazoan should be unable to perform the much simpler task of merely maintaining what is already formed."
Programmed theories imply that aging is regulated by biological clocks operating throughout the lifespan.
Lipid peroxidation of the inner mitochondrial membrane reduces the electric potential and the ability to generate energy.
Aging, therefore, is a direct consequence of systems.
It is an intrinsic mechanism that exists from the birth of the cell and continues.
Another Mayo study led by James Kirkland in collaboration with Scripps and other groups demonstrated that senolytics, drugs that target senescent cells, enhance cardiac function and improve vascular reactivity in old mice, alleviate gait disturbance caused by radiation in mice, and delay frailty, neurological dysfunction, and osteoporosis in progeroid mice.
Young cohorts, not depleted in numbers yet by extrinsic mortality, contribute far more to the next generation than the few remaining older cohorts, so the force of selection against late-acting deleterious mutations, which affect only these few older individuals, is very weak.
The nucleus of senescent cells is characterized by senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHF) and DNA segments with chromatin alterations reinforcing senescence (DNA-SCARS).
'''Senescence''' () (from , meaning "to grow old," from ''senex'') or '''biological aging''' (also spelled '''biological ageing''') is the gradual deterioration of function characteristic of most complex lifeforms, arguably found in all biological kingdoms, that on the level of the organism increases mortality after maturation.
As such, cellular senescence represents a change in "cell state" rather than a cell becoming "aged" as the name confusingly suggests.
The following is a list of genes connected to longevity through research on model organisms:
The origin and role of eccDNA in aging, if any, is unknown.
They demonstrated that these survival pathways are the "Achilles heel" of senescent cells using RNA interference approaches, including Bcl-2-, AKT-, p21-, and tyrosine kinase-related pathways.
Senescence may be the product of such selection.
Early experimental evidence supporting this idea was reviewed by Gensler and Bernstein.
The theory explains why relative differences in mortality rates of compared populations (within a given species) vanish with age (compensation law of mortality), and mortality convergence is observed due to the exhaustion of initial differences in redundancy levels.
Therefore, late-acting deleterious mutations could accumulate in populations over evolutionary time through genetic drift, which has been demonstrated experimentally.
They did not develop cataracts, avoided the usual wasting of muscle with age.
The reproductive-cell cycle theory suggests that aging is caused by changes in hormonal signaling over the lifespan.
Alexander was the first to propose that DNA damage is the primary cause of aging.
A single gene may affect multiple traits.
However, senescence is not universal.
While there may be some validity to the idea that for various types of specific damage detailed below that are by-products of metabolism, all other things being equal, a fast metabolism may reduce lifespan, in general this theory does not adequately explain the differences in lifespan either within, or between, species.
A gene can be expressed at various stages of life.
Senescent cells affect tumour suppression, wound healing and possibly embryonic/placental development and a pathological role in age-related diseases.
Therefore, natural selection can support lethal and harmful alleles, if their expression occurs after reproduction.
The current state of evidence bearing on this theory is reviewed in DNA damage theory of aging and by Bernstein et al.
Seabirds, which, in general, have the fewest predators of all birds, live longest.
These senescent cells, in sufficient numbers, will undoubtedly cause the deterioration of tissues, which is interpreted as organism ageing.
Some traits that increase fitness early in life may also have negative effects later in life.
These organisms are biologically immortal but not immortal in the traditional sense as they are nonetheless susceptible to trauma and infectious and non-infectious disease.
(In Wilson's disease, a hereditary defect that causes the body to retain copper, some of the symptoms resemble accelerated senescence.)
Superoxide dismutase, a protein that protects against the effects of mitochondrial free radicals, can extend yeast lifespan in stationary phase when overexpressed.
How and why some cells become post-mitotic in some species has been the subject of much research and speculation, but (as noted above) it is sometimes suggested that cellular senescence evolved as a way to prevent the onset and spread of cancer.
In some species of yeast, replicative aging may be partially caused by homologous recombination between rDNA repeats; excision of rDNA repeats results in the formation of extrachromosomal rDNA circles (ERCs).
Cells can also be induced to senesce via DNA damage in response to elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS), activation of oncogenes and cell-cell fusion, independent of telomere length.
It is not known, however, whether these mechanisms also exist in humans, since there are obvious differences in biology between humans and model organisms.
This suggests that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to aging.
p66shc (Not independently verified)
The onset of this neurological disease is (on average) at age 45 and is invariably fatal within 10–20 years.
Glycation mainly damages proteins.
The 'real hazards of mortality' are, in typical circumstances, predation, disease, and accidents.
In general, aging is characterized by the declining ability to respond to stress, increased homeostatic imbalance, and increased risk of aging-associated diseases.
Some animals, such as some reptiles and fish, age slowly (negligible senescence) and exhibit very long lifespans.
Whether replicative senescence (Hayflick limit) plays a causative role in organismal aging is at present an active area of investigation.
However, aging is seen as a progressive failure of homeodynamics–systemic preservation of homeostasis, involving genes for maintenance and repair, stochastic events leading to molecular damage and molecular heterogeneity, and chance events determining the probability of death.
ERCs have not been observed in other species (nor even all strains of the same yeast species) of yeast (which also display replicative senescence), and ERCs are not believed to contribute to aging in higher organisms such as humans (they have not been shown to accumulate in mammals in a similar manner to yeast).
They found delayed senescent cell accumulation in mice with mutations that extend lifespan, as well as in mice that had their lifespan extended by food restriction.
Although the uncoupling of senescence from cellular aging appears at first sight to be inconsistent with the fact that senescent cells contribute to the physical manifestation of organism ageing, as demonstrated by Baker et al., where removal of senescent cells slowed down aging
By converting nicotinamide to niacin, nicotinamide is removed, inhibiting the activity of Sir2.
Certain metal ions found in the body, such as copper and iron, may participate in the process.
One of these pathways involves the gene ''Sir2," a NAD+-dependent histone deacetylase.
The successive shortening of the chromosomal telomeres with each cell cycle is also believed to limit the number of divisions of the cell, thus contributing to aging.
People with diabetes, who have elevated blood sugar, develop senescence-associated disorders much earlier than the general population, but can delay such disorders by rigorous control of their blood sugar levels.
These results highlight the independence of cellular senescence from epigenetic aging.
Damage to enzymes reduces cellular functionality.
It is theorized by some that when it is discovered exactly what allows these cells, whether it be the result of telomere lengthening or not, to divide without limit that it will be possible to genetically alter other cells to have the same capability.
Despite the lack of a connection between circular DNA and aging in higher organisms, extra copies of Sir2 are capable of extending the lifespan of both worms and flies (though, in flies, this finding has not been replicated by other investigators, and the activator of Sir2 resveratrol does not reproducibly increase lifespan in either species).
This is consistent with the fact that mice with naturally long telomeres still age and eventually die even though their telomere lengths are far longer than the critical limit, and they age prematurely when their telomeres are forcibly shortened, due to replicative senescence.
Another related mechanism is that of the biologically immortal planarian flatworms, which have "apparently limitless telomere regenerative capacity fueled by a population of highly proliferative adult stem cells."
With respect to specific types of chemical damage caused by metabolism, it is suggested that damage to long-lived biopolymers, such as structural proteins or DNA, caused by ubiquitous chemical agents in the body such as oxygen and sugars, are in part responsible for aging.
A set of rare hereditary (genetic) disorders, each called progeria, has been known for some time.
In about 85% of tumors, this evasion of cellular senescence is the result of up-activation of their telomerase genes.
The explanation for the long lifespans of primates (such as humans, monkeys, and apes) relative to body size is that their intelligence, and often their sociality, help them avoid becoming prey.
Reliability theory also predicts the late-life mortality deceleration with subsequent leveling-off, as well as the late-life mortality plateaus, as an inevitable consequence of redundancy exhaustion at extreme old ages.
The theory explains why mortality rates increase exponentially with age (the Gompertz law) in many species, by taking into account the initial flaws (defects) in newly formed systems.
On mitosis the debris is not evenly divided between the new cells.
Lately, the role of telomeres in cellular senescence has aroused general interest, especially with a view to the possible genetically adverse effects of cloning.
Ned Sharpless and collaborators demonstrated the first in vivo link between p16-expressing senescent cells and lifespan.
The damage can include breakage of biopolymer chains, cross-linking of biopolymers, or chemical attachment of unnatural substituents (haptens) to biopolymers.
There is a current debate as to whether or not the pursuit of longevity and the postponement of senescence are cost-effective health care goals given finite health care resources.
Reliability theory is a general theory about systems failure.
Some cells do not age and are, therefore, described as being "biologically immortal".
This regulation would depend on changes in gene expression that affect the systems responsible for maintenance, repair, and defense responses.
Since few were alive at older ages and their contribution to the next generation was therefore small relative to the large cohorts of younger age groups, the force of selection against such late-acting deleterious mutations was correspondingly small.
B. S. Haldane wondered why the dominant mutation that causes Huntington's disease remained in the population, and why natural selection had not eliminated it.
In general, theories that explain senescence have been divided between the programmed and stochastic theories of aging.
Sir2 activity has been shown to increase under calorie restriction.
Resveratrol, a stilbenoid found in the skin of red grapes, was reported to extend the lifespan of yeast, worms, and flies (the lifespan extension in flies and worms have proved to be irreproducible by independent investigators).
SIRT1 can also regulate acetylates such as CBP/p300, and has been shown to deacetylate specific histone residues.
This is borne out among mammals, the best-studied in terms of life history.
Peter Medawar formalised this observation in his mutation accumulation theory of aging.
Calorically restricted animals process as much, or more, calories per gram of body mass, as their ''ad libitum'' fed counterparts, yet exhibit substantially longer lifespans.
This report suggests that DNA damage, not oxidative stress, is the cause of this form of accelerated aging.
Replicative senescence is the result of telomere shortening that ultimately triggers a DNA damage response.
This is called 'extrinsic mortality'.
Free radicals can damage proteins, lipids or DNA.
But, because many more individuals are alive at young ages than at old ages, even small positive effects early can be strongly selected for, and large negative effects later may be very weakly selected against.
The theory makes it possible to find a general failure law applicable to all adult and extreme old ages, where the Gompertz and the Weibull laws are just special cases of this more general failure law.
PNC1 is transcriptionally upregulated under stressful conditions such as caloric restriction, heat shock, and osmotic shock.
Reliability theory predicts that even those systems which are composed entirely of non-aging elements (with a constant failure rate) will nevertheless deteriorate (fail more often) with age, if these systems are redundant in irreplaceable elements.
This simple observation suggests that reactivation of telomerase in healthy individuals could greatly increase their cancer risk.
As noted above, senescence is not universal.
Recent investigation has unveiled a more complex picture.
The issue was raised in the case of Dolly the sheep, following her death from a contagious lung disease.
Importantly, these drugs had long term effects after a single dose, consistent with removal of senescent cells, rather than a temporary effect requiring continued presence of the drugs.
This implies that if cells are not shunted into senescence by the external pressures described above, they would still continue to age.
Cancer cells are usually immortal.
High position in the food chain, intelligence and cooperativeness all reduce extrinsic mortality in species.
Death is the ultimate consequence of aging, though "old age" is not a scientifically recognized cause of death because there is always a specific proximal cause, such as cancer, heart disease, or liver failure.
The length of the telomere strand has senescent effects; telomere shortening activates extensive alterations in alternative RNA splicing that produce senescent toxins such as progerin, which degrades the tissue and makes it more prone to failure.
In a few simple species, such as those in the genus ''Hydra'', senescence is negligible and cannot be detected.
They retained the fat layers in the skin that usually thin out with age and, in people, cause wrinkling.
As such, it is becoming apparent that senescent cells undergo conversion to an immunogenic phenotype that enables them to be eliminated by the immune system.
It was once thought that senescence did not occur in single-celled organisms that reproduce through the process of cellular mitosis.
For instance, the little brown bat, half the size of a mouse, can live 30 years in the wild.
In yeast, Sir2 activity is regulated by the nicotinamidase PNC1.
Moreover, average lifespans can vary greatly within and between species.
Stochastic theories blame environmental impacts on living organisms that induce cumulative damage at various levels as the cause of aging, examples of which ranging from damage to DNA, damage to tissues and cells by oxygen radicals (widely known as free radicals countered by the even more well-known antioxidants), and cross-linking.
Senescence is not the inevitable fate of all organisms and can be delayed.
In 2013, a group of scientists defined nine hallmarks of aging that are common between organisms with emphasis on mammals: genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, deregulated nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular senescence, stem cell exhaustion, and altered intercellular communication.
"The force of natural selection weakens with increasing age—even in a theoretically immortal population, provided only that it is exposed to real hazards of mortality.
For instance, many bats and rodents are of similar size, yet bats live much longer.
Due to the lack of available glucose in the cells, more NAD+ is available and can activate Sir2.
However, if a mutation affected younger individuals, selection against it would be strong.
However, at the cellular level, aging, as measured by the epigenetic clock, is distinct from senescence.
Other genes regulate aging in yeast by increasing the resistance to oxidative stress.
It allows researchers to predict the age-related failure kinetics for a system of given architecture (reliability structure) and given reliability of its components.
RAS1 and RAS2 also affect aging in yeast and have a human homologue.
In those species where cellular senescence is observed, cells eventually become post-mitotic when they can no longer replicate themselves through the process of cellular mitosis; i.e., cells experience ''replicative senescence''.
Whether the Sir2 homologues in higher organisms have any role in lifespan is unclear, but the human SIRT1 protein has been demonstrated to deacetylate p53, Ku70, and the forkhead family of transcription factors.
In yeast, Sir2 is required for genomic silencing at three loci: The yeast mating loci, the telomeres and the ribosomal DNA (rDNA).
Various other theories of aging exist, and are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
''Cellular senescence'' is the phenomenon by which normal diploid cells cease to divide.
According to the GenAge database of aging-related genes there are over 700 genes associated with aging in model organisms: 555 in the soil roundworm (''Caenorhabditis elegans''), 87 in the bakers' yeast (''Saccharomyces cerevisiae''), 75 in the fruit fly (''Drosophila melanogaster'') and 68 in the mouse (''Mus musculus'').
The exact etiology of senescence is still largely unclear and yet to be discovered.
Later, Jan van Deursen and Darren Baker in collaboration with Andre Terzic at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., provided the first in vivo evidence for a causal link between cellular senescence and aging by preventing the accumulation of senescent cells in BubR1 progeroid mice.
Consistent with this, telomerase-immortalised cells continued to age (according to the epigenetic clock) without having been treated with any senescence inducers or DNA-damaging agents, re-affirming the independence of the process of epigenetic ageing from telomeres, cellular senescence, and the DNA damage response pathway.
