The ''gu'' vary greatly in area (from 10 to 47&nbsp;km2) and population (from fewer than 140,000 to 630,000).
The Seoul Express Bus Terminal, Central City Terminal and Seoul Nambu Terminal are located in the district of Seocho District.
In this way the Roman Catholic Church has a very strong influence in Korean society.
Beside the palaces, Unhyeongung is known for being the royal residence of Regent Daewongun, the father of Emperor Gojong at the end of the Joseon Dynasty.
Historically, the city was during the Joseon Dynasty bounded by the Seoul Fortress Wall, which stretched between the four main mountains in central Seoul: Namsan, Naksan, Bukaksan and Inwangsan.
Seoul has many large intercity/express bus terminals.
* Jungnang District (중랑구; )
The largest wholesale and retail market in South Korea, the Dongdaemun Market, is located in Seoul.
The Seodaemun Prison is a former prison built during the Japanese occupation, and is currently used as a historic museum.
* Dobong District (도봉구; )
Bukhan, the world's most visited national park per square foot.
Seoul features one of the world's most advanced transportation infrastructures that is constantly under expansion.
Seoul hosted the 1986 Asian Games, commonly known as Asiad, 1988 Olympic Games, and Paralympic Games.
The government of each gu handles many of the functions that are handled by city governments in other jurisdictions.
A series of new high rises are under construction, including the Lotte World Tower, scheduled to be completed by 2016.
* Guro District (구로구; )
Seoul is a member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21 and the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group.
In 1945, the city was officially named Seoul, and was designated as a special city in 1949.
taking place from June until September.
In addition, Suseo Station,in Gangnam District, is scheduled to open in late 2016, and offer KTX service on the newly built Suseo High Speed Railway.
Both banks of the Han River have cycling paths that run all the way across the city along the river.
The river is no longer actively used for navigation, because its estuary is located at the borders of the two Koreas, with civilian entry barred.
In 2015, it was rated Asia's most livable city with the second highest quality of life globally by Arcadis.
The Independence Gate was built in 1897 to inspire an independent spirit.
Seoul has been surrounded by walls that were built to regulate visitors from other regions and protect the city in case of an invasion.
Some gu have only a few dong while others like Jongno District have a very large number of distinct neighbourhoods.
The Wongudan altar was a sacrificial place where Korean rulers held heavenly rituals since the Three Kingdoms period.
The Gangnam district is one of the most affluent areas in Seoul and is noted for the fashionable and upscale Apgujeong-dong and Cheongdam-dong areas and the COEX Mall.
The Wongaksa Pagoda 10 tier pagoda is situated In Tapgol Park, a small public park with an area of .
In the late 19th century, after hundreds of years of isolation, Seoul opened its gates to foreigners and began to modernize.
As Korea's economy started to grow rapidly from the 1960s, urbanization also accelerated and workers began to move to Seoul and other larger cities.
* Yongsan Station, Yongsan District: Honam line (KTX/Saemaul/Mugunghwa), Jeolla/Janghang lines (Saemaul/Mugunghwa)
The bell signaled the different times of the day and controlled the four major gates to the city.
Today, Seoul is considered a leading and rising global city, resulting from an economic boom called the Miracle on the Han River which transformed it to the world's 4th largest metropolitan economy with a GDP of US$845.9 billion in 2014 after Tokyo, New York City and Los Angeles.
The traditional heart of Seoul is the old Joseon Dynasty city, now the downtown area, where most palaces, government offices, corporate headquarters, hotels, and traditional markets are located.
This was a .24% decrease from the end of 2010.
Major railroad stations include:
Students spend six years in elementary school, three years in middle school, and three years in high school.
Although it accounts for only 0.6 percent of the nation's land area, 48.3 percent of South Korea's bank deposits were held in Seoul in 2003, and the city generated 23 percent of the country's GDP overall in 2012.
Seoul is divided into 25 ''gu'' () (district).
The Seoul Metropolitan Subway has 19 total lines which serve Seoul, Incheon, Gyeonggi province, western Gangwon province, and northern Chungnam province.
Various high-rise office buildings and residential buildings, like the Gangnam Finance Center, the Tower Palace, N Seoul Tower and Jongno Tower, dominate the city's skyline.
As of June 2011, 281,780 foreigners were located in Seoul.
* Yongsan District (용산구; )
Its Lotte Cinema houses the world's largest cinema screen.
There are also many buildings constructed with international styles in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Ex-Kepco head office building was purchased by Hyundai motor group with 9billion USD to build 115-storey Hyundai GBC & hotel complex  until   2021.
Two international airports serve Seoul.
After the annexation treaty in 1910, the Empire of Japan annexed Korea and renamed the city Gyeongseong ("Kyongsong" in Korean and "Keijo" in Japanese).
KOREA WORLD TRADE CENTER COMPLEX which comprises COEX mall, congress center, 3 Inter-continental hotels, Business tower (Asem tower),Residence hotel,Casino and City airport terminal  was  established in 1988 Seoul Olympic .
The other large palace, Changdeokgung, constructed in 1405, served as the main royal palace from 1611 to 1872.
Seoul Station was opened in 1900 as Gyeongseong Station.
* Gwanak District (관악구; )
Notable food and beverage companies include Jinro, whose soju is the most sold alcoholic drink in the world, beating out Smirnoff vodka; top selling beer producers Hite (merged with Jinro) and Oriental Brewery.
Cheonggyecheon, a stream that runs from west to east through the valley before emptying into the Han River, was for many years covered with concrete, but was recently restored by an urban revival project in 2005.
The World Trade Center Seoul, located in Gangnam District, hosts various expositions and conferences.
* Dongjak District (동작구; )
The two major religions in Seoul are Christianity and Buddhism.
Electronics markets are Gangbyeon station metro line 2 Techno mart, ENTER6 MALL & Shindorim station Technomart mall complex.
Jogyesa is the headquarters of the Jogye Order of Korean Buddhism.
When Joseon replaced Goryeo, the capital was moved to Seoul (also known as Hanyang and later as Hanseong), where it remained until the fall of the dynasty.
For many Korean film lovers from all over the world, the Korean Film Archive is running the Korean Film Museum and Cinematheque KOFA in its main center located in Digital Media City(DMC), Sangam-dong.
Yoido Full Gospel Church is a  Pentecostal church affiliated with the Assemblies of God on Yeouido in Seoul.
Seoul Metropolitan Office of Education comprises 235 College-Preparatory High Schools, 80 Vocational Schools, 377 Middle Schools, and 33 Special Education Schools .
Despite the city's population density, Seoul has a large quantity of parks.
* Eunpyeong District (은평구; )
* Seodaemun District (서대문구; )
There is an exit exam for graduating from high school and many students proceeding to the university level are required to take the College Scholastic Ability Test that is held every November.
Seoul hosted the 1986 Asian Games, 1988 Summer Olympics, 2002 FIFA World Cup, the Miss Universe 1980 pageant, and the 2010 G-20 Seoul summit.
The National Palace Museum of Korea is also located on the grounds of the Gyeongbokgung Palace.
* Gwangjin District (광진구; )
The city is bordered by eight mountains, as well as the more level lands of the Han River plain and western areas.
Amongst the city's national museum, The National Museum of Korea is the most representative of museums in not only Seoul but all of South Korea.
* Yeongdeungpo Station, Yeongdeungpo District: Gyeongbu/Honam/Janghang lines (Saemaul/Mugunghwa)
Namdaemun was the oldest wooden gate until a 2008 arson attack, and was re-opened after complete restoration in 2013.
As of the end of June 2011, 10.29 million Republic of Korea citizens lived in the city.
* Cheongnyangni Station, Dongdaemun District: Gyeongchun/Jungang/Yeongdong/Taebaek lines (Mugunghwa)
Gimpo is also linked by subway (line No.&nbsp;5 and #9).
During the Joseon dynasty, the gates were opened and closed each day, accompanied by the ringing of large bells at the Bosingak belfry.
Myeongdong is a shopping and entertainment area in downtown Seoul with mid- to high-end stores, fashion boutiques and international brand outlets.
* Gangbuk District (강북구; )
Urban and civil planning was a key concept when Seoul was first designed to serve as a capital in the late 14th century.
As the Three Kingdoms competed for this strategic region, control passed from Baekje to Goguryeo in the 5th century, and from Goguryeo to Silla in the 6th century.
Seoul became the first city in East Asia to introduce electricity in the royal palace, built by the Edison Illuminating Company and a decade later Seoul also implemented electrical street lights.
The Fortress Wall of Seoul was built early in the Joseon Dynasty for protection of the city.
The various lines are run by Korail, Seoul Metro, Seoul Metropolitan Rapid Transit Corporation, NeoTrans Co. Ltd., AREX, and Seoul Metro Line 9 Corporation.
Songpa has the most people, while Seocho has the largest area.
The Economist Intelligence Unit ranked Seoul 15th in the list of "Overall 2025 City Competitiveness" regarding future competitiveness of cities.
, 25% of the population has a commute time of an hour or more.
Shuttle buses also transfer passengers between Incheon and Gimpo airports.
The Joseon Dynasty built the "Five Grand Palaces" in Seoul – Changdeokgung, Changgyeonggung, Deoksugung, Gyeongbokgung and Gyeonghuigung – all of which are located in the district of Jongno District and Jung District.
As of July 2016, and excluding the still unopened Lotte World Tower, the tallest building in the city is the 279m high Three International Finance Center.
In addition, Seoul introduced in 2015 a bicycle-sharing system named Ddareungi.
Pungnap Toseong is a flat earthen wall built at the edge of the Han River which is widely believed to be the site of Wiryeseong.
In October 2005, the museum moved to a new building in Yongsan Family Park.
Insadong is the cultural art market of Seoul, where traditional and modern Korean artworks, such as paintings, sculptures and calligraphy are sold.
The Tteok & Kitchen Utensil Museum and Kimchi Field Museum provide information regarding Korean culinary history.
Seoul's bus system is operated by the Seoul Metropolitan Government (S.M.G.
Leeum, Samsung Museum of Art, is widely regarded as one of Seoul's largest private museum.
After many centuries of destruction and rebuilding, approximately ⅔ of the wall remains, as well as six of the original eight gates.
Among them, Changdeokgung was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1997 as an "outstanding example of Far Eastern palace architecture and garden design".
These areas are frequently sought after by people looking to escape from urban life on weekends and during vacations.
The former is operated by Seoul City Council and sits adjacent to Gyeonghuigung Palace, a Joseon dynasty royal palace.
August, the warmest month, has average high and low temperatures of  with higher temperatures possible.
In addition, in order to cope with the various modes of transport, Seoul's metropolitan government employs several mathematicians to coordinate the subway, bus, and traffic schedules into one timetable.
Situated on the Han River, Seoul's history stretches back more than two thousand years when it was founded in 18 BCE by Baekje, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea.
Some shops for local designers have opened in Samcheong-dong, where numerous small art galleries are located.
The Gyeongbok Palace, built in the 14th century, served as the royal residence until 1592.
Although Buddhism was suppressed by the Joseon state, it has continued its existence.
The city was liberated at the end of World War II.
Other notable streets in downtown Seoul include Euljiro, Teheranno, Sejongno, Chungmuro, Yulgongno, and Toegyero.
Itaewon caters mainly to foreign tourists and American soldiers based in the city.
Seoul is also linked to most major South Korean cities by the KTX high-speed train, which has a normal operation speed of more than .
Seoul Festival is a seasonal cultural festival held four times a year every spring, summer, autumn, and winter in Seoul, South Korea since 2003.
Now ex-kepco 25-storey building is under demolition.
Seoul is the world's most wired city and ranked first in technology readiness by PwC's ''Cities of Opportunity'' report.
Seoul is connected to every major city in South Korea by rail.
, Seoul has hosted Ultra Music Festival Korea, an annual dance music festival that takes place on the 2nd weekend of June.
Modern landmarks include the iconic N Seoul Tower, the gold-clad 63 Building, the neofuturistic Dongdaemun Design Plaza, Lotte World, the world's second largest indoor theme park,  Moonlight Rainbow Fountain, the world's longest bridge fountain  and the Sevit Floating Islands.
Munmyo and Dongmyo were built during the same period.
Ranked sixth in the Global Power City Index and Global Financial Centres Index, the metropolis exerts a major influence in global affairs as one of the five leading hosts of global conferences.
Japanese technology was imported, the city walls were removed, some of the gates demolished.
Situated near the gates are the traditional markets and largest shopping center, Namdaemun Market and Dongdaemun Market.
It also served as one of the host cities of the 2002 FIFA World Cup.
Seoul is within measurable distance of becoming the highest, most interesting and cleanest city in the East."
* Gangdong District (강동구; )
Following the war, Seoul began to focus on reconstruction and modernization.
One of the most famous parks in Namsan Park, which offers hiking recreation and views of the downtown Seoul skyline.
In 2008 the Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index ranked Seoul No.9.
When it opened in March 2001, Incheon International Airport on Yeongjong island in Incheon changed the role of Gimpo Airport significantly.
Meanwhile, Incheon International Airport has become, along with Hong Kong, a major transportation center for East Asia.
Cheonggyecheon, a stream that runs nearly  through downtown Seoul, is popular among both Seoul residents and tourists.
The Global Financial Centres Index in 2015 listed Seoul as the 6th financially most competitive city in the world.
There are nine major subway lines stretching for more than , with one additional line planned.
In 2010 Seoul was designated the World Design Capital for the year.
It is the oldest royal Confucian shrine preserved and the ritual ceremonies continue a tradition established in the 14th century.
This was an 8.84% increase from the end of 2010 and a 12.85% increase from June 2010.
* Nowon District (노원구; )
* Seongdong District (성동구; )
Across the Han River are the newer and wealthier areas of Gangnam District, Seocho District and surrounding neighborhoods.
Seoul is home to the majority of South Korea's most prestigious universities, including Seoul National University, Yonsei University, Korea University, Sungkyunkwan University, Sogang University, Hanyang University, Chung-Ang University, Dongguk University, Ewha Womans University, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Hongik University, Sejong University, Kookmin University, Konkuk University, Kyung Hee University, Seoul National University of Education,  Soongsil University, Sookmyung Women's University, and the University of Seoul.
From the 1970s, the size of Seoul administrative area greatly expanded as it annexed a number of towns and villages from several surrounding counties.
The main palace, Gyeongbokgung, underwent a large-scale restoration project.
With approximately 830,000 members (2007), it is the largest Pentecostal Christian congregation in the world, which has been recognized by the Guinness Book of World Records.
Other religions include Muism (indigenous religion) and Confucianism.
Hyochang Stadium, Seoul Olympic Auxiliary Stadium
Hwanghak-dong Flea Market and Janganpyeong Antique Market also offer antique products.
There are many Protestant churches in Seoul.
Other recreation centers include the former Olympic and World Cup stadiums and the City Hall public lawn.
Seoul is connected via AREX to Incheon International Airport, rated the world's best airport nine years in a row (2005–2013) by Airports Council International.
* Jung District (중구; )
Seoul is home to the world's largest modern university founded by a Buddhist Order, Dongguk University.
Taekwondo is Korea's national sport and Seoul is the location of the Kukkiwon, the world headquarters of taekwondo, as well as the World Taekwondo Federation.
* Yeongdeungpo District (영등포구; )
Hanhwa is one of the three largest Korean insurance companies, along with Samsung Life and Gangnam & Kyob life insurance group.
The descendants of the Joseon royal family still continue to hold ceremonies to commemorate ancestors at Jongmyo.
Winters are often cold to freezing with average January high and low temperatures of  and are generally much drier than summers, with an average of 28 days of snow annually.
Finally, the Seoul branch of the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, whose main museum is located in Gwacheon, opened in 2013, in Sogyeok-dong.
Seoul has a comprehensive urban railway network that interconnects every district of the city and the surrounding areas.
The War Memorial, one of nine municipal museums in Seoul, offers visitors an educational and emotional experience of various wars in which Korea was involved, including Korean War themes.
Seoul's most important streetcar line ran along Jongno until it was replaced by Line 1 of the subway system in the early 1970s.
Incheon is now responsible for almost all international flights and some domestic flights, while Gimpo serves only domestic flights with the exception of flights to Haneda Airport in Tokyo, Osaka Kansai International Airport, Taipei Songshan Airport in Taipei, Hongqiao Airport in Shanghai, and Beijing Capital International Airport in Beijing.
Seoul World Cup Stadium hosted the opening ceremony and first game of the tournament.
The nearby Namdaemun Market, named after the Namdaemun Gate, is the oldest continually running market in Seoul.
There are also religious buildings that take important roles in Korean society and politics.
Other domestic airports were also built around the time of the war, including Yeouido.
* Seoul Station, Yongsan District: Gyeongbu line (KTX/Saemaul/Mugunghwa-ho), Gyeongui line (Saemaul/Commuter)
Seoul is in the northwest of South Korea.
Seoul proper comprises 605.25&nbsp;km2, with a radius of approximately , roughly bisected into northern and southern halves by the Han River.
The National Folk Museum is situated on the grounds of the Gyeongbokgung Palace in the district of Jongno District and uses replicas of historical objects to illustrate the folk history of the Korean people.
Its metropolitan area was the most densely populated in the OECD in Asia in 2012, and second worldwide after that of Paris.
Gu of Seoul consist of 423 administrative dongs () in total.
Although there is a test for non-high school graduates, called school qualification exam, most of Koreans take the test
Incheon and Gimpo are linked to Seoul by highways, and to each other by the Incheon International Airport Railroad, which is also linked to Incheon line #1.
Also in Gangnam District is the COEX Mall, a large indoor shopping and entertainment complex.
* Seongbuk District (성북구; )
Seoul is home to various specialized schools, including three science high schools (Hansung Science High School, Sejong Science High School and Seoul Science High School), and six foreign language High Schools (Daewon Foreign Language High School, Daeil Foreign Language High School, Ewha Girls' Foreign Language High School, Hanyoung Foreign Language High School, Myungduk Foreign Language High School and Seoul Foreign Language High School).
The area that was the old capital in the Joseon Dynasty, and mostly comprises Jongno District and Jung District, constitutes the historical and political center of the city.
Seoul proper is noted for its population density, which is almost twice that of New York and eight times greater than Rome.
The Han River and its surrounding area played an important role in Korean history.
Seoul is home to 115 museums, including four national and nine official municipal museums.
Seoul is also home to the world's largest indoor amusement park, Lotte World.
The Olympic Stadium, Olympic Park, and Lotte World are located in Songpa District, on the south side of the Han River, upstream from Gangnam District.
In 1904, an American by the name of Angus Hamilton visited the city and said, "The streets of Seoul are magnificent, spacious, clean, admirably made and well-drained.
For example, the Seoul Electric Company, Seoul Electric Trolley Company, and Seoul Fresh Spring Water Company were all joint Korean–American owned enterprises.
This 47.7&nbsp;billion won ($44&nbsp;million) project will give residents and visitors Internet access at 10,430 parks, streets and other public places by 2015.
* Songpa District (송파구; )
* Geumcheon District (금천구; )
The Three Kingdoms of Korea strove to take control of this land, where the river was used as a trade route to China (via the Yellow Sea).
Originally, the city was entirely surrounded by a massive circular stone wall to provide its citizens security from wild animals, thieves and attacks.
According to the census of 2005, of the people of Seoul 37% follow Christianity (22.8% Protestantism and 14.2% Catholicism) and 16.8% follow Buddhism.
The most numerous are Presbyterian, but there are also many Methodist, Baptist, and Lutheran churches.
In 2014, the city's GDP per capita (PPP) of $39,786 was comparable to that of France and Finland.
The Seoul Capital Area contains five UNESCO World Heritage Sites: Changdeok Palace, Hwaseong Fortress, Jongmyo Shrine, Namhansanseong and the Royal Tombs of the Joseon Dynasty.
There are several city walls remaining in the area that date from this time.
In addition, East Seoul Bus Terminal in Gwangjin District and Sangbong Terminal in Jungnang District operate in the east of the city.
The Incheon International Airport Railroad, connecting the airport directly to Seoul Station in central Seoul, was recently opened.
Lotte World Tower, a 556m (1,824&nbsp;ft) supertall skyscraper with 123 floors, is being built in Seoul to become the OECD's tallest in 2016, with the world's tallest art gallery.
The next highest group consisted of the 9,999 United States citizens who were not of Korean ancestry.
Wholesale markets include Noryangjin Fisheries Wholesale Market and Garak Market.
