Whether someone spoke Croatian or Serbian was not an important distinction then, as the two languages were not distinguished by most speakers.
West European scientists judge the Yugoslav language policy as an exemplary one: although three-quarters of the population spoke one language, no single language was official on a federal level.
In the discussion, she shows that linguistic criteria such as mutual intelligibility, huge overlap in linguistic system, and the same dialectic basis of standard language provide evidence that Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian and Montenegrin are four national variants of the pluricentric Serbo-Croatian language.
:Kad je to čȗla, õfca je pobȇ̩gla f pȍlje.
Most Shtokavian dialects (Neoshtokavian) dialects underwent this shift, but Chakavian, Kajkavian and the Old Shtokavian dialects did not.
However, some consider there to be three numbers (paucal or ''dual,'' too), since (still preserved in closely related Slovene) after two (''dva'', ''dvije''/''dve''), three (''tri'') and four (''četiri''), and all numbers ending in them (e.g.
Both the language used in legal texts and that used in Glagolitic literature gradually came under the influence of the vernacular, which considerably affected its phonological, morphological, and lexical systems.
Its grammar evolved from Common Slavic, with complex inflection, preserving seven grammatical cases in nouns, pronouns, and adjectives.
Serbo-Croatian is also a second language of many Slovenians and Macedonians, especially those born during the time of Yugoslavia.
General accent rules in the standard language:
There are seven tenses for verbs: past, present, future, exact future, aorist, imperfect, and plusquamperfect; and three moods: indicative, imperative, and conditional.
Very rarely other sonorants can be syllabic, like  (in ''bicikl''),  (surname ''Štarklj''),  (unit ''njutn''), as well as   and  in slang.
The nationalists among the Croats conflictingly claim either that they speak an entirely separate language from Serbs and Bosnians or that these two peoples have, due to the longer lexicographic tradition among Croats, somehow "borrowed" their standard languages from them.
Newspapers, radio and television studios used sixteen languages, fourteen were used as languages of tuition in schools, and nine at universities.
Both Serbian and Croatian variants were represented in respectively different grammar books, dictionaries, school textbooks and in books known as pravopis (which detail spelling rules).
For utilitarian purposes, the Serbo-Croatian language is often called "''Naš jezik''" ("Our language") or "''Naški''" (sic.
Enisa Kafadar argues that there is only one Serbo-Croatian language with several varieties.
can be syllabic, playing the role of the syllable nucleus in certain words (occasionally, it can even have a long accent).
The usual argument generally goes along the following lines:
It should also be noted that, in the pre-national era, Catholic religious orientation did not necessarily equate with Croat ethnic identity in Dalmatia.
The earliest known Croatian Church Slavonic Glagolitic manuscripts are the ''Glagolita Clozianus'' and the ''Vienna Folia'' from the 11th century.
However, in modern Shtokavian the locative has almost merged into dative (the only difference is based on accent in some cases), and the other cases can be shown declining; namely:
Marulić explicitly called his Čakavian-written ''Judita'' as ''u uerish haruacchi slosena'' ("arranged in Croatian stanzas") in 1501, and the Štokavian grammar and dictionary of Bartol Kašić written in 1604 unambiguously identifies the ethnonyms ''Slavic'' and ''Illyrian'' with ''Croatian''.
In 1850 Serbian and Croatian writers and linguists signed the Vienna Literary Agreement, declaring their intention to create a unified standard.
Old Slavonic developed into the Serbo-Croatian variant of Church Slavonic between the 12th and 16th centuries.
There are no other rules for accent placement, thus the accent of every word must be learned individually; furthermore, in inflection, accent shifts are common, both in type and position (the so-called "mobile paradigms").
:A kȍjni su rȇkli: «Poslȕhni, õfca, nȃs sȑca bolĩju kad vîdime da čȍve̩k, gospodãr, dȇ̩la vȕnu ot õfci i dȇ̩la oblȅ̩ku zȃ se.
Like most Slavic languages, there are mostly three genders for nouns: masculine, feminine, and neuter, a distinction which is still present even in the plural (unlike Russian and, in part, the Čakavian dialect).
However, there are very few minimal pairs where an error in accent can lead to misunderstanding.
Finally, the former ''medieval'' texts from Dubrovnik and Montenegro dating before the 16th century were neither true Štokavian nor Serbian, but mostly specific a Jekavian-Čakavian that was nearer to actual Adriatic islanders in Croatia.
said in isolation for a short tonic ''e,'' or ''leave'' vs.
cognate Russian words, the accent in the Serbo-Croatian word will be one syllable before the one in the Russian word, with the rising tone.
In the 2003 census, around 150,000 Montenegrins, of the country's 620,000, declared Montenegrin as their native language.
South Slavic dialects historically formed a continuum.
I ȍnda ovcȁ nĩma vȉše vȕni.
When Jagić says "Croatian", he refers to a few cases referring to the Dubrovnik vernacular as ''ilirski'' (Illyrian).
Also, there are some exceptions, mostly applied to foreign words and compounds, that favor morphological/etymological over phonetic spelling:
The tone stressed vowels can be approximated in English with ''set'' vs.
Old Church Slavonic was adopted as the language of the liturgy.
Official languages were declared only at the level of constituent republics and provinces, and very generously: Vojvodina had five (among them Slovak and Romanian, spoken by 0.5 per cent of the population), and Kosovo four (Albanian, Turkish, Romany and Serbo-Croatian).
Accent diacritics are not used in the ordinary orthography, but only in the linguistic or language-learning literature (e.g.
* iz čegapronounced ''iščega'' (in many vernaculars)
the variants of German differ according to their prestige, the variants of Portuguese too.
Yet Croatian linguists claim that it was an act of unitarianism.
In Croatia, 170,000 mostly Italians and Hungarians use it as a second language.
It can be written in Serbian Cyrillic or Gaj's Latin alphabet, whose thirty letters mutually map one-to-one, and the orthography is highly phonemic in all standards.
also differ slightly.
Gundulić did not write in "Serbo-Croatian", nor did August Šenoa.
According to the 2002 Census, Serbo-Croatian and its variants have the largest number of speakers of the minority languages in Slovenia.
This politically correct term is frequently used to describe the Serbo-Croatian language by those who wish to avoid nationalistic and linguistic discussions.
* šeststo (six hundred)pronounced ''šesto'' (to avoid confusion with "šesto" sixth)
short vowel with falling tone
That figure is likely to increase since, due to the country's independence and strong institutional backing of Montenegrin language.
non-tonic long vowel
On the other hand, the opinion of Jagić from 1864 is argued not to have firm grounds.
In practice, the writing system does not take into account allophones which occur as a result of interaction between words:
: '''English language'''
In the past, Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects were spoken on a much larger territory, but have been replaced by Štokavian during the period of migrations caused by Ottoman Turkish conquest of the Balkans in the 15th and the 16th centuries.
The dissolution of Yugoslavia has made Serbo-Croatian even more typical pluricentric language, since the variants of other pluricentric languages are also spoken in different states.
I ȍndā  ōvcȁ néma vȉšē vȕnē.
:*The list of 100 words of the basic Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin vocabulary, as set out by Morris Swadesh, shows that all 100 words are identical.
By far the most competent Serbian scientist on the Dubrovnik language issue, Milan Rešetar, who was born in Dubrovnik himself, wrote behalf of language characteristics: "The one who thinks that Croatian and Serbian are two separate languages must confess that Dubrovnik always (linguistically) used to be Serbian."
Prior to the 19th century, they were collectively called "Illyric", "Slavic", "Slavonian", "Bosnian", "Dalmatian", "Serbian" or "Croatian".
(The number one ''jedan'' is treated as an adjective.)
* There is an accentual difference between the genitive singular and genitive plural of masculine and neuter nouns, which are otherwise homonyms (''seljaka'', ''seljaka'') except that on occasion an "a" (which might or might not appear in the singular) is filled between the last letter of the root and the genitive plural ending (''kapitalizma'', ''kapitalizama'').
However, some argue that these arguments have flaws:
Serbo-Croatian was standardized in the mid-19th-century Vienna Literary Agreement by Croatian and Serbian writers and philologists, decades before a Yugoslav state was established.
In Serbia, the Serbian language is the official one, while both Serbian and Croatian are official in the province of Vojvodina.
short vowel with rising tone
(From ''The History of the Croatian language'', Zagreb, 1864.)
Writers of early Serbo-Croatian religious poetry (''začinjavci'') gradually introduced the vernacular into their works.
Among pluricentric languages, Serbo-Croatian was the only one with a pluricentric standardisation within one state.
:Óvca koja níje ìmala vȕnē vȉd(j)ela je kònje na br(ij)égu.
Throughout the history of the South Slavs, the vernacular, literary, and written languages (e.g.
Apart from Slovene, Serbo-Croatian is the only Slavic language with a pitch accent (simple tone) system.
:Ovcȁ je reklȁ konjȇn: «Sȑce me bolĩ dok glȅdan čovȅka kako jȁše na konjȅ».
Migrations in the 20th century, primarily caused by urbanization and wars, also contributed to the reduction of dialectal differences.
Other dialects are not taught in schools or used by the state media.
Outside the Balkans, there are over 2 million native speakers of the language(s), especially in countries which are frequent targets of immigration, such as Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Sweden and the United States.
Jȇn od nîh je vlẽ̩ke̩l tẽška kȍla, drȕgi je nȍsil vȅliku vrȅ̩ču, a trẽjti je nȍsil čovȅ̩ka.
In 1954, major Serbian and Croatian writers, linguists and literary critics, backed by Matica srpska and Matica hrvatska signed the Novi Sad Agreement, which in its first conclusion stated: "Serbs, Croats and Montenegrins share a single language with two equal variants that have developed around Zagreb (western) and Belgrade (eastern)".
:õfca tera nı̃je imȅ̩̏la vȕne vȉdla je kȍjne na briẽgu.
The mutual intelligibility between their speakers "exceeds that between the standard variants of English, French, German, or Spanish".
All the consonants are voiced (if the last consonant is normally voiced) or voiceless (if the last consonant is normally voiceless).
Adjectives are placed in front of the noun they modify and must agree in both case and number with it.
Jèdān od njȉjū vũkō tȇška kȍla, drȕgī nosȉjo vȅlikū vrȅću, a trȅćī nosȉjo čovȉka.
Croatian linguist Dalibor Brozović advocated the term ''Serbo-Croatian'' as late as 1988, claiming that in an analogy with Indo-European, Serbo-Croatian does not only name the two components of the same language, but simply charts the limits of the region in which it is spoken and includes everything between the limits (‘Bosnian’ and ‘Montenegrin’).
Vatroslav Jagić pointed out in 1864:
:A kònji kāzȁše: «Slȕšāj, ȏvco, nãs sȑca bolũ kad vȉdīmo da čòvik, gȁzda, prȁvī vȕnu od ovãc i prȁvī rȍbu zá se od njẽ.
This has made possible to include all four varieties into a new grammar book.
And the sheep has no wool".
The primary dialects are named after the most common question word for ''what'': Shtokavian uses the pronoun ''što'' or ''šta'', Chakavian uses ''ča'' or ''ca'', Kajkavian (''kajkavski''), ''kaj'' or ''kej''.
This is a common situation in other pluricentric languages, e.g.
The turbulent history of the area, particularly due to expansion of the Ottoman Empire, resulted in a patchwork of dialectal and religious differences.
* bit ćepronounced ''biće'' (and only written separately in Bosnian and Croatian)
According to Swadesh, 81 per cent are sufficient to be considered as a single language.
Moreover, all languages differ in terms of prestige: "the fact is that languages (in terms of prestige, learnability etc.)
: "As I have mentioned in the preface, history knows only two national names in these parts—Croatian and Serbian.
In the meantime, other written monuments are found that mention ''srpski'', ''lingua serviana'' (= Serbian), and some that mention Croatian.
These migrations caused the koinéisation of the Shtokavian dialects, that used to form the West Shtokavian (more closer and transitional towards the neighbouring Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects) and East Shtokavian (transitional towards the Torlakian and the whole Bulgaro-Macedonian area) dialect bundles, and their subsequent spread at the expense of Chakavian and Kajkavian.
Verbs exhibit imperfective or perfective aspect, with a moderately complex tense system.
Notion of Montenegrin as a separate standard from Serbian is relatively recent.
Due to population migrations, Shtokavian became the most widespread in the western Balkans, intruding westwards into the area previously occupied by Chakavian and Kajkavian (which further blend into Slovenian in the northwest).
One of the earliest dictionaries, also in the Slavic languages as a whole, was the ''Bosnian–Turkish Dictionary'' of 1631 authored by Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi and was written in the Arebica script.
All variants of Serbo-Croatian were used in state administration and republican and federal institutions.
The breakup of Yugoslavia affected language attitudes, so that social conceptions of the language separated on ethnic and political lines.
This language was gradually adapted to non-liturgical purposes and became known as the Croatian version of Old Slavonic.
Serbo-Croatian competed with the more established literary languages of Latin and Old Slavonic in the west and Persian and Arabic in the east.
Only a few words are intentionally "misspelled", mostly in order to resolve ambiguity:
And within Serbo-Croatian, the Serbian variant, with twice as many speakers as the Croatian, enjoyed greater prestige, reinforced by the fact that Slovene and Macedonian speakers preferred it to the Croatian variant because their languages are also Ekavian.
Jèdan je òd njīh vȗkao téška kȍla, drȕgī je nòsio vèliku vrȅću, a trȅćī je nòsio čòv(j)eka.
The Baška tablet from the late 11th century was written in Glagolitic.
However, its nomenclature is controversial, as there is incentive that it is referred to as "Bosniak" (''bošnjački'') rather than "Bosnian" (''bosanski'') (see Bosnian language for details).
Serbian minorities are found in the Republic of Macedonia and in Romania.
In the Communist-dominated second Yugoslavia, ethnic issues eased to an extent, but the matter of language remained blurred and unresolved.
* od togapronounced ''otoga'' (in many vernaculars)
A similar feature exists in Czech, Slovak, and Macedonian.
In 1945 the decision to recognize Croatian and Serbian as separate languages was reversed in favor of a single Serbo-Croatian or Croato-Serbian language.
I ȏnda õfca nȇma vȉše vȕne.
Matica hrvatska and Matica srpska were to work together on a dictionary, and a committee of Serbian and Croatian linguists was asked to prepare a ''pravopis''.
Unofficially, Serbs and Croats typically called the language "Serbian" or "Croatian", respectively, without implying a distinction between the two, and again in independent Bosnia and Herzegovina, "Bosnian", "Croatian", and "Serbian" were considered to be three names of a single official language.
The agreement insisted on the equal status of Cyrillic and Latin scripts, and of Ekavian and Ijekavian pronunciations.
Serbian is spoken by about 9.5 million mostly in Serbia (6.7m), Bosnia and Herzegovina (1.4m), and Montenegro (0.4m).
This feature is present in some other Indo-European languages, such as Swedish, Norwegian, and Ancient Greek.
Serbo-Croatian is a pro-drop language with flexible word order, subject–verb–object being the default.
Some Štokavian tenses (namely, aorist and imperfect) favor a particular aspect (but they are rarer or absent in Čakavian and Kajkavian).
Familiarity of Kosovo Albanians with Serbian in Kosovo varies depending on age and education, and exact numbers are not available.
:*The affirmation of distinct Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin languages is ''politically'' motivated.
: The Sheep and the Horses
A more detailed overview, incorporating arguments from the Croatian philology and contemporary linguistics, would be as follows:
:On a hill, a sheep that had no wool saw horses, one of them pulling a heavy wagon, one carrying a big load, and one carrying a man quickly.
for a long tonic ''i,'' due to the prosody of final stressed syllables in English.
Yet, in practice, the variants of the conceived common literary language served as different literary variants, chiefly differing in lexical inventory and stylistic devices.
: '''Čakavian (Matulji near Rijeka)''':
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, all three languages are recorded as official but in practice and media, mostly Bosnian and Serbian are applied.
Historically, the rising tone appeared when the place of the accent shifted to the preceding syllable (the so-called "Neoshtokavian retraction"), but the quality of this new accent was different – its melody still "gravitated" towards the original syllable.
:Kad je tȏ čȕla, ovcȁ je pobȅgla va pȍje.
It is also important in the history of the nation as it mentions Zvonimir, the king of Croatia at the time.
Babić further complained that the Novi Sad Dictionary (1967) listed side by side words from both the Croatian and Serbian variants wherever they differed, which one can view as proof of careful respect for both variants, and not of unitarism.
A minority of Serbian linguists are of the opinion that Serbo-Croatian did exist, but has, in the meantime, dissolved.
Like other South Slavic languages, Serbo-Croatian has a simple phonology, with the common five-vowel system and twenty-five consonants.
As far as Dubrovnik is concerned, the Serbian name was never in use; on the contrary, the Croatian name was frequently used and gladly referred to"
: The sheep said to the horses: "My heart pains me, seeing a man driving horses".
In June 1941, the Nazi puppet Independent State of Croatia began to rid the language of "Eastern" (Serbian) words, and shut down Serbian schools.
:Ovcȁ kȃ ni imȅla vȕni vȉdela je konjȉ na brȇge.
Confrontations have on occasion been absurd.
each dialect has some similarities with the neighboring one, and differences grow with distance.
Thus a complex bi-variant language appeared, which the Serbs officially called "Serbo-Croatian" or "Serbian or Croatian" and the Croats "Croato-Serbian", or "Croatian or Serbian".
In addition, they use two alphabets that perfectly match each other (Latin and Cyrillic), thanks to Ljudevit Gaj and Vuk Karadžić.
The Shtokavian dialect literature, based almost exclusively on Chakavian original texts of religious provenance (missals, breviaries, prayer books) appeared almost a century later.
The radical break with the past, characteristic of modern Serbian (whose vernacular was likely not as similar to Croatian as it is today), is a trait completely at variance with Croatian linguistic history.
The Torlakian dialect is often added to the list, though sources usually note that it is a transitional dialect between Shtokavian and the Bulgaro-Macedonian dialects.
The imperfective aspect typically indicates that the action is unfinished, in progress, or repetitive; while the perfective aspect typically denotes that the action was completed, instantaneous, or of limited duration.
The language of religious poems, translations, miracle and morality plays contributed to the popular character of medieval Serbo-Croatian literature.
The differences among the dialects can be illustrated on the example of Schleicher's fable.
It is a large stone tablet found in the small Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor on the Croatian island of Krk that contains text written mostly in Chakavian in the Croatian angular Glagolitic script.
The most notable are the "Missal of Duke Novak" from the Lika region in northwestern Croatia (1368), "Evangel from Reims" (1395, named after the town of its final destination), Hrvoje's Missal from Bosnia and Split in Dalmatia (1404), and the first printed book in Serbo-Croatian, the Glagolitic Missale Romanum Glagolitice (1483).
morphology and syntax.
:A kònji rȅkoše: «Slȕšāj, ȏvco, nȃs sȑca bòlē kada vȉdīmo da čòv(j)ek, gospòdār, rȃdī vȕnu od ovácā i prȁvī òd(j)eću zá se.
Igor Mandić states: "During the last ten years, it has been the longest, the most serious and most acrid discussion (…) in 21st-century Croatian culture".
non-tonic short vowel
* The old instrumental ending "ju" of the feminine consonant stems and in some cases the "a" of the genitive plural of certain other sorts of feminine nouns is fast yielding to "i": ''noći'' instead of ''noćju'', ''borbi'' instead of ''boraba'' and so forth.
In short, formal standardization processes for Croatian and Serbian had coincided chronologically (and, one could add, ideologically), but they haven't produced a unified standard language.
From the very beginning, there were slightly different literary Serbian and Croatian standards, although both were based on the same Shtokavian subdialect, Eastern Herzegovinian.
The second rule is not strictly obeyed, especially in borrowed words.
Only the Yugoslav Army used Serbo-Croatian as the sole language of command, with all other languages represented in the army’s other activities—however, this is not different from other armies of multilingual states, or in other specific institutions, such as international air traffic control where English is used worldwide.
Inspired by that discussion, a monograph on language and nationalism has been published.
* For all nouns and adjectives, instrumental = dative = locative (at least orthographically) in the plural: ''ženama'', ''ženama'', ''ženama''; ''očima'', ''očima'', ''očima''; ''riječima'', ''riječima'', ''riječima''.
:*The Serbo-Croatian language was standardised in the mid-19th century, and all subsequent attempts to dissolve its basic unity have not succeeded.
Bosnian is spoken by 2.2 million people, chiefly Bosniaks, including about 220,000 in Serbia and Montenegro.
* prstni (adj., finger)pronounced ''prsni'' (to avoid confusion with "prsni" adj., chest)
A large Bosniak minority is present in the southwest region of Sandžak, but the "official recognition" of Bosnian language is moot.
In 1929, the constitution was suspended, and the country was renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, while the official language of Serbo-Croato-Slovene was reinstated in the 1931 constitution.
The beginning of written Serbo-Croatian can be traced from the 10th century and on when Serbo-Croatian medieval texts were written in five scripts: Latin, Glagolitic, Early Cyrillic, Bosnian Cyrillic (''bosančica/bosanica''), and Arebica, the last principally by Bosniak nobility.
Chakavian, Kajkavian, Shtokavian) of the various regions and ethnicities developed and diverged independently.
The opinion of the majority of Croatian linguists is that there has never been a Serbo-Croatian language, but two different standard languages that overlapped sometime in the course of history.
With unification of the first the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes – the approach of Karadžić and the Illyrians became dominant.
Officially, the language was called variously ''Serbo-Croat, Croato-Serbian, Serbian and Croatian, Croatian and Serbian, Serbian or Croatian, Croatian or Serbian.''
Bosnian is an optional course in 1st and 2nd grade of the elementary school, while it is also in official use in the municipality of Novi Pazar.
: The horses said: "Listen, sheep, our hearts pain us when we see this: a man, the master, makes the wool of the sheep into a warm garment for himself.
:Čȗvši tō, óvca pȍb(j)eže ȕ polje.
One systemic exception is that the consonant clusters '''ds''' and '''dš''' do not change into '''ts''' and '''tš''' (although ''d'' tends to be unvoiced in normal speech in such clusters):
:'''Neoštokavian Ijekavian/Ekavian'''
long vowel with rising tone
Thus, most words should be spelled as they are pronounced.
The official language was called "Serbo-Croato-Slovenian" (''srpsko-hrvatsko-slovenački'') in the 1921 constitution.
Today, use of the term "Serbo-Croatian" is controversial due to the prejudice that nation and language must match.
During the Austro-Hungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the language of all three nations was called "Bosnian" until the death of administrator von Kállay in 1907, at which point the name was changed to "Serbo-Croatian".
The pluricentric Serbo-Croatian standard language and all four contemporary standard variants are based on the Eastern Herzegovinian subdialect of Neo-Shtokavian.
twenty-two, ninety-three, one hundred four) the genitive singular is used, and after all other numbers five (''pet'') and up, the genitive plural is used.
Actually, aspects "compensate" for the relative lack of tenses, because aspect of the verb determines whether the act is completed or in progress in the referred time.
The term "Serbo-Croatian" (or synonyms) is not officially used in any of the successor countries of former Yugoslavia.
The evidence supporting this claim is patchy: Croatian linguist Stjepan Babić complained that the television transmission from Belgrade always used the Latin alphabet— which was true, but was not proof of unequal rights, but of frequency of use and prestige.
Serbo-Croatian thus generally goes by the ethnic names Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, and sometimes Montenegrin and Bunjevac.
In the mid-19th century, Serbian (led by self-taught writer and folklorist Vuk Stefanović Karadžić) and most Croatian writers and linguists (represented by the Illyrian movement and led by Ljudevit Gaj and Đuro Daničić), proposed the use of the most widespread dialect, Shtokavian, as the base for their common standard language.
This has been used as an argument to state that Croatian literature Croatian per se, but also includes Serbian and other languages that are part of Serbo-Croatian, These facts undermine the Croatian language proponents' argument that modern-day Croatian is based on a language called Old Croatian.
For example, the tongue-twister ''navrh brda vrba mrda'' involves four words with syllabic .
On January 15, 1944, the Anti-Fascist Council of the People's Liberation of Yugoslavia (AVNOJ) declared Croatian, Serbian, Slovene, and Macedonian to be equal in the entire territory of Yugoslavia.
The majority of mainstream Serbian linguists consider Serbian and Croatian to be one language, that is called Serbo-Croatian (''srpskohrvatski'') or Croato-Serbian (''hrvatskosrpski'').
The most important purely Shtokavian vernacular text is the Vatican Croatian Prayer Book (c. 1400).
