Although a landlocked country, Serbia operates a River Flotilla which patrols on the Danube, Sava, and Tisza rivers.
A fifth of all households consist of only one person, and just one-fourth of four and more persons.
Defence exports totaled around $250 million in 2011.
The estimate of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum indicates that between 320,000 and 340,000 ethnic Serb residents of Croatia, Bosnia and northern Serbia were murdered during the Ustaše genocide campaign; the same figures are supported by the Jewish Virtual Library.
Most notable contemporary authors include David Albahari, Svetislav Basara, Goran Petrović, Vladimir Arsenijević, Zoran Živković and others.
All opposition was suppressed and people deemed to be promoting opposition to socialism or promoting separatism were imprisoned or executed for sedition.
After one year of occupation, around 16,000 Serbian Jews were murdered in the area, or around 90% of its pre-war Jewish population.
Serbian Armed Forces have 28,000 active troops, supplemented by the "active reserve" which numbers 20,000 members and "passive reserve" with about 170,000.
Serbian cuisine is largely heterogeneous, sharing characteristics of the Balkans (especially former Yugoslavia), the Mediterranean (Greek in particular), Turkish, and Central European (especially Austrian and Hungarian) cuisines.
Serbian monasteries, with their fresco and icon paintings, are the pinnacle of Serbian medieval art.
Serbia is ranked 54th out of 180 countries in the 2014 Press Freedom Index report compiled by Reporters Without Borders.
Serbia and Montenegro remained together as the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY).
Serbia's mining industry is comparatively strong: Serbia is the 18th largest producer of coal (7th in the Europe) extracted from large deposits in Kolubara and Kostolac basins; it is also world's 23rd largest (3rd in Europe) producer of copper which is extracted by RTB Bor, a large domestic copper mining company; significant gold extraction is developed around Majdanpek.
Apart from Vojvodina and Northern Belgrade which were absorbed into the Habsburg Empire, Central Serbia was also included into the Austrian territory in 1688–1692 and 1788–1793.
The largest political parties in Serbia are the centre-right Serbian Progressive Party, leftist Socialist Party of Serbia and centre-left Democratic Party.
Serbia numbers around 7 million residents, and its capital, Belgrade, ranks among the largest cities in Southeast Europe.
The largest lake is the Đerdap Lake () and the longest river passing through Serbia the Danube ().
Noted painters of the second half of 20th century include Marko Čelebonović, Petar Lubarda, Milo Milunović, and Vladimir Veličković.
Serbia started the process of joining the EU by signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement on 29 April 2008 and officially applied for membership in the European Union on 22 December 2009.
Mountain of Tara in western Serbia is one of the last regions in Europe where bears can still live in absolute freedom.
There are 155 kilometers of crude oil pipelines connecting Pančevo and Novi Sad refineries as a part of trans-national Adria oil pipeline.
The Government (''Vlada'') is composed of the prime minister and cabinet ministers.
The areas with an altitude of  have an average annual temperature of around , and over  of altitude around .
The Belgrade International Theatre Festival – BITEF, founded in 1967, is one of the oldest theater festivals in the world, and it has become one of the five biggest European festivals.
The Serbs in the Byzantine world lived in the so-called ''Slav lands'', lands initially out of Byzantine control and independent.
Examples of this include Manasija, Ravanica and Kalenić monasteries.
The results showed 55.4% of voters in favor of independence, which was just above the 55% required by the referendum.
The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria on 28 June 1914 in Sarajevo by Gavrilo Princip, a member of the Young Bosnia organization, led to Austria-Hungary declaring war on Serbia.
There are several internationally popular music festivals held in Serbia, such as EXIT (with 25–30,000 foreign visitors coming from 60 different countries) and the Guča trumpet festival.
There are 340 newspapers published in Serbia of which 13 are daily newspapers.
In 1876, Serbia declared war on the Ottoman Empire, proclaiming its unification with Bosnia.
Highest circulation newspapers are tabloids ''Večernje Novosti'', ''Blic'', ''Kurir'', and ''Informer'', all with more than 100,000 copies sold.
In 1717–1739, Austrian Empire regained the rule in Central Serbia and formed the "Kingdom of Serbia".
The Ministry of Culture and Information is tasked with preserving the nation's cultural heritage and overseeing its development.
In the course of the First Balkan War in 1912, the Balkan League defeated the Ottoman Empire and captured its European territories, which enabled territorial expansion into Raška and Kosovo.
It is joined by its biggest tributaries, the Great Morava (longest river entirely in Serbia with 493&nbsp;km of length), Sava and Tisza rivers.
The Battle of Kosovo against the rising Ottoman Empire in 1389 marks a turning point and is considered as a beginning of the fall of the medieval Serbian state.
Serbia has been enduring a demographic crisis since the beginning of the 1990s, with a death rate that has continuously exceeded its birth rate, and a total fertility rate of 1.44 children per mother, one of the lowest in the world.
Serbia national youth football teams have won 2013 U-19 European Championship and 2015 U-20 World Cup.
Serbia, with its campaign, was a major Balkan Entente Power which contributed significantly to the Allied victory in the Balkans in November 1918, especially by helping France force Bulgaria's capitulation.
The Romans conquered much of the territory in the 2nd century BC.
Further activities supporting development of culture are undertaken at local government level.
Serbia has very favourable natural conditions (land and climate) for varied agricultural production.
The largest waterfall, Jelovarnik, located in Kopaonik, is 71 m high.
The freedom of the press and the freedom of speech are guaranteed by the constitution of Serbia.
The Axis puppet state of the Independent State of Croatia committed large-scale persecution and genocide of Serbs, Jews, and Roma.
There are 377 protected areas of Serbia, encompassing 4,947 square kilometers or 6.4% of the country.
The most notable Serbian rock acts include Bajaga i Instruktori, Đorđe Balašević, Disciplina Kičme, Ekatarina Velika, Električni Orgazam, Galija, Idoli, Kerber, Korni Grupa, Partibrejkers, Pekinška Patka, Pop Mašina, Rambo Amadeus, Riblja Čorba, Smak, Šarlo Akrobata, Van Gogh, YU Grupa, and others.
Football is the most popular sport in Serbia, and the Football Association of Serbia with 146,845 registered players, is the largest sporting association in the country.
, the most visited websites in Serbian (mainly on the .rs domain) are the Serbian version of Google followed by online editions of printed daily Blic, news web-portal of B92 broadcaster, news portal of printed daily Kurir and classifieds KupujemProdajem.
Medieval Serbia reached its peak during the reign of Stefan Dušan, who took advantage of the Byzantine civil war and doubled the size of the state by conquering territories to the south and east at the expense of Byzantium, reaching as far as the Peloponnese, also being crowned Emperor of Serbs and Greeks along the way.
Monuments of Serbian literacy from the early 11th century can be found, written in Glagolitic.
Serbia has 38 professional theatres, the most important of which are National Theatre in Belgrade, Serbian National Theatre in Novi Sad, National Theatre in Subotica, National Theatre in Niš and Knjaževsko-srpski teatar in Kragujevac (the oldest theatre in Serbia, established in 1835).
Since then it has adopted 10 different constitutions.
Thе University of Belgrade (placed in 301–400 bracket on 2013 Shanghai Ranking of World Universities, being best-placed university in Southeast Europe after those in Athens and Thessaloniki) and University of Novi Sad are generally considered as the best institutions of higher learning in the country.
King Alexander changed the name of the country to Yugoslavia and changed the internal divisions from the 33 oblasts to nine new banovinas.
Those protected areas include 5 national parks (Đerdap, Tara, Kopaonik, Fruška Gora and Šar Mountain), 15 nature parks, 15 "landscapes of outstanding features", 61 nature reserves, and 281 natural monuments.
In 1989, Slobodan Milošević rose to power in Serbia.
This culminated on 5 October when half a million people from all over the country congregated in Belgrade, compelling Milošević to concede defeat.
The Serbian Kingdom obtained recognition by Rome and the Byzantine Empire in 1217; it reached its peak in 1346 as a relatively short-lived Serbian Empire.
Serbia has a developed inland water transport since there are 1,716 kilometers of navigable inland waterways (1,043&nbsp;km of navigable rivers and 673&nbsp;km of navigable canals), which are almost all located in northern third of the country.
Serbian painting showed the influence of Biedermeier, Neoclassicism and Romanticism during the 19th century.
Novak Đoković, twelve-time Grand Slam champion, finished in 2011, 2012, 2014 and 2015 as No.
The Constitution of Serbia defines it as a secular state with guaranteed religious freedom.
Most popular pop singers include likes of Zdravko Čolić, Vlado Georgiev, Nataša Bekvalac among others.
The DOS announced that FR Yugoslavia would seek to join the European Union.
Coal is found in two large deposits: Kolubara (4 billion tons of reserves) and Kostolac (1.5 billion tons).
Largest private universities include John Naisbitt University and Singidunum University, both in Belgrade, and Educons University in Novi Sad.
By late 1944, the Belgrade Offensive swung in favour of the partisans in the civil war; the partisans subsequently gained control of Yugoslavia.
King Peter was succeeded by his son, Alexander, in August 1921.
The most important inland waterway is the Danube (part of Pan-European Corridor VII).
In 2010, there were 10,989 books and brochures published.
On 26 November 1918, the Podgorica Assembly deposed the House of Petrović-Njegoš and united Montenegro with Serbia.
KK Partizan basketball club was the 1992 European champion.
Serbia is also home to about 380 species of bird.
Nevertheless, there are several areas in which Serbia still excels such as growing information technology sector, which includes software development as well as outsourcing.
Starting in the 12th century, books were written in Cyrillic.
In 822, the Serbs "inhabited the greater part of Dalmatia", and Christianity was adopted as the state religion in  870.
The climate of Serbia is under the influences of the landmass of Eurasia and Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea.
Serbia treats the 352&nbsp;km long border between Kosovo and rest of Serbia as an "administrative line"; it is under shared control of Kosovo border police and Serbian police forces, and there are 11 crossing points.
The official currency of Serbia is Serbian dinar (ISO code: RSD), and the central bank is National Bank of Serbia.
Between 1998 and 1999, peace was broken again, when the situation in Kosovo worsened with continued clashes between Yugoslav security forces and the Albanian guerilla Kosovo Liberation Army.
The confrontations led to the short Kosovo War, which ended in withdrawal of Serbian forces from Kosovo and the establishment of UN administration of the province.
Serbia won the first major battles of World War I, including the Battle of Cer and Battle of Kolubara – marking the first Allied victories against the Central Powers in World War I.
As the government was fighting effects of crisis the public debt has doubled in 4 years: from pre-crisis level of 29.2% to 63.8% of GDP.
Conscription was abolished on 1 January 2011.
Also, there are 49 regional stations and 162 local stations.
From this epoch, the oldest Serbian Cyrillic book editorial are the Miroslav Gospels.
Public universities tend to be of a better quality and therefore more renowned than private ones.
Differences in elevation, proximity to the Adriatic Sea and large river basins, as well as exposure to the winds account for climate variations.
Other minority groups include Croats, Slovaks, Albanians, Montenegrins, Vlachs, Romanians, Macedonians and Bulgarians.
The magnate families Lazarević and Branković ruled the suzerain Serbian Despotate afterwards (in the 15th and 16th centuries).
As a result of these reforms, there was a massive overhaul of Kosovo's nomenklatura and police, that shifted from being Serb-dominated to ethnic Albanian-dominated through firing Serbs on a large scale.
The music has its tradition from the First Serbian Uprising.
Main industrial sectors include: automotive, mining, non-ferrous metals, food-processing, electronics, pharmaceuticals, clothes.
Agricultural production is most prominent in Vojvodina on the fertile Pannonian Plain.
Serbian is the only European language with active digraphia, using both Cyrillic and Latin alphabets.
The most important Serbian playwrighters were Jovan Sterija Popović and Branislav Nušić, while today renowned names are Dušan Kovačević and Biljana Srbljanović.
There are 1,262 magazines published in the country.
Besides terrestrial channels there are dozens Serbian television channels available only on cable or satellite.
Serbia has established diplomatic relations with 188 UN member states, the Holy See, the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, and the European Union.
Digital television transition has been completed in 2015 with DVB-T2 standard for signal transmission.
After the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453 and the Siege of Belgrade, the Serbian Despotate fell in 1459 following the siege of the provisional capital of Smederevo.
Some 64.7% of households have Internet connection, while practically the same percentage (64.2%) are provided with pay television services (i.e.
In all Serb lands south of the rivers Danube and Sava, the nobility was eliminated and the peasantry was enserfed to Ottoman masters, while much of the clergy fled or were confined to the isolated monasteries.
Islam has a strong historic following in the southern regions of Serbia, primarily in southern Raška.
Serbia was classified as a ''minor Entente power''.
+ '''Serbian Armed Forces'''
Tomislav Nikolić is the current president following the 2012 presidential election.
There are 241 kilometers of motorways (''autoputevi'') under construction, which are all due to be completed by 2017: two sections 40&nbsp;km-long of the A1 motorway (from south of Leskovac to Bujanovac), 102&nbsp;km-long segment of A2 (between Obrenovac and Čačak), and 70 kilometers on the A4 (east of Niš to the Bulgarian border).
Serbian motorway and expressway network:
In the structure of the agricultural production 70% is from the crop field production, and 30% is from the livestock production.
In addition to being the commander in chief of the armed forces, the president has the procedural duty of appointing the prime minister with the consent of the parliament, and has some influence on foreign policy.
The ''slava'' (patron saint veneration) is inscribed on UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists.
The most famous mountain resorts are Kopaonik, Stara Planina, and Zlatibor.
The two-halves were reunited in 1142.
Ranković was later removed from the office because of the disagreements regarding Kosovo's nomenklatura and the unity of Serbia.
, there are 1,677,510 registered passenger cars or 1 passenger car per 4.3 inhabitants.
A one-party state was soon established in Yugoslavia by the League of Communists of Yugoslavia, between 60,000 and 70,000 people were killed in Serbia during the communist takeover.
*Milutin Milanković is known for his theory of ice ages, suggesting a relationship between the Earth's long-term climate changes and periodic changes in its orbit, now known as Milankovitch cycles.
Following the Slavic migrations to the Balkans from the 6th century onwards, Serbs established several states in the early Middle Ages.
During the 1990s and 2000s popularity of rock music declined in Serbia, and although several major mainstream acts managed to sustain their popularity, an underground and independent music scene developed.
Recognized minority languages are: Hungarian, Slovak, Albanian, Romanian, Bulgarian and Rusyn, as well as other standard forms of Serbo-Croatian: Bosnian and Croatian.
The rivalry between the two clubs is known as the "Eternal Derby", and is often cited as one of the most exciting sports rivalries in the world.
As a result, Serbia formed a union with Montenegro in 1992, which broke apart in 2006, when Serbia again became an independent country.
Further concessions were made to the ethnic Albanians of Kosovo in response to unrest, including the creation of the University of Pristina as an Albanian language institution.
The production of electricity in 2012 in Serbia was 36.06 billion kilowatt-hours (KWh), while the final electricity consumption amounted to 35.5 billion kilowatt-hours (KWh).
Out of these, seven are radio stations with national coverage, including three of public broadcaster Radio Television of Serbia (Radio Belgrade 1, Radio Belgrade 2/Radio Belgrade 3 and Radio Belgrade 202), and four private ones (Radio S1, Radio S2, Play Radio, and Radio Hit FM).
Austria-Hungary became wary of the rising regional power on its borders and its potential to become an anchor for unification of all South Slavs, and the relationship between the two countries became tense.
After eight years of strong economic growth (average of 4.45% per year), Serbia entered the recession in 2009 with negative growth of −3% and again in 2012 with −1.5%.
Automotive industry (with FIAT as a forebearer) is dominated by cluster located in Kragujevac and its vicinity, and contributes to export with about $2 billion.
The revolution comprised two separate uprisings which gained autonomy from the Ottoman Empire that eventually evolved towards full independence (1835–1867).
Following a positive recommendation of the European Commission and European Council in June 2013, negotiations to join the EU commenced in January 2014.
It also operates network of 334 filling stations in Serbia (74% of domestic market) and additional 36 stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 31 in Bulgaria, and 28 in Romania.
VK Partizan has won a joint-record seven European champion titles.
Serbia exports across the world, notably to the Middle East, Africa, Southeast Asia, and North America.
Željko Joksimović won second place at the 2004 Eurovision Song Contest and Marija Šerifović managed to win the 2007 Eurovision Song Contest with the song "Molitva", and Serbia was the host of the 2008 edition of the contest.
Serbia became a constituent republic within the SFRY known as the Socialist Republic of Serbia, and had a republic-branch of the federal communist party, the League of Communists of Serbia.
The lowest recorded temperature in Serbia was  on 13 January 1985, Karajukića Bunari in Pešter, and the highest was , on 24 July 2007, recorded in Smederevska Palanka.
The ''kolo'' is the traditional collective folk dance, which has a number of varieties throughout the regions.
The country has free trade agreements with the EFTA and CEFTA, a preferential trade regime with the European Union, a Generalized System of Preferences with the United States, and individual free trade agreements with Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Turkey.
In 1166, Stefan Nemanja assumed the throne, marking the beginning of a prospering Serbia, henceforth under the rule of the Nemanjić dynasty.
There are one daily newspaper devoted to sports - ''Sportski žurnal'', one business daily ''Privredni pregled'', two regional newspapers (''Dnevnik'' published in Novi Sad and ''Narodne novine'' from Niš), one daily on Hungarian language (''Magyar Szo'' published in Subotica), and a free newspaper of ''24 sata'', distributed only in Belgrade and Novi Sad.
Serbian Cyrillic is the country's official alphabet.
There are three opera houses in Serbia: Opera of the National Theatre and Madlenianum Opera, both in Belgrade, and Opera of the Serbian National Theatre in Novi Sad.
Many concentration camps were established across the area.
The most important Serbian painters of the first half of the 20th century were Paja Jovanović and Uroš Predić of Realism, Cubist Sava Šumanović, Milena Pavlović-Barili and Nadežda Petrović of Impressionism, Expressionist Milan Konjović.
For centuries straddling the boundaries between East and West, the territory of Serbia had been divided among the Eastern and Western halves of the Roman Empire; then between Byzantium and the Kingdom of Hungary; and in the Early modern period between the Ottoman Empire and the Habsburg Empire.
The most popular are those from Užice and Morava region.
Seventeen Roman Emperors were born in the area of modern-day Serbia, second only to contemporary Italy.
However, there are numerous artificial lakes, mostly due to hydroelectric dams, the biggest being Đerdap (Iron Gates) on the Danube with 163&nbsp;km2 on the Serbian side (a total area of 253&nbsp;km2 is shared with Romania) as well as the deepest (with maximum depth of 92 m); Perućac on the Drina, and Vlasina.
Serbia is a unitary state composed of municipalities/cities, districts, and two autonomous provinces.
Education starts in either preschools or elementary schools.
Official Yugoslav sources used to estimate more than  victims, mostly Serbs.
By the early 6th century, Southern Slavs were present throughout the Byzantine Empire in large numbers.
In Vojvodina, the provincial administration uses, besides Serbian, five other languages (Hungarian, Slovak, Croatian, Romanian and Rusyn).
The Scordisci formed their own tribal state in this area, and built several fortifications, including their state capital at Singidunum (present-day Belgrade) and Naissos (present-day Niš).
The first half of the 19th century was dominated by Romanticism, with Branko Radičević, Đura Jakšić, Jovan Jovanović Zmaj and Laza Kostić being the most notable representatives, while the second half of the century was marked by Realist writers such as Milovan Glišić, Laza Lazarević, Simo Matavulj, Stevan Sremac, Vojislav Ilić, Branislav Nušić, Radoje Domanović and Borisav Stanković.
The most famous of these was Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, who issued an edict ordering religious tolerance throughout the Empire.
In the south, summers and autumns are drier, and winters are relatively cold, with heavy inland snowfall in the mountains.
The Chief of Staff is appointed by the President, who is the Commander-in-chief.
In two years, Serbia enlarged its territory by 80% and its population by 50%; it also suffered high casualties on the eve of World War I, with around 20,000 dead.
Dragan Džajić was officially recognized as "the best Serbian player of all times" by the Football Association of Serbia, and more recently the likes of Nemanja Vidić, Dejan Stanković and Branislav Ivanović play for the elite clubs of Europe, developing the nation's reputation as one of the world's biggest exporters of footballers.
Among the scientific institutes operating in Serbia, the largest are the Mihajlo Pupin Institute and Vinča Nuclear Institute, both in Belgrade.
Some of the international brand-names established production in Serbia: PepsiCo and Nestlé in food-processing sector; Coca-Cola (Belgrade), Heineken (Novi Sad) and Carlsberg (Bačka Palanka) in beverage industry; Nordzucker in sugar industry.
In 2008 the parliament of Kosovo, Serbia's southern province with an Albanian ethnic majority, declared independence, with mixed responses from the international community.
Serbia has, at first, recalled its ambassadors from states which have recognized Kosovo, in protest.
The official language is Serbian, a standardized form of Serbo-Croatian, native to 88% of the population.
The Byzantine influence on Serbia was profound, firstly through the introduction of Eastern Christianity (Orthodoxy) in the Early Middle Ages.
Southern Serbia is subject to Mediterranean influences.
Serbia has a well-established theatrical tradition with Joakim Vujić considered the founder of modern Serbian theater.
The Choir of Radio Television of Serbia is a leading vocal ensemble in the country.
Clothing and textile industry has seen a surge in recent years with significant greenfeild investments by foreign companies: Benneton in Niš, Geox in Vranje, Calzedonia in Sombor, Falke in Leskovac and others.Serbia's electronics industry had its peak in the 1980s and the industry today is only a third of what it was back then, but has witnessed a something of revival in last decade with investments of companies such as Siemens (wind turbines) in Subotica, Panasonic (lighting devices) in Svilajnac, and Gorenje (electrical home appliances) in Valjevo.
After the loss of independence to the Kingdom of Hungary and the Ottoman Empire, Serbia briefly regained sovereignty under Jovan Nenad in the 16th century.
Traditional Serbian art showed some Baroque influences at the end of the 18th century as shown in the works of Nikola Nešković, Teodor Kračun, Zaharije Orfelin and Jakov Orfelin.
Alexander was succeeded by his eleven-year-old son Peter II and a regency council was headed by his cousin, Prince Paul.
Serbia officially applied for membership in the European Union on 22 December 2009, and received candidate status on 1 March 2012, following a delay in December 2011.
The Serbian Orthodox Church has had an enduring status in Serbia, with the many Serbian monasteries constituting the most valuable cultural monuments left from Serbia in the Middle Ages.
Atheists numbered 80,053 or 1.1% of population and additional 4,070 declared as agnostics.
There are two main news agencies, Beta and Fonet.
The Serbian Chief of the General Staff reports to the Defence Minister.
Serbia's political climate remained tense and in 2003, the prime minister Zoran Đinđić was assassinated as result of a plot originating from circles of organized crime and former security officials.
Under the Ottoman system, Serbs, as Christians, were considered an inferior class of people and subjected to heavy taxes, and a small portion of the Serbian populace experienced Islamisation.
In the north, the 1848 revolution in Austria led to the establishment of the autonomous territory of Serbian Vojvodina; by 1849, the region was transformed into the Voivodeship of Serbia and Banat of Temeschwar.
*Mihajlo Pupin discovered a means of greatly extending the range of long-distance telephone communication by placing loading coils of wire (known as Pupin coils) at predetermined intervals along the transmitting wire (known as "pupinization").
Serbia's exports, however, recorded a steady growth in last couple of years reaching $14.61 billion in 2013.
Serbia is a country of rich ecosystem and species diversity – covering only 1.9% of the whole European territory Serbia is home to 39% of European vascular flora, 51% of European fish fauna, 40% of European reptile and amphibian fauna, 74% of European bird fauna, 67% European mammal fauna.
The Serbian Armed Forces take part in several multinational peacekeeping missions, including deployments in Lebanon, Cyprus, Ivory Coast, and Liberia.
The Supreme Court of Cassation, the highest court in the Republic of Serbia, began to operate on 1 January 2010 in accordance with the provisions of the new Law on Organization of Courts.
A characteristic of this style was the wealthy decoration of the frontal church walls.
In 2015, total of over 2.4 million tourists were recorded in accommodations, of which some 1.1 million were foreign.
A survey from 2014 showed that 47% of the Serbian population favour the Latin alphabet, 36% favour the Cyrillic one and 17% have no preference.
Despite being small on a world scale, Serbia's oil and gas resources (77.4 million tons of oil equivalent and 48.1 billion cubic meters, respectively) have a certain regional importance since they are largest in the region of former Yugoslavia as well as the Balkans (excluding Romania).
It was a model for later monasteries, like the Mileševa, Sopoćani, Žiča, Gračanica and Visoki Dečani.
The most disastrous were the floods in May 2014, when 57 people died and a damage of over a 1.5 billion euro was incited.
Most of its army and some people retreated into exile to Greece and Corfu, where they recovered, regrouped and returned to the Macedonian front to lead a final breakthrough through enemy lines on 15 September 1918, liberating Serbia and defeating the Austro-Hungarian Empire and Bulgaria.
Fixed telephone lines connect 89% of households in Serbia, and with about 9.1 million users the number of cellphones surpasses the total population of Serbia by 29%.
The National Assembly (''Narodna skupština'') is a unicameral legislative body.
At the beginning, they were under the influence of Byzantine Art which was particularly felt after the fall of Constantinople in 1204, when many Byzantine artists fled to Serbia.
The Pannonian Plain covers the northern third of the country (Vojvodina and Mačva) while the easternmost tip of Serbia extends into the Wallachian Plain.
