For demonstration purposes, he recorded the solo part of his Second Piano Concerto for Ampico, though only the second movement was used publicly and has survived.
In January 1899, Rachmaninoff attempted composition for the first time and completed two short piano pieces, ''Morceau de Fantaisie'' and Fughetta in F major.
1, Rachmaninoff entered a four-year depression and composed little until successful therapy allowed him to complete his enthusiastically received Piano Concerto No.
So you make music live.
Rachmaninoff died on 28 March 1943, four days before his 70th birthday.
He worked so hard on the piece, he could not settle himself into composing again until he heard the piece performed.
He became so ill after the performance that he had to return home.
Rachmaninoff did eventually return to composing in 1932, following the completion of his new home, Villa Senar, near Hertenstein, Lake Lucerne in Switzerland, where he retreated during his summers from 1932 to 1939.
He based his interpretations on the theory that each piece of music has a "culminating point."
From photographs of Rachmaninov in the 1920s and his portrait by Konstantin Somov in 1925 (Figure 1), at a time when he was recording his four piano concerti, the coarse facial features of acromegaly are not immediately apparent.
To this, Harold C. Schonberg, in his ''Lives of the Great Composers'', responded: "It is one of the most outrageously snobbish and even stupid statements ever to be found in a work that is supposed to be an objective reference."
His 1940 recording of his transcription of the song "Daisies" captures this quality extremely well.
8), a group of songs set to translations by Aleksey Pleshcheyev of Ukrainian and German poems.
About the pianist's interpretation of Rachmaninoff's own third concerto, the composer said to Abram Chasins that Horowitz "swallowed it whole ... he had the courage, the intensity, the daring."
Rachmaninoff also possessed an uncanny memory—one that would help put him in good stead when he had to learn the standard piano repertoire as a 45-year-old exile.
During his final studies at the Moscow Conservatory he completed the ''Youth Symphony'', a one-movement symphonic piece, ''Prince Rostislav'', a symphonic poem, and ''The Rock'' (Op.&nbsp;7), a fantasia for orchestra.
In January, he began a three-month daily course of hypnotherapy and psychotherapy with physician and amateur musician Nikolai Dahl.
Dahl structured his sessions to help the composer's sleep patterns, improve his mood and appetite during the day, and reignite the desire to compose.
After the performance, he was quoted as saying ''"Gentlemen—I, Sergei Rachmaninoff, have just heard myself play!"''
Aeolian in London created a set of three rolls of this concerto in 1909, which remained in the catalogues of its various successors until the late 1970s.
From 1919 he made 35 piano rolls (12 of which were his own compositions), for the American Piano Company (Ampico)'s reproducing piano.
Rachmaninoff applied these qualities in music by Chopin, including the B-flat minor Piano Sonata.
His near-Impressionist style perfectly matched the texts by symbolist poets.
Siloti recommended he attend the Moscow Conservatory and receive lessons from his former teacher, the more strict Nikolai Zverev, which lasted from 1885 to 1888.
He declined to be the conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra as such a long absence from his home and family in Russia seemed "absurd".
37) in 1915 after he witness a performance of an earlier choral work, ''Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom'' (Op.
Other choral works include a choral symphony, ''The Bells''; the cantata ''Spring''; the ''Three Russian Songs''; and an early ''Concerto for Choir'' (a cappella).
Rachmaninoff sought the company of fellow Russian musicians and befriended pianist Vladimir Horowitz; their first meeting, arranged by Steinway artist representative Alexander Greiner, took place in the basement of Steinway Hall in New York City on 8 January 1928, four days prior to Horowitz's debut at Carnegie Hall playing Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No.
Rachmaninoff ranked among the finest pianists of his time, along with Leopold Godowsky, Ignaz Friedman, Moriz Rosenthal, Josef Lhévinne, and Josef Hofmann, and he was famed for possessing a clean and virtuosic technique.
This syndrome would have accounted for several minor ailments he suffered all his life, including back pain, arthritis, eye strain, and bruising of the fingertips, although others have pointed out that this was more likely because he was playing the piano all day long.
Demanding piano concert tour schedules caused his output as composer to slow tremendously; between 1918 and 1943, he completed just six compositions, including ''Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini'', Symphony No.
His sense of self-worth as a symphonist was regained following the enthusiastic reaction to the premiere of his Symphony No.
Rachmaninoff continued to compose, publishing at this time his Six Songs (Op.&nbsp;4) and Two Pieces (Op.&nbsp;2).
Rachmaninoff biographer Sergei Bertensson wrote that Rachmaninoff took his position in the society seriously, "and for Rachmaninoff 'seriously' meant with moral as well as artistic seriousness: these were really fused in him."
His family was informed, but he was not.
In late 1895, to help improve his depleting finances, Rachmaninoff agreed to a three-month concert tour across Russia with a program shared by Teresina Tua, an Italian violinist.
1 (Op.&nbsp;13), a work conceived in January based on chants heard in Russian Orthodox church services.
Both these works were published posthumously.
1 premiered on 28 March 1897 in one of a long-running series of Russian Symphony Concerts.
However, the Orthodox church and Satina's parents opposed their announcement, thwarting their plans for marriage.
On 22 December 1917, they left on an open sled, travelling north through Finland and on to Helsinki with some money, a few notebooks with sketches of compositions, and two orchestral scores; the first Act of his unfinished opera ''Monna Vanna'' and Rimsky-Korsakov's opera ''The Golden Cockerel''.
He conducted the Philadelphia Orchestra for his conducting debut, and premiered his Piano Concerto  (Op.&nbsp;30) with the New York Symphony Orchestra.
:During a heavy concert schedule in Russia in 1912, he interrupted his schedule because of stiffness in his hands.
The job went to Richard Addinsell and the orchestrator Roy Douglas, who came up with the ''Warsaw Concerto''.
Other witnesses suggested that Glazunov, an alcoholic, may have been drunk, although this was never intimated by Rachmaninoff.
Rachmaninoff later dedicated "Spring Waters", Song No.
His publisher was slow in paying, so Rachmaninoff took an engagement at the Moscow Electrical Exhibition, where he premiered his landmark Prelude in C-sharp minor (Op.&nbsp;3, No.&nbsp;2), a composition that formed a part of five pieces titled ''Morceaux de fantaisie'', that was well received and became one of his most enduring pieces.
Rachmaninoff then took an excursion to Kiev to conduct several performances of ''Aleko''.
Especially important is Rachmaninoff's use of unusually widely spaced chords for bell-like sounds: this occurs in many pieces, most notably in the choral symphony ''The Bells'', the Second Piano Concerto, the E flat major ''Étude-Tableaux'' (Op.&nbsp;33, ), and the B-minor Prelude (Op.&nbsp;32, ).
The three symphonies:  in D minor, Op.&nbsp;13 (1895),  in E minor, Op.&nbsp;27 (1907), and  in A minor, Op.&nbsp;44 (1935–36).
Nevertheless, some of his most beautiful (nostalgic and melancholy) melodies occur in the Third Symphony, ''Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini'', and ''Symphonic Dances''.
It was during his trip when, on 25 October, Rachmaninoff received the news of Tchaikovsky's death from cholera on .
On 29 May 1892, the Conservatory issued Rachmaninoff with a diploma, allowing him to officially style himself as a "Free Artist."
Several manufacturers, and in particular the Aeolian Company, had published his compositions on perforated music rolls from about 1900 onwards.
The Rachmaninoffs had strong musical and military leanings.
Stylistically, Op.&nbsp;33 hearkens back to the preludes, while Op.&nbsp;39 shows the influences of Scriabin and Prokofiev.
33 (1911) and ''Études-Tableaux'', Op.
News of the young composer's gift reached his paternal grandfather Arkady who suggested to hire Anna Ornatskaya, a teacher from Saint Petersburg and friend of Rachmaninoff's mother, to live with the family and begin formal lessons, in 1880.
I was always under the spell of his glorious and inimitable tone which could make me forget my uneasiness about his too rapidly fleeting fingers and his exaggerated ''rubatos''.
21) and left compositions for a proposed return visit to London unfulfilled.
He acquired U.S. citizenship a month before his death from advanced melanoma.
In an article for ''Gramophone'', April 1931, Rachmaninoff defended an earlier stated view on the musical value of radio, about which he was sceptical: "the modern gramophone and modern methods of recording are musically superior to wireless transmission in every way".
In 1929, conductor and music publisher Serge Koussevitzky asked Rachmaninoff if he would select pieces from his ''Études-Tableaux'' for Italian composer Ottorino Respighi to orchestrate.
He may have based his interpretation of the Chopin sonata on Rubinstein's.
He did not enjoy the experience, and quit the tour early while sacrificing his performance fees which caused him to pawn his watch given to him by Zverev.
Regardless of the music, Rachmaninoff always planned his performances carefully.
At the height of such turmoil, Rachmaninoff received an offer to perform ten piano recitals across the peaceful Scandinavia, which he used as an excuse to quickly obtain permits for his family to leave the country.
His family and friends decided to seek professional help, to which Rachmaninoff agreed without resistance.
3; and he expressed a wish to accompany Horowitz in a performance of the piece.
Among these were included Six Choruses for Women's or Children's Voices (Op.
She was an important musical influence to Rachmaninoff who introduced him to the works of Tchaikovsky.
They reached safety in Stockholm, Sweden and, in early 1918, settled in Copenhagen, Denmark where Rachmaninoff worked as a concert pianist, practising exhaustively to improve his technique and learning further compositions to play.
This may have been due to overuse, although carpal tunnel syndrome or simply swelling and puffiness of the hands associated with acromegaly may have been the cause.
Rachmaninoff's repertoire, excepting his own works, consisted mainly of standard 19th Century virtuoso works plus music by Bach, Beethoven, Borodin, Debussy, Grieg, Liszt, Mendelssohn, Mozart, Schubert, Schumann and Tchaikovsky.
Rachmaninoff and Edison Records were pleased with the released discs and wished to record more, but Edison refused, saying the ten sides were sufficient.
3, and ''Symphonic Dances''.
He compared this time "Like the man who had suffered a stroke and for a long time had lost the use of his head and hands", and made a living by giving piano lessons.
The cash-strapped composer accepted, conducting ''Samson and Delilah'' by Camille Saint-Saëns as his first on 12 October 1897.
With the stories he told at the keyboard came multiple voices—a polyphonic dialogue, not the least in terms of dynamics.
Rachmaninoff wrote two major a cappella choral works—the ''Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom'' and the ''All-Night Vigil'' (also known as the ''Vespers'').
He then moved to Ivanovka estate with Siloti and began composing his Op.
Rachmaninoff conducted the premiere of ''The Bells'' in Saint Petersburg in November 1913.
Rachmaninoff returned to Moscow, where Tchaikovsky agreed to conduct ''The Rock'', a piece that he grew fond of, for an upcoming tour across Europe.
His First Symphony has many original features.
The piano is featured prominently in Rachmaninoff's compositional output, and through his own skills as a performer he explored the expressive possibilities of the instrument.
After the Russian Revolution, Rachmaninoff and his family left Russia and resided in the United States, first in New York City.
Two months later, he travelled to London for the first time to perform and conduct which earned positive reviews.
:The size of Rachmaninov’s hands may have been a manifestation of Marfan's syndrome, their size and slenderness typical of arachnodactyly.
His reputation as a composer generated a variety of opinions before his music gained steady recognition across the world.
He uses them most perceptibly in his ''Vespers'', but many of his melodies found their origins in these chants.
Thomas Edison, who was quite deaf, did not care for Rachmaninoff's playing, or for classical music in general, and referred to him as a "pounder" at their initial meeting.
Rachmaninoff shows the filigree as essential to the work's structure, not simply decorative.
Regardless of where that point was or at which dynamic within that piece, the performer had to know how to approach it with absolute calculation and precision; otherwise, the whole construction of the piece could crumble and the piece could become disjointed.
Nor did he express any of the clinical effects of a Marfan-related syndrome, such as Beal's syndrome (congenital contractural arachnodactyly), Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, homocystinuria, Stickler syndrome, or Sphrintzen-Goldberg syndrome.
His playing was marked by ''definition''—where other pianists' playing became blurry-sounding from overuse of the pedal or deficiencies in finger technique, Rachmaninoff's textures were always crystal clear.
39 (1917) and the inspirations behind the compositions, something that he did not previously reveal.
In the comfort of his own villa, which reminded him of his old family estate in Russia, Rachmaninoff composed ''Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini'' in 1934 and Symphony  (Op.&nbsp;44, 1935–36).
His sister-in-law, Sofia Satina, remembered him at the family estate at Ivanovka, pedalling gleefully through a set of rolls of his Second Piano Concerto, apparently acquired from a German source, most probably the Aeolian Company's Berlin subsidiary, the Choralion Company.
The piece was brutally panned by critic and nationalist composer César Cui, who likened it to a depiction of the ten plagues of Egypt, suggesting it would be admired by the "inmates" of a music conservatory in Hell.
Rachmaninoff recorded on a Lauter concert grand piano, one of the few the company made.
The music's aura of gloom reveals the depth and sincerity of his grief to the composer.
Contrary to rumors of "six and a half feet," Rachmaninoff’s physical height is documented in repeated (10 November 1918 and 30 October 1924) U.S. Immigration manifests at Ellis Island as 6'-1".
31), and felt disappointed with the composition.
Along with his musical gifts, Rachmaninoff possessed physical gifts that may have placed him in good stead as a pianist.
Respighi, however, titled each piece from the clues Rachmaninoff gave him and completed the orchestrations in 1930.
Shaginyan and the poetry she shared with Rachmaninoff has been cited as the inspiration for the six songs that make up his Six Songs, Op.
Edison agreed, but still issued multiple takes, an unusual practice which was standard at Edison Records, where strict company policy demanded three good takes of each piece in case of damage or wear to the masters.
He could hear a piece of music, even a symphony, then play it back the next day, the next year, or a decade after that.
It is from these letters that much of Rachmaninoff's early compositions can be detailed.
He wrote two piano sonatas, both of which are large scale and virtuosic in their technical demands.
All three men had Anton Rubinstein as a model for this kind of playing—Hofmann as a student of Rubinstein's, Rachmaninoff from hearing his famous series of historical recitals in Moscow while studying with Zverev, and Lhevinne from hearing and playing with him.
In 1942, Rachmaninoff moved to Beverly Hills, California.
The day the Russian Revolution of February 1917 began in Saint Petersburg, Rachmaninoff performed a piano recital in Moscow in aid of wounded Russian soldiers who had fought in the war.
The family recreated the atmosphere of their Ivanovka estate at their new home, entertaining Russian guests, employing Russian servants, and observing Russian customs.
However, Rachmaninoff had to resume work in October 1896 order to recoup his losses after "a rather large sum of money" that was not his, was stolen during a train journey.
However, a case can be made from later photographs...
For Horowitz, the opportunity represented a dream come true as Rachmaninoff was "the musical god of my youth ... the most unforgettable impression of my life!"
The deficiencies of the performance, conducted by Alexander Glazunov, were not commented on by critics, but according to a memoir from Alexander Ossovsky, a close friend of Rachmaninoff, Glazunov made poor use of rehearsal time, and the concert's program itself, which contained two other premières, was also a factor.
Rachmaninov did not display any signs of digital clubbing or any obvious hypertrophic skin changes associated with pachydermoperiostitis.
A stroke of good fortune came from Savva Mamontov, a Russian industrialist and founder of the Moscow Private Russian Opera Company, who offered Rachmaninoff the post of assistant conductor for the 1897–98 season.
His compositional style had already begun changing before the October Revolution deprived him of his homeland.
The Conservatoire Rachmaninoff in Paris, as well as streets in Veliky Novgorod (which is close to his birthplace) and Tambov, are named after the composer.
That summer, during a vacation in Finland, Rachmaninoff learned of Taneyev's death, a loss which, along with his father's passing that year, affected him greatly.
He handed it to Taneyev to correct any errors in its polyphony, but it was returned unaltered with complements.
''Francesca da Rimini'' exists somewhat in the shadow of the opera of the same name by Riccardo Zandonai.
1, which Rachmaninoff intended to attend, as he had heard positive reviews of Horowitz's playing of his own Piano Concerto No.
His orchestration became subtler and more varied, with textures carefully contrasted, and his writing on the whole became more concise.
In September 1895, before the tour started, Rachmaninoff completed his Symphony No.
On 1 February 1943, Rachmaninoff and Satina became American citizens.
If you are a composer, you have an affinity with other composers.
Rachmaninoff began to adopt a relaxed attitude to his studies, failing his general education classes and changing his report cards in what fellow Russian composer Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov later called a period of "purely Russian self-delusion and laziness".
The tour lasted from February to July 1918.
A choir sang his ''All Night Vigil'' at his funeral.
From 1909 to 1910, Rachmaninoff embarked on his first tour of North America, playing the piano and conducting across 26 performances which marked the composer's first solo piano recitals without another performer on the program.
He completed three operas, all short: ''Aleko'' (1892), ''The Miserly Knight'' (1903), and ''Francesca da Rimini'' (1904).
The company was pleased to comply with his requests, and proudly advertised him as one of their prominent recording artists.
However, Rachmaninov did not clearly exhibit any of the other clinical characteristics typical of Marfan's, such as scoliosis, pectus excavatum, and eye or cardiac complications.
His left hand technique was unusually powerful.
The two pieces Rachmaninoff singled out for praise from Rubinstein's concerts became cornerstones for his own recital programs.
Late in the year, he once again received an offer to become conductor of the Boston and Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, but declined.
:But then again, perhaps he just had big hands.
His chamber music includes two piano trios, both which are named ''Trio Elégiaque'' (the second of which is a memorial tribute to Tchaikovsky), and a Cello Sonata.
(The opening melody of the Third Piano Concerto, on the other hand, is not derived from chants; when asked, Rachmaninoff said that "it had written itself".)
Rachmaninoff agreed, giving Respighi five pieces from ''Études-Tableaux'', Op.
It was completed on 15 December.
They settled in Moscow where they had two daughters, Irina Sergeievna Rachmaninova (1903–1969) and Tatiana Sergeievna Rachmaninova (1907–1961).
He thought its performance was poor, particularly Glazunov's contribution.
Instead, he was interred on 1 June in Kensico Cemetery in Valhalla, New York.
His playing was marked by precision, rhythmic drive, notable use of staccato and the ability to maintain clarity when playing works with complex textures.
Whilst the American public clamoured for him, critical reception was divided and Rachmaninoff had to continually defend himself in the age-old debate of whether music could be both ‘serious’ and popular.
This Marfan speculation was proposed by Dr. D. A.
Music critic Paul Rosenfeld’s remark that Rachmaninoff's music ‘wants the imprint of a decided and important individuality,’ can have done nothing to alleviate the composer's writer's block.
On 1 November 1918, the family boarded a boat in Oslo, Norway bound for New York City, arriving eleven days later.
Twenty years later, an article in the ''Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine'', by Ramachandran and Aronson differed greatly from Young’s speculation:
Following the reaction to his first symphony, Rachmaninoff wrote in May 1897 that "I'm not at all affected" by its lack of success or critical reaction, but felt "deeply distressed and heavily depressed by the fact that my Symphony ... did not please me at all after its first rehearsal."
However, staff at the Edison recording studio in New York City asked Edison to reconsider his dismissive position, resulting in a limited contract for ten released sides.
Young (formerly principal scientist of the Wellcome Foundation) in a 1986 ''British Medical Journal'' article.
In 1919, Rachmaninoff recorded a selection of piano pieces for Edison Records on their "Diamond Disc" records, as they claimed the best audio fidelity in piano recording.
What is extraordinary is the variety of bell sounds and breadth of structural and other functions they fulfil."
Nevertheless, Rachmaninoff also possessed a far better sense of structure than many of his contemporaries, such as Hofmann, or the majority of pianists from the previous generation, judging from their respective recordings.
His first major completed work, the Piano Concerto , is dedicated to Dahl.
1, the Piano Concerto .
He spent the summer of 1892 on the estate of Ivan Konavalov, a rich landowner in the Kostroma Oblast, and moved back with the Satins in the Arbat District.
This talent was paired with a confidence in writing in both large- and small-scale forms.
:Acromegaly is an alternative diagnosis.
Rachmaninoff's performance is far more taut and concentrated than Grainger's.
In 1942, Rachmaninoff's doctor advised him to move to a warmer climate; his family settled in Beverly Hills, California.
The Second has  been the most popular of the three since its first performance.
She became impressed with her son's musical ability to recite entire passages from memory without playing a wrong note.
The composer's descendants have resisted this idea, pointing out that he died in the U.S. after spending decades outside of Russia in self-imposed political exile.
It was the fifth movement of ''All-Night Vigil'' that Rachmaninoff requested to have sung at his funeral.
The tour made him a popular figure in America; however, he was unhappy and declined subsequent job offers.
The piece was not performed for the rest of Rachmaninoff's life, but he revised it into a four-hand piano arrangement in 1898.
In both these sets Rachmaninoff was less concerned with pure melody than with coloring.
According to the Ampico publicity department, he initially disbelieved that a roll of punched paper could provide an accurate record, so he was invited to listen to a proof copy of his first recording.
It was received so warmly at its premiere in Moscow in aid of war relief that four additional performances were quickly scheduled.
This ability came from an exceptional independence of fingers and hands.
Rachmaninoff spent the summer of 1893 with friends in Lebedyn, where he composed ''Fantaisie-Tableaux'' (Suite , Op.&nbsp;5) and ''Morceaux de salon'' (Op.&nbsp;10).
Demanding concert tour schedules caused Rachmaninoff's output as a composer to slow significantly, so that between his arrival in the US in 1918 and his death in 1943, he completed just six compositions.
You can give their works ''color''.
A little over five weeks later he died in the house he had bought the year before on Elm Drive in Beverly Hills.
Alexander Goldenweiser said, "Whatever composition was ever mentioned—piano, orchestral, operatic, or other—by a Classical or contemporary composer, if Rachmaninoff had at any time heard it, and most of all if he liked it, he played it as though it were a work he had studied thoroughly."
Beginning in the mid-1890s, his compositions began showing a more individual tone.
You can make contact with their imaginations, knowing something of their problems and their ideals.
The variations show an even greater textural clarity than in the Op.&nbsp;38 songs, combined with a more abrasive use of chromatic harmony and a new rhythmic incisiveness.
In 1986, the Moscow Conservatory dedicated a concert hall on its premises to Rachmaninoff, designating the 252-seat auditorium Rachmaninoff Hall.
Born into a musical family, Rachmaninoff took up the piano at age four.
In 1904, Rachmaninoff agreed to a stint as conductor at the Bolshoi Theatre where he conducted his two new operas, ''The Miserly Knight'' and ''Francesca da Rimini'', in January 1906.
Particularly renowned are his renditions of Schumann's ''Carnaval'' and Chopin's ''Funeral March Sonata'', along with many shorter pieces.
Rachmaninoff's frequently used motifs include the ''Dies Irae'', often just the fragments of the first phrase.
He became a member of the board of directors for the Tolstoy Foundation Center in Valley Cottage, New York.
A monument to Rachmaninoff was unveiled in Veliky Novgorod, near his birthplace, on 14 June 2009.
15) and ''Moments Musicaux'' (Op.
In 1897, following the critical reaction to his Symphony No.
Further changes are apparent in the revised First Piano Concerto, which he finished just before leaving Russia, as well as in the Op.&nbsp;38 songs and Op.&nbsp;39 Études-Tableaux.
In 1942, Rachmaninov made a final revision of his troublesome Fourth Concerto but composed no more new music.
Works for piano solo include 24 Preludes traversing all 24 major and minor keys; Prelude in C-sharp minor (Op.&nbsp;3, ) from ''Morceaux de fantaisie'' (Op.&nbsp;3); ten preludes in Op.&nbsp;23; and thirteen in Op.&nbsp;32.
Rachmaninoff found his first romance in the neighbouring Skalon family with Vera, the youngest of three daughters.
In 1920, Rachmaninoff signed a recording contract with the Victor Talking Machine Company which earned him some much-needed income.
During his time at the opera company, Rachmaninoff became engaged to his first cousin Natalia Satina, a fellow pianist whom he had known since childhood.
