They usually use weapons that require close contact with the victims, such as knives or hands.
There have been studies done to compare and contrast these three groups and to discover similarities and differences between them.
Fantasy can lead to the first step in the process of a dissociative state, which, in the words of Stephen Giannangelo, "allows the serial killer to leave the stream of consciousness for what is, to him, a better place".
Popular racial stereotypes about the lower intelligence of African-Americans, and the stereotype that serial killers are white males, may explain the media focus on serial killers that are white and the failure to adequately report on those that are black.
For example, the Green River Task Force cost upwards of two million dollars a year, and as was witnessed with the Green River Killer investigation, other strategies can prevail where a task force fails.
They often lure the victims with ploys appealing to their sense of sympathy.
Boundaries between fantasy and reality are lost and fantasies turn to dominance, control, sexual conquest, and violence, eventually leading to murder.
*Some were involved in petty crimes, such as fraud, theft, vandalism,  or similar offenses.
According to Garrison (1996), "the child becomes sociopathic because the normal development of the concepts of right and wrong and empathy towards others is retarded because the child's emotional and social development occurs within his self-centered fantasies.
(See article Causes of sexual violence for the differences regarding anger rape, power rape, and sadistic rape.)
She believes that the myth that serial killers are always white might have become "truth" in some research fields due to the over-reporting of white serial killers in the media.
After her husband's death, she and four collaborators were accused of torturing and killing hundreds of girls and young women, with one witness attributing to them over 600 victims, though the number for which they were convicted was 80.
A sample of 202 IQs of serial killers had a median IQ of 89.
Liu Pengli of China, cousin of the Han Emperor Jing, was made Prince of Jidong in the sixth year of the middle period of Jing's reign (144&nbsp;BC).
A 2014 Radford/FGCU Serial Killer Database annual statistics report showed that for the decades 1900–2010, the percentage of White serial killers was 52.1% while the percentage of African American serial killers was 40.3%.
These kinds of killers are sometimes referred to as "angels of death" or angels of mercy.
Elizabeth herself was neither tried nor convicted.
Should the cases cross multiple jurisdictions, the law enforcement system in the United States is fragmented and thus not configured to detect multiple similar murders across a large geographic area (Egger 1998).
Female serial killers are rare compared to their male counterparts.
Such killers are sometimes abused as children, leaving them with feelings of powerlessness and inadequacy as adults.
They commit killings in specific places, such as their home or a health-care facility, or at different locations within the same city or state.
Disorganized serial killers are usually far more impulsive, often committing their murders with a random weapon available at the time, and usually do not attempt to hide the body.
Kenneth Bianchi, one of the "Hillside Stranglers", murdered women and girls of different ages, races and appearance because his sexual urges required different types of stimulation and increasing intensity.
The lack of empathy for their victims among young criminals is just one symptom of a problem that afflicts the whole society."
In simple terms, he described it as a woman who kills two or more husbands or lovers for material gain.
Other studies indicate that since 1975, increasingly strangers are marginally the most preferred victim of female serial killers, or that only 26% of female serial killers kill for material gain only.
Members of the Thuggee cult in India may have murdered a million people between 1740 and 1840.
Usually the victims are strangers, although the killer may have followed them for a period of time.
According to the FBI, identifying one, or multiple, murders as being the work of a serial killer is the first challenge an investigation faces, especially if the victim(s) come from a marginalized or high risk population and is normally linked through forensic or behavioral evidence (FBI 2008).
Material gain and a comfortable lifestyle are the primary motives of comfort killers.
Juvenile serial killers are uncommon.
One such collaboration, the ''Radford/FGCU Serial Killer Database Project'' was proposed at the 2012 FDIAI Annual Conference.
Some theorists believe the reasons are biological, suggesting serial killers are born, not made, and that their violent behavior is a result of abnormal brain activity.
Although motivations for female serial killers can include attention seeking, addiction, or the result of psychopathological behavioral factors, female serial killers are commonly categorized as murdering men for material gain, usually being emotionally close to their victims, and generally needing to have a relationship with the victim, hence the traditional cultural image of the "black widow."
He traveled around the United States seeking women to control.
Kenneth Bianchi was teased as a child because he urinated in his pants, suffered twitching, and as a teenager was ignored by his peers.
This neglect of the child leads to the lowering of their self-esteem and helps develop a fantasy world in which they are in control.
Thrill killers can abstain from killing for long periods of time and become more successful at killing as they refine their murder methods.
A 2010 article by Perri and Lichtenwald addressed some of the misperceptions concerning female criminality.
H. H. Holmes killed for insurance and business profits.
Unfortunately due to the need to commit resources (manpower, money, equipment, etc.)
In the 15th century, one of the wealthiest men in Europe and a former companion-in-arms of Joan of Arc, Gilles de Rais, sexually assaulted and killed peasant children, mainly boys, whom he had abducted from the surrounding villages and had taken to his castle.
In his more recent study, Vronsky states that the term "serial killing" first entered into American popular usage when published in the ''New York Times'' in the spring of 1981, to describe Atlanta serial killer Wayne Williams.
In both military and serial killing, the offender or the soldier may become desensitized to killing as well as compartmentalized; the soldiers do not see enemy personnel as "human" and neither do serial killers see their victims as humans.
The primary motive of a thrill killer is to induce pain or terror in their victims, which provides stimulation and excitement for the killer.
Sex is the primary motive of lust killers, whether or not the victims are dead, and fantasy plays a large role in their killings.
Many power- or control-motivated killers sexually abuse their victims, but they differ from hedonistic killers in that rape is not motivated by lust (as it would be with a lust murder) but as simply another form of dominating the victim.
or lack thereof is often marked by excessive violence and sometimes necrophilia and/or sexual violence.
Thrill killers murder only for the kill; usually the attack is not prolonged, and there is no sexual aspect.
John Wayne Gacy drew and painted art from prison, much of which he gave away.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the specific term "serial killer" first arose abroad in a 1960s German film article written by Siegfried Kracauer about the film M (1931), a German expressionist film about a pedophilic ''Serienmörder''.
After a murder, a comfort killer will usually wait for a period of time before killing again to allow any suspicions by family or authorities to subside.
Herbert Mullin believed the American casualties in the Vietnam War were preventing California from experiencing the Big One.
The prosecutors were allowed to present evidence of the two disappearances under the Doctrine of chances.
The dramatic murders of financially destitute women in the midst of the wealth of London, focused the media's attention on the plight of the urban poor and gained coverage worldwide.
Medical professionals will kill their patients for money, for a sense of sadistic pleasure, for a belief that they are "easing" the patient's pain, or simply "because they can".
One of the greatest themes of this book, however, is the possibility that the dualistic conflict seen in Jekyll/Hyde could happen to anyone.
The Hungarian aristocrat Elizabeth Báthory, born into one of the wealthiest families in Transylvania, allegedly tortured and killed as many as 650 girls and young women before her arrest in 1610.
Another movie, Dahmer, was released in the same year, and tells the story of Jeffrey Dahmer.
Family interaction also plays an important role in a child's growth and development.
Similar to a conference is an information clearing-house in which a jurisdiction with a suspected serial murder case collects all of its evidence and actively seeks data which may be related from other jurisdictions.
Ted Bundy is an example of a power/control-oriented serial killer.
Slashing, stabbing, hanging, drowning, asphyxiating, and strangling were among the ways Watts killed.
Police surgeon Thomas Bond assembled one of the earliest character profiles of the offender.
They are likely to be unemployed, a loner, or both, with very few friends.
In the book ''To Kill a Predator'' Adir Rondack combines technology with a serial killer by using a UAV to target his victims.
The officials of the court requested that Liu Pengli be executed; however, the emperor could not bear to have his own cousin killed, so Liu Pengli was made a commoner and banished.
Almost all of the serial killers in the study had experienced some sort of environmental problems during their childhood, such as a broken home caused by divorce, or a lack of discipline in the home.
The English term and concept of "serial killer" are commonly attributed to former FBI Special agent Robert Ressler in 1974.
Criminal behavior is a process of interaction with social institutions, in which everyone has the potential for criminal behavior.
The most prolific female serial killer in all of history is allegedly Elizabeth Báthory.
Disorganized serial killers have been found to have a slightly lower mean IQ than organized serial killers, at 92.8.
The difference is that the FBI handbook (2008) concentrates primarily on communication within a task force while Keppel (1989) makes getting information out to, and allowing information to be passed back from patrol officers a priority.
Kelleher and Kelleher (1998) created several categories to describe female serial killers.
In the article, Perri and Lichtenwald analyze the current research regarding female psychopathy, including case studies of female psychopathic killers featuring Münchausen syndrome by proxy, cesarean section homicide, fraud detection homicide, female kill teams, and a female serial killer.
One "analysis of 86 female serial killers from the U.S. found that the victims tended to be spouses, children or the elderly".
The FBI (2008) suggests completing Memorandums of Understanding to facilitate support and commitment of resources from different jurisdictions to an investigation.
Nature vs. nurture is a major focus because it explains how certain environments and family behaviors can directly link to the behavior.
While not the first serial killer in history, Jack the Ripper's case was the first to create a worldwide media frenzy.
Author Ann Rule postulates in her book ''Kiss Me, Kill Me'' (2004) that the English-language credit for coining the term ''serial killer'' goes to LAPD detective Pierce Brooks, who created the ViCAP system in 1985.
He was considered a pillar of the local community; he even won a professional award for a children's asthma clinic and was interviewed by Granada Television's ''World in Action''.
Before he was executed, serial killer Ted Bundy stated media violence and pornography had stimulated and increased his need to commit homicide, although this statement was made during last-ditch efforts to appeal his death sentence.
For short term needs, such as setting up road blocks or canvassing a neighborhood, additional resources should be called in on a short term basis.
Egger (1998) takes this one step further and suggests completing mutual aid pacts, which are written agreements to provide support to each other in a time of need, with surrounding jurisdictions.
Professional killers ("hitmen") may also be considered comfort serial killers.
In 1610, however, she was imprisoned in the Csejte Castle, where she remained bricked in a set of rooms until her death four years later.
He is the director of the Mayor's Crime Victims Office in Houston and is backed by the families of murder victims and "Son of Sam" laws existing in some states that prevent murderers from profiting from the publicity generated by their crimes.
It was common for the serial killers to come from a family that had experienced divorce, separation, or the lack of a parent.
Coral Watts was described by a surviving victim as "excited and hyper and clappin' and just making noises like he was excited, that this was gonna be fun" during the 1982 attack.
He was the subject of a massive manhunt and investigation by the Metropolitan Police, during which many modern criminal investigation techniques were pioneered.
Already mentioned was the task force, FBI 2008, Keppel 1989 which provides for a flexible, organized, framework for jurisdictions depending on the needs of the investigation.
Some, like Puente and Holmes, may be involved in and/or have previous convictions for theft, fraud, non payment of debts, embezzlement and other crimes of a similar nature.
For example, Henry Lee Lucas was ridiculed as a child and later cited the mass rejection by his peers as a cause for his hatred of everyone.
This type of serial killer seeks thrills and derives pleasure from killing, seeing people as expendable means to this goal.
Organization of the structure of an investigation is key to its success, as demonstrated by the investigation of the Green River Killer.
*Often, they have trouble staying employed and tend to work in menial jobs.
According to some sources, the percentage of serial killers who are African American is estimated to be between 13 and 22 percent.
However, in his book ''Serial Killers: The Method and Madness of Monsters'' (2004), criminal justice historian Peter Vronsky argues that while Ressler might have coined the term ''serial homicide'' within law, at Bramshill Police Academy in Britain, the terms ''serial murder'' and ''serial murderer'' appear in John Brophy's book ''The Meaning of Murder'' (1966).
This then leads to disposition (the inability to attach), which can further lead to homicidal behavior, unless the child finds a way to develop substantial relationships and fight the label they receive.
As his desire increased, he experimented with drugs, alcohol, and exotic sex.
I didn't enjoy doing that.
Forensic psychologists have identified three subtypes of the hedonistic killer: "lust", "thrill" and "comfort".
That's why I tried to create living zombies with … acid and the drill."
Other methods used by female serial killers include shootings (used by 20%), suffocation (16%), stabbing (11%), and drowning (5%).
Serial killers are also portrayed in fictional media, oftentimes as having substantial intelligence and looking for difficult targets, despite the contradiction with the psychological profile of serial killers.
Family, or lack thereof, is the most prominent part of a child's development because it is what the child can identify with on a regular basis.
In the United States, the majority of reported and investigated serial killers are white males, from a lower-to-middle-class background, usually in their late twenties to early thirties.
For example, the Zebra killers in the San Francisco Bay Area specifically targeted Caucasians.
Another medical profession serial killer is Genene Jones.
If a child receives no support from those around him or her, then he or she is unlikely to recover from the traumatic event in a positive way.
Holmes and Holmes believe that "until a reliable sample can be obtained and tested, there is no scientific statement that can be made concerning the exact role of biology as a determining factor of a serial killer personality."
A 2015 study published in ''The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology'' found that the most common motive for female serial killers was for financial gain and almost 40 percent of them had experienced some sort of mental illness.
Others specifically target prostitutes, who are likely to go voluntarily with a stranger.
Many movies, books, and documentaries have been written about serial killers, detailing the lives and crimes that have been committed.
Other sources state they often come from unstable families.
Recently, marketing has capitalized even more upon interest in serial killers with the rise of various merchandise such as trading cards, action figures, and books such as ''The Serial Killer Files: The Who, What, Where, How, and Why of the World's Most Terrifying Murderers'' by Harold Schechter, and ''The A-Z Encyclopedia of Serial Killers'' by Schecter and David Everitt.
The decision of whether resources are needed short or long term should be left to the lead investigator and facilitated by the administration (FBI 2008).
Doing this in advance would save time and resources that could be used on the investigation.
The "military theory" has been proposed as an explanation for why serial murderers kill, as some serial murderers have served in the military or related fields.
Peter Vronsky in ''Female Serial Killers'' (2007) maintains that female serial killers today often kill for the same reason males do: as a means of expressing rage and control.
The confusion and counter productiveness created by changing the structure of a task force mid investigation is illustrated by the way the Green River Task Force's staffing and structure was changed multiple times throughout the investigation.
Two serial killers, Bobby Joe Long and Richard Speck, came to attention for reported chromosomal abnormalities.
However, there are African American, Asian, and Hispanic (of any race) serial killers as well, and, according to the FBI, based on percentages of the U.S. population, whites are not more likely than other races to be serial killers.
In describing murderer Stacey Castor, forensic psychiatrist James Knoll offered a psychological perspective on what defines a "black widow" type.
A standardized method of documenting and distributing information must be established and investigators must be allowed time to complete reports while investigating leads and at the end of a shift (FBI 2008).
That subculture includes the collection, sale, and display of serial killer memorabilia, dubbed "murderabilia" by one of the best-known opponents of collectors of serial killer remnants, Andrew Kahan.
He was convicted of murdering his wife, a 1962 death that was originally ruled an accidental drowning, and which occurred only months after Vail took out two life insurance policies on her.
In the case of the investigation of Aileen Wournos, the Marion County Sheriff coordinated multiple agencies without any written or formal agreement.
"Social Process Theory" has also been suggested as an explanation for serial murder.
Some see themselves as attempting to change society, often to cure a societal ill.
In 2008, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) published a handbook entitled ''Serial Murder'' which was the product of a symposium held in 2005 to bring together the many issues surrounding serial murder, including its investigation.
"The serial killer is no different from any other individual who is instigated to seek approval from parents, sexual partners, or others."
Among serial killers, those of this type are in the event of their capture most likely to be described by acquaintances as kind and unlikely to hurt anyone.
This need for approval is what influences children to attempt to develop social relationships with their family and peers, but if they are rejected or neglected, they are unable to do so.
Serial killers are featured as stock characters in many types of media, not only in films, but in including printed works, songs, television programs, and video games as well.
Speck was erroneously reported to have an extra Y chromosome; in fact, his karyotype was performed twice and was normal each time.
*They were frequently bullied or socially isolated as children or adolescents.
A child used as a scapegoat will be deprived of their capacity to feel guilt.
Bundy and John Wayne Gacy are examples of organized serial killers.
The racial demographics regarding serial killers are often subject to debate.
Keppel (1989) suggests holding multi-jurisdictional conferences regularly to compare cases giving departments a greater chance to detect linked cases and overcome linkage blindness.
Theories for why certain people commit serial murder have been advanced.
During the course of a serial murder investigation it may become necessary to call in additional resources; the FBI defines this as Resource Augmentation.
He further elaborated on this, also saying, "I wanted to see if it was possible to make—again, it sounds really gross—uh, zombies, people that would not have a will of their own, but would follow my instructions without resistance.
A serial murder investigation generates staggering amounts of data, all of which needs to be reviewed and analyzed.
In this fantasy world, their emotional development is guided and maintained.
Some serial killers literally attain celebrity status in the way they acquire fans, and may have previous personal possessions auctioned off on websites like eBay.
Some people took Gacy's work just to trash or burn it, especially after discovering that many of his images depicted his own victims.
Chicago based metal band Macabre boast an entire back-catalogue of songs about serial killers, even referring to their own particular style of music as ''Murder Metal''.
The novella titled ''Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde'', by Robert Louis Stevenson, can be seen as a metaphor for the complex personality of the organized serial killer type that later disintegrates into the disorganized version.
Jeffrey Dahmer, who was repeatedly diagnosed with borderline personality disorder, searched for his perfect fantasy lover—beautiful, submissive and eternal.
Over the course of the investigation, for various reasons, the task force's organization was radically changed and reorganized multiple times – at one point including more than 50 full-time personnel, and at another, only a single investigator.
When a parent has a drug or alcohol problem, the attention in the household is on the parents rather than the child.
He was executed in 1898 after confessing to his crimes.
This results in the lowering of their self-esteem and helps develop their fantasy world, in which they are in control.
Utilizing over 170 data points, multiple-murderer methodology and victimology; researchers and Law Enforcement Agencies can build case studies and statistical profiles to further research the ''Who, What, Why and How'' of these types of crimes.
Finally, once a serial murder investigation has been identified, utilization of an FBI Rapid Response Team can assist both experienced and inexperienced jurisdictions in setting up a task force.
Eventually, it was discovered that he had murdered at least 100 people.
Criminal profiler Pat Brown says serial killers are usually reported as white because serial killers usually target victims of their own race, and the media typically focuses on "All-American" white and pretty female victims who were the targets of white male offenders; that crimes among minority offenders in urban communities, where crime rates are higher, are under-investigated; and that minority serial killers likely exist at the same ratios as white serial killers for the population.
An example is the BTK Killer, who sought attention from the press during his murder spree.
The methods that female serial killers use for murder are frequently covert or low-profile, such as murder by poison (the preferred choice for killing).
Serial killing is not the same as mass murdering (killing numerous people in a given incident); nor is it spree killing (in which murders are committed in two or more locations, in a short time).
This figure may be a proportional under-representation when compared to the number of military veterans in a nation's total population.
Films featuring serial killers include ''The Terror'' (1928), ''M'' (1931), ''Psycho'' (1960), ''Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer'' (1986), ''The Silence of the Lambs'' (1991), ''Peeping Tom'', ''The Texas Chain Saw Massacre'', ''The Watcher'', ''Mr.
Another study has shown that 16 percent of serial killers are African American, what author Maurice Godwin describes as a "sizeable portion".
As the war wound down, Mullin claimed his father instructed him via telepathy to raise the number of "human sacrifices to nature" in order to delay a catastrophic earthquake that would plunge California into the ocean.
In each case it was uniformed officers, not directly involved in the investigation, who knew what to look for and took the direct action that stopped the killer.
He is a suspect in the disappearances of two other women – his girlfriend in 1973 and his second wife in 1984.
They seek the adrenaline rush provided by hunting and killing victims.
They are also taught ethics in basic training.
According to the Chinese historian Sima Qian, he would "go out on marauding expeditions with 20 or 30 slaves or with young men who were in hiding from the law, murdering people and seizing their belongings for sheer sport".
The sexual serial murderer has a psychological need to have absolute control, dominance, and power over their victims, and the infliction of torture, pain, and ultimately death is used in an attempt to fulfill their need.
If the task force's framework is expanded to include the new resource, then it should be permanent and not removed.
H. H. Holmes was one of the first documented modern serial killers in America, responsible for the death of at least 27 victims at his hotel in Chicago in the early 1890s.
Though Castor was not officially defined as a serial killer, it is likely that she would have killed again.
Killers who have a strong desire for fame or to be renowned for their actions desire media attention as a way of validating and spreading their crimes; fear is also a component here, as some serial killers enjoy causing fear.
So after that, I started using the drilling technique."
Both men were residents of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; both imprisoned, tortured and killed several women; and both were arrested only months apart in 1987.
Displaced anger could result in animal torture, as identified in the Macdonald triad, and a further lack of basic identity.
Modern singers and bands, some more popular than others, have felt the fascination and horror toward certain celebrity serial killers, writing their own songs about them.
However, cases of extended bouts of sequential killings over periods of weeks or months with no apparent "cooling off period" or "return to normalcy" have caused some experts to suggest a hybrid category of "spree-serial killer".
They used the classifications of ''black widow'', ''angel of death'', ''sexual predator'', ''revenge'', ''profit or crime'', ''team killer'', ''question of sanity'', ''unexplained'', and ''unsolved''.
Eventually, what led to the end of the investigation was a conference of 25 detectives organized to share ideas to solve the case.
He claimed a demon transmitted orders through his neighbor's dog and instructed him to commit murder.
This made an already complicated situation more difficult, resulting in the delay or loss of information, which allowed Ridgeway to continue killing (Guillen 2007).
It is believed she killed 11 to 46 infants and children while working at Bexar County Medical Center Hospital in San Antonio, Texas.
The movie ''Bundy'', which was released in 2002, focuses on serial killer Ted Bundy's personal life in college, leading up to his execution.
Organized nonsocial offenders tend to be on the higher end of the average, with a mean IQ of 99.2.
Richard Kuklinski charged tens of thousands of dollars for a "hit", earning enough money to support his family in a middle-class lifestyle (Bruno, 1993).
According to ''The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology,'' there is evidence that 16 % of all serial killers are women.
These killers maintain a high degree of control over the crime scene and usually have a solid knowledge of forensic science that enables them to cover their tracks, such as burying the body or weighing it down and sinking it in a river.
A lack of family structure and identity could also be a cause leading to serial murder traits.
There are three main categories that juvenile serial killers can fit into: primary, maturing, and secondary killers.
The motives of serial killers are generally placed into four categories: ''visionary'', ''mission-oriented'', ''hedonistic'' and ''power or control''; however, the motives of any given killer may display considerable overlap among these categories.
Many serial killers claim that a violent culture influenced them to commit murders.
Often, organized killers have social and other interpersonal skills sufficient to enable them to develop both personal and romantic relationships, friends and lovers and sometimes even attract and maintain a spouse and sustain a family including children.
A study by Eric W. Hickey (2010) of 64 female serial killers in the U.S. indicated that sexual activity was one of several motives in 10% of the cases, enjoyment in 11% and control in 14%, and that 51% of all U.S. female serial killers murdered at least one woman and 31% murdered at least one child.
This process may be considered an expression of the intersubjectivity associated with a cognitive deficit regarding the capability to make sharp distinctions between other people and inanimate objects.
According to a dissertation by an Alliant International University-Fresno PhD student, there are several factors that could account for juvenile serial killers.
Lorenzo Carcaterra, author of ''Gangster'' (2001), explains how potential criminals are labeled by society, which can then lead to their offspring also developing in the same way through the cycle of violence.
