The victorious British now controlled all of eastern North America.
The celebration of these successes was dampened by their embarrassing defeat in the Battle of Carillon (Ticonderoga), in which 4,000 French troops repulsed 16,000 British.
All of Britain's campaigns against New France succeeded in 1759, part of what became known as an ''Annus Mirabilis''.
Seeing French defeat, in 1760 the Seven Nations of Canada resigned from the war and negotiated the Treaty of Kahnawake with the British.
First, Frederick devastated Soubise's forces at the Battle of Rossbach on 5 November 1757 and then routed a vastly superior Austrian force at the Battle of Leuthen on 5 December 1757 Rossbach was the only battle between the French and the Prussians during the entire war.
The Russian quartermasters department had not improved, so the same problems reoccurred in Prussia.
This was the final battle of the war in North America, and it forced the French to surrender to Lieutenant Colonel William Amherst.
In Britain, it was speculated that a total Prussian collapse was now imminent.
This was disputed by Britain.
The Russians lacked a quartermaster's department capable of keeping armies operating in Central Europe properly supplied over the primitive mud roads of eastern Europe.
At the Battle of Lobositz on 1 October 1756, Frederick prevented the isolated Saxon army from being reinforced by an Austrian army under General Browne.
Now-isolated France was forced to accede to the Austro-Russian alliance or face ruin.
France was very much interested in colonial expansion and was willing to exploit the vulnerability of Hanover in war against Great Britain, but it had no desire to divert forces to central Europe for Prussia's interest.
Austria was not able to retake Silesia or make any significant territorial gain.
The Russians and the Austrians were determined to reduce the power of Prussia, the new threat on their doorstep.
In April 1758, the British concluded the Anglo-Prussian Convention with Frederick in which they committed to pay him an annual subsidy of £670,000.
Prussia, having secured Silesia, came to terms with Austria in disregard of French interests.
France had long claimed the entire Mississippi River basin.
As consequence of the war the Valdivian Fort System, a Spanish defensive complex in southern Chile, was updated and reinforced from 1764 onwards.
Morale declined further when news of defeat in the Battle of Signal Hill in Newfoundland reached Paris.
The French capital of Pondicherry fell to the British in 1761; together with the fall of the lesser French settlements of Karikal and Mahé this effectively eliminated French power in India.
Hadik, however, left the city with his hussars and safely reached the Austrian lines.
Frederick himself lost half his army in the Battle of Kunersdorf (now Kunowice Poland), the worst defeat in his military career and one that drove him to the brink of abdication and thoughts of suicide.
It involved every European great power of the time except the Ottoman Empire, spanning five continents, and affected Europe, the Americas, West Africa, India, and the Philippines.
In 1756 Austria was making military preparations for war with Prussia and pursuing an alliance with Russia for this purpose.
Britain's main weapon was the Royal Navy, which could control the seas and bring as many invasion troops as were needed.
Prussia was devastated and the Prussian Army had taken huge losses, and in the war's aftermath, Frederick could not afford to rebuild the Prussian Army to what it was before the war.
France also returned Minorca to the British.
The two nations eventually dispatched regular troops to North America to enforce their claims.
Britain now threatened to withdraw its subsidies if Prussia did not consider offering concessions to secure peace.
France's navy was crippled by the war.
The Native American tribes were excluded from the settlement; a subsequent conflict, known as Pontiac's War, was also unsuccessful in returning them to their pre-war status.
At Liegnitz (now Legnica, Poland), the Russians arrived too late to participate in the battle.
This power dynamic was important to the future and the latter conflicts of the ''Reich''.
Swedish historiography uses the name ''Pommerska kriget'' (Pomeranian War), as Swedish involvement was limited to Pomerania in northern central Germany.
At home, however, stability had been established.
The Russians defeated the Prussians several times in the war, but the Russians lacked the necessary logistical capability to follow up their victories with lasting gains, and in this sense, the salvation of the House of Hohenzollern was due more to Russian weakness with respect to logistics than to Prussian strength on the battlefield.
Naples, Sicily, and Savoy, although sided with the Franco-Spanish alliance, declined to join the coalition under fear of British power.
Like Sweden, Russia concluded a separate peace with Prussia.
The British settlers along the coast were upset that French troops would now be close to the western borders of their colonies.
Over the winter the new commander of the Hanoverian forces, Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick, regrouped his army and launched a series of offensives that drove the French back across the River Rhine.
This success convinced Pitt to launch two further expeditions to take the island of Gorée and the French trading post on the Gambia.
As the Prussian armies had dwindled to just 60,000 men and with Berlin itself under siege, Frederick's survival was severely threatened.
In spite of this, the Prussians were now facing the prospect of four major powers attacking on four fronts (France from the west, Austria from the south, Russia from the east and Sweden from the north).
The Russians under Zakhar Chernyshev and Pyotr Rumyantsev stormed Kolberg in Pomerania, while the Austrians captured Schweidnitz.
The British had suffered further defeats in North America, particularly at Fort William Henry.
Among its conditions was their unrestricted travel between Canada and New York, as the nations had extensive trade between Montreal and Albany as well as populations living throughout the area.
It was only after 1806 when Prussian government brought in reforms to recover from the disaster of Jena that Prussia's rise to greatness later in the 19th century was realized.
On 29 August 1756, he led Prussian troops across the border of Saxony, one of the small German states in league with Austria.
Meanwhile, Frederick and Keith would make for Dresden.
Not only that, France had no intention to ally with Russia, who,  years earlier, had meddled in France's affairs during Austria's succession war.
Pontiac's War was a major conflict in which the British temporarily lost control of the Great Lakes-Northwest regions to the Indians.
Negotiations had started there on 31 December 1762.
Many middle and small powers in Europe, unlike in the previous wars, tried to steer clear away from the escalating conflict, even though they had interests in the conflict or with the belligerents, like Denmark–Norway.
But after her surprising grand success against a coalition of great powers, European states such as Austria, The Dutch Republic, Sweden, Denmark-Norway, Ottoman Empire, and Russia now saw Britain as a greater threat than France and did not join them, while the Prussians were angered by what they considered a British betrayal in 1762.
The British Royal Navy took the French sugar colonies of Guadeloupe in 1759 and Martinique in 1762 as well as the Spanish cities of Havana in Cuba, and Manila in the Philippines, both prominent Spanish colonial cities.
This problem was compounded when the main Hanoverian army under Cumberland was defeated at the Battle of Hastenbeck and forced to surrender entirely at the Convention of Klosterzeven following a French Invasion of Hanover.
However, after five days of artillery bombardment the Russian army was able to storm it.
They also agreed to a secret clause that promised the restoration of Silesia and the countship of Glatz (now Kłodzko, Poland) to Austria in the event of hostilities with Prussia.
France also saw the dismemberment of Prussia as threatening to the stability of Central Europe.
One of them, led by general Platen in September resulted in the loss of 2,000 Russians, mostly captured, and the destruction of 5,000 wagons.
Besthuzev, assuming the preparation was directed against Prussia, was more than happy to obey the request of the British.
The tendency of Russian armies to break off operations after fighting a major battle, even when they were not defeated, was less about their casualties and more about their supply lines; after expending much of their munitions in a battle, Russian generals did not wish to risk another battle knowing resupply would be a long time coming.
Deprived of men, the Prussians had to resort to this new sort of warfare, raiding, to delay the advance of their enemies.
The Austrians had ultimately made little progress in the campaign in Saxony despite Hochkirch and had failed to achieve a decisive breakthrough.
At the Battle of Villinghausen, forces under Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick defeated a 92,000-man French army.
For much of the eighteenth century, France approached its wars in the same way.
The British government was close to bankruptcy, and Britain now faced the delicate task of pacifying its new French-Canadian subjects as well as the many American Indian tribes who had supported France.
The supply system that allowed the Russians to advance into the Balkans during the war with the Ottomans in 1787-92, Marshal Alexander Suvorov to campaign effectively in Italy and Switzerland in 1798-99, and for the Russians to fight across Germany and France in 1813-14 to take Paris was created directly in response to the logistic problems experienced by the Russians in the Seven Years War.
The latter victory was marred when France's native allies broke the terms of capitulation and attacked the retreating British column, which was under French guard, slaughtering and scalping soldiers and taking captive many men, women and children while the French refused to protect their captives.
The only significant Austrian success was the partial occupation of Silesia.
Unbeknownst to his foreign minister, Louis had established a network of agents throughout Europe with the goal of pursuing personal political objectives that were often at odds with France’s publicly stated policies.
Ferdinand had succeeded in driving the French from Hanover and Westphalia and re-captured the port of Emden in March 1758 before crossing the Rhine with his own forces,  which caused alarm in France.
However, the Russians was not yet able to take Königsberg after using up their supplies of cannonballs at Memel and Gross-Jägersdorf and retreated soon afterward.
The war also brought to an end the "Old System" of alliances in Europe, In the years after the war, under the direction of Lord Sandwich, the British attempted to re-establish this system.
The results were absolute chaos.
At the same time, the Russians failed in an attempt to take Kolberg in Pomerania (now Kołobrzeg, Poland) from the Prussians.
A lasting legacy of the war was that it awakened the Russians to their logistic weaknesses, and led to major reforms of the Imperial Russian Army's quartermaster department.
At the same time, his Brunswick allies captured the key town of Göttingen and compounded this by taking Cassel.
This was accomplished in the diplomatic revolution of 1756, in which Britain ended its long-standing alliance with Austria in favor of Prussia, leaving Austria to side with France.
Still, the fact that the Russians proved capable of defeating in battle the army of a "first-rate" European power on its own soil despite the often indifferent quality of their generals improved Russia's standing in Europe.
The treaty, however, required that the fortifications of these settlements be destroyed and never rebuilt, while only minimal garrisons could be maintained there, thus rendering them worthless as military bases.
Fort Niagara and Fort Carillon on 8 July 1758 fell to sizable British forces, cutting off French frontier forts further west.
The French retaliated by attacking Washington's army at Fort Necessity on 3 July 1754 and forced Washington to surrender.
Unbeknownst to the other powers, King George II also made overtures to the Prussian king, Frederick, who, fearing the Austro-Russian intentions, was also desirous of a rapprochement with Britain.
Britain's basic framework for the alliance itself was to protect Hanover's interests against France.
In the south, although the French captured Cuddalore, their siege of Madras failed, while the British commander Sir Eyre Coote decisively defeated the Comte de Lally at the Battle of Wandiwash in 1760 and overran the French territory of the Northern Circars.
He tried as hard as he could to avoid Austrian entanglement in Hanover's political affairs, and was even willing to trade Austrian Netherlands for France's aid in recapturing Silesia.
This long-standing weakness was evident in the Russian-Ottoman War of 1735-1739, where Russian battle victories led to only modest war gains due to problems supplying their armies.
Frederick, who had considered ceding East Prussia to Russia if Peter III helped him secure Saxony, finally insisted on excluding Russia (in fact, no longer a belligerent) from the negotiations.
Saxony was merely a buffer between Prussia and Austrian Bohemia, whereas Poland, despite its union with the ancient lands of Lithuania, was prey to pro-French and pro-Russian factions.
His manpower had dramatically decreased, and he had lost so many effective officers and generals that a new offensive was perhaps impossible.
William Pitt The Elder, who entered the cabinet in 1756, had a grand vision for the war that made it entirely different from previous wars with France.
The arrival of British reinforcements stalled a further Spanish advance, and the Battle of Valencia de Alcántara saw British-Portuguese forces overrun a major Spanish supply base.
1762 brought two new countries into the war.
Sweden declared war on Prussia and invaded Pomerania with 17,000 men.
In January 1758, the Russians invaded East Prussia, where   the province almost denuded of troops put little opposition.
On 2 June 1746, Austria and Russia concluded a defensive alliance that covered their own territory and Poland against attack by Prussia or the Ottoman Empire.
It was characterized in Europe by sieges and the arson of towns as well as open battles with heavy losses.
The Hanoverians were victorious over the French at the Battle of Warburg, their continued success preventing France from sending troops to aid the Austrians against Prussia in the east.
The war spread beyond Southern India and into Bengal, where British forces under Robert Clive recaptured Calcutta from the Nawab Siraj ud-Daulah, a French ally, and ousted him from his throne at the Battle of Plassey in 1757.
Not only was Frederick forced to break off his invasion of Bohemia, he was now forced to withdraw further into Prussian-controlled territory.
A rear-guard of 1,400 under Dury held off the French while the rest of the army embarked.
Despite the huge disparity in numbers, the year had been successful for the Prussian-led forces on the continent, in contrast to the British campaigns in North America.
The British—by inclination as well as for practical reasons—had tended to avoid large-scale commitments of troops on the continent.
It marked the end of his final attempt to launch a major invasion of Austrian territory.
He had hoped for a lasting peace with France, and he was afraid that if he took too much, the whole of Europe would unite in envious hostility against Great Britain.
Prussia, the leading anti-Austrian state in Germany, had been supported by France.
The end of that year saw Frederick once more victorious, defeating the able Daun in the Battle of Torgau; but he suffered very heavy casualties, and the Austrians retreated in good order.
Moreover, the Indians feared that with the coming of British rule might lead to white settlers displacing them off their land, whereas it was known that the French had only come as fur traders.
Following the battle at Prague, Frederick took 5,000 troops from the siege at Prague and sent them to reinforce the 19,000-man army under the Duke of Brunswick-Bevern at Kolin in Bohemia.
The war restructured not only the European political order, but also affected events all around the world, paving the way for the beginning of later British world supremacy in the 19th century, the rise of Prussia in Germany, the beginning of tensions in British North America, as well as a clear sign of France's eventual turmoil.
Throughout New England, New York, and the North-west Native American tribes formed differing alliances with the major belligerents.
Austrian marshal, Daun, arrived too late to participate in the battle of Prague, but picked up 16,000 men who had escaped from the battle.
Though the Hanoverians defeated an army of 60,000 French at Minden, Austrian general Daun forced the surrender of an entire Prussian corps of 13,000 in the Battle of Maxen.
In India, the outbreak of the Seven Years' War in Europe renewed the long running conflict between the French and the British trading companies for influence.
In response France concluded an alliance with its long-time enemy Austria, an event known as the Diplomatic Revolution.
Not only that, but France was enraged, and terrified, by the sudden betrayal of its only ally.
If war against France for colonial expansion was to be resumed, then Hanover had to be secured against Franco-Prussian attack.
Years later, Kaunitz kept trying to establish France's alliance with Austria.
The boundary between British and French possessions in North America was largely undefined in the 1750s.
For the first time, aiming to curtail Britain and Prussia's ever-growing might, France formed a grand coalition of its own, which ended with failure as Britain rose as the world's predominant power, altering the European balance of power.
His second goal was to advance into Bohemia where he might set up winter quarters at Austria's expense.
During the war with France in 1792-1795, the Prussian Army did not fare well against revolutionary France, and in 1806, the Prussians were annihilated by the French at the Battle of Jena.
In India, the British retained the Northern Circars, but returned all the French trading ports.
Also, by promising to vote for Joseph II in the Imperial elections, Frederick II accepted the Habsburg preeminence in the Holy Roman Empire.
Both sides suffered heavy casualties – the Prussians 12,800, the Russians 18,000 – but the Russians withdrew, and Frederick claimed victory.
In August, the Mediterranean fleet under Jean-François de La Clue-Sabran was scattered by a larger British fleet under Edward Boscawen at the Battle of Lagos.
Because of Prussia's alliance with Britain, Austria formed an alliance with France, seeing an opportunity to recapture Silesia, which had been lost in a previous war.
France’s traditional enemies, Great Britain and Austria, had coalesced just as they had done against Louis XIV.
The carefully coded word in the agreement proved no less catalytic for the other European powers.
Neither group, however, found much reason to be satisfied with its partnership: British subsidies to Austria produced nothing of much help to the British, while the British military effort had not saved Silesia for Austria.
His losses further forced him to lift the siege and withdraw from Bohemia altogether.
However, in November and December 1757, the whole situation in Germany was reversed.
Still, the loss of Berlin to the Russians and Austrians was a great blow to Frederick's prestige as many pointed out that the Prussians had no hope of occupying temporarily or otherwise St. Petersburg or Vienna.
Despite Ferdinand's victory over the French at the Battle of Krefeld and the brief occupation of Düsseldorf, he was compelled by the successful manoeuvering of larger French forces to withdraw across the Rhine.
The treaty simply restored the status quo of 1748, with Silesia and Glatz reverting to Frederick and Saxony to its own elector.
The Duke of Brunswick-Bevern was to traverse Lusatia to close in on Bautzen.
First, he would seize Saxony and eliminate it as a threat to Prussia, then using the Saxon army and treasury to aid the Prussian war effort.
Worsening weather forced the two armies to separate: the ships sailed for the safer anchorage of St.&nbsp;Cast, while the army proceeded overland.
Accordingly, leaving Field Marshal Count Kurt von Schwerin in Silesia with 25,000 soldiers to guard against incursions from Moravia and Hungary, and leaving Field Marshal Hans von Lehwaldt in East Prussia to guard against Russian invasion from the east, Frederick set off with his army for Saxony.
Britain also dispatched 9,000 troops to reinforce Ferdinand's Hanoverian army, the first British troop commitment on the continent and a reversal in the policy of Pitt.
As prime minister, Pitt committed Britain to a grand strategy of seizing the entire French Empire, especially its possessions in North America and India.
Covered by naval bombardment, the army drove off the French force detailed to oppose their landing, captured Cherbourg, and destroyed its fortifications, docks, and shipping.
Great Britain planned a "descent" (an amphibious demonstration or raid) on Rochefort, a joint operation to overrun the town and burn shipping in the Charente.
The general Fouqué was defeated by the Austrians in the Battle of Landshut.
He also placed a corps of his own troops under Frederick's command.
However, none of this had happened yet, and after 1763, various nations all sent officers to Prussia to learn the secrets of Prussia's military power.
In 1762, towards the end of the war, French forces attacked St.&nbsp;John's, Newfoundland.
France and Spain avenged their defeat in 1778 when the American Revolutionary War broke out, with hopes of destroying Britain's dominance once and for all.
An army was assembled under the command of Charles Spencer, 3rd Duke of Marlborough; he was aided by Lord George Sackville.
In the words of the American historian Daniel Marston, Gross-Jägersdorf left the Prussians with "a newfound respect for the fighting capabilities of the Russians that was reinforced in the later battles of Zorndorf and Kunersdorf".
If successful, the expedition would have strengthened France's hand at the negotiating table.
In 1756 and 1757 the French captured forts Oswego and William Henry from the British.
Frederick the Great’s personal reputation was enormously enhanced, as his debt to fortune (Russia’s volte-face after Elizabeth’s death) and to British financial support were soon forgotten, while the memory of his energy and his military genius was strenuously kept alive.
British subsidies had been stopped by the new prime minister, Lord Bute, and the Russian emperor had been overthrown by his wife, Catherine, who ended Russia's alliance with Prussia and withdrew from the war.
Frederick saw Saxony and Polish west Prussia as potential fields for expansion but could not expect French support if he started an aggressive war for them.
They felt the French would encourage their tribal allies among the North American natives to attack them.
At the same time, Kaunitz kept approaching the French in the hope of establishing just such an alliance with Austria.
Sweden, fearing Prussia's expansionist tendencies, went to war in 1757 to protect its Baltic dominions, seeing its chance when virtually all of Europe opposed Prussia.
Spain, aided by the French, launched an invasion of Portugal and succeeded in capturing Almeida.
Her Prussophile successor, Peter III, at once recalled Russian armies from Berlin (see: the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1762)) and mediated Frederick's truce with Sweden.
Spain lost control of Florida to Great Britain, but it received from the French the Île d'Orléans and all of the former French holdings west of the Mississippi River.
Despite the debatable strategic success and the operational failure of the descent on Rochefort, William Pitt—who saw purpose in this type of asymmetric enterprise—prepared to continue such operations.
The ''Reichsarmee'' was a collection of armies from the smaller German states that banded together to heed the appeal of the Holy Roman Emperor Franz I against Frederick.
France was deprived of many of its colonies and had saddled itself with heavy war debts that its inefficient financial system could barely handle.
Meanwhile, rising power Prussia was struggling with Austria for dominance within and outside the Holy Roman Empire in central Europe.
The naval squadron and transports for the expedition were commanded by Richard Howe.
In August 1757, the two men agreed to a political partnership and formed a coalition government that gave new, firmer direction to the war effort.
When the Prussian king, Frederick, was marching south with his powerful armies, the Hungarian general unexpectedly swung his force of 5,000, mostly hussars, around the Prussians and occupied part of their capital, Berlin, for one night.
The tenacious resistance of Kolberg allowed Frederick to focus on the Austrians instead of having to split his forces.
Consequently, when the American War of Independence turned into a global war between 1778–83, Britain found itself opposed by a strong coalition of European powers, and lacking any substantial ally.
The French planned to invade the British Isles during 1759 by accumulating troops near the mouth of the Loire and concentrating their Brest and Toulon fleets.
The Treaty of Hubertusburg, between Austria, Prussia, and Saxony, was signed on 15 February 1763, at a hunting lodge between Dresden and Leipzig.
It burned shipping in the harbor, roughly 80 French privateers and merchantmen, as well as four warships which were under construction.
An attack on Havre de Grace was called off, and the fleet sailed on to Cherbourg; the weather being bad and provisions low, that too was abandoned, and the expedition returned having damaged French privateering and provided further strategic demonstration against the French coast.
In early 1758, Frederick launched an invasion of Moravia, and laid siege to Olmütz (now Olomouc, Czech Republic).
The loss of these valuable colonies further weakened the French economy.
The '''Seven Years' War''' was a world war fought between 1754 and 1763, the main conflict occurring in the seven-year period from 1756 to 1763.
Choiseul, however, had no intention of making a permanent peace, and, when France went to war with Great Britain during the American Revolution, the British found no support among the European powers.
They made two attempts to storm the fortress of Kolberg, but neither succeeded.
Meanwhile, after the battle of Kunersdorf, the Russian army was mostly inactive due mostly to their tenuous supply lines.
Even so, France concluded a defensive alliance with Prussia in 1747, and the maintenance of the Anglo-Austrian alignment after 1748 was deemed essential by the Duke of Newcastle, British secretary of state in the ministry of his brother Henry Pelham.
The act protected Catholic religion and French language, which enraged the Americans, but the Québécois remained loyal to the British Crown during the American Revolution and did not rebel.
In marked contrast to France, Britain strove to prosecute the war actively in the colonies, taking full advantage of its naval power.
By that time, it still held Dresden, the southeastern parts of Saxony, the county of Glatz, and southern Silesia, but the prospect of victory was dim without Russian support.
Spain lost Florida but gained French Louisiana and regained control of its colonies, e.g., Cuba and the Philippines, which had been captured by the British during the war.
The fact that the Russians could now supply their armies over the sea, which was considerably faster and safer (Prussian cavalry could not intercept Russian ships in the Baltic) than over the land threatened to swing the balance of power decisively against Prussia.
Along with France, they agreed in 1756 to mutual defense and an attack by Austria and Russia on Prussia, subsidized by France.
Thirdly, he wanted to invade Moravia from Silesia, seize the fortress at Olmütz, and advance on Vienna to force an end to the war.
The Quebec Act of 1774, similarly intended to win over the loyalty of French Canadians, also spurred resentment among American colonists.
Russian logistics were so poor that in October 1759, an agreement was signed under which the Austrians undertook to supply the Russians as the quartermaster's department of the Russian Army was badly strained by the demands of Russian armies operating so far from home.
The collapse of that system and the aligning of France with Austria and of Great Britain with Prussia constituted what is known as the "diplomatic revolution" or the "reversal of alliances."
Thereafter, on 1 May 1756, the First Treaty of Versailles was signed, in which both nations pledged 24,000 troops to defend each other in the case of an attack.
The Austrians wanted at least to retain Glatz, which they had in fact reconquered, but Frederick would not allow it.
The hereditary elector of Saxony, Augustus III, was also elective King of Poland as Augustus III, but the two territories were physically separated by Brandenburg and Silesia.
The history of the Seven Years' War in North America, particularly the expulsion of the Acadians, the siege of Quebec, the death of Wolfe, and the Battle of Fort William Henry generated a vast number of ballads, broadsides, images, and novels (see Longfellow's ''Evangeline'', Benjamin West's ''The Death of General Wolfe'', James Fenimore Cooper's ''The Last of the Mohicans''), maps and other printed materials, which testify to how this event held the imagination of the British and North American public long after Wolfe's death in 1759.
The Prussian army was too weak to simultaneously besiege Prague and keep Daun away, and Frederick was forced to attack prepared positions.
The tardiness of Bligh in moving his forces allowed a French force of 10,000 from Brest to catch up with him and open fire on the reembarkation troops.
In the Seven Years' War, the British chose as their principal partner the greatest general of the day, Frederick the Great of Prussia, then the rising power in central Europe, and paid Frederick substantial subsidies for his campaigns.
