Summer is the dominant season and lasts from May to October, the latter in spite of the dwindling daylight and inland position.
The number of people using bicycles as a means of transport in Seville has increased substantially in recent years, multiplying tenfold from 2006 to 2011. , an estimated 9 percent of all mechanized trips in the city (and 5.6 percent of all trips including those on foot) are made by bicycle.
Even further east, it is located on the same parallel as South Korean capital of Seoul.
The service has just five stops: Plaza Nueva, Archivo de Indias, Puerta de Jerez, Prado de San Sebastián and San Bernardo, all as part of ''Phase I'' of the project.
Seville was founded as the Roman city of ''Hispalis''.
It holds many masterworks by Murillo, Pacheco, Zurbarán, Valdés Leal, and others masters of the Baroque Sevillian School, containing also Flemish paintings of the 15th and 16th centuries.
The city's population grew to nearly a million people.
* The ''Antiquarium'' in Metropol Parasol, an underground museum which exhibits ''in situ'' Roman and Muslim remains.
Seville is also the hottest major metropolitan area in the geographical Western Europe, with summer average high temperatures of above 35&nbsp;°C.
De Llano then moved to capture Radio Seville, which he used to broadcast propaganda on behalf of the Franquist forces.
In 1953 the shipyard of Seville was opened, eventually employing more than 2,000 workers in the 1970s.
The neighbourhood of ''Triana'', situated on the west bank of the Guadalquivir River, played an important role in the history of the city and constitutes by itself a folk, monumental and cultural center.
The historical edifice of the Palace of San Telmo is now the seat of the presidency of the Andalusian Autonomous Government.
Seville has one ring road, the SE-30, which connects with the dual carriageway of the south, the A-4, that directly communicates the city with Cádiz, Cordoba and Madrid.
Not long before the opening, the Spanish government began a modernisation of the city in order to prepare for the expected crowds by erecting new hotels and widening the mediaeval streets to allow for the movement of automobiles.
Seville is the only commercial river port of Spain, and the only inland city in the country where cruise ships can arrive in the historical centre.
During Roman rule, the name was Latinised as ''Hispalis''.
Seville is the hometown of two rival association football teams: Real Betis Balompié and Sevilla Fútbol Club, both teams are playing in the Liga BBVA.
By 1492, tribunals existed in eight Castilian cities: Ávila, Córdoba, Jaén, Medina del Campo, Segovia, Sigüenza, Toledo and Valladolid; and by the Alhambra decree all Jews were forced to convert to Catholicism or be ejected from Spain.
The annual average temperature is  during the day and  at night.
The city unsuccessfully bid for the 2004 and 2008 Summer Olympics, for which the 60,000-seat Estadio de La Cartuja was designed to stage.
Seville's diverse music scene is reflected in the variety of its club-centred nightlife.
Two bus stations serve transportation between surrounding areas and other cities: ''Plaza de Armas'' Station, with destinations north and west, and ''Prado de San Sebastián'' Station, covering routes to the south and east.
Seville became the dean of the Spanish provincial press in 1758 with the publication of its first newspaper, the ''Hebdomario útil de Seville'', the first to be printed in Spain outside Madrid.
Construction of the ''Real Fábrica de Tabacos'' (Royal Tobacco Factory) began in 1728, with additions to it over the next 30 years.
It is expected to be extended to Santa Justa AVE station, including four new stops: San Francisco Javier, Eduardo Dato, Luis de Morales and Santa Justa.
The ''Sevillana de Electricidad'' Company was created in 1894 to provide electric power throughout the municipality, and in 1901 the ''Plaza de Armas'' railway station was inaugurated.
The tower was started in March 2008 and is expected to be finished in 2015.
After the discovery of the Americas, Seville became one of the economic centres of the Spanish Empire as its port monopolised the trans-oceanic trade and the Casa de Contratación (House of Trade) wielded its power, opening a Golden Age of arts and literature.
The Hospital de las Cinco Llagas (literally, "Hospital of the Five Holy Wounds") is the current seat of the Parliament of Andalusia.
The interior is the longest nave in Spain, and is lavishly decorated, with a large quantity of gold evident.
The 20th century in Seville saw the tribulations of the Spanish Civil War, decisive cultural milestones such as the Ibero-American Exposition of 1929 and Expo '92, and the city's election as the capital of the Autonomous Community of Andalusia.
Seville is located not many miles inland from the Andalusian coast, but still sees a much more continental climate than the nearest port cities Cádiz and Huelva for example—although it is much too mild in winter to be described as a 'proper' continental area.
Seville is the capital of the autonomous community of Andalusia.
Seville has the only inland port in Spain, located  from the mouth of the Guadalquivir River.
Seville is on the  Red Ciudades AVE, a net created with Seville next to 17 major cities of Spain with high-speed rail.
The Plaza de San Francisco was the site of the 'autos de fé'.
Trade unionism in Seville began during the 1960s with the underground organisational activities of the Workers' Commissions or Comisiones Obreras (CCOO), in factories such as Hytasa, the Astilleros shipyards, Hispano Aviación, etc.
Seville is approximately 2,200 years old.
Traditionally, women wear elaborate flamenco dresses and men dress in their best suits.
It is popularly believed to be a rebus signifying the Spanish "No me ha dejado", meaning "It Seville has not abandoned me" but pronounced with synalepha as  .
Many operas have been set in the city, including those by such composers as Beethoven ''(Fidelio)'', Mozart ''(The Marriage of Figaro and Don Giovanni)'',  Rossini (The Barber of Seville) and Bizet "(Carmen)".
On 21 August 2012, the Muelle de las Delicias, controlled by the Port Authority of Seville, hosted the cruise ship Azamara Journey for two days, the largest ship ever to visit the town.
On the other hand, ''La Macarena'' neighbourhood is located on the northern side of the city centre.
The first Auto de Fé took place in Seville on 6 February 1481, when six people were burned alive.
During the Feria, families, businesses and organisations set up ''casetas'' (marquees) in which they spend the week dancing, drinking, and socialising.
* The ''Castillo de San Jorge'' (Castle of St. George) is situated near the Triana market, next to the Isabel II bridge.
Several of the movement's leaders were imprisoned in November 1973.
The Sevici community bicycle programme has integrated bicycles into the public transport network.
* The Flamenco Art Museum
Both teams have only won the league once each: Betis in 1935 and Sevilla in 1946.
Most of the city is on the east side of the river, while Triana, La Cartuja and Los Remedios are on the west side.
Annual tonnage rose to 5.3 million tonnes of goods in 2006.
The administrative headquarters are in Torre Triana, in La Cartuja.
There is a non-accredited record by the National Institute of Meteorology of  on 1 August during the 2003 heat wave, according to a weather station (83910 LEZL) located in the southern part of Seville Airport, near the abandoned military zone.
''Spal'' is the oldest known name for Seville.
Currently, it is the fifth biggest Metro company in Spain by number of passengers carried (more than 12,000,000 in 2009).
In the late 16th century the monopoly was broken, with the port of Cádiz also authorised as a port of trade.
This vessel belongs to the shipping company Royal Caribbean and can accommodate up to 700 passengers.
Aside from traditional neighbourhoods such as Santa Cruz, Triana and others, those further away from the centre, such as Nervión, Sevilla Este, and El Porvenir have seen recent economic growth.
Elections to the autonomous community are held every four years.
Principal fields of innovation and research are: telecommunications, new technologies, biotechnology (with applications in local agricultural practices), environment and renewable energy.
Cartuja 93 is a research and development park.
The average height above sea level is .
The General Archive of the Indies, is the repository of extremely valuable archival documents illustrating the history of the Spanish Empire in the Americas and the Philippines.
The Inquisition then grew rapidly.
On average there are 66 days of rain.
La Giralda is a tower attached to the Cathedral that dates back to the twelfth century.
Public buildings constructed including churches, many of which were built in the ''Mudéjar'' style, and the Seville Cathedral, built during the 15th century with Gothic architecture.
The overall scheme is called Cyclocity by JCDecaux, but each city's system is branded under an individual name.
The ''Plaza de España'', in Maria Luisa Park (''Parque de Maria Luisa''), was built by the architect Aníbal González for the 1929 Exposición Ibero-Americana.
Because of financial problems, Cervantes worked as a purveyor for the Spanish Armada, and later as a tax collector.
Until the economic crisis of 2007, this urban area saw significant population growth and the development of new industrial and commercial parks.
Other museums in Seville are:
It is one of many bases for the Spanish low cost carrier Vueling, and from November 2010 Ryanair will base two aircraft at the airport.
Seville housed the tennis Davis Cup final in 2004 and 2011, and the 7th Athletics World Championships.
''Plaza de Armas'' station has direct bus lines to many Spanish cities and with Lisbon, in Portugal.
Bicycles are available for hire around the city at low cost and green bicycle lanes can be seen on most major streets.
The administration of the City is decentralized into 11 districts.
The public bicycle rental system is financed by a local advertising operator in return for the city signing over a 10-year licence to exploit citywide billboards.
Some of the installations remaining at the site after the exposition were converted into the Scientific and Technological Park Cartuja 93.
December is the wettest month, with an average rainfall of .
In 1597, discrepancies in his accounts of the three years previous landed him in the Royal Prison of Seville for a short time.
During the 18th century Charles III of Spain promoted Seville's industries.
It contains some important monuments and religious buildings, such as the Museum and Catholic Church of ''La Macarena'' or the ''Hospital de las Cinco Llagas''.
Tourists today can climb the tower by walking up a series of ramps that were previously used by officials who rode their horses to the top of the tower.
Its Old Town, the third largest in Europe with an area of , contains three UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the Alcázar palace complex, the Cathedral and the General Archive of the Indies.
In 1929 the city hosted the Ibero-American Exposition, which accelerated the southern expansion of the city and created new public spaces such as the Plaza de España and the Maria Luisa Park.
The façade to Plaza Nueva was built in the 19th century in Neoclassical style.
The most important art collection of Seville is the Museum of Fine Arts of Seville.
On 5 November 1982, Pope John Paul II arrived in Seville to officiate at a Mass before more than half a million people at the fairgrounds.
The coldest temperature extreme of  was registered by the weather station at Seville Airport on 12 February 1956.
A historical record high (disputed) of  was recorded on 4 August 1881, according to the NOAA Satellite and Information Service.
This temperature would be one of the highest ever recorded in Spain and Europe after the European record of   recorded in Athens on 10 July 1977 and the 47.4&nbsp;°C (117.4&nbsp;°F) of Amareleja, Portugal on 1 August 2003.
The city has boundaries on the north with La Rinconada, La Algaba and Santiponce; on the east with Alcalá de Guadaira; on the south with Dos Hermanas and Gelves and on the west with San Juan de Aznalfarache, Tomares and Camas.
Seville has an area of , according to the National Topographic Map ''(Mapa Topográfico Nacional)'' series from the ''Instituto Geográfico Nacional&nbsp;– Centro Nacional de Información Geográfica'', the country's civilian survey organisation (pages 984, 985 and 1002).
According to legend, the Arabs brought the bitter orange to Seville from East Asia via Iraq around the 10th century to beautify and perfume their patios and gardens, as well as to provide shade.
Bitter Seville oranges grow on trees lining the city streets.
Seville has a municipal population of about 703,000 , and a metropolitan population of about 1.5 million, making it the fourth-largest city in Spain and the 30th most populous municipality in the European Union.
On 3 April 1979 Spain held its first democratic municipal elections after the end of Franco's dictatorship; councillors representing four different political parties were elected in Seville.
The Aljarafe region lies further west, and is considered part of the metropolitan area.
The metro of Sevilla has 1 line with 22 stations and is currently expanding, with 3 more different lines projected.
Original Moorish buildings are the ''Patio del Yeso'' in the Alcázar, the city walls, and the main section of the Giralda, bell tower of the Seville Cathedral.
Under Francisco Franco's rule Spain was officially neutral in World War II (although it did collaborate with the Axis powers), and like the rest of the country, Seville remained largely economically and culturally isolated from the outside world.
Like most Mediterranean climates, Seville has a drier summer and wet winter.
The port has undergone reorganisation.
After the initial takeover of the city, resistance continued among residents of the working-class neighbourhoods for some time, until a series of fierce reprisals took place.
The Alcázar, the Cathedral, and the ''Archivo General de Indias'' (General Archive of the Indies) are UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
Seville, and most significantly, the western district of Triana, was a major centre of the development of flamenco.
The emblem is present on the municipal flag and features on city property such as manhole covers, and Christopher Columbus's tomb in the Cathedral.
The Seville Airport, ''(Aeropuerto de Sevilla)'', was expanded with a new terminal building designed by the architect Rafael Moneo, and various other improvements were made.
All municipalities in the metropolitan area depend directly or indirectly on Seville's economy, while agriculture dominates the economy of the smaller villages, with some industrial activity localised in industrial parks.
* The Archaeological Museum, which contains collections from the Tartessian and Roman periods, located in ''América'' square at the María Luisa Park.
The city is situated in the fertile valley of the Guadalquivir River.
The Palace of San Telmo, formerly the University of Sailors, and later the Seminary, is now the seat for the Andalusian Autonomous Government.
* Precipitation varies from  per year, concentrated in the period October to April.
Before the existence of wetlands regulation in the Guadalquivir basin, Seville suffered regular heavy flooding; perhaps worst of all were the floods that occurred in November 1961 when the River Tamarguillo, a tributary of the Guadalquivir, overflowed as a result of a prodigious downpour of rain, and Seville was consequently declared a disaster zone.
The city surrendered on 23 November 1248.
It has one terminal and one runway.
During this period,  availability of infrastructure  in the city contributed to the growth of an economy dominated by the service sector, but in which industry still holds a considerable place.
The city is also home to many theatres and performance spaces where classical music is performed, including Teatro Lope de Vega, Teatro La Maestranza, Teatro Central, the Real Alcazar Gardens and the Sala Joaquín Turina.
With a height of 180.5 metres (592&nbsp;feet) and 40 floors, it will be the tallest building in Andalusia.
In addition to that São Miguel, the main island of the Azores archipelago lies on the same latitude.
Since 2015 the government of the autonomous community is a coalition between the centre-left Spanish Socialist Workers' Party or ''Partido Socialista Obrero Español'' (PSOE) and the centrist Ciudadanos; its president is Susana Díaz.
The eight in the middle represents a ''madeja'' , or skein of wool.
Seville is internationally renowned for the solemn but decorative processions during Holy Week and the colourful and lively fair held two weeks after.
It was established in 1835 in the former Convent of ''La Merced''.
The marquees are set up on a permanent fairground in the district of Los Remedios, in which each street is named after a famous bullfighter.
Seville's Guadalquivir river is one of only three FISA approved international training centres for rowing (sport) and the only one in Spain; the 2002 World Rowing Championships and the 2013 European Rowing Championships were held there.
Following Roman rule, there were successive conquests of the Roman province of ''Hispania Baetica'' by the Vandals, the Suebi and the Visigoths during the 5th and 6th centuries.
'''Seville''' (;  , ) is the capital and largest city of the autonomous community of Andalusia and the province of Seville, Spain.
* The Andalusian Contemporary Art Center, situated in the neighbourhood of La Cartuja.
Also there is another dual carriageway, the A-92, linking the city with Estepa, Antequera, Granada, Guadix and Almeria.
It later became known as ''Ishbiliya'' () after the Muslim conquest in 712.
* The "Centro Velázquez" (Velázquez Centre) located at the Old Priests Hospital in the touristic Santa Cruz neighbourhood.
Seville is on the same parallel as United States west coast city San Francisco and the surrounding Bay Area.
This extension was postponed although the City Council had made expanding the metro lines a priority.
The airport handled 4,051,392 passengers and just under 5,000 tonnes of cargo in 2009.
* The Museum and Treasure of ''La Macarena'', where the collection of the Macarena brotherhood is exhibited.
Seville fell very quickly at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War in 1936.
* The Bullfighting Museum, in the La Maestranza bullring
After the Umayyad invasion, this name was adapted into Arabic as ''Ishbiliyya'' (Arabic ); since "p" does not exist in Arabic, it was replaced by "b", the Latin place-name suffix ''-is'' was replaced by its direct Arabic equivalent ''-iyya'', and stressed "a" /æ/ turned into "i" /i/, due to the phonetic phenomenon called imela.
Coinciding with the Baroque period of European history, the 17th century in Seville represented the most brilliant flowering of the city's culture; then began a gradual economic and demographic decline as silting in the Guadalquivir forced the trade monopoly to relocate to the nearby port of Cádiz.
Sevilla's stadium, the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán, was a venue during the 1982 FIFA World Cup and four years later hosted the 1986 European Cup Final.
* Winters are mild: January is the coolest month, with average maximum temperatures of  and minimum of .
The first tribunal of the Spanish Inquisition was instituted in Seville in 1478.
The ''Semana Santa'' (Holy Week) and the ''Feria de Sevilla'' (Seville Fair), also known as ''Feria de Abril'' (April Fair), are the two most well-known of Seville's festivals.
The Jewish quarter's land and shops (sited in modern-day 'Barrio Santa Cruz') were appropriated by the church.
In 1992, coinciding with the fifth centenary of the Discovery of the Americas, the Universal Exposition was held for six months in Seville, on the occasion of which the local communications network infrastructure was greatly improved: the SE-30 ring road around the city was completed and new highways were constructed; the new Santa Justa train station had opened in 1991, while the Spanish High Speed Rail system, the ''Alta Velocidad Española'' (AVE), began to operate between Madrid-Seville.
The city's development continued after the Castilian conquest in 1248.
* The Museum of Arts and Traditions, also in América Square, in front of the Archaeological museum.
The Seville harbour, located about  from the Atlantic Ocean, is the only river port in Spain.
The passage of the various civilisations instrumental in its growth has left the city with a distinct personality, and a large and well-preserved historical centre.
During the Muslim rule in Spain, Seville came under the jurisdiction of the Caliphate of Córdoba before becoming the independent Taifa of Seville; later it was ruled by the Muslim Almoravids and the Almohads until finally being incorporated into the Christian Kingdom of Castile under Ferdinand III in 1248.
Outside of Seville are nine PS20 solar power towers which use the city's sunny weather to provide most of it with clean and renewable energy.
The Moorish urban influences continued and are present in contemporary Seville, for instance in the custom of decorating with herbaje and small fountains the courtyards of the houses.
It is among the largest of all medieval and Gothic cathedrals, in terms of both area and volume.
The '''Santa Justa Train Station''' is served by the AVE high-speed rail system, operated by the Spanish state-owned rail company Renfe.
Since 2011, the government of the city has been by the conservative People's Party or ''Partido Popular'' (PP), and Juan Ignacio Zoido Álvarez has been mayor.
This modern architecture structure houses the central market and an underground archaeological complex.
It is at a relative distance from the three larger cities in the country, as well as Lisbon in Portugal, making it by far the largest city in the south of the Iberian peninsula.
Seville has a subtropical Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification ''Csa'').
The Common Council of Seville has 33 councillors and a mayor, with elections every four years.
The Royal Tobacco Factory is housed on the original site of the first tobacco factory in Europe, a vast 18th century building in Baroque style and the purported inspiration for the opera ''Carmen''.
The Seville metro ("Metro de Sevilla" in Spanish) is a light metro network serving the city of Seville and its metropolitan area.
Following the 1492 Christopher Columbus expedition to the New World (from the port of Palos de la Frontera), the results from his claiming territory and trade for the Crown of Castile (incipient Spain) in the West Indies began to profit the city, as all goods imported from the New World had to pass through the Casa de Contratacion before being distributed throughout the rest of Spain.
The writer Miguel de Cervantes lived primarily in Seville between 1596 and 1600.
Seville has one important basketball club, the CB Sevilla, that plays in ACB League.
* The Naval Museum, housed in the golden Torre del Oro, next to the river Guadalquivir.
The University of Seville and the University Pablo de Olavide are important centres of learning in western Andalusia as they offer a wide range of academic courses; consequently the city has a large number of students from Huelva and Cádiz.
Seville is also home to many international schools and colleges that cater to American students who come to study abroad
The ''Metropol Parasol'', in La Encarnación square, is the world's largest wooden structure.
By the 18th century its international importance was in decline.
"NO8DO" is the official motto of Seville.
The City Hall was built in the 16th century in high Plateresque style by master architect Diego de Riaño.
The Great Plague of Seville in 1649 reduced the population by almost half, and it would not recover until the early 19th century.
All stations were built with platform screen doors.
It was the second largest building in Spain, after the royal residence El Escorial.
The Metropol Parasol was completed in March 2011, costing just over €102 million in total, more than twice as much as originally planned.
San Pablo Airport is the main airport for Seville and is Andalusia's second busiest airport, after Malaga.
The punk rock group Reincidentes and indie band Sr Chinarro, as well as singer Kiko Veneno, rose to prominence in the early 1990s.
In 1519, Ferdinand Magellan departed from Seville for the first circumnavigation of the Earth.
In 1247, the Christian King Ferdinand III of Castile and Leon began the conquest of Andalusia.
A five-line commuter rail service (''Cercanías'') joins the city with the Metropolitan area.
* Museum of Pottery in Triana.
This harbour complex offers access to the Atlantic and the Mediterranean, and allows trade in goods between the south of Spain (Andalusia, Extremadura) and Europe, the Middle East and North Africa.
The Moors' Palace became the Castilian royal residence, and during Pedro I's rule it was replaced by the Alcázar (the upper levels are still used by the Royal Family as the official Seville residence).
The City Hall is on the Plaza Nueva, in the ''El Arenal'' neighbourhood.
After the silting up of the harbour by the Guadalquivir (river), upriver shipping ceased and the city went into relative economic decline.
The popular TV show Game of Thrones has shot many scenes at this location.
The system is totally independent of any other rail or street traffic.
A chain was strung through the water from the base of the tower to prevent boats from traveling into the river port.
Only Sevilla has won European competitions, winning consecutive UEFA Cup finals in 2006 and 2007 and the UEFA Europa League in 2014, 2015 and 2016.
The decisive action took place in May 1248 when Ramon Bonifaz sailed up the Guadalquivir and severed the Triana bridge that made the provisioning of the city from the farms of the Aljarafe possible.
It was the last seat for the Spanish Inquisition.
Construction was started in 1181 and continued for over 500 years, mainly in the Mudéjar style, but also in the Renaissance style.
It is an outstanding example of Regionalist Revival Architecture, a bizarre and loftily conceived mixture of diverse historic styles, such as Art Deco  and lavishly ornamented with typical glazed tiles.
Many were killed during the pogrom, although most were forced to convert.
* The Carriages Museum, in the Los Remedios neighbourhood.
It was the sixth Metro system to be built in Spain, after those in Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, Bilbao and Palma de Mallorca.
