Some scholars assume that Austronesian seafarers and later Maldivian and Arab traders were the first to visit the uninhabited Seychelles.
The literacy rate for school-age children rose to more than 90% by the late 1980s.
It is one of only a handful of countries in Africa with high Human Development Index.
The most popular sport in the Seychelles is basketball, which has particularly developed in this decade.
University of Seychelles, initiated in conjunction with the University of London, opened on 17 September 2009 in three locations and offers qualifications from the University of London.
Today, Seychelles boasts the highest nominal per capita GDP in Africa.
The first draft of a new constitution failed to receive the requisite 60% of voters in 1992, but an amended version was approved in 1993.
India has and continues to play a key role developing the military of Seychelles.
Since independence in 1976, per capita output has expanded to roughly seven times the old near-subsistence level.
US Ambassador to Seychelles (1982–85)  David Fischer has stated publicly that René was complicit in money laundering and murder, among other things.
There, the team competed against some of the continent's largest countries such as Egypt.
Despite huge disparities across nations, Seychelles claims to have achieved nearly all of its Millennium Development Goals.
The Supreme Court of Seychelles, created in 1903, is the highest trial court in Seychelles and the first court of appeal from all the lower courts and tribunals.
In Operation Flowers are Blooming, the Indian naval vessel INS Vindhyagiri arrived in Port Victoria to help avert the coup.
In January 2013, Seychelles declared a state of emergency; the tropical cyclone Felleng caused torrential rain, and flooding and landslides destroyed hundreds of houses.
The median age of the Seychellois was 32 years.
Quoting from his report, in the 1960s, about 33% of the working population worked at plantations, and 20% worked in the public or government sector.
The marine life around the islands, especially the more remote coral islands, can be spectacular.
'''Seychelles''' ( ; French: ), officially the '''Republic of Seychelles''' (; Creole: ''Repiblik Sesel''), is an archipelago and country in the Indian Ocean.
It has been reported that the granitic islands of Seychelles supported distinct species of Seychelles giant tortoises; the status of the different populations is currently unclear.
Temperatures on Mahé vary from , and rainfall ranges from  annually at Victoria to  on the mountain slopes.
Foreign newspapers and magazines are readily available in most bookshops and newsagents.
The leader of this hijacking was the infamous German mercenary D. Clodo, a former member of the Rhodesian SAS.
In recent years, the government has encouraged foreign investment in order to upgrade these sectors.
The earliest recorded sighting by Europeans took place in 1502 by the Portuguese Admiral Vasco da Gama, who passed through the Amirantes and named them after himself (islands of the Admiral).
However, extinctions were far fewer than on islands such as Mauritius or Hawaii, partly due to a shorter period of human occupation (since 1770).
The granitic islands of Seychelles are home to about 75 endemic plant species, with a further 25 or so species in the Aldabra group.
The island is being leased for development of infrastructure, a euphemism for developing strategic assets by India.
The freshwater crab genus ''Seychellum'' is endemic to the granitic Seychelles, and a further 26 species of crabs and five species of hermit crabs live on the islands.
Sometimes nicknamed the "love nut" because of the shape of its fruit which, with the husk removed, presents a "double" coconut resembling buttocks, the coco de mer produces the world's heaviest seed pods.
On 28 September, 2016, the Office of the President announced that Michel would step down effective 16 October, and that Vice President Danny Faure would complete the rest of Michel's term.
Despite its growth, the vulnerability of the tourist sector was illustrated by the sharp drop in 1991–1992 due largely to the Gulf War.
Spread over , it is strategically located in the Indian Ocean, north of Madagascar.
There are also imported English and French language television programmes imported on Seychellois terrestrial television and international satellite television has grown rapidly in recent years.
Seychelles is a member of the African Union, the Southern African Development Community, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the United Nations.
French and English are official languages along with Seychellois Creole, which is primarily based upon French, yet nowadays is often laced with English words and phrases.
Despite the growth of tourism, farming and fishing continue to employ some people, as do industries that process coconuts and vanilla.
Seychellois society is essentially matriarchal.
In recent years the government has encouraged foreign investment to upgrade hotels and other services.
This strange and ancient plant in a genus of its own (''Medusagynaceae'') has resisted all efforts to propagate it.
The Aldabra population is the largest in the world.
The primary political parties are the ruling socialist People's Party (PP), known until 2009 as the Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF), and the socially liberal Seychelles National Party (SNP).
The climate is equable although quite humid, as the islands are small, classified by Köppen-Geiger system as tropical rain forest (Af).
In recent years oil has been imported from Kuwait and also from Bahrain.
The 115-island country, whose capital is Victoria, lies  east of mainland East Africa.
In 1986, an attempted coup led by the Seychelles Minister of Defence, Ogilvy Berlouis, caused President René to request assistance from India.
There are 67 raised coral islands in the Aldabra Group, west of the Farquhar Group: Aldabra Atoll (comprising 46 islands—Grande Terre, Picard, Polymnie, Malabar, Île Michel, Île Esprit, Île aux Moustiques, Ilot Parc, Ilot Emile, Ilot Yangue, Ilot Magnan, Île Lanier, Champignon des Os, Euphrate, Grand Mentor, Grand Ilot, Gros Ilot Gionnet, Gros Ilot Sésame, Heron Rock, Hide Island, Île aux Aigrettes, Île aux Cèdres, Îles Chalands, Île Fangame, Île Héron, Île Michel, Île Squacco, Île Sylvestre, Île Verte, Ilot Déder, Ilot du Sud, Ilot du Milieu, Ilot du Nord, Ilot Dubois, Ilot Macoa, Ilot Marquoix, Ilots Niçois, Ilot Salade, Middle Row Island, Noddy Rock, North Row Island, Petit Mentor, Petit Mentor Endans, Petits Ilots, Pink Rock and Table Ronde), Assumption Island, Astove and Cosmoledo Atoll (comprising 19 islands—Menai, Île du Nord (West North), Île Nord-Est (East North), Île du Trou, Goëlettes, Grand Polyte, Petit Polyte, Grand Île (Wizard), Pagode, Île du Sud-Ouest (South), Île aux Moustiques, Île Baleine, Île aux Chauve-Souris, Île aux Macaques, Île aux Rats, Île du Nord-Ouest, Île Observation, Île Sud-Est and Ilot la Croix).
Their government's Seychelles Climate Guide describes the nation's climate as rainy, with a dry season with an ocean economy in the ocean regions.
Evidence of this harmonious blend is also revealed in Seychellois food, incorporating various aspects of French, Chinese, Indian and African cuisine.
Unwed mothers are the societal norm, and the law requires fathers to support their children.
The tourism sector paid better, and the plantation economy could only expand so far.
These unique reptiles can be found even in captive herds.
The Catholic and Anglican churches opened mission schools in 1851.
In 1977, a coup d'état by France Albert René ousted the first president of the republic, James Mancham.
The British controlled the islands between 1794 and 1810.
There are two coral sand cays north of the granitics: Denis and Bird.
Dishes are often garnished with fresh flowers.
The outer islands of Aldabra and Cosmoledo are home to the largest numbers.
Moutya playing and dancing can often be seen at beach bazaars.
In 1981, Mike Hoare led a team of 43 South African mercenaries masquerading as holidaying Rugby players in a coup attempt in what is known as the Seychelles affair.
The Seychelles were uninhabited throughout most of recorded history.
In 1965, during a three-month visit to the islands, futurist Donald Prell prepared for the then crown colony Governor General, an economic report containing a scenario for the future of the economy.
Precipitation is somewhat less on the other islands.
With a population of roughly 92,000, it has the smallest population of any independent African state; however, it does have a larger population than the British overseas territory Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha.
A form of percussion music called contombley is popular, as is Moutya, a fusion of native folk rhythms with Kenyan benga.
Although multinational oil companies have explored the waters around the islands, no oil or gas has been found.
Since 1981 a system of free education has been in effect requiring attendance by all children in grades one to nine, beginning at age five.
Numerous Seychellois are considered multiracial: blending from African, Asian and European descent to create a modern creole culture.
In granitic Seychelles the largest numbers are on Aride Island including the world's largest numbers of two species.
They are located on Mahé, Praslin, La Digue and Silhouette.
There are 29 coral islands in the Amirantes group, west of the granitics: Desroches, Poivre Atoll (comprising three islands—Poivre, Florentin and South Island), Alphonse, D'Arros, St. Joseph Atoll (comprising 14 islands—St.
Most of the islands lie outside the cyclone belt, so high winds are rare.
After proclamation of independence from the United Kingdom in 1976, Seychelles has developed from a largely agricultural society to a market-based diversified economy, with agriculture being supplanted by rapidly rising service and public sectors as well as tourism.
Seychelles has the highest incarceration rate in the world, having edged out the United States in 2012.
Many older Seychellois had not been taught to read or write in their childhood; adult education classes helped raise adult literacy from 60% to a claimed 100% in 2014.
Kontredans (based on European contredanse) is popular, especially in District and School competitions during the annual Festival Kreol (International Creole Festival).
There are a total of 68 schools in Seychelles.
* Ladob is eaten either as a savoury dish or as a dessert.
The temperature varies little throughout the year.
There are 45 granite-based islands known as the Granitic Seychelles.
These incentives have given rise to an enormous amount of investment in real estate projects and new resort properties, such as project TIME, distributed by the World Bank, along with its predecessor project MAGIC.
Since then the government has moved to reduce the dependence on tourism by promoting the development of farming, fishing, small-scale manufacturing and most recently the offshore financial sector, through the establishment of the  Financial Services Authority and the enactment of several pieces of legislation (such as the International Corporate Service Providers Act, the International Business Companies Act, the Securities Act, the Mutual Funds and Hedge Fund Act, amongst others).
Seychelles today is known for success stories in protecting its flora and fauna.
Other political parties operate other papers such as ''Regar''.
, the main export products are processed fish (60%) and non-fillet frozen fish (22%).
The prime agricultural products currently produced in Seychelles include sweet potatoes, vanilla, coconuts and cinnamon.
René discouraged over-dependence on tourism and declared that he wanted "to keep the Seychelles for the Seychellois".
Jean Baptiste Quéau de Quincy, French administrator of Seychelles during the years of war with the United Kingdom, declined to resist when armed enemy warships arrived.
The country's national team qualified for the 2015 African Games, its greatest accomplishment to date.
He stepped down in 2004 in favour of his vice-president, James Michel, who was re-elected in 2006 and again in 2011.
According to the 2013 Index of Economic Freedom, which measures the degree of limited government, market openness, regulatory efficiency, rule of law, and other factors, economic freedom has been increasing each year since 2010.
Through harmonious socioeconomic policies and developments over the years, today Seychelles is described as a fusion of peoples and cultures.
The main television and radio network is operated by the Seychelles Broadcasting Corporation which offers locally produced news and discussion programmes in the Seychellois Creole language.
Britain eventually assumed full control upon the surrender of Mauritius in 1810, formalised in 1814 at the Treaty of Paris.
Help has arrived from abroad.
Mothers tend to be dominant in the household, controlling most expenditures and looking after the interests of the children.
More than 1,000 species of fish have been recorded.
Initially tied to a basket of international currencies it was depegged and allowed to be devalued and float freely in 2008 on the presumed hopes of attracting further foreign investment in the Seychelles economy.
17 MDGS and 169 targets have been achieved.
The main daily newspaper is the ''Seychelles Nation'', dedicated to local government views and current affairs and topics.
Additionally, there are three private schools: École Française, International School and the Independent School.
Like many fragile island ecosystems, Seychelles saw the loss of biodiversity when humans first settled in the area, including the disappearance of most of the giant tortoises from the granitic islands, the felling of coastal and mid-level forests, and the extinction of species such as the chestnut flanked white eye, the Seychelles parakeet, and the saltwater crocodile.
Broadcasts run between 3pm and 11:30pm on weekdays and longer hours during the weekends.
There are no refining capacities on the islands.
Fish dishes are cooked in several ways, such as steamed, grilled, wrapped in banana leaves, baked, salted and smoked.
The British administration employed Indians on indentured servitude to the same degree as in Mauritius resulting in a small Indian population.
The earliest recorded landing was in January 1609, by the crew of the "Ascension" under Captain Sharpeigh during the fourth voyage of the British East India Company.
The end result of this sustainable development is an intact and stable natural environment, which attracts financially strong visitors (150,000 in 2007) rather than short-term mass tourism.
Seychelles became a crown colony separate from Mauritius in 1903.
Oil and gas imports, distribution and re-export are the responsibility of Seychelles Petroleum (Sepec), while oil exploration is the responsibility of the Seychelles National Oil Company (SNOC).
Despite the country's newfound economic prosperity, poverty remains widespread due to very high level of income inequality,  one of the highest in the world, and low wealth distribution.
Other non-Christian faiths accounted for 1.1% of the population while a further 5.9% were non-religious or did not specify a religion.
In the 1970s Seychelles was "the place to be seen, a playground for film stars and the international jet set".
These products provide much of the economic support of the locals.
In 2005, a deal was signed with US firm Petroquest, giving it exploration rights to about 30,000&nbsp;km2 around Constant, Topaz, Farquhar and Coëtivy islands until 2014.
The plantation sector of the economy declined in prominence, and tourism became the primary industry of Seychelles.
There was a gun battle at the airport, and most of the mercenaries later escaped in a hijacked Air India plane.
The rare Seychelles black parrot, the national bird of the country, is now protected.
The sooty terns also breed on the islands.
During the coolest months, July and August, the average low is about .
As of June, 2014, Seychelles had 868 prisoners per 100,000 people.
Other unique plant species include the Wright's gardenia (''Rothmannia annae'') found only on Aride Island Special Reserve.
Frozen and canned fish, copra, cinnamon and vanilla are the main export commodities.
Joseph Île aux Fouquets, Resource, Petit Carcassaye, Grand Carcassaye, Benjamin, Bancs Ferrari, Chiens, Pélicans, Vars, Île Paul, Banc de Sable, Banc aux Cocos and Île aux Poules), Marie Louise, Desnoeufs, African Banks (comprising two islands—African Banks and South Island), Rémire, St. François, Boudeuse, Etoile, Bijoutier.
The Indians, like a similar minority of Chinese, were confined to a merchant class.
The country holds a record for the highest percentage of land under natural conservation—nearly 50% of the total land area.
The public school system consists of 23 crèches, 25 primary schools and 13 secondary schools.
Both the French and British settlers used enslaved Africans, and although the British prohibited slavery in 1835, African workers continued to come.
In the 1980s there were a series of coup attempts against President France-Albert René, some of which were supported by South Africa.
There are 13 coral islands in the Farquhar Group, south-southwest of the Amirantes: Farquhar Atoll (comprising 10 islands—Bancs de Sable Déposés Île aux Goëlettes Lapins Île du Milieu North Manaha South Manaha Middle Manaha North Island and South Island), Providence Atoll (comprising two islands—Providence and Bancs Providence) and St Pierre.
March and April are the hottest months, but the temperature seldom exceeds .
Hinduism is practiced by 2.4%, and Islam by 1.6%.
Their main languages are Seychellois Creole of The French Language, French and English.
The majority of the islands are uninhabited, with many dedicated as nature reserves.
The national currency of Seychelles is the Seychellois rupee.
René ruled as a strongman under a socialist one-party system until in 1993, when he was forced to introduce a multi-party system.
Growth has been led by the tourist sector, which employs about 30% of the labour force, compared to agriculture which today employs about 3% of the labour force.
Environmental legislation is very strict, and every tourism project must undergo an environmental review and a lengthy process of consultations with the public and conservationists.
It is mixed with onion and spices, and the onion is fried and it is cooked in oil.
Additional food staples include coconut, breadfruit, mangoes and ''kordonnyen fish''.
The archipelago consists of 115 islands.
Curry dishes with rice are also a significant aspect of the country's cuisine.
The islands as per the Constitution are divided into groups as follows.
The Southeast Trades is on the decline but still fairly strong.
Particularly well-known is the coco de mer, a species of palm that grows only on the islands of Praslin and neighbouring Curieuse.
There are two coral islands south of the Granitics: Coëtivy and Platte.
The papers are mostly written in Seychellois Creole, French and English.
In 1971, with the opening of Seychelles International Airport, tourism became a significant industry, essentially dividing the economy into plantations and tourism.
Since 1976, per capita output has increased nearly sevenfold.
When the British gained control of the islands during the Napoleonic Wars, they allowed the French upper class to retain their land.
Seychelles imports oil from the Persian Gulf in the form of refined petroleum derivatives at the rate of about .
Since the worldwide economic crises of 2008, the Seychelles government has prioritised a curbing of the budget deficit, including the containment of social welfare costs and further privatisation of public enterprises.
Seychelles imports three times more oil than is needed for internal uses because it re-exports the surplus oil in the form of bunker for ships and aircraft calling at Mahé.
The jellyfish tree is to be found in only a few locations on Mahe.
During March 2015, Seychelles allocated Assumption island to be developed by India.
The Catholic mission later operated boys' and girls' secondary schools with religious Brothers and nuns from abroad even after the government became responsible for them in 1944.
Ninety percent of all children attend nursery school at age four.
The dessert version usually consists of ripe plantain and sweet potatoes (but may also include cassava, breadfruit or even corossol) boiled with coconut milk, sugar, nutmeg and vanilla in the form of a pod until the fruit is soft and the sauce is creamy.
During the plantation era, cinnamon, vanilla and copra were the chief exports.
Seychelles is a world leader in sustainable tourism.
The largest ethnic groups were those of African, French, Indian and Chinese descent.
Staple foods include fish, seafood and shellfish dishes, often accompanied with rice.
A transit point for trade between Africa and Asia, the islands were occasionally used by pirates until the French began to take control starting in 1756 when a Stone of Possession was laid by Captain Nicholas Morphey.
Elections were held in 1966 and 1970.
Other nearby island countries and territories include Comoros, Mayotte, Madagascar, Réunion and Mauritius to the south.
As the islands of Seychelles had no indigenous population, the current Seychellois are composed of people who have immigrated.
During his tenure, he was accused of involvement in criminal activity.
India also signed a pact to develop the Assumption Island, one of the 115 islands that make up the country.
The administration launched plans to open a university in an attempt to slow down the brain drain that has occurred.
Clodo later stood trial in South Africa (where he was acquitted) as well as in his home country Germany for air-piracy.
Reportedly, weather patterns there are becoming less predictable.
All the private schools are on Mahé, and the International School has a branch on Praslin.
There are several unique varieties of orchids on the islands.
Independence was granted in 1976 as a republic within the Commonwealth.
The United Arab Emirates sent five patrol boats, the United States gave a drone, the PR China offered two patrol planes, Luxembourg provided a speedboat and Italy continues to send Navy boats to patrol the coasts.
The islands were named after Jean Moreau de Séchelles, Louis XV's Minister of Finance.
Seychelles hosts some of the largest seabird colonies in the world.
The savoury dish usually includes salted fish, cooked in a similar fashion to the dessert version, with plantain, cassava and breadfruit, but with salt used in place of sugar (and omitting vanilla).
After handing over 2 SDB Mk5 patrol vessels namely INS Tarasa and INS Tarmugli to Seychelles Coast Guard, built by GRSE which were subsequently renamed SCG Constant and SCG Topaz, India also gifted a Dornier Maritime Patrol aircraft built by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited.
Instead, he successfully negotiated the status of capitulation to Britain which gave the settlers a privileged position of neutrality.
There are seven post-secondary (non-tertiary) schools: the Seychelles Polytechnic, School of Advanced Level Studies, Seychelles Tourism Academy, University of Seychelles Education, Seychelles Institute of Technology, Maritime Training Center, Seychelles Agricultural and Horticultural Training Center and the National Institute for Health and Social Studies.
Including second-language speakers, Seychellois is the most-spoken official language in the Seychelles, followed by French, and lastly English .
An island nation, Seychelles is located in the Indian Ocean, northeast of Madagascar and about  east of Kenya.
Since 1993 a law guarantees the citizens the right to a clean environment and at the same time obliges them to protect this environment.
Until the mid-19th century, little formal education was available in Seychelles.
The Military of Seychelles is the Seychelles People's Defence Force which consists of a number of distinct branches:  including an Infantry Unit, Coast Guard, Air Force and a Presidential Protection Unit.
The hot months are from December to April, with higher humidity (80%).
The highest court of law in Seychelles is the Seychelles Court of Appeal, which is the court of final appeal in the country.
* Shark chutney typically consists of boiled skinned shark, finely mashed, and cooked with squeezed bilimbi juice and lime.
The Aldabra giant tortoise now populates many of the islands of Seychelles.
The southeast trade winds blow regularly from May to November, and this is the most pleasant time of the year.
Thus the ''Gran blan'' ("big whites") of French origin dominated economic and political life.
A teacher training college opened in 1959, when the supply of locally trained teachers began to grow, and in short time many new schools were established.
These are in descending order of size: Mahé, Praslin, Silhouette Island, La Digue, Curieuse, Felicite, Frégate, Ste-Anne, North, Cerf, Marianne, Grand Sœur, Thérèse, Aride, Conception, Petite Sœur, Cousin, Cousine, Long, Récif, Round (Praslin), Anonyme, Mamelles, Moyenne, Eden, Ile Soleil, Romainville, Île aux Vaches Marines, L'Islette, Beacon (Île Sèche), Cachée, Cocos, Round (Mahé), L'Ilot Frégate, Booby, Chauve Souris (Mahé), Chauve Souris (Praslin), Île La Fouche, Hodoul, L'Ilot, Rat, Souris, St. Pierre (Praslin), Zavé, Harrison Rocks (Grand Rocher).
Men are important for their earning ability, but their domestic role is relatively peripheral.
The Indian Ocean Tracking Station on Mahé was closed in August 1996 after the Seychelles government attempted to raise the rent to more than $10,000,000 per year.
* Fresh tropical fruits
The government has a pervasive presence in economic activity, with public enterprises active in petroleum product distribution, banking, imports of basic products, telecommunications and a wide range of other businesses.
* Chicken dishes, such as chicken curry and coconut milk.
The 1979 constitution declared a socialist one-party state, which lasted until 1991.
