Some of the prehistoric peoples who once lived in Siberia have dispersed and migrated into other regions, bringing aspects of their cultures with them.
Failure to return from an out-of-body journey can lead to death.
Rather, like other indigenous cultures the world over, their spiritual functionaries are described by words in their own languages, and in many cases are not taught to outsiders.
Shamans perform a variety of functions depending upon their respective cultures; healing, leading a sacrifice, preserving the tradition by storytelling and songs, fortune-telling, and acting as a psychopomp (literal meaning, "guide of souls").
Shamans in ecstasy displayed unusual physical strength, the ability to withstand extreme temperatures, the bearing of stabbing and cutting without pain, and the heightened receptivity of the sense organs.
The spirit guide energizes the shaman, enabling him/her to enter the spiritual dimension.
At the lowest level, most adults have abilities as shamans and will carry out the same functions as those who have a widespread reputation for their powers and knowledge.
In Soviet Central Asia, the Soviet government persecuted and denounced shamans as practitioners of fraudulent medicine and perpetuators of outdated religious beliefs in the new age of science and logic.
Anthropologist Mihály Hoppál also discusses whether the term "shamanism" is appropriate.
The shaman's attire varies throughout the region but his chief accessories are his coat, cap, and tambourine or drum.
Such practices cannot be generalized easily, accurately, or usefully into a global religion of shamanism.
Some contribute to the fallacy that Native American cultures and religions are something that only existed in the past, and which can be mined for data despite the opinions of Native communities.
In addition to ''curanderos'' use of ayahuasca and their ritualized ingestion of mescaline-bearing San Pedro cactuses (Trichocereus pachanoi) for the divination and diagnosis of sorcery, north-coastal shamans are famous throughout the region for their intricately complex and symbolically dense healing altars called mesas (tables).
The grave was one of at least 28 graves at the site, located in a cave in lower Galilee and belonging to the Natufian culture, but is said to be unlike any other among the Epipaleolithic Natufians or in the Paleolithic period.
This grave site was evidence of a female shaman.
This happens so the shaman can venture to its depths to bring back vital information for the sick, and the tribe.
Along with persecution under the tsarist and Soviet regimes, the spread of Christianity and Islam had a role in the disintegration of native faith throughout central Asia.
The functions of a shaman may include either guiding to their proper abode the souls of the dead (which may be guided either one-at-a-time or in a cumulative group, depending on culture), and/or curing (healing) of ailments.
When a person is sick due to his soul being lost, or captured by wild spirit, it is necessary to ask for and receive permission of that animal, whether it is a chicken, pig, dog, goat or any other animals required, to use its soul for an exchange with the afflicted person's soul for a period of 12 months.
Shamans are also considered as prophets and seers.
The ailments may be either purely physical afflictions—such as disease, which may be cured by gifting, flattering, threatening, or wrestling the disease-spirit (sometimes trying all these, sequentially), and which may be completed by displaying a supposedly extracted token of the disease-spirit (displaying this, even if "fraudulent", is supposed to impress the disease-spirit that it has been, or is in the process of being, defeated, so that it will retreat and stay out of the patient's body), or else mental (including psychosomatic) afflictions—such as persistent terror (on account of a frightening experience), which may be likewise cured by similar methods.
The shaman also cleanses excess negative energies, which confuse or pollute the soul.
Among the Inuit, shamans fetch the souls of game from remote places, or soul travel to ask for game from mythological beings like the Sea Woman.
Robert Sapolsky has theorized that shamanism is practiced by schizotypal individuals.
Among the Tucano people, a sophisticated system exists for environmental resources management and for avoiding resource depletion through overhunting.
Some of these practitioners express a desire to practice a system that is based upon their own ancestral traditions.
It has affected the development of many neopagan practices.
Among the Greenland Inuit, the laity have greater capacity to relate with spiritual beings.
Many spiritual seekers travel to Peru to work with ''ayahuasqueros'', shamans who engage in the ritual use of ayahuasca, a psychedelic tea which has been documented to cure everything from depression to addiction.
The cap is usually made from the skin of a bird with the feathers and sometimes head, still attached.
'Noro' generally administer public or communal ceremonies while 'Yuta' focus on civil and private matters.
Shamans represented an important component in the traditional culture of Central Asians and because of their important role in society, Soviet organizations and campaigns targeted shamans in their attempt to eradicate traditional influences in the lives of the indigenous peoples.
Combined phytogeographical and linguistic considerations (distribution of various tree species and the presence of their names in various Uralic languages) suggest that this area was north of Central Ural Mountains and on lower and middle parts of Ob River.
When taking ayahuasca, participants frequently report meeting spirits, and receiving divine revelations.
Ginzburg in particular has argued that some of these traditions influenced the conception of witchcraft in Christendom, in particular ideas regarding the witches' sabbath, leading to the events of the witch trials in the Early Modern period.
A single shaman may fulfill several of these functions.
The "New Age Frauds and Plastic Shamans" website discusses potentially plastic shamans.
Other animal remains came from a boar, leopard, and two martens.
See also the soul dualism concept.
The Yámana  corresponds to the Selknam .
Shamanic practices continue today in the tundras, jungles, deserts, and other rural areas, and even in cities, towns, suburbs, and shantytowns all over the world.
These aboriginal shamans use ''maban'' or ''mabain'', the material that is believed to give them their purported magical powers.
"It seems that the woman … was perceived as being in a close relationship with these animal spirits", researchers noted.
Many classical ethnographic sources of "shamanism" were recorded among Siberian peoples.
The myths concerning the role of shaman had several variants, and also the name of their protagonists varied from culture to culture.
Among the Barasana of Brazil, there is no absolute difference between those recognized as shamans and those who are not.
There are distinct types of shaman who perform more specialized functions.
Other scholars assert that the word comes directly from the Manchu language, and as such would be the only commonly used English word that is a loan from this language.
The elderly woman had been arranged on her side, with her legs apart and folded inward at the knee.
In situations of trauma, the soul piece may not return to the body on its own, and a shaman must intervene and return the soul essence.
Reaching this altered state of consciousness required great mental exertion, concentration and strict self-discipline.
The shaman operates primarily within the spiritual world, which in turn affects the human world.
Shamanism is no more a living practice among Hungarians, but remnants have been reserved as fragments of folklore, in folktales, customs.
For example, many Uralic peoples live now outside Siberia, however the original location of the Proto-Uralic peoples (and its extent) is debated.
Since the early middle-ages Shinto has been influenced by and syncretized with Buddhism and other elements of continental East Asian culture.
The loss of memories is not always lessened by the fact the shaman is not always the only person in a community who knows the beliefs and motives related to the local shaman-hood (laics know myths as well, among Barasana, even though less; there are former shaman apprentices unable to complete the learning among Greenlandic Inuit peoples, moreover, even laics can have trance-like experiences among the Inuit; the assistant of a shaman can be extremely knowledgeable among Dagara).
Among the Hmong people, the shaman or the ''Ntxiv Neej'' (Tee-Neng), acts as healer.
Other fieldworks use systems theory concepts and ecological considerations to understand the shaman's lore.
Such practices are presumably very ancient.
To Kehoe, citing that ritualistic practices (most notably drumming, trance, chanting, entheogens and hallucinogens, spirit communication and healing) as being definitive of shamanism is poor practice.
* flying to the sky to consult cosmological beings (the moon or the brother of the moon) to get a name for a newborn baby
The radical transformations occurring after the October Socialist Revolution led to a sharp decrease in the activity of shamans.
Shamans are summoned in order to purge the unwholesome spirits from a person.
Commonly, a shaman "enters the body" of the patient to confront the spiritual infirmity and heals by banishing the infectious spirit.
''Ayahuasqueros'' have become popular among Western spiritual seekers, who claim that the ''ayauasqueros'' and their ayahuasca brews have cured them of everything from depression to addiction to cancer.
(Series of such opposing symbols referred to a world-view behind them.
Thus, a yaskomo is believed to be able to reach sky, earth, and water.
:Beliefs related to spirits can explain many different phenomena.
Shamanism is still widely practiced in the Ryukyu Islands (Okinawa, Japan), where shamans are known as 'Noro' (all women) and 'Yuta'.
There is an endeavor in some contemporary occult and esoteric circles to reinvent shamanism in a modern form, often drawing from core shamanism—a set of beliefs and practices synthesized by Michael Harner—centered on the use of ritual drumming and dance, and Harner's interpretations of various indigenous religions.
Thus, their audience knows the used symbols and meanings—that is why shamanism can be efficient: people in the audience trust it.
* flying deep down in a river, to achieve the help of other beings.
Most shamans have dreams or visions that convey certain messages.
One such picture featured a half-animal, with the face and legs of a man, with antlers and a tail of a stag.
The Selk'nams believed their s to have supernatural capabilities, e.g.
The term was introduced to the west after Russian forces conquered the shamanistic Khanate of Kazan in 1552.
Linking to a Sami example, Kathleen Osgood Dana writes:
Despite distinctions between various types of shamans and specific traditions, there is a uniformity throughout the region manifested in the personal beliefs, objectives, rituals, symbols and the appearance of shamans.
The shaman may have or acquire many spirit guides, who often guide and direct the shaman in his/her travels in the spirit world.
After these, three groups of ancestral spirits dominated.
In addition to the spiritual dimension, Hmong shaman attempt to treat many physical illnesses through use of the text of sacred words (khawv koob).
With the arrival of European settlers and colonial administration, the practice of Native American traditional beliefs was discouraged and Christianity was imposed  upon the indigenous people.
The word "shaman" probably originates from the Evenki word "''šamán,''" most likely from the southwestern dialect spoken by the Sym Evenki peoples.
The figure of  appeared in myths, too.
At these businesses, a shaman generally heads the organization and performs services such as healing, fortunetelling, and solving all kinds of problems.
As mentioned, a (debated) approach explains the etymology of the word "shaman" as meaning "one who knows".
Armin Geertz coined and introduced the hermeneutics, "ethnohermeneutics", approaches to the practice of interpretation.
In the Peruvian Amazon Basin, shamans and ''curanderos'' use medicine songs called ''icaros'' to evoke spirits.
This includes criticism of New Age and modern Western forms of shamanism, which, according to Kehoe, misrepresent or dilute indigenous practices.
Shamans claim to gain knowledge and the power to heal by entering into the spiritual world or dimension.
Some shamans observe dietary or customary restrictions particular to their tradition.
Animals are one of the most important elements of indigenous religion in Central Asia because of the role they play in the survival of the nomadic civilizations of the steppes as well as sedentary populations living on land not conducive to agriculture.
The majority of the herbal knowledge base is passed down from one ''inyanga'' to the next, often within a particular family circle in any one village.
The magician or sorcerer can either be a white magician or a medicine man whose actions are for the good of others, while the black magician or witchdoctors can either do well or harm to people, but mostly harm for a fee.
Besides that, many taboos may prescribe the behavior of people towards game, so that the souls of the animals do not feel angry or hurt, or the pleased soul of the already killed prey can tell the other, still living animals, that they can allow themselves to be caught and killed.
Geographical factors heavily influence the character and development of the religion, myths, rituals and epics of Central Asia.
Shamanistic techniques have also been used in New Age therapies which use enactment and association with other realities as an intervention.
The spiritual hierarchy in clan-based Mongolian society was complex.
The shaman uses (and the audience understands) multiple codes.
The use of sleight-of-hand tricks, ventriloquism, and hypnosis were common in these rituals but did not explain the more impressive feats and actual cures accomplished by shamans.
In shamanism it is believed that part of the human soul is free to leave the body.
Siberia is regarded as the ''locus classicus'' of shamanism.
Spells are commonly used to protect against these dangers, and the use of more dangerous plants is often very highly ritualized.
The shaman heals within the spiritual dimension by returning 'lost' parts of the human soul from wherever they have gone.
Those with shamanic knowledge usually enjoy great power and prestige in the community, but they may also be regarded suspiciously or fearfully as potentially harmful to others.
Shamans made use of intoxicating substances and hallucinogens, especially mukhomor mushrooms and alcohol, as a means of hastening the attainment of ecstasy.
Meanings may be manifested in objects such as amulets.
In most communities, the traditions were not completely eradicated, but rather went underground, and were practiced secretly until the prohibitive laws were repealed.
As part of his service to mankind, the animal soul is sent off to be reincarnated into a higher form of animal, or even to become a member of a god's family (ua Fuab Tais Ntuj tus tub, tus ntxhais) to live a life of luxury, free of the suffering as an animal.
The Hmong people, as an ancient people of China with a 5,000-year history, continue to maintain and practice its form of shamanism known as "Ua Neeb" in mainland Asia.
Functionally, the shaman is a person who is an expert in keeping together the multiple codes of the society.
Mircea Eliade writes, "A first definition of this complex phenomenon, and perhaps the least hazardous, will be: shamanism = 'technique of religious ecstasy'."
He or she is special because the shaman is able to learn how to cure himself.
Shamans may visit other worlds/dimensions to bring guidance to misguided souls and to ameliorate illnesses of the human soul caused by foreign elements.
In contemporary Nahuatl, there is a spiritual practice known as ''cualli ohtli'' – the "good path" followed during dreaming by "friends of the night" to ''Tlalocán''.
The highest group consisted of 99 ''tngri'' (55 of them benevolent or "white" and 44 terrifying or "black"), 77 ''natigai'' or "earth-mothers", besides others.
Sangomas are highly revered and respected in their society, where illness is thought to be caused by witchcraft, pollution (contact with impure objects or occurrences), bad spirits, or the ancestors themselves, either malevolently, or through neglect if they are not respected, or to show an individual her calling to become a sangoma (''thwasa'').
Shamanism is believed to be declining around the world, possibly due to other organised religious influences, like Christianity, that want people who practice shamanism to convert to their own system and doctrine.
The third definition attempts to distinguish shamans from other magico-religious specialists who are believed to contact spirits, such as "mediums", "witch doctors", "spiritual healers" or "prophets," by claiming that shamans undertake some particular technique not used by the others.
There are semiotic theoretical approaches to shamanism, ("ethnosemiotics").
Term "shaman" is used in several English-language publications also in relation to Eskimos.
For example, the shaman's drumming can appear to its members as certainty of ''knowledge''—this explains the above described etymology for the word "shaman" as meaning "one who knows."
An epilepsy attack is the initiation of the Shaman; it is equivalent to them being cured.
In this role they took on tasks such as healing, divination, appealing to ancestors, manipulating the elements, leading lost souls and officiating public religious rituals.
Daydream, reverie, and trance are not restricted to shamans.
She suggests that ''shaman'' may have entered the various Tungus dialects as a corruption of this term, and then been told to the white, male and Christian missionaries, explorers, soldiers and colonial administrators with whom the people had increasing contact for centuries.
A subsequent text laments that shamans of older times were stronger, possessing capabilities like omnividence, fortune-telling even for decades in the future, moving as fast as a bullet; the texts contrast them to the recent heartless, unknowing, greedy shamans.
Plato wrote in his ''Phaedrus'' that the "first prophecies were the words of an oak", and that those who lived at that time found it rewarding enough to "listen to an oak or a stone, so long as it was telling the truth".
Some anthropologists and practitioners have discussed the impact of such neoshamanism as "giving extra pay" (Harvey, 1997 and elsewhere) to indigenous American traditions, particularly as many pagan or heathen shamanic practitioners do not call themselves shamans, but instead use specific names derived from the European traditions—they work within such as ''völva'' or ''seidkona'' (seid-woman) of the sagas (see Blain 2002, Wallis 2003).
This military background can be seen in the reverence for horses and warriors within many indigenous religions.
In many Inuit groups, they provide services for the community and get a "due payment" (cultures), believe the payment is given to the helping spirits but these goods are only "welcome addenda."
For example, the importance of  storytelling, or acting as a singer, can be understood better if we examine the whole belief system.
Witzel argues that survivals of the older, original forms of shamanism are therefore to be found in the southern hemisphere among peoples such as the San Bushmen of Botswana, the Andamanese of the Andaman Islands off the coast of Burma, and the Aborigines of Australia.
A person can become a shaman through hereditary title or through natural ability.
The wounded healer is an archetype for a shamanic trial and journey.
Once someone is declared a Shaman, he is declared to be a sick man, but not just any type of sick man.
The second definition limits the term to refer to those who contact a spirit world while in an altered state of consciousness at the behest of others.
Some of the cultures were coast-dwelling, others were land-oriented.
;Scarcity of hunted game
The harsh conditions and poverty caused by the extreme temperatures drove Central Asian nomads throughout history to pursue militaristic goals against their sedentary neighbors.
Also the usage of a specific shaman's language is documented among several Eskimo groups, used mostly for talking to spirits.
The more recent Laurasian types of myths and forms of shamanism are found in Eurasian and North and South America and are later cultural elaborations based upon the earlier Gondwana types of myths and shamanism, both of which probably derived from an earlier human source population.
On the island of Papua New Guinea, indigenous tribes believe that illness and calamity are caused by dark spirits, or ''masalai'', which cling to a person's body and poison them.
The Palace of Earthly Tranquility, one of the principal halls of the Forbidden City in Beijing, was partly dedicated to Shamanistic rituals.
among Polar Inuit, at the end of 19th century, Sagloq, the last shaman who was believed to be able to travel to the sky and under the sea died—and many other former shamanic capacities were lost during that time as well, like ventriloquism and sleight-of-hand.
Whalers who frequently interact with Inuit tribes are one source of this decline in that region.
The Tungusic term was subsequently adopted by Russians interacting with the indigenous peoples in Siberia.
In their rituals, music, dance, special garments and offerings are part of the performance that surround the spirit journey.
Many shamans practice ventriloquism and make use of their ability to accurately imitate the sounds of animals, nature, humans and other noises in order to provide the audience with the ambiance of the journey.
Shamans perform in a "state of ecstasy" deliberately induced by an effort of will.
Some historians of the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern period have argued that traces of shamanistic traditions can be seen in the popular folk belief of this period.
Sharon (1993) has argued that the mesas symbolize the dualistic ideology underpinning the practice and experience of north-coastal shamanism.
The word was brought to Western Europe in the late 17th century by the Dutch traveler Nicolaes Witsen, who reported his stay and journeys among the Tungusic and Samoyedic-speaking indigenous peoples of Siberia in his book ''Noord en Oost Tataryen'' (1692).
The use of these elements serves the purpose of outwardly expressing his mystical communion with nature and the spirits for the rest of the tribe.
Elaborate dances and recitations of songs and poetry are used to make the shamans spiritual adventures into a matter of living reality to his audience.
The laity usually employ amulets, spells, formulas, songs.
As a religion of nature, shamanism throughout Central Asia held particular reverence for the relations between sky, earth and water and believed in the mystical importance of trees and mountains.
The etymology of the Evenki word is sometimes connected to a Tungus root ''ša-'' "to know".
European-based neoshamanic traditions are focused upon the researched or imagined traditions of ancient Europe, where many mystical practices and belief systems were suppressed by the Christian church.
The book ''Japan Through the Looking Glass: Shaman to Shinto'' uncovers the extraordinary aspects of Japanese beliefs.
The Hmong believe that all things on Earth have a soul (or multiple souls) and those souls are treated as equal and can be considered interchangeable.
The Russian linguist Menovshikov (Меновщиков), an expert of Siberian Yupik and Sireniki Eskimo languages (while admitting that he is not a specialist in ethnology) mentions, that the shamanistic seances of those Siberian Yupik and Sireniki groups he has seen have many similarities to those of Greenland Inuit groups described by Fridtjof Nansen, although a large distance separates Siberia and Greenland.
He also suggests a cooperation of modern science and indigenous lore.
This proposal has been thoroughly critiqued since 1917.
The presence of distinctive characteristics and features of shamanic stories help folklorists and anthropologists reconstruct a culture’s practice of shamanism.
The soul concepts of several groups are specific examples of soul dualism (showing variability in details in the various cultures).
When speaking of "shamanism" in various Eskimo groups, we must remember that (as mentioned above) the term "shamanism" can cover certain characteristics of ''various'' different cultures.
Among several Samoyedic peoples shamanism was a living tradition also in modern times, especially at groups living in isolation, until recent times (Nganasans).
The Piaroa people have ecological concerns related to shamanism.
the details of the soul dualism showed great variability, ranging from guardianship to a kind of reincarnation.
Besides healing, contact with spiritual beings, involvement in initiation and other secret ceremonies, they are also enforcers of tribal laws, keepers of special knowledge and may "hex" to death one who breaks a social taboo by singing a song only known to the "clever men".
An entheogen ("generating the divine within") is a psychoactive substance used in a religious, shamanic, or spiritual context.
For the ecological aspects of shamanistic practice, and related beliefs, see below.
These people are often apprentice shamans who failed to complete their initiations.
the tupilaq concept).
While in other parts of the world, religious rituals are primarily used to promote agricultural prosperity, here they were used to ensure success in hunting and breeding livestock.
The "Lord-Spirits" were the souls of clan leaders to whom any member of a clan could appeal for physical or spiritual help.
One indicator of a plastic shaman might be someone who discusses "Native American spirituality" but does not mention any specific Native American tribe.
Among her unusual grave goods were 50 complete tortoise shells, a human foot, and certain body parts from animals such as a cow tail and eagle wings.
By engaging in their work, a shaman is exposed to significant personal risk, from the spirit world, from enemy shamans, or from the means employed to alter the shaman's state of consciousness.
The drum or tambourine is the essential means of communicating with spirits and enabling the shaman to reach altred states of consciousness on his journey.
It may consist of retrieving the lost soul of the ill person.
This "rain-stone" was used for many occasions including bringing an end to drought as well as producing hailstorms as a means of warfare.
These roles vary among the Nenets, Enets, and Selkup shaman.
The ''yaskomo'' of the Waiwai is believed to be able to perform a soul flight.
The so-called "classical" shamanism of Siberia and the Americas reflect a further cultural evolutionary development at the local levels.
This is the uncanny mark of the wounded healer.
This system is conceptualized mythologically and symbolically by the belief that breaking hunting restrictions may cause illness.
Shamanism encompasses the premise that shamans are intermediaries or messengers between the human world and the spirit worlds.
Shamans act as mediators in their culture.
Adam Brand, a merchant from Lübeck, published in 1698 his account of a Russian embassy to China; a translation of his book, published the same year, introduced the word ''shaman'' to English speakers.
In many areas, former shamans ceased to fulfill the functions in the community they used to, as they felt mocked by their own community, or regarded their own past as deprecated and are unwilling to talk about it to an ethnographer.
Both Selk'nam and Yámana had persons filling in shaman-like roles.
Shamanism in Central Asia also places a strong emphasis on the opposition between summer and winter, corresponding to the huge differences in temperature common in the region.
For this interpretative assistant, it would be unwelcome to fall into trance.
Some of these Italian traditions survived into the 20th and early 21st centuries, allowing Italian-American sociologist Sabina Magliocco to make a brief study of them (2009).
''Ayahuasqueros'' are Peruvians who specialize in the use of ayahuasca.
These spirit guides are always present within the shaman, although others encounter them only when the shaman is in a trance.
Some areas could enjoy a prolonged resistance due to their remoteness.
Piers Vitebsky also mentions that, despite really astonishing similarities, there is no unity in shamanism.
