Pudong Airport is the main international airport, while Hongqiao Airport mainly operates domestic flights with limited short-haul international flights.
During the Qing dynasty, Shanghai became one of the most important sea ports in the Yangtze Delta region as a result of two important central government policy changes: In 1684, the Kangxi Emperor reversed the Ming dynasty prohibition on oceangoing vessels – a ban that had been in force since 1525; and in 1732 the Yongzheng Emperor moved the customs office for Jiangsu province (; see Customs House, Shanghai) from the prefectural capital of Songjiang to Shanghai, and gave Shanghai exclusive control over customs collections for Jiangsu's foreign trade.
Located at the heart of the Yangtze River Delta, Shanghai has the world's busiest container port, which handled 29.05&nbsp;million TEUs in 2010.
Shanghai has a rich collection of buildings and structures of various architectural styles.
All this international activity gave Shanghai the nickname "the Great Athens of China"
Shanghai is officially abbreviated  (''Hù'') in Chinese, a contraction of  (''Hù Dú'', lit "Harpoon Ditch"), a 4th- or  Jin name for the mouth of Suzhou Creek when it was the main conduit into the ocean.
The Battle of Shanghai in 1937 resulted in the occupation of the Chinese administered parts of Shanghai outside of the International Settlement and the French Concession.
The Old City and modern downtown Shanghai are now located in the center of an expanding peninsula between the Yangtze River Delta to the north and Hangzhou Bay to the south, formed by the Yangtze's natural deposition and by modern land reclamation projects.
In 1843, a teachers' college was also set up.
He ordered the excavation of the Huangpu River.
The Chinese-held old city of Shanghai fell to the rebels of the Small Swords Society in 1853 but was recovered by the Qing government in February 1855.
The radical leftist Jiang Qing and her three cohorts, together the Gang of Four, were based in the city.
Yet, to compromise with its urban nature, it was much smaller and provided an "interior haven" to the commotions in the streets, allowing for raindrops to fall and vegetation to grow freely within a residence.
These two films were very influential, and established Shanghai as the center of Chinese film-making.
Zhongshan Park in northwestern central Shanghai is famous for its monument of Chopin, the tallest statue dedicated to the composer in the world.
According to a 2012 survey only around 13% of the population of Shanghai belongs to organised religions, the largest groups being Buddhists with 10.4%, followed by Protestants with 1.9%, Catholics with 0.7% and other faiths with 0.1%.
Shanghai also has the world's most extensive network of urban bus routes, with nearly one thousand bus lines, operated by numerous transportation companies.
Today, Huating appears as the name of a four-star hotel in the city.
Shanghai is a major hub of China's expressway network.
One of the newest parks is in the Xujiahui area – Xujiahui Park, built in 1999 on the former grounds of the Great Chinese Rubber Works Factory and the EMI Recording Studio (now La Villa Rouge restaurant).
This honour was usually reserved for places with the status of a city, such as a prefectural capital not normally given to a mere county town, as Shanghai was.
They often cannot speak the local language and therefore use Mandarin as a lingua franca.
Bus fare normally costs 2 RMB.
On 23 January 2014, Yang Xiong, the mayor of Shanghai municipality announced that three main measures would be taken to manage the air pollution in Shanghai, along with surrounding Anhui, Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces.
Shanghai was then the most important financial center in the Far East.
The three largest service industries are financial services, retail, and real estate.
It is a global financial centre, and a transport hub with the world's busiest container port.
The Shanghai Muslim Association is located in the Xiaotaoyuan Mosque in Huangpu.
The club dates back to 1858 when the first recorded cricket match was played between a team of British Naval officers and a Shanghai 11.
Most Shanghai residents are the descendants of immigrants from the two adjacent provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang who moved to Shanghai in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
During this decade, large numbers of Soviet experts, including architects, poured into China to aid the country in the construction of a communist state.
Shanghai took the top spot in the 2009 and 2012 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), a worldwide study of academic performance of 15-year-old students conducted by the OECD.
A highest record of  was registered in another station on 7 August 2013.
After 1949, most foreign firms moved their offices from Shanghai to Hong Kong, as part of a foreign divestment due to the Communist victory.
20.6 million of the total population, or 89.3%, are urban, and 2.5 million (10.7％) are rural.
Among Catholic churches, St Ignatius Cathedral in Xujiahui is one of the largest, while She Shan Basilica is an active pilgrimage site.
In the past years Shanghai has been widely recognized as a new influence and inspiration for cyberpunk culture.
Shanghai Botanical Garden is located  southwest of the city center and was established in 1978.
A number of areas in the former foreign concessions are also well-preserved, the most notable ones being the French Concession.
The system includes the world's oldest trolleybus system.
The Shanghai cricket team was a cricket team that played various international matches between 1866 and 1948.
Shanghai also holds the Shanghai Masters tennis tournament which is part of ATP World Tour Masters 1000, and the BMW Masters and WGC-HSBC Champions golf tournaments.
The name "shikumen" means "stone storage door", referring to the strong gateway to each house.
This deep-water port was made necessary by the increasing size of container ships but also the silting of the Yangtze, which narrows to less than  as far out as  from Hengsha.
There are disputes as to exactly how the name should be understood, but Chinese historians have concluded that during the Tang dynasty Shanghai was literally on the sea.
The base fare is currently ¥14 (inclusive of a ¥1 fuel surcharge; ¥18 between 11:00&nbsp;pm and 5:00&nbsp;am) which covers the first .
In 2013 the Shanghai Municipality and the Chinese Academy of Sciences founded the ShanghaiTech University in the Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park in Pudong.
The $4.4&nbsp;billion theme park and resort in Pudong features a castle that is the biggest among Disney's resorts.
During the Warring States period, Shanghai was part of the fief of Lord Chunshen of Chu, one of the Four Lords of the Warring States.
In 1863, the British settlement to the south of Suzhou Creek (northern Huangpu District) and the American settlement to the north (southern Hongkou District) joined in order to form the Shanghai International Settlement.
In November 2015 Christopher Cottrell of the ''Global Times'' wrote that Shanghai "prides itself on its international schools".
Shanghai's film industry went on to blossom during the early 1930s, generating great stars such as Hu Die, Ruan Lingyu, Zhou Xuan, Jin Yan, and Zhao Dan.
They argued that Shanghai School literature was merely commercial and therefore did not advance social progress.
Auto manufacture is another important industry.
The prevalence of Mandarin fluency is generally higher for those born after 1949 than those born before, while the prevalence of English fluency is higher for people who received their secondary and tertiary education before 1949 than those who did so after 1949 and before the 1990s.
Private car ownership in Shanghai has been rapidly increasing in recent years, but a new private car cannot be driven until the owner buys a license in the monthly private car license plate auction.
Under the masters from this school, traditional Chinese art developed into the modern style of "Chinese painting".
, there are 14 metro lines (excluding the Shanghai Maglev Train and Jinshan Railway), 329 stations and  of tracks in operation, making it the longest network in the world.
The French opted out of the Shanghai Municipal Council and maintained its own concession to the south and southwest.
Less than Beijing, the city also has some examples of Soviet neoclassical architecture or Stalinist architecture.
The few hills such as She Shan lie to the southwest and the highest point is the peak of Dajinshan Island in Hangzhou Bay ().
The cadre school China Executive Leadership Academy in Pudong is also located in Shanghai.
Later, checked fabrics became also quite common.
The municipality borders the provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang to the north, south and west, and is bounded to the east by the East China Sea.
Shanghai is sometimes considered a center of innovation and progress in China.
The two Chinese characters in the city's name are  (''shàng'', "above") and  (''hǎi'', "sea"), together meaning "Upon-the-Sea".
The Zone introduced a number of pilot reforms designed to create a preferential environment for foreign investment.
The cheongsam went along well with the western overcoat and the scarf, and portrayed a unique East Asian modernity, epitomizing the Shanghainese population in general.
The White Cloud Temple of Shanghai is an important Taoist centre in the city.
Shanghai also has an ice hockey team, China Dragon, and a baseball team, the Shanghai Golden Eagles, which plays in the China Baseball League.
Authorities pulled nearly one-third of government vehicles from the roads, while a mass of construction work was halted.
The historic center of the city was located on the west bank of the Huangpu (Puxi), near the mouth of Suzhou Creek, connecting it with Lake Tai and the Grand Canal.
The high supply of hotel rooms has kept room rates lower than expected, with the average room rate for four- and five-star hotels in 2012 at just RMB950 (US$153).
The Sino-Japanese War concluded with the Treaty of Shimonoseki, which elevated Japan to become another foreign power in Shanghai.
Following a 45-year dormancy after the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the club was re-established in 1994 by expatriates living in the city and has since grown to over 300 members.
Shanghai underwent a series of changes in the boundaries of its subdivisions over the next decade.
The foreign concessions were occupied by the Japanese on 8 December 1941 and remained occupied until Japan's surrender in 1945, during which time war crimes were committed.
The extensive public park system in Shanghai offers the citizens some reprieve from the urban jungle.
It was the largest and most prosperous city in East Asia during the 1930s, and rapid re-development began in the 1990s.
In the 1930s, some 30,000 Jewish refugees from Europe arrived in the city.
The Shanghai Natural History Museum and the Shanghai Science and Technology Museum are major natural history and science museums.
Two main railways terminate in Shanghai: Jinghu Railway from Beijing, and Huhang Railway from Hangzhou.
Xi Jinping, successor to Hu Jintao as General Secretary and President, was a compromise candidate between the two groups with supporters in both camps.
Extremes since 1951 have ranged from  on 31 January 1977 (unofficial record of  was set on 19 January 1893) to  on 6 and 8 August 2013.
The former racetrack turned central park, People's Square park, located in the heart of downtown Shanghai, is especially well known for its proximity to other major landmarks in the city.
During the Spring and Autumn period, the Shanghai area belonged to the Kingdom of Wu, which was conquered by the Kingdom of Yue, which in turn was conquered by the Kingdom of Chu.
The event features international designers but the primary purpose is to showcase Chinese designers.
The city then flourished as a center of commerce between China and other parts of the world (predominantly Western countries), and became the primary financial hub of the Asia-Pacific region in the 1930s.
The zone covers an area of 29&nbsp;km2 and integrates four existing bonded zones — Waigaoqiao Free Trade Zone, Waigaoqiao Free Trade Logistics Park, Yangshan Free Trade Port Area and Pudong Airport Comprehensive Free Trade Zone.
In 2010 the two airports served 71.7&nbsp;million passengers (Pudong 40.4&nbsp;million, Hongqiao 31.3&nbsp;million), and handled 3.7&nbsp;million tons of cargo (Pudong 3.22&nbsp;million tons, Hongqiao 480 thousand tons).
The Bund's first revitalization started in 1986 with a new promenade by the Dutch Architect Paulus Snoeren, the completion was in the mid-1990s.
Other prominent architects who contributed to the Art Deco style are Parker & Palmer, who designed the Peace Hotel, Metropole Hotel, and the Broadway Mansions, and Austrian architect GH Gonda who designed the Capital Theatre.
Islam came into Shanghai 700 years ago and a mosque was built in 1295 in Songjiang.
In recent years, a large number of architecturally distinctive and even eccentric buildings have sprung up throughout Shanghai.
Additionally, the government has moved almost all the factories within the city center to either the outskirts or other provinces in the recent decades.
Yet, even during the most tumultuous times of the Cultural Revolution, Shanghai was able to maintain high economic productivity and relative social stability.
During the First Opium War (1839–1842), British forces occupied the city.
From the 1990s, many migrants outside of Wu-speaking area have come to Shanghai for work.
The shikumen is a cultural blend of elements found in Western architecture with traditional Lower Yangtze (Jiangnan) Chinese architecture and social behavior.
Between 1860–1862, the Taiping rebels twice attacked Shanghai and destroyed the city's eastern and southern suburbs, but failed to take the city.
In 2010, Shanghai returned tram, this time as a modern rubber tyred Translohr system, in Zhangjiang area of East Shanghai as Zhangjiang Tram.
Shanghai aims to be an international shipping center in the near future.
The whole resembles terrace houses or townhouses commonly seen in Anglo-American countries, but distinguished by the tall, heavy brick wall in front of each house.
The park has a man-made lake with a sky bridge running across the park, and offers a pleasant respite for Xujiahui shoppers.
The Jews lived side-by-side in a designated area called Shanghai Ghetto and formed a vibrant community centered on the Ohel Moishe Synagogue, which is preserved remnant of this portion of Shanghai's complex religious past.
Members of this school were themselves educated ''literati'' who had come to question their very status and the purpose of art and had anticipated the impending modernization of Chinese society.
renowned for its Lujiazui skyline, museums and historic buildings, such as those along The Bund, the City God Temple and the Yu Garden.
With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 34% in March to 54% in August, the city receives 1,895 hours of bright sunshine annually.
According to the municipal regulation in 2016, only those who are Shanghai registered residents or have paid social insurance or individual incomer tax for over 3 years in a row.
Zeng Qinghong, a former deputy party secretray of Shanghai, also rose to the Politburo Standing Committee and became the Vice President and an influential power broker.
Shanghai is the hometown of many outstanding and well-known Chinese professional athletes, such as Yao Ming, the 110-meter hurdler Liu Xiang, the table-tennis player Wang Liqin and the former world women's single champion and current Olympic silver medalist badminton player Wang Yihan.
This character appears on all motor vehicle license plates issued in the municipality today.
Beginning in 2004, Shanghai started hosting the Chinese Grand Prix, one round of the Formula One World Championship.
Prior to 2007 they were permitted to attend 150 select public schools.
The earliest occurrence of this name dates from the 11th-century Song Dynasty, at which time there was already a river confluence and a town with this name in the area.
Shanghai is a major center of higher education in China with over 30 universities and colleges.
All traditional Chinese dwellings had a courtyard, and the shikumen was no exception.
Some of the parks, aside from offering a green public space to locals, became popular tourist attractions due to their unique location, history or architecture.
The provincial-level Municipality of Shanghai administers both the eastern area of this peninsula and many of its surrounding islands.
Due to its cosmopolitan history, Shanghai has a blend of religious heritage as shown by the religious buildings and institutions still scattered around the city.
Dong Qichang was one of the masters from this school.
Because the Zone is not technically considered PRC territory for tax purposes, commodities entering the zone are not subject to duty and customs clearance as would otherwise be the case.
Of course, this is based on official figures, so the real number of foreign citizens in the city is probably much higher.
Around 87% of the population may be either irreligious or involved in worship of nature deities and ancestors, Confucian churches, Taoism and folk religious sects.
Another professional team, Shanghai Shenxin, is currently in China League One.
In 2012 NYU Shanghai was established in Pudong by New York University in partnership with East China Normal University as the first Sino-US joint venture university.
Other well-known Shanghai parks include: People's Square Park, Gongqing Forest Park, Fuxing Park, Zhongshan Park, Lu Xun Park, Century Park, and Jing'an Park.
Shanghai is one of the main industrial centers of China, playing a key role in China's heavy industries.
The city is also susceptible to typhoons in summer and the beginning of autumn, none of which in recent years has caused considerable damage.
During World War II thousands of Jews descended upon Shanghai in an effort to flee Hitler's regime.
This new research university is aiming to be a first-class institution on a national and international level.
Shanghai also has 150,000 officially registered foreigners, including 31,500 Japanese, 21,000 Americans and 20,700 Koreans.
However, the Shanghainese styles have seen a recent revival as stylish party dresses.
These buildings were mostly erected during the period from the founding of the People's Republic in 1949 until the Sino-Soviet Split in the late 1960s.
By 1932, Shanghai had become the world's fifth largest city and home to 70,000 foreigners.
By the 1940s, cheongsams came in transparent black, beaded bodices, matching capes and even velvet.
It measured  high and  in circumference.
The Treaty of the Bogue signed in 1843, and the Sino-American Treaty of Wanghia signed in 1844 forced Chinese concession to European and American desires for visitation and trade on Chinese soil.
Two important events helped promote Shanghai's development in the Ming dynasty.
Shanghai has one of the largest proportions of Catholics in China (2003).
In recent times Shanghai has established its own fashion week called Shanghai Fashion Week.
The most pleasant seasons are spring, although changeable and often rainy, and autumn, which is generally sunny and dry.
These Shanghai Russians constituted the second-largest foreign community.
Children with foreign passports are permitted to attend any public school in Shanghai.
Like Shanghai's architecture, local fashion designers strive to create a fusion of western and traditional designs, often with innovative if controversial results.
The movie ''In the Mood for Love'', which was directed by Wong Kar-wai (a native Shanghainese himself), depicts a slice of the displaced Shanghainese community in Hong Kong and the nostalgia for that era, featuring 1940s music by Zhou Xuan.
Some of his most notable Art Deco buildings include the Park Hotel and the Grand Theater.
During the December 2013 Eastern China smog, air pollution rates reached between 23 and 31 times the international standard.
Its sandy soil has required its skyscrapers to be built with deep concrete piles to stop them from sinking into the soft ground of the central area.
Built in 1914 as Jessfield Park, it once contained the campus of St. John's University, Shanghai's first international college; today, it is known for its extensive rose and peony gardens, a large children's play area, and as the location of an important transfer station on the city's metro system.
Most of inbound flights were cancelled, and more than 50 flights were diverted at Pudong International Airport.
Britain, France (under the 1844 Treaty of Whampoa), and the United States all carved out concessions outside the walled city of Shanghai, which was still ruled by the Chinese.
Shanghai has four major railway stations: Shanghai Railway Station, Shanghai South Railway Station, Shanghai West Railway Station, and Shanghai Hongqiao Railway Station.
The central financial district Lujiazui has grown up on the east bank of the Huangpu (Pudong).
The war ended with the 1842 Treaty of Nanking, which allowed the British to dictate opening the treaty ports, Shanghai included, for international trade.
Shanghai has one of the world's largest number of Art Deco buildings as a result of the construction boom during the 1920s and 1930s.
Around 11,500 license plates are auctioned each month and the average price is about 84,000 RMB ($12,758).
Shanghai has several museums of regional and national importance.
On 22 October 2010, it set a record of daily ridership of 7.548&nbsp;million.
During the Wanli reign (1573–1620), Shanghai received an important psychological boost from the erection of a City God Temple in 1602.
In the last two decades Shanghai has been one of the fastest developing cities in the world.
Power Station of Art is built in a converted power station, similar to London's Tate Modern.
However, with the Communist Party takeover of the mainland in 1949, trade was limited to socialist countries, and the city's global influence declined.
With cricket in the rest of China almost non-existent, for that period they were the de facto Chinese national side.
Shanghai lies on China's east coast roughly equidistant from Beijing and Guangzhou.
Many aspects of Shanghainese popular culture ("Shanghainese Pops") were transferred to Hong Kong by the numerous Shanghainese emigrants and refugees after the Communist Revolution.
Shanghai has the largest number of international schools of any city in China.
The destruction of local wetlands occasioned by the creation of Pudong International Airport along the peninsula's eastern shore has been somewhat offset by the protection and expansion of the nearby shoals of Jiuduansha as a nature preserve.
The city also has various nicknames in English, including "Pearl of the Orient" and "Paris of the East".
Buddhism, in its Chinese varieties, has had a presence in Shanghai since ancient times.
The Shanghai Disney Resort Project was approved by the government on 4 November 2009, and opened in 2016.
The ''Wenmiao'' (Temple of the God of Culture) is dedicated to Confucius.
China's first short film, ''The Difficult Couple'' (1913), and the country's first fictional feature film, ''An Orphan Rescues His Grandfather'' (孤儿救祖记, ''Gu'er Jiu Zuji'', 1923) were both produced in Shanghai.
In August 2014, Shanghai was named FDi magazine's Chinese Province of the Future 2014/15 due to "particularly impressive performances in the Business Friendliness and Connectivity categories, as well as placing second in the Economic Potential and Human Capital and Lifestyle categories".
Shanghai has more than 930 kindergartens, 1,200 primary and 850 middle schools.
In 1854, the Shanghai Municipal Council was created to manage the foreign settlements.
The municipality does not, however, include an exclave of Jiangsu on northern Chongming or the two islands forming Shanghai's Yangshan Port, which are part of Zhejiang's Shengsi County.
China's top tier The Shanghai Sharks of the Chinese Basketball Association developed Yao Ming before he entered the NBA.
The Shanghai-based SAIC Motor is one of the three largest automotive corporations in China, and has strategic partnerships with Volkswagen and General Motors.
Summers are hot and humid, with an average of 8.7 days exceeding  annually; occasional downpours or freak thunderstorms can be expected.
It is commonly considered as a further development of the Wu or Wumen School in the then-cultural center of the region, Suzhou.
The Shanghai Museum has one of the best collections of Chinese historical artifacts in the world, including a large collection of ancient Chinese bronzes.
In literature, the term was used in the 1930s by some May Fourth Movement intellectualsnotably Zhou Zuoren and Shen Congwenas a derogatory label for the literature produced in Shanghai at the time.
This is exemplified by the Pudong District, a former swampland reclaimed to serve as a pilot area for integrated economic reforms.
Critics of PISA results counter that in Shanghai and other Chinese cities, most children of migrant workers can only attend city schools up to the ninth grade, and must return to their parents' hometowns for high school due to hukou restrictions, thus skewing the composition of the city's high school students in favor of wealthier local families.
The only exception is Chen Liangyu, who was fired in 2006 and later convicted of corruption.
Despite rampant redevelopment, the old city still retains some buildings of a traditional style, such as the Yuyuan Garden, an elaborate traditional garden in the Jiangnan style.
Since Jiang Zemin became the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China in June 1989, all but one former Shanghai party secretary was elevated to the Politburo Standing Committee, the ''de facto'' highest decision-making body in China, including Jiang himself (Party General Secretary), Zhu Rongji (Premier), Wu Bangguo (Chairman of the National People's Congress), Huang Ju (Vice Premier), Xi Jinping (current General Secretary), and Yu Zhengsheng.
The Shanghai School challenged and broke the elitist tradition of Chinese art, while also paying technical homage to the ancient masters and improving on existing traditional techniques.
The China Art Museum, located in the former China Pavilion of Expo 2010, is the largest art museum in Asia.
Officials with ties to the Shanghai administration form a powerful faction in the national government, the so-called Shanghai Clique, which was often thought to compete against the rival Youth League Faction over personnel appointments and policy decisions.
Its importance to the fiscal well-being of the central government also denied it economic liberalizations begun in 1978.
On 12 February 2014, China's cabinet announced that a 10-billion-renminbi (US$1.7-billion) fund will be set up to help companies to meet new environmental standards.
The study concludes that public-funded schools in Shanghai have the highest educational quality in the world.
Each residence is connected and arranged in straight alleys, known as a ''longtang'' (弄堂), pronounced ''longdang'' in Shanghainese.
During the 1950s and 1960s, Shanghai became the center for radical leftism since it was the industrial centre of China with most skilled industrial workers.
Supported by the People's Republic Ministry of Commerce, Shanghai Fashion Week is a major business and culture event of national significance hosted by the Shanghai Municipal Government.
Under the Republic of China, Shanghai's political status was raised to that of a municipality on 14 July 1927.
The distinctive Oriental Pearl Tower, at , is located nearby, as is One Lujiazui, standing at .
Additional kilometers cost ¥2.4 each (¥3.2 between 11:00&nbsp;pm and 5:00&nbsp;am).
