Shark lifespans vary by species.
It is currently thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks.
Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010.
This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.
Preservation requires rapid burial in bottom sediments.
In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.
The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind.
*Lamniformes: They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks.
The presence of whole fish arranged tail-first in their stomachs suggest that they were fast swimmers with great agility.
The oldest generally accepted shark scales are from about 420 million years ago, in the Silurian period.
The first sharks looked very different from modern sharks.
This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment.
Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans.
It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them and as such they are not truly asleep.
Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments.
Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life.
Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean.
The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts.
Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.
The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchoidei and Squalomorpha.
However, the term "shark" has also been used for extinct members of the subclass Elasmobranchii outside the Selachimorpha, such as ''Cladoselache'' and ''Xenacanthus'', as well as other Chondrichthyes such as the holocephalid eugenedontidans.
Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer and treat osteoarthritis.
From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.
Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape.
When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display.
The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.
Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.
The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body.
Acanthodians are often referred to as "spiny sharks"; though they are not part of Chondrichthyes proper, they are a paraphyletic assemblage leading to cartilaginous fish as a whole.
A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.
From there blood enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.
Paleontological evidence suggests that this shark was an active predator of large cetaceans.
The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth.
Estimates suggest that sharks grow tens of thousands of teeth over a lifetime, which explains the abundant fossils.
This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters.
Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in ''United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins''.
The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.
Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.
The oldest white shark teeth date from 60 to 66 million years ago, around the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs.
Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua.
They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.
Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce.
This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey.
The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras.
These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection.
Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.
This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine.
Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be Squalean.
A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported.
''Jaws'' author Peter Benchley, as well as ''Jaws'' director Steven Spielberg later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.
Only scales have been recovered from the first sharks and not all paleontologists agree that these are from true sharks, suspecting that these scales are actually those of thelodont agnathans.
They include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, the thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark.
As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional.
In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.
Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.
In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.
This system is found in most fish, including sharks.
Sharks are common down to depths of , and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below .
This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.
Most fossils are of teeth, often in large numbers.
Sharks can travel 70 to 80&nbsp;km in a day.
In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake.
The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses.
Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals.
In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct.
Partial skeletons and even complete fossilized remains have been discovered.
Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.
The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii), and Squalea (or Squalomorphii).
Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present.
Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish.
In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.
Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies.
In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.
For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.
It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.
The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal.
megalodon'' may have approached a maxima of  in total length and  in mass.
Unlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young.
*† Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes)
The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.
Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele, and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii.
The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.
Lamnoids and Carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show the Lamnoids and Orectoloboids are a clade.
During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.
Whale sharks (''Rhincodon typus'') may also live over 100 years.
Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.
However, some species, including the great white shark (''Carcharodon carcharias''), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey.
This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.
Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious.
Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water.
Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.
Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.
Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing.
Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating.
Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.
Like most extinct sharks, ''C.
The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.
Well-known species such as the great white shark, tiger shark, blue shark, mako shark, and the hammerhead shark are apex predators—organisms at the top of their underwater food chain.
These comedic effects can sometimes be unintentional, as seen in ''Batman: The Movie'' and various Syfy channel films like ''Dinoshark'' and ''Sharktopus''.
No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.
Few governments enforce laws that protect them.
The soft bones can be easily chewed.
The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact.
Digestion can take a long time.
More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long distance transportation.
The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted.
The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at .
In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.
Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting.
Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes.
Its teeth had several pointed cusps, which wore down from use.
The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.
The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery.
Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.
Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce hákarl, which is widely regarded as a national dish.
Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species.
In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks.
Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body.
Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.
Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed.
Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of  and can live up to 25 years.
The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs.
These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.
Most sharks are carnivorous.
Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head.
Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia.
They generally do not live in freshwater although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can survive and be found in both seawater and freshwater.
*Heterodontiformes: They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks.
Since then, sharks have diversified into over 500 species.
The Xenacanthida was almost exclusive to freshwater environments.
A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel.
Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean.
The respiration and circulation process begins when deoxygenated blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart.
The Hypnosqualea may be invalid.
Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks.
Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.
Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons for 2000, and 1.41 million tons for 2010.
The young are born alive and fully functional.
Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate.
Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole.
Most sharks have eight fins.
Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.
It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.
Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics.
Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.
A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.
The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female.
The teeth consist of easily fossilized calcium phosphate, an apatite.
The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming.
Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes.
The Hexanchoidei includes the Hexanchiformes and Chlamydoselachiformes.
Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form.
It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.
The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.
Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue.
There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.
Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility.
In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s).
Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries, and is considered healthy and full of nutrients.
Sharks are also killed for meat.
*Squaliformes: This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks.
A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of shark found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind.
One of the most recently evolved families is the hammerhead shark (family Sphyrnidae), which emerged in the Eocene.
In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth, the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater.
This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments.
In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips,  in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled.
Among the most ancient and primitive sharks is ''Cladoselache'', from about 370 million years ago, which has been found within Paleozoic strata in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee.
In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to ''purchase'' shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.
The other group, the hybodonts, appeared about 320 million years ago and lived mostly in the oceans, but also in freshwater.
Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do.
Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.
The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the ''Jaws'' film series.
Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.
China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.
The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated.
Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion.
European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.
Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.
In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.
When a shark dies, the decomposing skeleton breaks up, scattering the apatite prisms.
Fossil mackerel shark teeth date to the Early Cretaceous.
Jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium.
Sharks are found in all seas.
The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength.
In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets.
The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids.
Some seabed–dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators.
Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.
Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime.
The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months.
The results of a 2014 study of the gill structure of an unusually well-preserved 325 million year old fossil suggested that sharks are not "living fossils", but rather have evolved more extensively than previously thought over the hundreds of millions of years they have been around.
Most fossil sharks from about 300 to 150 million years ago can be assigned to one of two groups.
Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world.
By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.
A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom–dwelling sharks.
Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools.
Lamniforme sharks practice ''oophagy'', where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs.
The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them.
The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to .
The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage.
