Soay sheep come in several colors, and researchers investigated why the larger, darker sheep were in decline; this occurrence contradicted the rule of thumb that larger members of a population tend to be more successful reproductively.
For this purpose shepherds may use herding dogs in this effort, with a highly bred herding ability.
A snort (explosive exhalation through the nostrils) may signal aggression or a warning, and is often elicited from startled sheep.
In contradiction to this image, male sheep are often used as symbols of virility and power; the logos of the Los Angeles Rams football team and the Dodge Ram pickup truck allude to males of the bighorn sheep, ''Ovis canadensis''.
Eid al-Adha is a major annual festival in Islam in which sheep (or other animals) are sacrificed in remembrance of this act.
The first is to ensure all sheep are healthy when purchased.
Furthermore, in contrast to the red deer and gazelle (two other ungulates of primary importance to meat production in prehistoric times), sheep do not defend territories although they do form home ranges.
The ram uses his vomeronasal organ (sometimes called the Jacobson's organ) to sense the pheromones of ewes and detect when they are in estrus.
Many of these products are now often made with cow's milk, especially when produced outside their country of origin.
Sheep are one of the few livestock animals raised for meat today that have rarely been raised in an intensive, confined animal feeding operation (CAFO).
In the wake of the environmental and conservation movements, the use of these methods now usually falls under the purview of specially designated government agencies in most developed countries.
In comparison, countries such as the U.S. consume only a pound or less (under 0.5&nbsp;kg), with Americans eating 50&nbsp;pounds (22&nbsp;kg) of pork and 65&nbsp;pounds (29&nbsp;kg) of beef.
Especially in industrialized countries, sheep producers may fatten market lambs before slaughter (called "finishing") in feedlots.
Long wool breeds are the largest of sheep, with long wool and a slow rate of growth.
Sheep husbandry is practised throughout the majority of the inhabited world, and has been fundamental to many civilizations.
In addition to facial wool (in some breeds), visual field limitations can include ears and (in some breeds) horns, so the visual field can be extended by tilting the head.
Paradoxically, sheep can both cause and solve the spread of invasive plant species.
They are an efficient use of land; roughly six sheep can be kept on the amount that would suffice for a single cow or horse.
Pregnant sheep are also a useful model for human pregnancy, and have been used to investigate the effects on fetal development of malnutrition and hypoxia.
Research conducted in Imperial County, California compared lamb grazing with herbicides for weed control in seedling alfalfa fields.
Sheep can become hefted to one particular local pasture (heft) so they do not roam freely in unfenced landscapes.
This is safer than grazing, which requires lowering the head thus leaving the animal vulnerable to predators, while cud chewing does not.
Fleeces are used as material in making alternative products such as wool insulation.
Other deities occasionally shown with ram features include the goddess Ishtar, the Phoenician god Baal-Hamon, and the Babylonian god Ea-Oannes.
A minor class of sheep are the dairy breeds.
Such visual characteristics are likely to produce a well-focused retinal image of objects in both the middle and long distance.
However, many would disagree with regard to timing.
Afterwards, sheep may be moved to a new pasture to avoid ingesting the same parasites.
A variety of bleats may be heard, depending on sheep age and circumstances.
Ear tags with numbers are attached, or ear marks are applied, for ease of later identification of sheep.
Another trait unique to domestic sheep as compared to wild ovines is their wide variation in color.
Apart from contact communication, bleating may signal distress, frustration or impatience; however, sheep are usually silent when in pain.
Dual-purpose breeds that may primarily be meat or wool sheep are often used secondarily as milking animals, but there are a few breeds that are predominantly used for milking.
Also, in contrast to most livestock species, the cost of raising sheep is not necessarily tied to the price of feed crops such as grain, soybeans and corn.
For example: the American Columbia breed was developed by crossing Lincoln rams (a long wool breed) with fine-wooled Rambouillet ewes.
More seriously, the organisms that can cause spontaneous enzootic abortion in sheep are easily transmitted to pregnant women.
A new option for deriving profit from live sheep is the rental of flocks for grazing; these "mowing services" are hired in order to keep unwanted vegetation down in public spaces and to lessen fire hazard.
In this trial, lambs provided insect control as effectively as insecticides.
In addition to other treatments, crutching (shearing wool from a sheep's rump) is a common preventive method.
Many sheep breeders flush ewes and rams with a daily ration of grain during breeding to increase fertility.
Because sheep eyes have no accommodation, one might expect the image of very near objects to be blurred, but a rather clear near image could be provided by the tapetum and large retinal image of the sheep's eye, and adequate close vision may occur at muzzle length.
The bolus is periodically regurgitated back to the mouth as cud for additional chewing and salivation.
Domestic sheep are sometimes used in medical research, particularly for researching cardiovascular physiology, in areas such as hypertension and heart failure.
There is variation of wool type and quality even among members of the same flock, so wool classing is a step in the commercial processing of the fibre..
Perhaps the most unusual dish of sheep meat is the Scottish haggis, composed of various sheep innards cooked along with oatmeal and chopped onions inside its stomach.
Farmers may also choose to focus on a particular breed of sheep in order to sell registered purebred animals, as well as provide a ram rental service for breeding.
Fly maggots cause the extremely destructive condition of flystrike.
A hybrid of a ewe and a buck (a male goat) is called a sheep-goat hybrid (only a single such animal has been confirmed), and is not to be confused with the sheep-goat chimera, though both are known as "geep".
Each sheep lifts its head upwards to check the position of other sheep in the flock.
In general, sheep have a tendency to move out of the dark and into well-lit areas, and prefer to move uphill when disturbed.
Diseases of the hoof, such as foot rot and foot scald may occur, and are treated with footbaths and other remedies.
One of the earliest animals to be domesticated for agricultural purposes, sheep are raised for fleece, meat (lamb, hogget or mutton) and milk.
However, the impact of predation varies dramatically with region.
An adult female sheep is referred to as a ''ewe'' (), an intact male as a ''ram'' or occasionally a ''tup'', a castrated male as a ''wether'', and a younger sheep as a  ''lamb''.
In both ancient and modern religious ritual, sheep are used as sacrificial animals.
Sheepraising has a large lexicon of unique terms which vary considerably by region and dialect.
Greeks and Romans sacrificed sheep regularly in religious practice, and Judaism once sacrificed sheep as a Korban (sacrifice), such as the Passover lamb .
For many sheep owners, the cost of shearing is greater than the possible profit from the fleece, making subsisting on wool production alone practically impossible without farm subsidies.
This can also mean maintaining a closed flock, and quarantining new sheep for a month.
Other than forage, the other staple feed for sheep is hay, often during the winter months.
For this reason, many shepherds use managed intensive rotational grazing, where a flock is rotated through multiple pastures, giving plants time to recover.
OHSU and the involved scientists vehemently denied such accusations.
Common plants toxic to sheep are present in most of the world, and include (but are not limited to) cherry, some oaks and acorns, tomato, yew, rhubarb, potato, and rhododendron.
External sheep parasites include: lice (for different parts of the body), sheep keds, nose bots, sheep itch mites, and maggots.
However, this research has been controversial, and much publicity has been produced by a study at the Oregon Health and Science University that investigated the mechanisms that produce homosexuality in rams.
Many buyers avoid outlets known to be clearing houses for animals culled from healthy flocks as either sick or simply inferior.
Fine wool breeds are those that have wool of great crimp and density, which are preferred for textiles.
They are ingested during grazing, incubate within the sheep, and are expelled through the digestive system (beginning the cycle again).
Ovine rinderpest (or ''peste des petits ruminants'') is a highly contagious and often fatal viral disease affecting sheep and goats.
During or soon after labor, ewes and lambs may be confined to small lambing jugs, small pens designed to aid both careful observation of ewes and to cement the bond between them and their lambs.
Donkeys and guard llamas have been used since the 1980s in sheep operations, using the same basic principle as livestock guardian dogs.
(Other important rumen organisms include some archaea, which produce methane from carbon dioxide.)
Selection for easily dyeable white fleeces began early in sheep domestication, and as white wool is a dominant trait it spread quickly.
Entomologists also compared grazing lambs to insecticides for insect control in winter alfalfa.
Despite the falling demand and price for sheep products in many markets, sheep have distinct economic advantages when compared with other livestock.
Flock behaviour in sheep is generally only exhibited in groups of four or more sheep; fewer sheep may not react as expected when alone or with few other sheep.
Sounds made by domestic sheep include bleats, grunts, rumbles and snorts.
In the English language, to call someone a sheep or ovine may allude that they are timid and easily led.
Ovine obstetrics can be problematic.
In 60 Merinos, visual fields ranged from 219.1° to 303.0°, averaging 269.9°, and the binocular field ranged from 8.9° to 77.7°, averaging 47.5°; 36% of the measurements were limited by wool, although photographs of the experiments indicate that only limited facial wool regrowth had occurred since shearing.
Sheep meat is also popular in France, Africa (especially the Maghreb), the Caribbean, the rest of the Middle East, India, and parts of China.
Depending on breed, domestic sheep may have no horns at all (i.e.
Cornered sheep may charge and butt, or threaten by hoof stamping and adopting an aggressive posture.
In addition to animal guardians, contemporary sheep operations may use non-lethal predator deterrents such as motion-activated lights and noisy alarms.
A sheep's wool is the most widely used animal fiber, and is usually harvested by shearing.
Also included in some sheep's diets are minerals, either in a trace mix or in licks.
After the birth, ewes ideally break the amniotic sac (if it is not broken during labor), and begin licking clean the lamb.
However, there are exceptions.
Although there is a growing movement advocating alternative farming styles, a large percentage of beef cattle, pigs, and poultry are still produced under such conditions.
Males of the two species differ in that buck goats acquire a unique and strong odor during the rut, whereas rams do not.
These black sheep were considered undesirable by shepherds, as black wool is not as commercially viable as white wool.
Sheep follow a similar reproductive strategy to other herd animals.
Combined with the  lower cost of quality sheep, all these factors combine to equal a lower overhead for sheep producers, thus entailing a higher profitability potential for the small farmer.
In the case of any such problems, those present at lambing may assist the ewe by extracting or repositioning lambs.
For this reason, domestic sheep on normal pasture begin to slowly decline from four years on, and the life expectancy of a sheep is 10 to 12 years, though some sheep may live as long as 20 years.
Rumbling sounds are made by the ram during courting;  somewhat similar rumbling sounds may be made by the ewe, especially when with her neonate lambs.
Both sheep and goats use their lips and tongues to select parts of the plant that are easier to digest or higher in nutrition.
After mating, sheep have a gestation period of about five months, and normal labor takes one to three hours.
The 1970s saw a resurgence in the use of livestock guardian dogs and the development of new methods of predator control by sheep producers, many of them non-lethal.
According to the Biblical story of the Binding of Isaac, a ram is sacrificed as a substitute for Isaac after an angel stays Abraham's hand (in the Islamic tradition, Abraham was about to sacrifice Ishmael).
Somewhat differently, the adjective "sheepish" is also used to describe embarrassment.
In addition to long-term facial recognition of individuals, sheep can also differentiate emotional states through facial characteristics.
Religious symbolism and ritual involving sheep began with some of the first known faiths: Skulls of rams (along with bulls) occupied central placement in shrines at the Çatalhöyük settlement in 8,000 BCE.
Other features used when classifying sheep include face color (generally white or black), tail length, presence or lack of horns, and the topography for which the breed has been developed.
Sheep can recognize individual human and ovine faces, and remember them for years.
Flies lay their eggs in wounds or wet, manure-soiled wool; when the maggots hatch they burrow into a sheep's flesh, eventually causing death if untreated.
Some countries allow mulesing, a practice that involves stripping away the skin on the rump to prevent fly-strike, normally performed when the sheep is a lamb.
During fermentation, the rumen produces gas that must be expelled; disturbances of the organ, such as sudden changes in a sheep's diet, can cause the potentially fatal condition of bloat, when gas becomes trapped in the rumen, due to reflex closure of the caudal esophageal sphincter when in contact with foam or liquid.
Some farmers who keep sheep also make a profit from live sheep.
Relationships in flocks tend to be closest among related sheep: in mixed-breed flocks, subgroups of the same breed tend to form, and a ewe and her direct descendants often move as a unit within large flocks.
Sheep tails also hang down, even when short or docked, while the short tails of goats are held upwards.
Hair sheep are also more resistant to parasites and hot weather.
In the modern era, Australia, New Zealand, the southern and central South American nations, and the British Isles are most closely associated with sheep production.
Sheep milk contains 4.8% lactose, which may affect those who are intolerant.
Many breeders take a variety of preventive measures to ward off problems.
Historically, shepherds often created remedies by experimentation on the farm.
Two fundamental preventive programs are maintaining good nutrition and reducing stress in the sheep.
The nature of the fleece varies widely among the breeds, from dense and highly crimped, to long and hairlike.
The need for traditional anti-parasite drugs and antibiotics is widespread, and is the main impediment to certified organic farming with sheep.
A last group of sheep breeds is that of fur or '''hair sheep''', which do not grow wool at all.
The dominance hierarchy of sheep and their natural inclination to follow a leader to new pastures were the pivotal factors in sheep being one of the first domesticated livestock species.
Sheep producers have used a wide variety of measures to combat predation.
Common signs are a discharge from the nasal passage, sneezing, and frantic movement such as head shaking.
Sheep continue to be important for wool and meat today, and are also occasionally raised for pelts, as dairy animals, or as model organisms for science.
As with other domestic animals, the meat of uncastrated males is inferior in quality, especially as they grow.
Like all ruminants, sheep have a complex digestive system composed of four chambers, allowing them to break down cellulose from stems, leaves, and seed hulls into simpler carbohydrates.
China, Australia, India, and Iran have the largest modern flocks, and serve both local and exportation needs for wool and mutton.
adolescent ewes) in early pregnancy can result in restricted placental development, restricting growth of fetal lambs in late pregnancy.
Downs breeds have wool between the extremes, and are typically fast-growing meat and ram breeds with dark faces.
Sight is a vital part of sheep communication, and when grazing, they maintain visual contact with each other.
In behavioral sciences, sheep have been used in isolated cases for the study of facial recognition, as their mental process of recognition is qualitatively similar to humans.
Although some breeds regularly throw larger litters of lambs, most produce single or twin lambs.
Bluetongue disease is an insect-borne illness causing fever and inflammation of the mucous membranes.
"Mutton" is derived from the Old French ''moton'', which was the word for sheep used by the Anglo-Norman rulers of much of the British Isles in the Middle Ages.
Hair sheep are similar to the early domesticated sheep kept before woolly breeds were developed, and are raised for meat and pelts.
However, colored sheep do appear in many modern breeds, and may even appear as a recessive trait in white flocks.
Sheep, however, graze well in monoculture pastures where most goats fare poorly.
Lambs that either fail to nurse or are rejected by the ewe require help to survive, such as bottle-feeding or fostering by another ewe.
The previous record holder was a Merino ram sold for £205,000 in 1989.
Especially in developing countries, such flocks may be a part of subsistence agriculture rather than a system of trade.
Many other specific terms for the various life stages of sheep exist, generally related to lambing, shearing, and age.
The front teeth are then gradually lost as sheep age, making it harder for them to feed and hindering the health and productivity of the animal.
Docking and castration are commonly done after 24 hours (to avoid interference with maternal bonding and consumption of colostrum) and are often done not later than one week after birth, to minimize pain, stress, recovery time and complications.
Breeds are often categorized by the type of their wool.
Even if sheep survive an attack, they may die from their injuries, or simply from panic.
Other countries such as New Zealand have smaller flocks but retain a large international economic impact due to their export of sheep products.
The ewe uses her vomeronasal organ for early recognition of her neonate lamb.
In contrast, only some sheep are regularly given high-concentration grain feed, much less kept in confinement.
In the study of natural selection, the population of Soay sheep that remain on the island of Hirta have been used to explore the relation of body size and coloration to reproductive success.
In 10 sheep (Cambridge, Lleyn and Welsh Mountain breeds, which lack facial wool), the visual field ranged from 298° to 325°, averaging 313.1°, with binocular overlap ranging from 44.5° to 74°, averaging 61.7°.
In the quality of their milk, the fat and protein content percentages of dairy sheep vary from non-dairy breeds, but lactose content does not.
when the concentration of maternal antibodies passively acquired via colostrum is expected to have fallen low enough to permit development of active immunity.
Sheep can also consume plants, such as noxious weeds, that most other animals will not touch, and produce more young at a faster rate.
It has been reported that some sheep have apparently shown problem-solving abilities; a flock in West Yorkshire, England allegedly found a way to get over cattle grids by rolling on their backs, although documentation of this has relied on anecdotal accounts.
Throughout modern history, "mutton" has been limited to the meat of mature sheep usually at least two years of age; "lamb" is used for that of immature sheep less than a year.
Sheep droppings, which are high in cellulose, have even been sterilized and mixed with traditional pulp materials to make paper.
The '''sheep''' (''Ovis aries'') is a quadrupedal, ruminant mammal typically kept as livestock.
They do not require expensive housing, such as that used in the intensive farming of chickens or pigs.
Worms are the most common internal parasites.
Cud chewing is an adaptation allowing ruminants to graze more quickly in the morning, and then fully chew and digest feed later in the day.
Avoiding poisoning is also important; common poisons are pesticide sprays, inorganic fertilizer, motor oil, as well as radiator coolant containing ethylene glycol.
Good depth perception, inferred from the sheep's sure-footedness, was confirmed in "visual cliff" experiments; behavioral responses indicating depth perception are seen in lambs at one day old.
Sheep testicles—called animelles or lamb fries—are considered a delicacy in many parts of the world.
The Rare Breeds Survival Trust of the UK lists 22 native breeds as having only 3,000 registered animals (each), and The Livestock Conservancy lists 14 as either "critical" or "threatened".
Sheep have been used as pack animals; Tibetan nomads distribute baggage equally throughout a flock as it is herded between living sites.
When sheep graze, vegetation is chewed into a mass called a bolus, which is then passed into the rumen, via the reticulum.
Sheep are key symbols in fables and nursery rhymes like ''The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing'', ''Little Bo Peep'', ''Baa, Baa, Black Sheep'', and ''Mary Had a Little Lamb''; novels such as George Orwell's ''Animal Farm'' and Haruki Murakami's ''A Wild Sheep Chase''; songs such as Bach's ''Sheep may safely graze'' (''Schafe können sicher weiden'') and Pink Floyd's ''Sheep'', and poems like William Blake's "The Lamb".
Ewes generally reach sexual maturity at six to eight months old, and rams generally at four to six months.
Some major medium wool breeds, such as the Corriedale, are dual-purpose crosses of long and fine-wooled breeds and were created for high-production commercial flocks.
Fencing (both regular and electric), penning sheep at night and lambing indoors all continue to be widely used.
Sheep also play a major role in many local economies, which may be niche markets focused on organic or sustainable agriculture and local food customers.
In Mongolia, shagai are an ancient form of dice made from the cuboid bones of sheep that are often used for fortunetelling purposes.
Some Christian saints are considered patrons of shepherds, and even of sheep themselves.
As the demand for carpet-quality wool declines, some breeders of this type of sheep are attempting to use a few of these traditional breeds for alternative purposes.
Sheep are flock animals and strongly gregarious; much sheep behavior can be understood on the basis of these tendencies.
Ovine Johne's disease is a wasting disease that affects young sheep.
This constant monitoring is probably what keeps the sheep in a flock as they move along grazing.
A minority of rams (8% on average) display a preference for homosexuality and a small number of the females that were accompanied by a male fetus ''in utero'' are freemartins (female animals that are behaviorally masculine and lack functioning ovaries).
With a much narrower face, sheep crop plants very close to the ground and can overgraze a pasture much faster than cattle.
For meat and hide producers, hair sheep are cheaper to keep, as they do not need shearing.
Sheep become stressed when isolated; this stress is reduced if they are provided with a mirror, indicating that the sight of other sheep reduces stress.
The same danger applies to mineral supplements such as salt licks.
A few primitive breeds of sheep retain some of the characteristics of their wild cousins, such as short tails.
In antiquity, symbolism involving sheep cropped up in religions in the ancient Near East, the Mideast, and the Mediterranean area: Çatalhöyük, ancient Egyptian religion, the Cana'anite and Phoenician tradition, Judaism, Greek religion, and others.
While white wool is desirable for large commercial markets, there is a niche market for colored fleeces, mostly for handspinning.
However, overfeeding of ewe hoggets (i.e.
Ewes have estrus cycles about every 17 days, during which they emit a scent and indicate readiness through physical displays towards rams.
In sheep, position in a moving flock is highly correlated with social dominance, but there is no definitive study to show consistent voluntary leadership by an individual sheep.
For example, Finnsheep ewe lambs may reach puberty as early as 3 to 4 months, and Merino ewes sometimes reach puberty at 18 to 20 months.
Sheep figure in many mythologies—such as the Golden Fleece—and major religions, especially the Abrahamic traditions.
The domestic sheep is a multi-purpose animal, and the more than 200 breeds now in existence were created to serve these diverse purposes.
This is particularly true for ewes with newborn lambs.
More modern shepherds used guns, traps, and poisons to kill predators, causing significant decreases in predator populations.
External parasites may be controlled through the use of backliners, sprays or immersive sheep dips.
A group of sheep is called a flock, herd or mob.
The bleats of individual sheep are distinctive, enabling the ewe and her lambs to recognize each other's vocalizations.
863 breeds as of 1993, 1314 breeds as of 1995  and 1229 breeds as of 2006.
A few sheep conditions are transmissible to humans.
Despite these perceptions, a University of Illinois monograph on sheep reported them to be just below pigs and on par with cattle in IQ.
In the 21st century, the nations with the highest consumption of sheep meat are the Arab States of the Persian Gulf, New Zealand, Australia, Greece, Uruguay, the United Kingdom and Ireland.
