They currently play in the second tier of the professional league, the Championship and are current champions, having won back to back titles in 2012 and 2013.
Sheffield Health and Social Care NHS Foundation Trust provides mental health services, services for people with learning disabilities, substance misuse services, long term neurological conditions, as well as a consortium of GP practises.
It is thought this tradition is now unique in Britain.
Sheffield does not have as extensive a suburban and inter-urban railway network as other comparable British cities.
Sheffield Eagles RLFC are the city's professional Rugby league team who play their matches at Owlerton Stadium.
The M1 skirts the north-east of the city, linking Sheffield with London to the south and Leeds to the north, and crosses Tinsley Viaduct near Rotherham; the M18 branches from the M1 close to Sheffield, linking the city with Doncaster, Robin Hood Doncaster Sheffield Airport, and the Humber ports.
Sheffield's main market was once Castle Market, built above the remains of the castle.
Owing to its long history, Sheffield has a large number of pubs throughout the city.
The network is due to be extended to Rotherham Parkgate by 2017, with a fleet of new "train-trams" sharing a conventional rail line between Sheffield and Rotherham.
In the 1950s and 1960s, many of the city's slums were demolished, and replaced with housing schemes such as the Park Hill flats.
By contrast, in November 2007, Sheffield's Peace and Winter Gardens beat London's South Bank to gain the Royal Institute of British Architects' Academy of Urbanism "Great Place" Award, as an "outstanding example of how cities can be improved, to make urban spaces as attractive and accessible as possible".
In 2002 the Showroom was voted as the best Independent cinema in the country by ''Guardian'' readers.
These local routes include the Penistone Line, the Dearne Valley Line, the Hope Valley Line and the Hallam Line.
The films and plays ''The Full Monty'', ''Threads'', ''Looks and Smiles'', ''When Saturday Comes'', ''Whatever Happened to Harold Smith?
The coalition government announced in October 2010 that Sheffield would be included in the proposed High Speed Rail network connecting the North of England with London.
Roughly a third of Sheffield lies in the Peak District National Park.
Sheffield and Hallam contest what has become known as the Sheffield derby.
As well as the main stations of Sheffield and Meadowhall, there are five suburban stations, at Chapeltown, Darnall, Woodhouse, Dronfield and Dore.
DSA airport opened on 28 April 2005 and is served mainly by charter and budget airlines.
From 1570 to 1584, Mary, Queen of Scots, was imprisoned in Sheffield Castle and Sheffield Manor.
Of these, only five are Grade I listed.
The system contains both on-street and segregated running, depending upon the section and line.
In the 14th century, Sheffield was already noted for the production of knives, as mentioned in Geoffrey Chaucer's ''The Canterbury Tales'', and by the early 1600s it had become the main centre of cutlery manufacture in England outside London, overseen by the Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire.
These networks supply heat and hot water for many buildings throughout the city.
In 1857 a collective of cricketers formed the world's first-ever official football club, Sheffield F.C., and the world's second-ever, Hallam F.C., who also play at the world's oldest football ground in the suburb of Crosspool.
A recent addition to the city's nightlife is Leopold Square, situated just off the northern end of West Street.
The Master Cutler, a named passenger express train running from Sheffield railway station to London St Pancras, provides a direct connection to the capital.
There are 83 parks in Sheffield (13 'City' Parks, 20 'District' Parks and 50 'Local' Parks) which are located throughout the city.
In 2011 the racial composition of Sheffield's population was 84% White (81% White British, 0.5% White Irish, 0.1% Gypsy or Irish Traveller, 2.3% Other White), 2.4% of mixed race (1.0% White and Black Caribbean, 0.2% White and Black African, 0.6% White and Asian, 0.6% Other Mixed), 8% Asian (1.1% Indian, 4% Pakistani, 0.6% Bangladeshi, 1.3% Chinese, 1.0% Other Asian), 3.6% Black (2.1% African, 1% Caribbean, 0.5% Other Black), 1.5% Arab and 0.7% of other ethnic heritage.
The town was incorporated as a borough in 1842 and was granted a city charter in 1893.
West Street, running through the heart of the West End district of the city centre, is home to many pubs, bars and clubs and attracts many student visitors.
HBS Radio (Hospital Broadcasting Sheffield) broadcasts a 24-hour service to the Royal Hallamshire, Jessop Wing, Northern General and Weston Park Hospitals.
City Campus is located in the city centre, close to Sheffield railway station, and Collegiate Crescent Campus is about two miles away, adjacent to Ecclesall Road in south-west Sheffield.
The Northern General Hospital is the second 'campus' and is a large facility in the northern suburbs of Sheffield, containing the city's A&E department.
Two Megabus services, the M12 and M20, call at Sheffield en route to London from Newcastle upon Tyne and Inverness respectively.
It is home to several restaurants, bars, a cinema multiplex and a bowling alley.
The stage was won by the eventual overall winner, Vincenzo Nibali of Astana Pro Team.
Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust provides healthcare for children within the city of Sheffield, South Yorkshire and the UK as a whole.
The Lyceum, which opened in 1897, serves as a venue for touring West End productions and operas by Opera North, as well as locally produced shows.
A zero-fare bus service, the ''FreeBee'' (Operated by First South Yorkshire), operated a circular route around the city centre from the Sheffield Interchange.
A flurry of new operators was created after deregulation in 1986, though a series of mergers has reduced the number.
The tradition of singing carols in pubs around Christmas is still kept alive in the city.
Estimated to contain over two million trees, Sheffield has more trees per person than any other city in Europe, and according to Sheffield City Council, it is England's greenest city, a claim that was reinforced when it won the 2005 Entente Florale competition.
All schools are non-selective, mixed sex schools (apart from Sheffield High School which is an all-girls school).
Sheffield's museums are managed by two distinct organisations.
However, the Liberal Democrats controlled the Council between 1999 and 2001 and took control again from 2008 to 2011.
The city is in the eastern foothills of the Pennines, and the valleys of the River Don and its four tributaries, the Loxley, the Porter Brook, the Rivelin and the Sheaf.
Sheffield has two universities, the University of Sheffield and Sheffield Hallam University.
Historically part of the West Riding of Yorkshire, its name derives from the River Sheaf, which runs through the city.
Sheffield also has many golf courses all around the city.
On average, through the winter months of December to March, there are 67 days during which ground frost occurs.
This compares to the UK's total carbon footprint of 698,568,010&nbsp;tonnes per year.
First South Yorkshire, became by far the largest bus operator and in recent years implemented a series of fare rises and service cuts which saw bus ridership drop.
It has recorded weather for more than 125 years, and a 2008 report showed that the climate of Sheffield is warming faster than it has at any time during this period, with 1990 and 2006 being the hottest years on record.
, ''Kill List'' and ''The Princess Bride'' also include several scenes filmed in Sheffield and a substantial part of ''Among Giants'' was filmed in the city.
The former Don Valley International Athletics Stadium, once the largest athletics stadium in the UK, was also constructed for the Universiade games.
Sheffield hosts a number of festivals, the Grin Up North Sheffield Comedy Festival, the Sensoria Music & Film Festival and the Tramlines Festival.
It is this tribe who are thought to have constructed several hill forts in and around Sheffield.
Sheffield's local bus infrastructure has its main hub at Sheffield Interchange.
There are more than 250 parks, woodlands and gardens in the city, and an estimated 2&nbsp;million trees, giving Sheffield the highest ratio of trees to people of any city in Europe.
The Weston Park Weather station, established in 1882, is one of the longest running weather stations in the United Kingdom.
Rotherham United, who play in the Championship, did play their home games in the city between 2008 and 2012, having moved to play at Sheffield's Don Valley Stadium in 2008 following a dispute with their previous landlord at their traditional home ground of Millmoor, Rotherham.
Medical services in Sheffield are provided by three NHS Foundation Trusts.
The climb was just  long at an average gradient of 10.8%.
Sheffield hosted the finish of Stage 2 of the 2014 Tour de France.
The city is home to thirteen morris dance teams - thought to be one of the highest concentration of sides in the country.
It connects Sheffield, Rotherham and Doncaster with the River Trent at Keadby and (via the New Junction Canal) the Aire and Calder Navigation.
The site is dominated by its water features, principle among which is the Goodwin Fountain.
These electoral wards are grouped into six parliamentary constituencies.
Since 2012 there have been disputes between the city council and residents over the fate of the city's 36,000 highway trees, with 2000 having been felled by October 2015 as part of the £2 billion Streets Ahead road improvement scheme.
Domestic recycling services were recently improved with the addition of glass recycling bins for each home.
Following the closure of Sheffield City Airport in 2008, the closest international airport to Sheffield is '''Doncaster Sheffield Airport,''' which is located  less than 40 minutes from the city centre.
The National Hockey League's Stanley Cup was made in Sheffield in 1892.
Sheffield has a thriving folk music, song and dance community.
These include The Human League, Heaven 17, ABC and the more industrially inclined Cabaret Voltaire & Clock DVA.
(Local folklore insists that, like Rome, Sheffield was built "on seven hills".)
However, there are several local rail routes running along the city's valleys and beyond, connecting it with other parts of South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire and Derbyshire.
Some are unaccompanied, some have a piano or organ, there is a flip chart with the words on in one place, a string quartet (quintet, sextet, septet) accompanies the singing at another, some encourage soloists, others stick to audience participation, a brass band plays at certain events, the choir takes the lead at another.
However, 79% of the housing in the city is between  above sea level.
In about the same period, a technique was developed for fusing a thin sheet of silver onto a copper ingot to produce silver plating, which became widely known as Sheffield plate.
Sheffield is located at .
It has over 170&nbsp;woodlands (covering ), 78&nbsp;public parks (covering ) and 10&nbsp;public gardens.
These innovations spurred Sheffield's growth as an industrial town, but the loss of some important export markets led to a recession in the late 18th and early 19th century.
In 2008, the Bus Rapid Transit Scheme between Sheffield and Rotherham was approved by the Yorkshire and Humber Assembly's Regional Transport Board.
Sheffield is also home to the Sheffield Steel Rollergirls, a roller derby team.
The coldest temperature to be recorded in recent years was .
Sheffield also has a very wide variety of habitat, comparing favourably with any city in the United Kingdom: urban, parkland and woodland, agricultural and arable land, moors, meadows and freshwater-based habitats.
July was also the hottest month, with an average maximum temperature of .
Its network consists of  of track and three lines, from Halfway to Malin Bridge (Blue Line), from Meadowhall to Middlewood (Yellow Line), and from Meadowhall to Herdings Park (Purple Line), with all three lines running via the city centre.
Although Barnsley Metropolitan Borough also borders Sheffield to the north, the town itself is a few miles further away.
Since their redevelopment in 1998, the Peace gardens have received a number of regional and national accolades.
Five local radio stations broadcast in the city.
As a consequence, several communities actually reside within both entities.
The university is the third largest in the UK, with more than 37,000 students (of whom over 4,000 are international students), 4,170 staff and 747 courses.
The 560/564 service is a direct connection to London Victoria Coach Station via Chesterfield and Milton Keynes, operating 12 times a day in both directions.
These historical areas are largely ignored by the modern administrative and political divisions of the city; instead it is divided into 28&nbsp;electoral wards, with each ward generally covering 4–6&nbsp;areas.
This area includes a significant part of the countryside surrounding the main urban region.
The trusts title includes the word 'teaching' because it undertakes training of medical students at the University of Sheffield and has strong links to Sheffield Hallam University as well.
East Midlands Trains run services to St Pancras International and Eurostar run services from there to France and Belgium.
In the final, they were comprehensively beaten by Featherstone.
Like the rest of the United Kingdom, the climate in Sheffield is generally temperate.
Sheffield Hallam University's history goes back to 1843 with the establishment of the Sheffield School of Design.
These topographical factors have served to restrict urban spread, resulting in a relatively stable population size and a low degree of mobility.
They play in the 10 team professional Elite Ice Hockey League.
Kelham Island Museum (located just to the North of the city centre) showcases the city's history of steel manufacturing.
By 1860 there were 15&nbsp;football clubs in Sheffield, with the first ever amateur league and cup competitions taking place in the city.
Construction of the Yorkshire/East Midlands High Speed line is likely to begin 2025 and services begin operation in 2032.
The city also hosts the Sheffield Tigers rugby union, Sheffield Sharks basketball, Sheffield University Bankers hockey, Sheffield Steelers ice hockey and Sheffield Tigers speedway teams.
The Sheffield Parkway connects the city centre with the motorways.
The main shopping areas in the city centre are on The Moor precinct, Fargate, Orchard Square and the Devonshire Quarter.
Between 1971 and 2000 Sheffield averaged  of rain per year; December was the wettest month with  and July the driest with .
Directly to the west of the city are the Peak District National Park and the Pennine hill range, while the lowlands of the South Yorkshire Coalfield lie to the east.
The ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'' reports that King Eanred of Northumbria submitted to King Egbert of Wessex at the hamlet of Dore (now a suburb of Sheffield) in 829, a key event in the unification of the kingdom of England under the House of Wessex.
The Sheffield Walk of Fame in the City Centre honours famous Sheffield residents past and present in a similar way to the Hollywood version.
There are many cycle routes going along country paths in the woods surrounding the city.
Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust provides healthcare to people (primarily adults) throughout Sheffield and South Yorkshire.
The firm also has the capacity for pouring the largest single ingot (570 tonnes) in Europe and is currently in the process of expanding its capabilities.
It also provides hot water, which is distributed through over  of pipes under the city, via two networks.
Fifty-nine are Grade II*, but the overwhelming majority are listed as Grade II.
A Curzon Cinemas complex has also recently opened in the city centre, close to the existing Odeon complex.
The team then hit troubled times before reforming in 2003.
The University of Sheffield runs a number of courses and research projects dedicated to folk culture.
Also within the city there are a number of nature reserves which when combined occupy  of land.
Gradually, Anglian settlers pushed west from the kingdom of Deira.
The Showroom, an independent cinema showing non-mainstream productions, is located in Sheaf Square, close to Sheffield station.
These include not only cinemas, hospitals, shops and offices, but also universities (Sheffield Hallam University and the University of Sheffield), and residential properties.
This electronic tradition has continued: techno label Warp Records was a central pillar of the Yorkshire Bleeps and Bass scene of the early 1990s, and has gone on to become one of the UK's oldest and best-loved dance music labels.
Consequently, there are many parks and woods throughout the city and beyond.
The city's five independent private schools include Birkdale School and the Sheffield High School.
It lies directly beside Rotherham, from which it is separated largely by the M1 motorway.
More than 660&nbsp;lives were lost and many buildings destroyed.
The one point in the King of the Mountains Competition was claimed by Chris Froome of Team Sky.
Sheffield has a District Energy system that exploits the city's domestic waste, by incinerating it and converting the energy from it to electricity.
Aagrah, an Indian restaurant in the square which serves Kashmiri cuisine, has recently been voted "Best Restaurant Group in the UK" at the prestigious British Curry Awards.
The Sheffield College is organised on a federal basis and was originally created from the merger of six colleges around the city, since reduced to just four: Sheffield City (formerly Castle) near the city centre, Hillsborough, serving the north of the city and Norton and Peaks to the south.
Major railway routes through Sheffield railway station include the Midland Main Line, which links the city to London via the East Midlands, the Cross Country Route which links the East of Scotland and Northeast of England with the West Midlands and the Southwest, and the lines linking Liverpool and Manchester with Hull and East Anglia.
The Sheffield Carols, as they are known locally, predate modern carols by over a century and are sung with alternative words and verses.
The 1980s saw the worst of this run-down of Sheffield's industries, along with those of many other areas of the UK.
Sheffield has two large theatres, the Lyceum Theatre and the Crucible Theatre, which together with the smaller Studio Theatre make up the largest theatre complex outside London, located in Tudor Square.
Increased automation and competition from abroad resulted in the closure of many steel mills.
Council owned/run buildings are maintained by Kier Group Sheffield in partnership with the council.
The International Open and World Matchplay Championship bowls tournaments have both been held at Ponds Forge.
Aside from the main railway station there are five other stations in Sheffield.
The majority of council-owned facilities are operated by independent charitable trusts.
There are plans for two routes; one (the Northern route) via Meadowhall and Templeborough, and the other via the developing employment centre and Waverley.
The resulting poor conditions culminated in a cholera epidemic that killed 402&nbsp;people in 1832.
Shepherd Wheel (in the south-East of the city) is a former water-powered grinding workshop, Grade II listed and a Scheduled Ancient Monument.
For cycling, although hilly, Sheffield is compact and has few major trunk roads.
An inner ring road, mostly constructed in the 1970s and extended in 2007 to form a complete ring, allows traffic to avoid the city centre, and an outer ring road runs to the east, south east and north, nearer the edge of the city, but does not serve the western side of Sheffield.
Sheffield is the third largest English district by population.
Sheffield also has close ties with snooker, with the city's Crucible Theatre being the venue for the World Snooker Championships.
Odeon Sheffield, situated on Arundel Gate in the city Centre and Vue, located within Meadowhall Shopping Centre, are the two other mainstream cinemas in the city.
The lowest daytime maximum temperature in the city since records began is , also recorded in February 1895.
Museums Sheffield manages the Weston Park Museum (a Grade II* listed Building), Millennium Galleries and Graves Art Gallery.
The United Kingdom Census 2001 reported a resident population for Sheffield of 513,234, a 2% decline from the 1991 census.
The English Institute of Sport hosts most of the top fencing competitions each year, including the National Championships for Seniors, Juniors (U20's) and Cadets (U17's) as well as the 2011 Senior European Fencing Championships.
In Anglo-Saxon times, the Sheffield area straddled the border between the kingdoms of Mercia and Northumbria.
In 2012, Sheffield City Region Enterprise Zone was launched to promote development in a number of sites in Sheffield and across the wider region.
The force has in its possession one Police helicopter, known as Sierra Yankee 99.
Many of Sheffield's sporting facilities were built for the World Student Games, which the city hosted in 1991, including Sheffield Arena and the Ponds Forge international diving and swimming complex.
The Supertram serves as an important connection between areas in the North East of Sheffield (namely Meadowhall and Valley Centertainment) and the city centre.
The city is part of the wider Sheffield urban area, which had a population of 640,720.
The 350 and 240 services connect Sheffield to Manchester Airport and Heathrow/Gatwick Airports respectively.
The population of the City of Sheffield is  () and it is one of the eight largest regional English cities that make up the Core Cities Group.
Forgemasters, founded in 1805, is the sole remaining independent steel works in the world and dominates the north east of Sheffield around the Lower Don Valley.
Sheffield has an international reputation for metallurgy and steel-making.
The Early Years Education and Childcare Service of Sheffield City Council manages 32 nurseries and children's centres in the city.
In March 2014 additional sites were added to the zone.
The park, known as Sheaf Valley Park, has an open-air amphitheatre and will include an arboretum.
'''Sheffield''' () is a city and metropolitan borough in South Yorkshire, England.
The gardens date back to 1779 and have been dedicated to the victims of the Hillsborough Disaster since the redevelopment of the gardens in the early 1990s.
One such, the ''Heart of the City Project'', has initiated a number of public works in the city centre: the Peace Gardens were renovated in 1998, the Millennium Galleries opened in April 2001, the Winter Gardens were opened in May 2003, and a public space to link these two areas, the Millennium Square, was opened in May 2006.
Nearly all forms of the dance are represented in the city, including Cotswold (Five Rivers Morris, Pecsaetan Morris, Harthill Morris, Lord Conyer's Morris Men, Sheffield City Morris, William Morris), border (Boggart's Breakfast), North West (Yorkshire Chandelier, Silkstone Greens, Lizzie Dripping), rapper (Sheffield Steel Rapper) and Yorkshire Longsword (Grenoside Sword Dancers, Handsworth Traditional Sword Dancers).
The force polices an area of approximately 1,554 square kilometres and is the 13th largest force in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The influx of people also led to demand for better water supplies, and a number of new reservoirs were constructed on the outskirts of the town.
The A57 and A61 roads are the major trunk roads through Sheffield.
Coach services running through Sheffield are operated by National Express and to a lesser extent Megabus, part of the Stagecoach Group.
Sheffield was once home to a number of historically important nightclubs in the early dance music scene of the 1980s and 90s, Gatecrasher One was one of the most popular clubs in the North of England until its destruction by fire on 18 June 2007.
However, the mid-2007 population estimate was 530,300, representing an increase of about 17,000 residents since 2001.
A link road, opened in February 2016, connects Doncaster Sheffield Airport to the M18 motorway, reducing the journey time from Sheffield city centre from 40 to 25 minutes.
Hillsborough Stadium was chosen as the proposed venue for matches in Sheffield.
During the 1740s, a form of the crucible steel process was discovered that allowed the manufacture of a better quality of steel than had previously been possible.
In a 2010 survey of forecast expenditure at retail centres in the United Kingdom, Meadowhall was ranked 12th and Sheffield City Centre 19th.
The site was once home to a medieval deer park, latterly owned by the Duke of Norfolk.
It consists of 84&nbsp;councillors elected to represent 28&nbsp;wards: three councillors per ward.
This process was rendered obsolete in 1856 by Henry Bessemer's invention of the Bessemer converter.
Sheffield is also home to the Sheffield Steelers ice hockey team who play out of the 8,500 seater Sheffield Arena.
Indie band The Long Blondes originated from the city, as part of what the ''NME'' dubbed the New Yorkshire scene.
In terms of religion, 53% of the population are Christian, 6% are Muslim, 0.6% are Hindu, 0.4% are Buddhist, 0.2% are Sikh, 0.1% are Jewish, 0.4% belong to another religion, 31% have no religion and 7% did not state their religion.
Sheffield is largely unparished, but Bradfield and Ecclesfield have parish councils, and Stocksbridge has a town council.
More recently, a  was recorded as a daytime maximum at Weston Park, on 20 December 2010.
Sheffield is also home to two FM licensed community radio stations: Sheffield Live 93.2, and Burngreave Community Radio on 103.1.
Sheffield received its municipal charter in 1843, becoming the City of Sheffield in 1893.  International competition in iron and steel caused a decline in these industries in the 1970s and 1980s, coinciding with the collapse of coal mining in the area.
This has resulted in increased competition, and price drops on certain routes.
With the redevelopment of London St Pancras station (now St Pancras International) complete, Sheffield has a direct connection to continental Europe.
Sheffield and Hallam are today Sheffield's two major non-league sides, although Sheffield now play just outside the city in nearby Dronfield, Derbyshire.
It operates on the site of the former RAF Finningley.
These run east–west and north–south respectively, crossing in the city centre, from where the other major roads generally radiate spoke-like.
The city also has two indoor climbing centres.
The metropolitan population of Sheffield is 1,569,000.
