The district is featured in a 9-hour epic documentary film ''West of the Tracks'' (the literal meaning of Tiexi) by a young filmmaker Wang Bing.
It is famous for wholesaling cheap clothes and household items.
was the first Chinese team to win the AFC Champions League in 1990.
The new Tiexi District now has a population of 907,091 (2014), a total area of , and enjoys the same administrative rank as a municipality (Administrative Committee of Shenyang).
Shenyang Olympic Sports Centre Stadium, a 60,000-seated soccer stadium, was a venue for the football preliminary of 2008 Summer Olympics.
The South Square () outside the Main Station Building was rebuilt into a multi-levelled complex, with two above ground forming an elevated airport-style drop-off zone and a large ground-level area for bus stops, as well as a three-level underground city providing shopping malls,carparks, taxi pick-up and interchange with Subway Line 2, while also capable of rapid conversion into an air raid shelter if needed.
They were built in 1643.
The outer city wall was built in 1680 to protect the urban area outside the inner city wall, which also had eight gates.
According to the Shenyang Environmental Protection Bureau coal used for heating is the source of 30% of the air pollution in Shenyang.
Shenyang North Railway Station was formerly the "Liaoning Main Station" () before 1946 and colloquially known as the "Old North Station" ().
Shenyang has a few foreign banks, such as South Korea's Hana Bank, the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ of Japan.
Another area, Wu'ai Market, (), features a large multi-story shopping center with a size comparable to that of many city blocks.
The East Pagoda Airport (), in Dadong District, is the oldest airport in Shenyang, opened in 1920s and retired in the 1980s.
On 20 August, Soviet troops captured Shenyang.
Shenyang is home of many performance art organizations, such as Shenyang Acrobatic Troupe of China, Liaoning Song and Dance Ensemble, and Liaoning Ballet.
Shenhe District is the site of the Mukden Palace, just south of the Central Temple.
The name is actually a mis-tranliteration of the pronunciation for ''Fiyanggū'' (, , 1605 – 1643), the Manchu Prince Jian of the First Rank whose tomb was in the area.
CMU is one of the top 10 medical universities in China and listed with IMED.
Shenyang Sport University  is a famous professional sports university in China.
It is the only finance and trade development zone except Lujiazui in Shanghai and is the nucleus zone of Shenyang Central Business Zone.
Shendan Expressway is a 4-lane expressway to Benxi and Dandong.
Statistically, the total GDP of the city of Shenyang is 383.66&nbsp;billion yuan in year 2009 (ranked 1st out of the 58 cities and counties in Liaoning province).
It lies  southwest of downtown Shenyang, near the intersection of G1 Beijing–Harbin Expressway and G91 Liaozhong Ring Expressway.
Shenyang has been planning an underground rapid transit system since 1940, but was unable to materialize the idea due to the city's geology and engineering limitations.
Due to the sizeable Hui population in Shenyang, halal foods are a common and also enjoyed by non-Muslim people.
It is also the seat of the Provincial Government of Liaoning.
As for the East and the South, only the pagodas are left.
Sujiatun is known mostly for its agricultural and industrial activity.
"Su family village district") forms the southernmost part of the suburbs, located  away from central Shenyang.
The downtown Heping District has all manner of businesses that are brightly neon-lit at night, centred around '''Taiyuan Street''' (), one of the most famous shopping district in the Northeast.
At its peak in the 1970s, Shenyang was one of the top three industrial centres in China, alongside Shanghai and Tianjin.
Many spend their holidays shopping on these two streets.
There is the Central Temple (), built during the Ming dynasty, showing the center of ancient Shenyang.
'''Dadong District''' (大东区, lit.
Dawutai Theatre is famous for its Er Ren Zhuan and Chinese skit performances by Zhao Benshan and his students.
Terminal 3 at Shenyang Taoxian International Airport is the largest terminal in the northeast China.
"big street"), and one that runs more east-west are call a "road" ().
It covers an area of 1.12&nbsp;million m², among which there is more than 600,000&nbsp;m² constructible.
It previously had only an area of  and a population of 764,419.
This annexation of territory left an exclave territory lying between Tiexi District, Heping District and Sujiatun District, separated from the main body of Yuhong District, hence making the Tiexi District flanked at the "neck" by the two parts of Yuhong.
Around  outside Shenyang's outer city wall, there were four pagodas and four temples: East Pagoda/Yongguang Temple, South Pagoda/Guangci Temple, West Pagoda/Yanshou Temple, and North Pagoda/Falun Temple.
In 2011, a huge expansion project known as the "North Station Transport Hub Reconstruction Project" () was initiated in response to the growing demand of floor area posed by the increasing passenger traffic after introduction of the high-speed rail service.
Tyco International, General Motors, and Michelin Shenyang Tyre Corporation, are expanding their operations in Shenyang due to a deep pool of skilled technical labor; good transportation; low land-use fees; and solid local support.
'''Shenyang''' (; ), formerly known by its Manchu name '''Mukden''' () On 16 August 1945, Manchurian Emperor Puyi was captured in Shenyang Airport by the Soviet Red Army while he was in an airplane fleeing to Japan.
It is contained popular tourist landmarks such as the 9.18 Historical Museum, the North and East Pagodas, Bawang Temple and the Wanquan Park.
Many of the boulevards in this area are lined of very large ginkgo trees, which become golden in color and produce their distinctive fruits in autumn.
It borders Shenbei New District to the northeast, Huanggu District to the east, Tiexi District to the south, and Xinmin City to the west.
Its diplomas are accredited worldwide.
Shenyang has two major railway stations: Shenyang North Railway Station and Shenyang Railway Station.
Two northeast folk dances, Er Ren Zhuan and Yang Ge, are very popular in Shenyang.
Shenyang dialect is similar to the other Northeastern dialects and also to the national standard of Mandarin, ''Putonghua'', but is known as a form of ''Dongbeihua'' and has a wide range of vocabulary that is not part of the country's official language.
The frost-free period is 183 days, which is long considering the severity of the winters.
Due to the popularity enjoyed by many Shenyang based comedians, the city is nationally recognized as a stronghold of comedy.
It is the site of the large historical mausoleum of Qing dynasty's Huang Taiji called Beiling park.
Middle Street has a history of more than 100 years.
"royal aunt district") is named after Huanggutun ("tun" means village), where the Huanggutun Incident took place.
Investment subsidies are granted to multinational corporations (MNCs) that set up offices or headquarters in Shenyang.
Huanggu district also hosts the Liaoning Mansion Hotel.
Japan, Russia, South Korea.
There are other expressways to Fushun, Changchun and Xinmin.
During the first five-year plan (1951–1956) many factories were built in Tiexi district.
Currently, Shenyang is working on expanding the city and to relocate the city government to the Hunnan New Area.
This temple is located just south of the '''Middle Street''' (), one of the most famous shopping streets and the first commercial pedestrian zone in China.
Monthly mean temperatures range from  in January to  in July, for an annual average of .
In 2011, a daily direct container rail service carries car parts  from Leipzig, Germany to Shenyang through Siberia in 23 days.
In early 2007, a  high-speed train decreased travel time between Beijing and Shenyang to around 4&nbsp;hours.
The 4th loop will complete in 2013.
Nearly half of the annual rainfall occurs in July and August.
By 2010, it aims to attract 30 foreign banks and 60 non-bank financial institutions.
'''Liaozhong District''' (辽中区, lit.
It was built by Russian in 1899 and expanded later by Japanese.
The Shenyang Modern Tram network started operation in August 15, 2013.
So far, the zone has transferred more than 400,000&nbsp;m² ground, introduced over 40 large projects and actually made use of over 200&nbsp;million USD foreign investment.
The Yuhong Airport (), located in Yuhong District, is commissioned for military use only.
The district is traversed by two corridors along two major highways, one leading to the Eastern Mausoleum and the neighbouring city of Fushun, and the other leading to the airport.
The zone has hosted more than 5,700 enterprises, including 700 foreign-invested enterprises.
The city never came to an economic halt until the 1990s, when its massive factories went bankrupt and left millions jobless, which was well documented in the film ''Tie Xi Qu: West of the Tracks''.
It is the fastest highway (8-lane) linking one of the largest port city to Shenyang.
There is also a very large underground shopping center, offering lots of items, especially fashion jewelries, accessories and clothing.
Launched in 1988 as the Shenyang National New and High-Tech Industrial Development Zone and elevated to a national-level zone in 1991, the Hunnan New Area (浑南新区) focuses on electronic and information technology products such as software, computers, network systems, communication equipment and audio/visual equipment; advanced manufacturing technologies, especially for automobiles, medical equipment; advanced materials and biological and pharmaceutical products.
"great eastern district") is an industrial zone and used to be the largest of the inner city districts.
A new tram network system was built in the city's south in 2013.
On November 18, 2005, the construction of the first Shenyang Metro line finally started and the construction of the second line started on November 18, 2006.
It also serves Shenyang Taoxian International Airport.
The total investment planned is more than 20&nbsp;billion Yuan and more than 60 stories-high international and multifunctional symbol buildings are planned to be built.
Most of Shenhe District is within the old city wall.
However, the economy of the city has revived significantly in recent years, thanks to the central government's "Revitalize Northeast China" campaign and the rapid development of software and auto manufacture industries.
There are 34,033 hospital beds and 45,680 various kinds of medical and technical personnel, among whom there are 17,346 licensed doctors, 1,909 assistant licensed doctors, and 16887 certified nurses.
The four Pagodas are identical Buddha-stupas as high as .
In Shenyang, there are more than 160 bus routes.
The railways leading to the station forms the border between Shenhe District and the neighbouring eastern portion of Huanggu District.
"railway's west district") is the most populous district and makes up the western part of the inner city, and is famous for its industry.
'''Yuhong District''' (于洪区, lit.
The main urban area is located to the north of '''Hun River''', formerly a major tributary of the Liao River and often locally referred as the city's "mother river".
'''Sujiatun District''' (苏家屯区, lit.
As Shenyang dialect is mutually intelligible with most forms of Mandarin, some people prefer to characterize it as an "accent" rather than a different "dialect."
Ethnically and culturally diverse, Shenyang has 38 of China's 56 recognized ethnic groups, including the Han Chinese majority that make up 91.26&nbsp;percent of Shenyang's population.
It borders the districts of Yuhong and Heping to the north, Dongling to the northeast, Tiexi to the northwest; it also borders the prefecture-level cities of Fushun to the east, Benxi to the southeast, and Liaoyang to the southwest.
It has become the sample zone of international finance and modern service trade and the regional finance, trade and information center of Northeast China.
France, Germany, North Korea, and the United States all have consulates in Shenyang's Heping District.
The average elevation of the urban area is .
Brilliance Auto is a major Chinese automobile manufacturer, and most of its production plants are also located in Shenyang.
The 6th loop (also known as G91 or Central Liaoning Express Beltway) is under construction, with a total length of , which make it the longest beltway in the world when complete.
This mixed-use district also contains large blocks of residential complexes, so as well as strips of small to medium-sized shopping districts.
'''Heping District''' (和平区, lit.
Shenyang is the railway hub of Northeast China.
The current Main Station Building () began construction in 1986, was commissioned for operation in December 1990, and became one of the five most important railway hubs in China, earning itself the nickname "Northeast's No.
Shenyang Dialect was formed in early period of Qing Dynasty.
The heavy industry started in the 1920s and was well developed before the second world war.
The station building has recently undergone a major overhaul and extension.
Today, it focuses on regular service and is being refurbished with a large archway and new terminal, reducing access to the boarding platforms by rerouting customers under and over ground while construction is completed.
It contains hundreds, if not thousands, of mini or boutique stores that open very early in the morning and close in the early afternoon.
The city has been identified by the Economist Intelligence Unit in the November 2010 Access China White Paper as a member of the CHAMPS ('''C'''hongqing, '''H'''efei, '''A'''nshan, '''M'''aanshan, '''P'''ingdingshan and '''S'''henyang), an economic profile of the top 20 emerging cities in China.
Half of the 16 million metric tons of coal consumed by the city during the winter of 2013-14 were used for heating.
Shenyang has a monsoon-influenced humid continental climate (Köppen ''Dwa'') characterised by hot, humid summers, due to the monsoon, and dry, cold winters, due to the Siberian anticyclone.
The American expat group is growing as well, in part due to the high demand of private English schools opening in Shenyang, as well as small kindergartens and private schools.
The university is the training base for winter sports in China and has many Olympic champions.
As the transport hub of Northeast China, Shenyang is served by air, rail, a two-line subway system and an extensive network of streets and expressways, with bus service throughout the city.
Shenyang has 731 medical and healthcare centers, 63,000 healthcare staff and 3.02 healthcare worker per 1,000 people.
The city receives 2,468 hours of bright sunshine annually; monthly percent of possible ranges from 45&nbsp;percent in July to 62&nbsp;percent in October.
The western parts of the city's administrative area are located on the alluvial plain of the Liao River, while the eastern part consists of the hinterlands of the Changbai Mountains, and is covered with forests.
In December 2011, the Shenyang city government announced plan to rebuild light rail transit network in 2012, comprising 4 lines with  distance in the Hunnan New District.
The city is also served by the Qinshen Passenger Railway, a high-speed railway connecting Shenyang and Qinhuangdao.
During the Chinese Civil War, Shenyang remained a Kuomintang stronghold from 1946 to 1948, although the Chinese communists controlled the surrounding countryside.
The first factories of this place were built in 1934 by the Japanese to produce war goods for the Imperial Army and nationalized after World War II.
The Middle Loop was planned in as early as the 1930s and finally complete in 1985.
'''Shenbei New District''' (沈北新区, lit.
It suffered major disruptions during the Chinese Civil War from power outage and Kuomintang bombings, but quickly resumed operation after the conclusion of the Liaoshen Campaign.
The major thoroughfare of '''Youths Avenue''' (), the primary north-south arterial road of the city that traverses past the City Government Square linking the Beiling Park to the Taoxian Airport, separates the southern portion of Shenhe District from the neighbouring southern portion of Heping District.
Neusoft Group is the biggest software company in China.
The 37 minority groups are Manchu, Korean, Hui, Xibo, Mongolian, Zhuang, Miao, Tujia, Dong, Daur, Bai,  Uyghur, Tibetan, Yi, Taiwanese Aboriginal People, She, Bouyei, Yao, Akha, Kazakh, Dai, Li, Shui, Nakhi, Jingpo, Kyrgyz, Tu, Mulao, Qiang, Maonan, Gelao, Russian, Evenks, Tatars, Oroqen, Nanai and Lhoba.
It contained the departments of Engineering, Law and Education.
Only the North Pagoda and Temple is well preserved.
Shenyang is home to China Medical University Hospital, 202 Hospital, China Medical University 1st, 2nd and 4th Hospital, Liaoning Tumor Hospital, Shenyang No.7 People's Hospital, Shenyang Orthopaedics Hospital, Shenyang Army General Hospital, North Hospital, and various other hospitals and clinics.
The Soviets were replaced by the Nationalist Chinese, who were flown in on U.S. transport planes.
The station was expanded in 2010.
In 2005, Middle Street gained the title of China top 10 famous commercial shopping streets and in 2008; it won the International Golden Street title.
The original building was built in 1927.
The Shenyang Botanical Garden and the Shenyang Expo Garden (which hosted the 2006 International Horticultural Exposition) are also located in this district.
In the western Shenhe District there is a Muslim town, and the South Pagoda () is located in southern Shenhe District.
"East Mausoleum district") before June 17, 2014, referring to the UNESCO World Heritage Site-listed tombs dedicated to the founder of Later Jin (the former name of Qing dynasty), Nurhachi, and his empress Monggo-Jerjer.
Hunnan District hosts the city's only operational commercial airport, the Taoxian International Airport, and is rapidly becoming high-end residential areas with luxury apartments, fine neighbourhoods and sleek commercial developments, as suburbs of Shenyang are growing steadily.
The West Pagoda was rebuilt in 1998.
The oldest airfield in Shenyang, the now-defunct East Pagoda Airport, is also located in Dadong District.
The German consulate is relatively new, opened in 2013.
Other major factors include dust from construction sites, 20%; vehicle exhaust, 20%; industrial emissions, 10%; and extraterritorial dust 20%.
The city follows a largely grid-style urban layout, with the roads follow a slightly northwest-to-southeast orientation due to the South Manchurian Railway, which runs in that direction.
"Hun River's south district"), was formerly called the '''Dongling District''' (东陵区, lit.
Shenyang Machine Tool Group is the largest machine tool manufacturer in China.
There are many long-distance and express bus routes to Beijing and other cities in the northeast.
British and US reports indicate that the Soviet troops that occupied Northeast China and Eastern Inner Mongolia region looted and terrorized the people of Shenyang, and were not discouraged by Soviet authorities from "three days of rape and pillage".
Shenyang Finance and Trade Development Zone was founded in 1992.
The Beiling Airport (), in Huanggu District, is used by Shenyang Aircraft Corporation for test flights.
China Resources Beverage, the distributor of C'estbon water, has its northeast regional office in the district.
The only exceptions to this rule are the Middle Street in Shenhe District, which takes its historical name from ancient times (though its modern official name is actually the "Middle Street Road"); and the Minzhu Road in Heping District that traverses diagonally north-south across the superblock between the Shenyang Railway Station and the Zhongshan Park, but as one of the only three diagonal streets in the entire city it is accommodated as a "road" instead of "street" in keeping with the other two counterparts that runs east-west.
In 2006, the city hosted a total of 1,063 banks and bank branches and 144 insurance-related companies.
In May 2002, the Shenyang city government annexed a large area of suburban land from the neighbouring Yuhong District to establish an new state-level development zone — the Shenyang Economic and Technological Development Zone (沈阳经济技术开发区), and transferred its administration to Tiexi District to form the '''Tiexi New District''' (铁西新区), thus giving Tiexi District the current "necked" shape on the map.
Not only is Shenyang multi-ethnic, it is a place where many foreigners live, especially from Japan and Korea.
The four seasons here are distinctive.
It is the most southwestern part of Shenyang City, bordering Xinmin City to the north, and Tiexi District to the northeast, as well as the prefecture-level cities of Liaoyang to the southeast, Anshan to the south and southwest, and Jinzhou to the west.
With the growing expat population, many new restaurants and businesses that cater to them are opening.
The 2014 registered population of Sujiatun is 428,859 and it has an area of .
"new town district"), is a new development zone and forms the majority of the northern suburbs.
There are three other airports in Shenyang, none of them open to public.
"Yu and Hong district") forms part of the northwestern and western suburbs.
It has an area of  and a population of 324,074 (2014).
'''Huanggu District''' (皇姑区, lit.
It is  and a registered population of 716,417 (as per 2014).
The city is growing quite fast and many foreigners are coming to Shenyang.
There was also previously another canal on the east side called Huishan Nullah (辉山明渠) that drains into Xinkai River's lower section, but is now no longer existent due to land reclamation from urban constructions.
Shenyang also has many French and Germans because BMW and Michelin Tyres have large operations here.
Fengyong University was the first private university in China to follow western methods.
The Shen-Da Expressway connecting Shenyang and Dalian is the first expressway built in China.
Shenyang has many shopping areas that provide necessities, luxuries and entertainments.
It has an area of  and a population of 320,370 (2014).
Shenyang is famous for its football tradition.
'''Hunnan District''' (浑南区, lit.
"peace district") is located slightly west of the center of Shenyang.
'''Tiexi District''' (铁西区, lit.
The local football club is the Liaoning F.C., in the Chinese Super League.
Shenyang Aircraft Corporation produces airplanes for civilian use as well as for the PLAAF.
Most of it was rebuilt on the old city wall of the Ming dynasty, and the city wall gates were increased from four to eight.
There are a lot of high-end hotels located in Shenhe District, such as Sheraton, Kempinski, Lexington, Marriott (which is the first Marriott Hotel directly named "Marriott" in mainland China, but due to finance conflicts, this hotel is not administrated by Marriott International).
Shenyang used to have about 20 trolley bus routes, one of the biggest trolley bus networks in China.
The city's central urban area is surrounded by three artificial rivers — respectively the '''South Canal''' (南运河, famous for the series of linear parks and gardens along it) from the south, the '''Xinkai River''' (新开河, formerly the '''North Canal''') from the north and northeast, and the '''Weigong River''' (卫工河, formerly the Weigong Nullah) from the west, all interconnected as a continuous waterway.
Shenyang has one of the highest concentrations of educational institutes in China.
Eight railways connect Shenyang with Beijing, Dalian, Changchun, Harbin and Fushun.
One of the shopping districts is Middle Street ().
"Shen River district") is the central area of Shenyang, and currently houses the seat of the City Government.
It has an area of  and a population of 817,288 (2014).
Nearly all of the city walls were demolished after 1949.
The district, better known as downtown, sprung up around Shenyang Railway Station (known locally as the "South Station" in comparing to the "North Station" in Shenhe District), the former hub of the South Manchurian Railway.
Over the past 200 years or so, Shenyang has somehow managed to grow and increase its industrial might, despite consecutive wars with Russia and Japan in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the Second World War, and China's Civil War (Shenyang became the main battleground between the Communists and Nationalists).
The information technology center is in Sanhao street (), in the southern part of the city.
Trams in Shenyang was introduced in Shenyang from 1924, and had 6 lines in operation up until 1945.
Shenyang ranges in latitude from 41° 11' to 43° 02' N and in longitude from 122° 25' to 123° 48' E, and is located in the central part of Liaoning Province.
They were smaller replicas of Beijing's counterparts.
Two gates and one corner tower of the inner city wall were rebuilt during the 1990s.
Inside the city there is an east-to-west expressway through the city center, most of which is elevated.
The first (East-West) line was opened September 27, 2010 and the second (north–south) was opened on January 9, 2012.
