Shetland is within the Highlands and Islands electoral region.
The production peaked in 1905 at more than a million barrels, of which seven hundred and eight thousand were exported.
Overall visitor expenditure was worth £16.4 million in 2006, in which year just under 26,000 cruise liner passengers arrived at Lerwick Harbour.
With the passing of the Crofters' Act in 1886 the Liberal prime minister William Gladstone emancipated crofters from the rule of the landlords.
When the use of the letter yogh was discontinued, it was often replaced by the similar-looking letter z, hence '''', the misspelt form used to describe the pre-1975 county council.
Although Norn was spoken for hundreds of years it is now extinct and few written sources remain.
Oil reserves discovered in the later 20th century in the seas both east and west of Shetland have provided a much needed alternative source of income for the islands.
From the mid-13th century onwards Scottish monarchs increasingly sought to take control of the islands surrounding the mainland.
By the late 19th century 90% of all Shetland was owned by just 32 people, and between 1861 and 1881 more than 8,000 Shetlanders emigrated.
Unsurprisingly, Sigurd agreed and the islands became Christian at a stroke.
Shetland is a National Scenic Area which, unusually, is made up of a number of discrete locations: Fair Isle, Foula, South West Mainland (including the Scalloway Islands), Muckle Roe, Esha Ness, Fethaland and Herma Ness.
The Shetland pig, or grice, has been extinct since approximately 1930.
Knitwear is important both to the economy and culture of Shetland, and the Fair Isle design is well known.
The 10th Cruiser Squadron was stationed at Swarbacks Minn and during a single year from March 1917 more than 4,500 ships sailed from Lerwick as part of an escorted convoy system.
Shetland was colonised during the late 8th and 9th centuries, the fate of the existing indigenous population being uncertain.
During this period, the Stanes of Stofast, a 2000-tonne glacial erratic, came to rest on a prominent hilltop in Lunnasting.
The current MSP is Tavish Scott of the Scottish Liberal Democrats.
Three quarters of the islands' workforce is employed in the service sector, and the Shetland Islands Council alone accounted for 27.9% of output in 2003.
However, the industry faces challenges due to plagiarism of the word "Shetland" by manufacturers operating elsewhere, and a certification trademark, "The Shetland Lady", has been registered.
As the money was never paid, the connection with the crown of Scotland has become perpetual.
The islands are represented by the Shetland football team who regularly compete in the Island Games.
The discovery of North Sea oil in the 1970s significantly boosted Shetland incomes, employment and public sector revenues.
This service, which takes about 12 hours, is operated by NorthLink Ferries.
The islands were Christianised in the late 10th century.
The Grice was a breed of semi-domesticated pig that had a habit of attacking lambs, and that became extinct in 1930.
As Norn was gradually replaced by Scots, '''' became ''''.
Others are the Shetland Sheepdog or "Sheltie", the endangered Shetland cattle and Shetland Goose and the Shetland sheep which is believed to have originated prior to 1000 AD.
Crofting, the farming of small plots of land on a legally restricted tenancy basis, is still practised and is viewed as a key Shetland tradition as well as an important source of income.
Taxes from the oil have increased public sector spending on social welfare, art, sport, environmental measures and financial development.
Loganair operates flights for FlyBe to other parts of Scotland up to ten times a day, the destinations being Kirkwall, Aberdeen, Inverness, Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Farming is mostly concerned with the raising of Shetland sheep, known for their unusually fine wool.
Only 16 of about 100 islands are inhabited.
The Norn language was a form of Old Norse, which continued to be spoken until the 18th century when it was replaced by an insular dialect of Scots known as Shetlandic, which is in turn being replaced by Scottish English.
The islands have produced a variety of writers of prose and poetry, often in Shetland Scots.
The political composition of the Council is 22 Independents.
Much of Shetland's economy depends on the oil-bearing sediments in the surrounding seas.
In the 14th century, Orkney and Shetland remained a Norwegian province, but Scottish influence was growing.
The flora is dominated by Arctic-alpine plants, wild flowers, moss and lichen.
Unusually, from c. 1100 onwards the Norse ''jarls'' owed allegiance both to Norway and to the Scottish crown through their holdings as Earls of Caithness.
Fishing remains central to the islands' economy today, with the total catch being  in 2009, valued at over £73.2 million.
The landscape in Shetland is marked by the grazing of sheep and the harsh conditions have limited the total number of plant species to about 400.
The Lerwick Up Helly Aa is one of a variety of fire festivals held in Shetland annually in the middle of winter, it is always started on the last Tuesday of January.
The islands were described as "beautiful and rewarding" and the Shetlanders as "a fiercely independent and self-reliant bunch".
The 1975 novel ''North Star'' by Hammond Innes is largely set in Shetland and Raman Mundair's 2007 book of poetry ''A Choreographer's Cartography'' offers a British Asian perspective on the landscape.
Spring squill, buck's-horn plantain, Scots lovage, roseroot and sea campion are abundant, especially in sheltered places.
Notable exponents of Shetland folk music include Aly Bain, Fiddlers' Bid, and the late Tom Anderson and Peerie Willie Johnson.
The islands' motto, which appears on the Council's coat of arms, is ''''.
Several RAF bases were also established at Sullom Voe and several lighthouses suffered enemy air attacks.
The name ''Jarlshof'' meaning "Earl's Mansion" is a coinage of his.
During World War I many Shetlanders served in the Gordon Highlanders, a further 3,000 served in the Merchant Navy and more than 1500 in a special local naval reserve.
Scatsta Airport near Sullom Voe allows frequent charter flights from Aberdeen to transport oilfield workers and this small terminal has the fifth largest number of international passengers in Scotland.
Shetland is also served by a domestic connection from Lerwick to Aberdeen on mainland Scotland.
Hugh MacDiarmid, the Scots poet and writer lived in Whalsay from the mid-1930s through 1942, and wrote many poems there, including a number that directly address or reflect the Shetland environment such as "On A Raised Beach", which was inspired by a visit to West Linga.
This includes a smithy, a cluster of wheelhouses and a later broch.
Shetland then went into an economic depression as the Scottish and local traders were not as skilled in trading with salted fish.
His fleet assembled in Bressay Sound before sailing for Scotland.
There are an additional 15 inhabited islands.
Snowfall is usually confined to the period November to February, and snow seldom lies on the ground for more than a day.
Undaunted, he made the film over four months during the summer of 1936 on Foula and the film transposes these events to Shetland.
In AD 43 and 77 the Roman authors Pomponius Mela and Pliny the Elder referred to the seven islands they call '''' and '''' respectively, both of which are assumed to be Shetland.
In early Irish literature, Shetland is referred to as ''''—"the Isles of Cats", which may have been the pre-Norse inhabitants' name for the islands.
The most distinctive features are the ultrabasic ophiolite, peridotite and gabbro on Unst and Fetlar, which are remnants of the Iapetus Ocean floor.
Shetlandic is used both in local radio and dialect writing, and kept alive by the Shetland Folk Society.
Modern Shetlanders have almost identical proportions of Scandinavian matrilineal and patrilineal genetic ancestry, suggesting that the islands were settled by both men and women in equal measure.
Transport between islands is primarily by ferry, and Shetland Islands Council operates various inter-island services.
There is a variety of indigenous breeds, of which the diminutive Shetland pony is probably the best known, as well as being an important part of the Shetland farming tradition.
Some 3,000 served during the Napoleonic wars from 1800 to 1815 and press gangs were rife.
It was first recorded in 1837 by botanist Thomas Edmondston.
In the Scottish Parliament the Shetland constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system.
Shetland is served by a weekly local newspaper, ''The Shetland Times'' and the online ''Shetland News'' http://www.shetnews.co.uk/  with radio service being provided by BBC Radio Shetland and the commercial radio station SIBC.
This is also the source of the ZE postcode used for Shetland.
The project is run by the Unst Partnership, the local community's development trust.
Numerous rarities have also been recorded including black-browed albatross and snow goose, and a single pair of snowy owls bred on Fetlar from 1967 to 1975.
On the death of Haakon VI in 1380, Norway formed a political union with Denmark after which the interest of the royal house in the islands declined.
East and West Burra, Muckle Roe, Papa Stour, Trondra and Vaila are smaller islands to the west of Mainland.
When Scotland became part of the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707, trade with northern Europe decreased.
If you refuse, I'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel."
The late 16th century and early 17th century was dominated by the influence of the despotic Robert Stewart, Earl of Orkney, who was granted the islands by his half-sister Mary Queen of Scots, and his son Patrick.
Thomas Fraser was a country musician who never released a commercial recording during his life, but whose work has become popular more than 20 years after his untimely death in 1978.
There are a further 81 SSSIs, which cover 66% or more of the land surfaces of Fair Isle, Papa Stour, Fetlar, Noss and Foula.
Shetland is a popular destination for cruise ships, and in 2010 the Lonely Planet guide named Shetland as the sixth best region in the world for tourists seeking unspoilt destinations.
Annual bright sunshine averages 1110 hours, rendering overcast days common.
A sizeable component of Scandinavian patrilineal ancestry has been reported in Orkney (55%) and Shetland (68%).
After the stalemate of the Battle of Largs, Haakon retreated to Orkney, where he died in December 1263, entertained on his death bed by recitations of the sagas.
The site has provided evidence of habitation during various phases right up until Viking times.
The PURE project on Unst is a research centre which uses a combination of wind power and fuel cells to create a wind hydrogen system.
Although reported from two other sites in the nineteenth century, it currently grows only on two serpentine hills on the island of Unst.
Mackerel makes up more than half of the catch in Shetland by weight and value, and there are significant landings of haddock, cod, herring, whiting, monkfish and shellfish.
The main island of the group is known as Mainland, and of the next largest, Yell, Unst, and Fetlar lie to the north and Bressay and Whalsay lie to the east.
Less rain falls from April to August although no month receives less than .
There are two monthly magazines in production: ''Shetland Life'' and ''i'i' Shetland''.
Jon Haraldsson, who was murdered in Thurso in 1231, was the last of an unbroken line of Norse jarls, and thereafter the earls were Scots noblemen of the houses of Angus and St. Clair.
Operated by Directflight Ltd. in partnership with Shetland Islands Council, it is devoted to inter-island flights from the Shetland Mainland to most of the inhabited islands.
Hunter (2000) states in relation to King Bridei I of the Picts in the sixth century AD: "As for Shetland, Orkney, Skye and the Western Isles, their inhabitants, most of whom appear to have been Pictish in culture and speech at this time, are likely to have regarded Bridei as a fairly distant presence.” In 2011, the collective site, "The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland", including Broch of Mousa, Old Scatness and Jarlshof, joined the UKs "Tentative List" of World Heritage Sites.
The cuisine of Shetland is based on locally produced lamb, beef and seafood, much of it organic.
The climate all year round is moderate due to the influence of the surrounding seas, with average peak temperatures of  in March and  in July and August.
Forty years later, the documentary ''Return to the Edge of the World'' was filmed, capturing a reunion of cast and crew of the film as they revisited the island in 1978.
The plan is meeting significant opposition within the islands, primarily resulting from the anticipated visual impact of the development.
After his victory King Sverre placed Shetland under direct Norwegian rule, a state of affairs that continued for nearly two centuries.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a congregation in Lerwick.
The festival is just over 100 years old in its present, highly organised form.
Geological evidence shows that in around 6100 BC a tsunami caused by the Storegga Slides hit Shetland, as well as the rest of the east coast of Scotland, and may have created a wave of up to  high in the voes where modern populations are highest.
It made over 200 trips across the sea with Leif Larsen, the most highly decorated allied naval officer of the war, making 52 of them.
A number of other films have been made on or about Shetland including ''A Crofter's Life in Shetland'' (1932) ''A Shetland Lyric'' (1934), ''Devil's Gate'' (2003) and ''It's Nice Up North'' (2006), a comedy documentary by Graham Fellows.
During World War II a Norwegian naval unit nicknamed the "Shetland Bus" was established by the Special Operations Executive in the autumn of 1940 with a base first at Lunna and later in Scalloway to conduct operations around the coast of Norway.
In addition to Mousa there are significant ruins at Clickimin, Culswick, Old Scatness and West Burrafirth, although their origin and purpose is a matter of some controversy.
Humans have lived there since the Mesolithic period, and the earliest written references to the islands date back to Roman times.
Numerous brochs were erected during the Iron Age.
The same site provides dates for early Neolithic activity and finds at Scord of Brouster in Walls have been dated to 3400 BC.
Haldane Burgess was a Shetland historian, poet, novelist, violinist, linguist and socialist and Rhoda Bulter (1929–94) is one of the best-known Shetland poets of recent times.
Due to the islands' latitude, on clear winter nights the "northern lights" can sometimes be seen in the sky, while in summer there is almost perpetual daylight, a state of affairs known locally as the "simmer dim".
Due to the practice, dating to at least the early Neolithic, of building in stone on virtually treeless islands, Shetland is extremely rich in physical remains of the prehistoric eras and there are over 5,000 archaeological sites all told.
It is possible that the Pictish "cat" sound forms part of this Norse name.
In 1194, when Harald Maddadsson was Earl of Orkney and Shetland, a rebellion broke out against King Sverre Sigurdsson of Norway.
After the islands were transferred to Scotland, thousands of Scots families emigrated to Shetland in the 16th and 17th centuries but studies of the genetic makeup of the islands' population indicate that Shetlanders are just under half Scandinavian in origin.
The trade with the North German towns lasted until the 1707 Act of Union when high salt duties prohibited the German merchants from trading with Shetland.
Roy Grönneberg, who founded the local chapter of the Scottish National Party in 1966, designed the flag of Shetland in cooperation with Bill Adams to mark the 500th anniversary of the transfer of the islands from Norway to Scotland.
Public bus services are operated on Mainland, Whalsay, Burra, Unst and Yell.
Pottery shards found at the important site of Jarlshof also indicate that there was Neolithic activity there although the main settlement dates from the Bronze Age.
Inevitably, the real ale-producing Valhalla Brewery is the most northerly in Britain.
Lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at various locations.
The highest temperature on record was  in July 1991 and the coldest  in the Januaries of 1952 and 1959.
In January 2007, the Shetland Islands Council signed a partnership agreement with Scottish and Southern Energy for the Viking Wind Farm, a 200-turbine wind farm and subsea cable.
Shetland's location means that it provides a number of such records: Muness is the most northerly castle in the United Kingdom and Skaw the most northerly settlement.
An annual film festival takes place in the newly built Mareel, a cinema, music and education venue.
This Icelandic phrase is taken from the Danish 1241 Basic Law, ''Codex Holmiensis'', and is also mentioned in ''Njáls saga'', and means "By law shall land be built".
The islands' senior football league is the G&S Flooring Premier League.
The Shetland wren, Fair Isle wren and Shetland starling are subspecies endemic to Shetland.
The Hansa would buy shiploads of salted fish, wool and butter and import salt, cloth, beer and other goods.
The Forty Fiddlers was formed in the 1950s to promote the traditional fiddle style, which is a vibrant part of local culture today.
Shetland mouse-ear (''Cerastium nigrescens'') is an endemic flowering plant found only in Shetland.
About 30 fishing vessels used by Norwegian refugees were gathered and the Shetland Bus conducted covert operations, carrying intelligence agents, refugees, instructors for the resistance, and military supplies.
Walter Scott's 1822 novel ''The Pirate'' is set in "a remote part of Shetland", and was inspired by his 1814 visit to the islands.
Oil and gas were first landed in 1978 at Sullom Voe, which has subsequently become one of the largest terminals in Europe.
His death halted any further Norwegian expansion in Scotland and following this ill-fated expedition, the Hebrides and Mann were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth, although the Scots recognised continuing Norwegian sovereignty over Orkney and Shetland.
The latter commenced the building of Scalloway Castle, but after his imprisonment in 1609 the Crown annexed Orkney and Shetland again until 1643 when Charles I granted them to William Douglas, 7th Earl of Morton.
Another possible early written reference to the islands is Tacitus' report in AD 98, after describing the discovery and conquest of Orkney, that the Roman fleet had seen "Thule, too".
Shetland has three national nature reserves, at the seabird colonies of Hermaness and Noss, and at Keen of Hamar to preserve the serpentine flora.
St Kilda lies in the Atlantic Ocean,  west of the Outer Hebrides but Powell was unable to get permission to film there.
The geographical isolation and recent glacial history of Shetland have resulted in a depleted mammalian fauna and the brown rat and house mouse are two of only three species of rodent present on the islands.
The '''' ("Island Beardies") sailed for Norway but were beaten in the Battle of Florvåg near Bergen.
In response, Norwegian king Harald Hårfagre ("Harald Fair Hair") annexed the Northern Isles (comprising Orkney and Shetland) in 875.
Michael Powell made ''The Edge of the World'' in 1937, a dramatisation based on the true story of the evacuation of the last 36 inhabitants of the remote island of St Kilda on 29 August 1930.
Shetland has an oceanic, temperate maritime climate bordering on the subpolar variety, with long but cool winters and short mild summers.
During this period 120 men were taken from Fetlar alone and only 20 of them returned home.
In total, Shetland lost more than 500 men, a higher proportion than any other part of Britain, and there were further waves of emigration in the 1920s and 1930s.
Nonetheless, Shetland's connection with Norway has proven to be enduring.
Fishing has continued to be an important aspect of the economy up to the present day.
Smallpox afflicted the islands in the 17th and 18th centuries, but as vaccines became common after 1760 the population increased to a maximum of 31,670 in 1861.
The general character of the climate is windy and cloudy with at least  of rain falling on more than 250 days a year.
Vikings then made the islands the headquarters of pirate expeditions carried out against Norway and the coasts of mainland Scotland.
The Shetlanders' nautical skills were sought by the Royal Navy.
Thus it is one of only three Councils in Scotland with a majority of elected members not representing a political party.
The highest point of Shetland is Ronas Hill, which reaches only .
There are also populations of various moorland birds such as curlew, snipe and golden plover.
The later Iron Age inhabitants of the Northern Isles were probably Pictish, although the historical record is sparse.
Heel-shaped cairns, are a style of chambered cairn unique to Shetland, with a particularly large example on Vementry.
The local way of life reflects the joint Norse and Scottish heritage including the Up Helly Aa fire festival, and a strong musical tradition, especially the traditional fiddle style.
Average yearly precipitation is , with November and December the wettest months.
However, British rule came at price for many ordinary people as well as traders.
Crops raised include oats and barley; however, the cold, windswept islands make for a harsh environment for most plants.
Shetland's culture and landscapes have inspired a variety of musicians, writers and film-makers.
The expanding population of Scandinavia led to a shortage of available resources and arable land there and led to a period of Viking expansion, the Norse gradually shifting their attention from plundering to invasion.
However, some local merchant-lairds took up where the German merchants had left off, and fitted out their own ships to export fish from Shetland to the Continent.
Most of the individual islands have Norse names, although the derivations of some are obscure and may represent pre-Norse, possibly Pictish or even pre-Celtic names or elements.
These rights were held on and off by the Mortons until 1766, when they were sold by James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton to Laurence Dundas.
Native trees such as rowan and crab apple are only found in a few isolated places such as cliffs and loch islands.
The Act enabled those who had effectively been landowners' serfs to become owner-occupiers of their own small farms.
The archipelago is exposed to wind and tide, and there are numerous sites of wrecked ships.
The Pleistocene glaciations entirely covered the islands.
Other 20th and 21st century poets and novelists include Christine De Luca, Robert Alan Jamieson who grew up in Sandness, the late Lollie Graham of Veensgarth, Stella Sutherland of Bressay, the late William J Tait from Yell and Laureen Johnson.
Shetland's access to oil revenues has funded the Shetland Charitable Trust, which in turn funds a wide variety of local programmes.
There are also Old Red Sandstone deposits and granite intrusions.
"Shetland knives" are stone tools that date from this period made from felsite from Northmavine.
For much of the later 20th century it was the major vehicle for the work of local writers — and others, including early work by George Mackay Brown.
In 2013 her novel ''Red Bones'' became the basis of BBC crime drama television series ''Shetland''.
The colours are identical to those of the flag of Scotland, but are shaped in the Nordic cross.
Mainland has 45 separate sites.
There are numerous areas set aside to protect the local fauna and flora, including a number of important seabird nesting sites.
In contrast, winters are considerably milder than those expected in nearby continental areas, even comparable to winter temperatures of many parts of England and Wales much further south.
The initial letter is the Middle Scots letter, "yogh", the pronunciation of which is almost identical to the original Norn sound, "".
In 1469, Shetland was pledged by Christian I, in his capacity as King of Norway, as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret, betrothed to James III of Scotland.
The islands lie some  to the northeast of Orkney and  southeast of the Faroe Islands and form part of the division between the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the North Sea to the east.
For example, almost every place name in use can be traced back to the Vikings.
It is possible that ''Apodemus'' was introduced from Orkney where a population has existed since at the least the Bronze Age.
In 2009, the most popular visitor attractions were the Shetland Museum, the RSPB reserve at Sumburgh Head, Bonhoga Gallery at Weisdale Mill and Jarlshof.
The Shetland pony and Shetland Sheepdog are two well known Shetland animal breeds.
Sumburgh Airport, the main airport on Shetland, is located close to Sumburgh Head,  south of Lerwick.
Shetland is also home to the North Atlantic Fisheries College, the Centre for Nordic Studies and Shetland College, which are all associated with the University of the Highlands and Islands.
Some services also call at Kirkwall, Orkney, which increases the journey time between Aberdeen and Lerwick by 2 hours.
This strategy eventually led to an invasion by Haakon Haakonsson, King of Norway.
The process was begun in earnest by Alexander II and was continued by his successor Alexander III.
There are plans of road tunnels to some of the islands, escecially Bressay and Whalsay, however it is hard to convince the mainland government to finance them.
It then became '''' in the 16th century.
The Shetland field mouse is the third and the archipelago's fourth endemic subspecies, of which there are three varieties on Yell, Foula and Fair Isle.
Temperatures over  are very rare.
The first written record of the pony was in 1603 in the Court Books of Shetland and, for its size, it is the strongest of all the horse breeds.
The former print works and offices of the local newspaper, The Shetland Times, has been converted into a chapel.
In 1470, William Sinclair, 1st Earl of Caithness ceded his title to James III and the following year the Northern Isles were directly annexed to the Crown of Scotland, a process confirmed by Parliament in 1472.
Comprising the Shetland constituency of the Scottish Parliament, Shetland is also one of the 32 council areas of Scotland; the islands' administrative centre and only burgh is Lerwick, which is also the capital of Shetland since taking over from Scalloway in 1708.
