Among these elements are Shinto mythology, marriage customs, architectural styles, and technological developments such as lacquerware, textiles, laminated bows, metalworking, and glass making.
In modern-day Japan it appears to be difficult to find authentic ritual possession, called ''kamigakari'', in ''kagura'' dance.
In 552 or 538 a Buddha image was given to the Yamato leader which profoundly changed the course of Japanese religious history, especially in relation to the undeveloped native religious conglomeration that was Shinto.
In most cases they are on or near a shrine grounds.
This practice comes from Shinto history, when the kami Izanagi-no-Mikoto first performed misogi after returning from the land of Yomi, where he was made impure by Izanami-no-Mikoto after her death.
The god manifests in a duality, a male and a female function, respectively ''Takamimusubi'' (高御産巣日神) and ''Kamimusubi'' (神産巣日神).
Japanese culture begins to develop in no small part due to influences from mainland trade and immigration from China.
At that time, there was a renewed interest in "Japanese studies" (''kokugaku''), perhaps as a result of the closed country policy.
In the Heian period (8th–12th centuries) this was one of the important rites at the Imperial Court and had found its fixed place in the ''tama shizume'' festival in the eleventh month.
At some point there was a recognition that the ancestors created the current generations and the reverence of ancestors (''tama'') took shape.
It is comparable to what Rudolf Otto described as the ''mysterium tremendum and fascinans''.
In shrine compounds, there are a ''haiden'' (拝殿) or public hall of worship, ''heiden'' (幣殿) or hall of offerings and the ''honden'' (本殿) or the main hall.
'''''Izumo kagura''''' is centered in the Sada shrine of Izumo, Shimane prefecture.
There are many locations of stone ritual structures, refined burial practices and early Torii that lend to the continuity of primal Shinto.
Fridell argues that scholars call the period 1868–1945 the "State Shinto period" because, "during these decades, Shinto elements came under a great deal of overt state influence and control as the Japanese government systematically utilized shrine worship as a major force for mobilizing imperial loyalties on behalf of modern nation-building."
'''''Ise kagura''''' is a collective name for rituals that are based upon the ''yudate'' (boiling water rites of Shugendō origin) ritual.
The ritual of ''chinkon'' continued to be performed on the emperors of Japan, thought to be descendents of Amaterasu.
Therefore, ''kagura'' is a rite of ''tama shizume'', of pacifying the spirits of the departed.
At this festival people sing as accompaniment to the dance: "Depart!
Prior to this time clan Shinto had dominated and a codification of "Imperial Shinto" did not exist as such.
Shinto today is a term that applies to the religion of public shrines devoted to the worship of a multitude of gods (''kami''), suited to various purposes such as war memorials and harvest festivals, and applies as well to various sectarian organizations.
Shrines are private institutions, and are supported financially by the congregation and visitors.
In the post-war period, numerous "New Religions" cropped up, many of them ostensibly based on Shinto, but on the whole, Japanese religiosity may have decreased.
These dolls are very common.
These accounts were written with two purposes in mind: the introduction of Taoist, Confucian, and Buddhist themes into Japanese religion; and garnering support for the legitimacy of the Imperial house, based on its lineage from the sun goddess, Amaterasu.
The practice of purification by ritual use of water while reciting prayers is typically done daily by regular practitioners, and when possible by lay practitioners.
The settlements of the new arrivals seem to have coexisted with those of the Jōmon for some time.
These changes were directed internally by the various clans frequently as a syncratic cultural event to outside influences.
The following descriptions relate to ''sato kagura'', ''kagura'' that is from the countryside.
The Kojiki establishes the Japanese imperial family as the foundation of Japanese culture, being the descendants of Amaterasu Omikami.
In 1890, the Imperial Rescript on Education was issued, and students were required to ritually recite its oath to "offer yourselves courageously to the State" as well as to protect the Imperial family.
This time period led to the creation of the Yamato culture and development of formal Shinto practices.
This rite of purification is also known as ''chinkon''.
Shinto tends to hold negative views on death and corpses as a source of pollution called ''kegare''.
The earliest records of Japanese culture were written by Chinese traders who described this land as "Wa".
The Emperor lays out plans for the Buddha Dainichi (Great Sun Buddha), at Tōdai-ji assisted by the Priest Gyogi (or Gyoki) Bosatsu.
Shinto is the largest religion in Japan, practiced by nearly 80% of the population, yet only a small percentage of these identify themselves as "Shintoists" in surveys.
During this period, numerous scholars of ''kokugaku'' believed that this national Shinto could be the unifying agent of the country around the Emperor while the process of modernization was undertaken with all possible speed.
In both ancient Japanese collections, the Nihongi and Kojiki, Ame-no-uzeme’s dance is described as ''asobi'', which in old Japanese language means a ceremony that is designed to appease the spirits of the departed, and which was conducted at funeral ceremonies.
Moreover, according to the scholar Jason Ānanda Josephson, It is inaccurate to describe shrines as constituting a "state religion" or a "theocracy" during this period since they had neither organization, nor doctrine, and were uninterested in conversion.
The attempt was largely unsuccessful, since as early as the ''Nihon Shoki'' parts of the mythology were explicitly borrowed from Taoism doctrines.
In these contexts, "Shinto" takes on the meaning of "Japan’s traditional religion", as opposed to foreign religions such as Christianity, Buddhism, Islam and so forth.
'''''Shishi kagura''''' also known as the Shugen-No tradition, uses the dance of a ''shishi'' (lion or mountain animal) mask as the image and presence of the deity.
''Omikuji'' are paper lots upon which personal fortunes are written.
They are typically placed in the home at a kamidana.
Amenominakanushi has been considered a concept developed under the influence of Chinese thought.
The main types are: ''miko kagura'', ''Ise kagura'', ''Izumo kagura'', and ''shishi kagura''.
This explanation was later challenged by Kūkai (空海, 774–835), who saw the ''kami'' as different embodiments of the Buddhas themselves (''honji suijaku'' theory).
The Soga family eventually prevailed and supported Empress Suiko and Prince Shotoku, who helped impress Buddhist faith into Japan.
The concept of animism in Shinto is no longer current, however.
These bells are usually in the shapes of the zodiacal animals: ''hamaya'', which are symbolic arrows for the fight against evil and bad luck; and ''Inuhariko'', which are paper dogs that are used to induce and to bless good births.
Be cleansed and go!
Eventually as the Yamato gained power a formalization process began.
While this is a Buddhist practice, darumas can be found at shrines, as well.
This type of cleanliness is usually performed to prevent ill outcomes.
Priests were officially nominated and organized by the state, and they instructed the youth in a form of Shinto theology based on the official dogma of the divinity of Japan's national origins and its Emperor.
Actual possession is not taking place but elements of possession such as losing control and high jumps are applied in the dance.
From this knowledge stems the ethical dimension of Shinto, focusing on sincerity (''makoto''), honesty (''tadashii'') and purity.
The basic performance of this is the hand and mouth washing (Temizu 手水) done at the entrance to a shrine.
The Paekche in the Three Kingdoms of Korea had political alliances with Yamato, and in the 5th century imported the Chinese writing system to record Japanese names and events for trade and political records.
This time period is defined by the increase of central power in Naniwa, now Osaka, of the feudal lord system.
The Taiho Code also called Ritsuryō (律令?)
It is performed in many of the larger Shinto shrines and is characterized by slow, elegant, circular movements, by emphasis on the four directions and by the central use of torimono (objects dancers carry in their hands), especially the fan and bells.
This is not considered an imposition of belief, but a sign of being welcomed by the local ''kami'', with the promise of addition to the pantheon of ''kami'' after death.
There is a division between the ''kagura'' that is performed at the Imperial palace and the shrines related to it, and the ''kagura'' that is performed in the countryside.
However, the ''yamabushi kagura'' tradition has retained its ritualistic and religious nature.
The recipient makes a wish and paints one eye; when the goal is accomplished, the recipient paints the other eye.
Shinto practices were first recorded and codified in the written historical records of the ''Kojiki'' and ''Nihon Shoki'' in the 8th century.
This marks the rise of Ise Daijingu as the main imperial shrine historically.
Everything from the setup of the instruments to the most subtle sounds and the arrangement of the music is crucial to encouraging the kami to come down and dance.
It is the sense of the terms ''michi'' or ''to'', "way", in the terms "kami-no-michi" or "Shinto".
In 513 they sent a Confucian scholar to the court to assist in the teachings of Confucian thought.
In other mythical accounts the originating ''kami'' is called ''Umashiashikabihikoji'' (宇摩志阿斯訶備比古遅神 "God of the ''Ashi'' Reed") or ''Kuninotokotachi'' (国之常立神 in Kojiki, 国常立尊 in Nihonshoki; ''Kunitokotachi-no-Kami'' or ''Kuninotokotachi-no-Kami?
For example, he linked Amaterasu (the sun goddess and ancestor of the Imperial family) with Dainichi Nyorai, a central manifestation of the Buddhists, whose name means literally "Great Sun Buddha".
It was a liturgy of rules and codifications, primarily focused on regulation of religion, government structure, land codes, criminal and civil law.
The word ''Shinto'' ("way of the gods") was adopted, originally as ''Jindō'' or ''Shindō'', from the written Chinese ''Shendao'' (神道, ), combining two ''kanji'': , meaning "spirit" or ''kami''; and , meaning a philosophical path or study (from the Chinese word ''dào'').
The heart of the shrine is periodic rituals, spiritual events in parishioners' lives, and festivals.
There is today a balance between outside influences of Buddhist, Confucian, Taoist, Abrahamic, Hindu and secular beliefs.
Much of modern Japan was under only fragmentary control by the Imperial family, and rival ethnic groups.
Also there was an increasing influence of Chinese culture which profoundly changed the practices of government structure, social structure, burial practices, and warfare.
Since the Japanese language does not distinguish between singular and plural, ''kami'' refers to the divinity, or sacred essence, that manifests in multiple forms.
New shrines are built and assimilated each time the city is moved.
Amaterasu came out and light returned to the universe.
The word "kagura" is thought to be a contracted form of ''kami no kura'' or "seat of the kami" or the "site where the kami is received."
A relatively small number of people practice Shinto in America.
A ''daruma'' is a round, paper doll of the Indian monk, Bodhidharma.
Shinto kami are commonly being seen by Buddhist clergy as guardians of manifestation, guardians, or pupils of Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Usually there will be only one or sometimes two approaches to the Shrine for the public and all will have the ''torii'' over the way.
''Miko kagura'' originally was a shamanic trance dance, but later, it became an art and was interpreted as a prayer dance.
This practice was necessary due to the Shinto belief in the impurity of death and the need to avoid this pollution.
However, it is common to see choreographed possession in the dances.
The development of ''niiname'' or the (now) Shinto harvest festival is attributed to this period as offerings for good harvests of similar format (typically rice) become common.
The Japanese also held close alliance and trade with the Gaya confederacy which was in the south of the peninsula.
Ofuda may be kept anywhere, as long as they are in their protective pouches, but there are several rules about the proper placement of kamidana.
This period hosted many changes to the country, government, and religion.
Izanagi chases her there, but runs away when he finds the dead figure of his spouse.
New arrivals from the continent seem to have invaded Japan from the West, bringing with them new technologies such as rice farming and metallurgy.
As he returns to the land of the living, Amaterasu (the sun goddess) is born from his left eye, Tsukiyomi (the moon deity) from his right eye, and Susanoo (the storm deity) is born from Izanagi's nose.
The oldest recorded usage of the word ''Shindo'' is from the second half of the 6th century.
Music plays a very important role in the ''kagura'' performance.
Jomon peoples of Japan used natural housing, predated rice farming, and frequently were hunter-gatherers; the physical evidence for ritual practices are difficult to document.
It includes the ''Ise daikagura'' group and the ''yamabushi kagura'' and ''bangaku'' groups of the Tohoku area (Northeastern Japan).
Such ceremonies have also been adapted to modern life.
The psychological shock of the Western "Black Ships" and the subsequent collapse of the shogunate convinced many that the nation needed to unify in order to resist being colonized by outside forces.
To illustrate, one would not visit a shrine if a close relative in the household had died recently.
The ''honden'' houses the symbol of the enshrined ''kami''.
Such processes continued to deepen throughout the early Shōwa period, coming to an abrupt end in August 1945 when Japan lost the war in the Pacific.
Also the practice of sending imperial princesses to the Ise shrine begins.
However, this practice of moving the capital due to "death impurity" is then abolished by the Taihō Code and rise in Buddhist influence.
The creation of the imperial Jingi-kan or Shinto Shrine office was completed.
Folk ''kagura'', or ''kagura'' from the countryside is divided according to region.
Shinto has also spread abroad to a limited extent, and a few non-Japanese Shinto priests have been ordained.
They are also renewed annually.
With the flourishing of ''kokugaku'' the concept was studied by scholars.
Spirit pacification and rejuvenation were usually achieved by songs and dances, also called ''asobi''.
Shinto gods are collectively called , an expression literally meaning "eight million kami", but interpreted as meaning "myriad", although it can be translated as "many Kami".
In the context of this clan based system, local beliefs developed naturally and when assimilation between clans occurred, they also took on some beliefs of the neighboring tribes.
All of the grand shrines are regulated under Taihō and are required to account for incomes, priests, and practices due to their national contributions.
There is an internal system of historical Shinto development that configures the relationships between Shinto and other religious practices over its long history; the inside and outside Kami (spirits).
The explanation generally given for this anomaly is that, following the demise of State Shinto, modern Shinto has reverted to its more traditional position as a traditional religion which is culturally ingrained, rather than enforced.
Other protective items include ''dorei'', which are earthenware bells that are used to pray for good fortune.
There were disputes about who would ascend to power and support the imperial family between the Soga and Mononobe/Nakatomi Shinto families.
The ''kamidana'' is a household shrine that acts as a substitute for a large shrine on a daily basis.
All shrines are open to the public at some times or throughout the year.
Beginning with Emperor Temmu (672–686), continuing through Empress Jito (686–697) and Emperor Mommu (697–707) Court Shinto rites are strengthened and made parallel to Buddhist beliefs in court life.
The mythological anthologies, along with other poetry anthologies like the ''Collection of Ten Thousand Leaves'' (''Man'yōshū'') and others, were intended to impress others with the worthiness of the Imperial family and their divine mandate to rule.
Their history lies with Buddhist practice of selling amulets.
The priest Gyogi went to Ise Daijingu Shrine for blessings to build the Buddha Dainichi.
Unlike other ''kagura'' types in which the ''kami'' appear only temporarily, during the ''shishi kagura'' the ''kami'' is constantly present in the shishi head mask.
The recorded history dates to the Kojiki (712) and Nihon Shoki (720), but archeological records date back significantly further.
It is common for families to participate in ceremonies for children at a shrine, yet have a Buddhist funeral at the time of death.
The priest Gyogi is known for his belief in assimilation of Shinto Kami and Buddhas.
The most common of the ''mori'' are sacred groves of trees, or mountains, or waterfalls.
The principal worship of ''kami'' is done at public shrines or worship at small home shrines called ''kamidana'' (神棚, lit.
Buddhism and Shinto coexisted and were amalgamated in the ''shinbutsu shūgō'' and Kūkai's syncretic view held wide sway up until the end of the Edo period.
However, the attempt did set the stage for the arrival of state Shinto, following the Meiji Restoration (c.1868), when Shinto and Buddhism were separated (''shinbutsu bunri'').
During this time in the pre-writing historical period, objects from the mainland start appearing in large amounts, specifically mirrors, swords, and jewels.
Practitioners express their diverse beliefs through a standard language and practice, adopting a similar style in dress and ritual, dating from around the time of the Nara and Heian periods (8th to 12th centuries AD).
This is the period of the development of the feudal state, and the Yamato and Izumo cultures.
Purification rites called Harae are a vital part of Shinto.
While many of the public shrines are elaborate structures, all are characteristic Japanese architectural styles of different periods depending on their age.
was an attempt to create a bulwark to dynamic external influences and stabilize the society through imperial power.
They are frequently used to ward off bad luck and to gain better health.
Since Japanese language does not distinguish between singular and plural, ''kami'' refers to the divinity, or sacred essence, that manifests in multiple forms: rocks, trees, rivers, animals, places, and even people can be said to possess the nature of ''kami''.
They were responsible for the relationship with their "gods" Kami and if one clan conquered another, their "god" would be assimilated.
There are several Shinto shrines in America.
Rhythm patterns of five and seven are common, possibly relating to the Shinto belief of the twelve generations of heavenly and earthly deities.
In more modern times Shinto has developed new branches and forms on a regular basis, including leaving Japan.
It has two types: ''torimono ma'', unmasked dances that include held objects, and ''shinno'' (sacred No), dramatic masked dances based on myths.
Up to this time Shinto had been largely a clan ('uji') based religious practice, exclusive to each clan.
However, it was not until the Hakuho ruling period of 645–710 was Shinto installed at the imperial faith along with the Fujiwara Clan and reforms that followed.
Ame-no-uzeme began to dance and create a noisy commotion in order to entice Amaterasu to come out.
The songs are used as magical devices to summon the gods and as prayers for blessings.
The Nihonshoki was more interested in creating a structural system of government, foreign policy, religious hierarchy, and domestic social order.
Shrines were also established in Taiwan and Korea during the period of Japanese imperial rule, but following the war, they were either destroyed or converted into some other use.
Both are compilations of prior oral traditions.
''Omamori'' are personal-protection amulets that sold by shrines.
The public shrine is a building or place that functions as a conduit for ''kami''.
In the myth, the birth of the god of fire (''Kagu-Tsuchi'') causes the death of Izanami, who descends into ''Yomi-no-kuni'', the netherworld.
The inside or ''ujigami'' (''uji'' meaning clan) Kami roles that supports cohesion and continuation of established roles and patterns; and the ''hitogami'' or outside Kami, bringing innovation, new beliefs, new messages, and some instability.
All priests, monks, and nuns were required to be registered, as were temples.
Be purified and leave!"
One Buddhist explanation saw the ''kami'' as supernatural beings still caught in the cycle of birth and rebirth (reincarnation).
Shinto has very ancient roots in the Japanese islands.
In 1871, a Ministry of Rites was formed and Shinto shrines were divided into twelve levels with the Ise Shrine (dedicated to Amaterasu, and thus symbolic of the legitimacy of the Imperial family) at the peak and small sanctuaries of humble towns at the base.
For example, the co-creator deities Izanami and Izanagi are explicitly compared to yin and yang.
During the Edo period, the lion dances became showy and acrobatic losing its touch with spirituality.
The more dedicated believer may perform misogi by standing beneath a waterfall or performing the ritual ablutions in a river.
''Ofuda'' are talismans—made of paper, wood, or metal—that are issued at shrines.
It includes ''miko'' dances as well as dancing of the ''torimono'' type.
Additionally, if anyone is injured on the grounds of a shrine, the area must be ritually purified.
The lion head of the ''yamabushi kagura'' schools is black and can click its teeth.
Those who are killed without being shown gratitude for their sacrifice will hold a  (grudge) and become powerful and evil ''kami'' who seek revenge (''aragami'').
They are frequently mountains, trees, unusual rocks, rivers, waterfalls, and other natural things.
Also the rice culture begins to blossom throughout Japan and this leads to the settlement of society, and seasonal reliance of crops.
It was used for securing and strengthening the soul of a dying person.
There was some trade amongst the indigenous peoples within Japanese islands and the mainland, as well as some varying migrations.
It is possible that this ritual is connected with the ritual to revive the sun goddess during the low point of the winter solstice.
It focuses on ritual practices to be carried out diligently, to establish a connection between present-day Japan and its ancient past.
The Jōmon is succeeded by the Yayoi period.
Those who understand ''kannagara'' know the divine, the human, and how people should live.
In the latter 6th century, there was a breakdown of the alliances between Japan and Paekche but the influence led to the codification of Shinto as the native religion in opposition to the extreme outside influences of the mainland.
The ''kami'' reside in all things, but certain objects and places are designated for the interface of people and kami: ''yorishiro'', ''shintai'', shrines, and ''kamidana''.
Normal days are called "day" (''ke''), and festive days are called "sunny" or, simply, "good" (''hare'').
One may choose to have one's name added to another list when moving and then be listed at both places.
Some shrines may have festivals that attract hundreds of thousands, especially in the New Year season.
In Shinto ''kannagara'', meaning "way path of expression of the ''kami''", refers to the law of the natural order.
The great bells and drums, Kofun burial mounds, and the founding of the imperial family are important to this period.
The Nakatomi family are made the chief court Shinto chaplains and chief priests at Ise Daijingu which held until 1892.
A survey conducted in the mid-1970s indicated that of those participants who claimed not to believe in religion, one-third had a Buddhist or Shinto altar in their home, and about one quarter carried an ''omamori'' (an amulet to gain protection by ''kami'') on their person.
There is a mythological tale of how ''kagura'' dance came into existence.
The capital is moved again to Heijō-kyō, or Nara, in AD 710 by Empress Gemmei due to the death of the Emperor.
Shrines are fronted by a distinctive Japanese gate (鳥居, ''torii'') made of two uprights and two crossbars denoting the separation between common space and sacred space.
By the end of the Jōmon period, a dramatic shift had taken place according to archaeological studies.
In the 18th century, various Japanese scholars, in particular Motoori Norinaga (本居 宣長, 1730–1801), tried to tear apart the "real" Shinto from various foreign influences.
Perhaps the most famous would be Emperor Ojin who was enshrined as Hachiman the God of War after his death.
The shrine is a building in which the kami is enshrined (housed).
All three of these have a direct connection to the imperial divine status as they are the symbols of imperial divinity and are Shinto honorary objects.
On holidays and other special occasions the inner shrine doors may be opened and special offerings made.
''Izumo kagura'' appears to be the most popular type of ''kagura''.
