Occasionally, severe pain may require an opioid medication, such as morphine.
In the skin, the virus causes local inflammation and blistering.
Once the lesions have crusted over, capsaicin cream (Zostrix) can be used.
Shingles occurs only in people who have been previously infected with VZV; although it can occur at any age, approximately half of the cases in the USA occur in those aged 50 years or older.
Sometimes this leads to unnecessary dental treatment.
MRI and CT scans are usually normal in cases of VZV reactivation in the CNS.
Involvement of the tip of the nose in the zoster rash is a strong predictor of herpes ophthalmicus.
As with chickenpox and/or other forms of herpes, direct contact with an active rash can spread VZV to a person who has no immunity to the virus.
The complete sequence of the viral genome was published in 1986.
The immune system eventually eliminates the virus from most locations, but it remains dormant (or latent) in the ganglia adjacent to the spinal cord (called the dorsal root ganglion) or the trigeminal ganglion in the base of the skull.
There is, however, a strong relationship with increasing age.
This equates to about 50% relative risk reduction.
Shingles in children is often painless, but people are more likely to get shingles as they age, and the disease tends to be more severe.
Postherpetic neuralgia arises in approximately 20% of people with shingles.
The introduction of DNA analysis techniques has shown some complications of varicella-zoster to be more common than previously thought.
Paracetamol, NSAIDs, or opioids may be used to help with the acute pain.
There is no recommended upper age limit.
Typically the rash occurs on either the left or right of the body or face in a single stripe.
Other serious effects that may occur in some cases include partial facial paralysis (usually temporary), ear damage, or encephalitis.
People aged 71 to 78 on that date would only have an opportunity to have the shingles vaccine after reaching the age of 79.
The idea of an association between the two diseases gained strength when it was shown that lymph from a person with shingles could induce chickenpox in young volunteers.
Lending support to this hypothesis that contact with children with chickenpox boosts adult cell-mediated immunity to help postpone or suppress shingles, a study by Thomas et al.
This condition may involve complications that affect several levels of the nervous system and cause many cranial neuropathies, polyneuritis, myelitis, or aseptic meningitis.
The latest real-time PCR tests are rapid, easy to perform, and as sensitive as nested PCR, and have a lower risk of contamination.
Later the rash becomes vesicular, forming small blisters filled with a serous exudate, as the fever and general malaise continue.
concluded that since the introduction of the chickenpox vaccine, hospitalization costs for complications of shingles increased by more than $700 million annually for those over age 60.
An earlier Connecticut study found a higher hospitalization rate; the difference may be due to the prevalence of HIV in the earlier study, or to the introduction of antivirals in California before 1994.
Nested PCR test has high sensitivity, but is susceptible to contamination leading to false positive results.
In the mouth, shingles appears initially as 1–4&nbsp;mm opaque blisters (vesicles), which break down quickly to leave ulcers that heal within 10–14 days.
Shingles is due to a reactivation of varicella zoster virus (VZV) within a person's body.
* Secondary bacterial infection
The skin of the forehead, upper eyelid and orbit of the eye may be involved.
In those with poor immune function the rash may occur widely.
However, individuals with a history of severe HZ are often insistent on receiving the vaccine, and there have been concerns about the validity of people's histories of HZ.
Physicians began to report that cases of shingles were often followed by chickenpox in the younger people who lived with the person with shingles.
Topical lidocaine and nerve blocks may also reduce pain.
In October 2007 the vaccine was officially recommended in the U.S. for healthy adults aged 60 and over.
Chickenpox is due to an initial infection with VZV.
A later study by Patel ''et al.''
The prodromal pain (before the rash) may be confused with toothache.
The presence of rash, as well as speciﬁc neurological symptoms, were required to diagnose a CNS infection caused by VZV.
Since 2000, PCR testing has become more widely used, and the number of diagnosed cases of CNS infection has increased.
The rash usually heals within two to four weeks; however, some people develop ongoing nerve pain which may last for months or years, a condition called postherpetic neuralgia.
The most popular test detects VZV-specific IgM antibody in blood; this appears only during chickenpox or shingles and not while the virus is dormant.
Pain can be mild to extreme in the affected dermatome, with sensations that are often described as stinging, tingling, aching, numbing or throbbing, and can be interspersed with quick stabs of agonizing pain.
Why this suppression sometimes fails is poorly understood, but shingles is more likely to occur in people whose immune systems are impaired due to aging, immunosuppressive therapy, psychological stress, or other factors.
The virus has never been successfully recovered from human nerve cells by cell culture.
For example, in the past, clinicians believed that encephalitis was caused by herpes simplex, and that patients always died or developed serious long term function problems.
In the United Kingdom and other parts of Europe, population-based varicella immunization is not practiced.
Although shingles typically resolves within 3–5 weeks, certain complications may arise:
In 1831 Richard Bright hypothesized that the disease arose from the dorsal root ganglion, and an 1861 paper by Felix von Bärensprung confirmed this.
Diagnosis of complications of varicella-zoster, particularly in cases where the disease reactivates after years or decades of latency, are difficult.
The disease has been recognized since ancient times.
Instead, the increased risk may result from the immune suppression that allows the reactivation of the virus.
Brain biopsy is not undertaken lightly:  it is reserved only for serious cases that cannot be diagnosed by less invasive methods.
Another study by Yih ''et al''.
Risk factors for reactivation include older age, poor immune function, and having had chickenpox before 18 months of age.
For example, sporadic meningoencephalitis (ME) caused by varicella-zoster was regarded as rare disease, mostly related to childhood chickenpox.
It contains the same material as the varicella vaccine, just at a higher dose.
It also decreases rates of postherpetic neuralgia, and if an outbreak occurs, its severity.
''Shingles oticus'', also known as Ramsay Hunt syndrome type II, involves the ear.
Oral involvement may occur alone or in combination with a rash on the skin over the cutaneous distribution of the same trigeminal branch.
The short- and long-term pain caused by shingles outbreaks originates from inflammation of affected nerves due to the widespread growth of the virus in those areas.
Shingles may occur in the mouth if the maxillary or mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve is affected, in which the rash may appear on the mucous membrane of the upper jaw (usually the palate, sometimes the gums of the upper teeth) or the lower jaw (tongue or gums of the lower teeth) respectively.
Other potential risk factors include mechanical trauma and exposure to immunotoxins.
It is unclear whether the risk is different by gender.
For this reason, knowledge of these herpes virus conditions was limited to severe cases.
A study of 1994 California data found hospitalization rates of 2.1 per 100,000 person-years, rising to 9.3 per 100,000 person-years for ages 60 and up.
+ '''Development of the shingles rash'''
Shingles has no relationship to season and does not occur in epidemics.
This newly infected individual may then develop chickenpox, but will not immediately develop shingles.
Shingles can be confused with herpes simplex, dermatitis herpetiformis and impetigo, and skin reactions caused by contact dermatitis, candidiasis, certain drugs and insect bites.
Until the mid 1990s, infectious complications of the Central Nervous System (CNS) caused by VZV reactivation were regarded as rare.
In most cases after one to two days, but sometimes as long as three weeks, the initial phase is followed by the appearance of the characteristic skin rash.
reported that adults in households with children had lower rates of shingles than households without children.
People with mild to moderate pain can be treated with over-the-counter pain medications.
In some people, symptoms may include conjunctivitis, keratitis, uveitis, and optic nerve palsies that can sometimes cause chronic ocular inflammation, loss of vision, and debilitating pain.
Varicella zoster virus is not the same as herpes simplex virus; however, they belong to the same family of viruses.
Post herpetic neuralgia uncommonly is associated with shingles in the mouth.
While more common among older people, children may also get the disease.
In the Shingles Prevention Study (SPS), vaccine efficacy was maintained through four years of follow-up.
A 2007 study found that the shingles vaccine is likely to be cost-effective in the U.S., projecting an annual savings of $82 to $103 million in healthcare costs with cost-effectiveness ratios ranging from $16,229 to $27,609 per quality-adjusted life year gained.
The disease results from virus particles in a single sensory ganglion switching from their latent lysogenic cycles to their active lytic cycles.
During pregnancy, first infections with VZV, causing chickenpox, may lead to infection of the fetus and complications in the newborn, but chronic infection or reactivation in shingles are not associated with fetal infection.
People were diagnosed at autopsy or by brain biopsy.
Of these drugs, acyclovir has been the standard treatment, but the new drugs valaciclovir and famciclovir demonstrate similar or superior efficacy and good safety and tolerability.
Laboratory tests are available to diagnose shingles.
The Tzanck smear is helpful for diagnosing acute infection with a herpes virus, but does not distinguish between HSV and VZV.
showed a 28% increase in shingles incidence from 1996 to 2001.
When the virus is reactivated in this nerve branch it is termed ''zoster ophthalmicus''.
* Postherpetic neuralgia, a condition of chronic pain following shingles
indicated that pediatricians reflected incidence rates from 1/2 to 1/8 that of the general population their age.
Repeated attacks of shingles are rare, and it is extremely rare for a person to have more than three recurrences.
* Motor involvement, including weakness especially in "motor herpes zoster"
The rash and pain usually subside within three to five weeks, but about one in five people develop a painful condition called postherpetic neuralgia, which is often difficult to manage.
The shingles vaccine decreases the chance of shingles by about half in those between the ages of 50 and 80.
PCR is not a foolproof method of diagnosis, but because so many other indicators have turned out to not be reliable in diagnosing VZV infections in the CNS, screening for VZV by PCR is recommended.
According to a study in North Carolina, "black subjects were significantly less likely to develop zoster than were white subjects."
The painful vesicles eventually become cloudy or darkened as they fill with blood, and crust over within seven to ten days; usually the crusts fall off and the skin heals, but sometimes, after severe blistering, scarring and discolored skin remain.
How the virus remains in the body or subsequently re-activates, is not well understood.
The results of a further study by Yawn ''et al''.
The causative agent for shingles is the varicella zoster virus (VZV)—a double-stranded DNA virus related to the Herpes simplex virus.
From 2013 the UK National Health Service started offering shingles vaccination, with Zostavax, to elderly people.
Mortality rates in treated patients are decreasing.
Adults with latent VZV infection who are exposed intermittently to children with chickenpox receive an immune boost.
Therefore, oral involvement rarely causes complications such as osteonecrosis, tooth loss, periodontitis (gum disease), pulp calcification, pulp necrosis, periapical lesions and tooth developmental anomalies.
After 80 the vaccine is still effective, just less so.
''Zoster'' comes from Greek ''zōstēr'', meaning "belt" or "girdle", after the characteristic belt-like dermatomal rash.
It is estimated that about a third of people develop shingles at some point in their life.
The family name of all the herpesviridae derives from the Greek word ''herpein'' ("to creep"), referring to the latent, recurring infections typical of this group of viruses.
The likelihood of vaccination causing a case of HZ appears to be very low.
Complications in immunocompromised individuals with shingles may be reduced with intravenous acyclovir.
Exposure to the virus in the blisters can cause chickenpox in someone who has not had it before but will not trigger shingles.
Notwithstanding these limitations, the use of PCR has resulted in an advance in the state of the art in our understanding of herpesviruses, including VZV, during the 1990s and 2000s.
Zoster ophthalmicus occurs in approximately 10% to 25% of cases.
Another important risk factor is immunosuppression, as in people with HIV.
The number of new cases per year ranges from 1.2–3.4 per 1,000 among healthy individuals to 3.9–11.8 per 1,000 among those older than 65 years of age.
When routine chickenpox vaccination was introduced in the United States, there was concern that, because older adults would no longer receive this natural periodic boost, there would be an increase in the incidence of shingles.
The incidence rate of shingles ranges from 1.2 to 3.4 per 1,000 person‐years among younger healthy individuals, increasing to 3.9–11.8 per 1,000 person‐years among those older than 65 years, and incidence rates worldwide are similar.
Most individuals are infected with this virus as children which causes an episode of chickenpox.
A systematic review by Cochrane concluded that the herpes zoster vaccine was useful for preventing  herpes zoster for at least three years.
Evidence does not show a significant effect of antivirals or steroids on rates of postherpetic neuralgia.
Following one dose of live attenuated vaccine 69% were protected in the first year and 4%  after eight years.
Although VZV has been detected in autopsies of nervous tissue, there are no methods to find dormant virus in the ganglia of living people.
It is likely that incidence rate will change in the future, due to the aging of the population, changes in therapy for malignant and autoimmune diseases, and changes in chickenpox vaccination rates; a wide adoption of zoster vaccination could dramatically reduce the incidence rate.
This periodic boost to the immune system helps to prevent shingles in older adults.
The drugs are used both for prevention (for example in HIV/AIDS) and as therapy during the acute phase.
As with shingles of the skin, the lesions tend to only involve one side, distinguishing it from other oral blistering conditions.
Besides the skin, other organs, such as the liver or brain, may also be affected (causing hepatitis or encephalitis respectively), making the condition potentially lethal.
Upon reactivation, the virus replicates in neuronal cell bodies, and virions are shed from the cells and carried down the axons to the area of skin innervated by that ganglion.
The frequency of CNS infections presented at the emergency room of a community hospital is not negligible, so a means of diagnosing cases is needed.
Old references cite vesicular rash as a characteristic finding, however, recent studies have found that rash is only present in 45% of cases.
In contrast to the herpes simplex virus, the latency of VZV is poorly understood.
Although DNA analysis techniques such as polymerase chain reaction can be used to look for DNA of herpesviruses in spinal fluid or blood, the results may be negative, even in cases where other definitive symptoms exist.
Molecular biology tests based on in vitro nucleic acid amplification (PCR tests) are currently considered the most reliable.
Otherwise there are typically few symptoms.
A 2008 study showed that people with close relatives who had had shingles were twice as likely to develop it themselves, but a 2010 study found no such link.
Also, the study by Terada et al.
The incidence of side effects is low.
However, by 1942, it was recognized that shingles was a more serious disease in adults than in children, and that it increased in frequency with advancing age.
In one study, it was estimated that 26% of those who contract shingles eventually present complications.
The rationale is that until the entire population could be immunized, adults who have previously contracted VZV would instead derive benefit from occasional exposure to VZV (from children), which serves as a booster to their immunity to the virus, and may reduce the risk of shingles later on in life.
There is a slightly increased risk of developing cancer after a shingles infection.
When the rash is absent (early or late in the disease, or in the case of zoster sine herpete), shingles can be difficult to diagnose.
Until the 1940s the disease was considered benign, and serious complications were thought to be very rare.
However, herpes simplex virus (HSV) can occasionally produce a rash in such a pattern (zosteriform herpes simplex).
People aged either 70 or 79 on 1 September 2013 were offered the vaccine.
Two to four days before the rash occurs there may be pain or tingling in the area.
There is no strong evidence for a genetic link or a link to family history.
It is thought to result from the virus spreading from the facial nerve to the vestibulocochlear nerve.
CSF pleocytosis, previously thought to be a strong indicator of VZV encephalitis, was absent in half of a group of patients diagnosed with VZV encephalitis by PCR.
Shingles has a long recorded history, although historical accounts fail to distinguish the blistering caused by VZV and those caused by smallpox, ergotism, and erysipelas.
Unless the immune system is compromised, it suppresses reactivation of the virus and prevents shingles outbreaks.
Symptoms include hearing loss and vertigo (rotational dizziness).
It has been recommended that people with primary or acquired immunodeficiency should not receive the vaccine.
Other risk factors include psychological stress.
Side effects however appear to be minimal.
However, upon closer inspection, the two studies that showed no increase in shingles incidence were conducted among populations where varicella vaccination was not as yet widespread in the community.
By the mid-1960s, several studies identified the gradual reduction in cellular immunity in old age, observing that in a cohort of 1,000 people who lived to the age of 85, approximately 500 (i.e., 50%) would have at least one attack of shingles, and 10 (i.e., 1%) would have at least two attacks.
However, meningoencephalitis caused by varicella-zoster is increasingly recognized as a predominant cause of ME among immunocompetent adults in non-epidemic circumstances.
DNA techniques have made it possible to diagnose “mild” cases, caused by VZV or HSV, in which the symptoms include fever, headache, and altered mental status.
Unusual complications may occur with intra-oral shingles that are not seen elsewhere.
Both the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the ACIP recommended the vaccination of adults regardless of a previous episode of HZ.
At first the rash appears similar to the first appearance of hives; however, unlike hives, shingles causes skin changes limited to a dermatome, normally resulting in a stripe or belt-like pattern that is limited to one side of the body and does not cross the midline.
Administering gabapentin along with antivirals may offer relief of postherpetic neuralgia.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends shingle vaccine for use in people 60 years old and older to prevent shingles, but it is not recommended to treat active shingles or postherpetic neuralgia (pain after the rash is gone) once it develops.
Two doses of a adjuvanted herpes zoster subunit vaccine had levels of protection of about 90% at 3.5 years.
In some people, shingles can reactivate presenting as ''zoster sine herpete'': pain radiating along the path of a single spinal nerve (a ''dermatomal distribution''), but without an accompanying rash.
The earliest symptoms of shingles, which include headache, fever, and malaise, are nonspecific, and may result in an incorrect diagnosis.
Diagnosis is typically based on a person's signs and symptoms.
It is defined as more than twenty skin lesions appearing outside either the primarily affected dermatome or dermatomes directly adjacent to it.
About half of those living to age 85 will have at least one attack, and less than 5% will have more than one attack.
In the late 18th century William Heberden established a way to differentiate between shingles and smallpox, and in the late 19th century shingles was differentiated from erysipelas.
''Zoster sine herpete'' ("zoster without herpes") describes a person who has all of the symptoms of shingles except this characteristic rash.
These symptoms are commonly followed by sensations of burning pain, itching, hyperesthesia (oversensitivity), or paresthesia ("pins and needles": tingling, pricking, or numbness).
Virus-specific proteins continue to be made by the infected cells during the latent period, so true latency, as opposed to chronic, low-level, active infection, has not been proven to occur in VZV infections.
The pain and rash most commonly occurs on the torso, but can appear on the face, eyes or other parts of the body.
If the rash involves the eye, vision loss may occur.
The common name for the disease, ''shingles'', derives from the Latin ''cingulus'', a variant of Latin ''cingulum'' meaning "girdle".
An episode of HZ has an immunizing effect, reducing the probability of a subsequent recurrence.
In larger laboratories, lymph collected from a blister is tested by polymerase chain reaction for VZV DNA, or examined with an electron microscope for virus particles.
* Eye involvement: trigeminal nerve involvement (as seen in herpes ophthalmicus) should be treated early and aggressively as it may lead to blindness.
Their use in Ramsay Hunt syndrome has not been properly studied as of 2008.
Multiple studies and surveillance data, at least when viewed superficially, demonstrate no consistent trends in incidence in the U.S. since the chickenpox vaccination program began in 1995.
Negative PCR does not rule out VZV involvement, but a positive PCR can be used for diagnosis, and appropriate treatment started (for example, antivirals can be prescribed rather than antibiotics).
In people who are at a high risk for repeated attacks of shingles, five daily oral doses of acyclovir are usually effective.
Antiviral drugs may reduce the severity and duration of shingles; however, they do not prevent postherpetic neuralgia.
The ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve is most commonly involved branch.
If the rash has appeared, identifying this disease (making a differential diagnosis) requires only a visual examination, since very few diseases produce a rash in a dermatomal pattern (see map).
They also have more sensitivity than viral cultures.
This relationship with age has been demonstrated in many countries, and is attributed to the fact that cellular immunity declines as people grow older.
The significant advantage of valciclovir over aciclovir is its dosing of only 3 times/day (compared with aciclovir's 5 times/day dosing), which could make it more convenient for people and improve adherence with therapy.
If shingles develops, antiviral medications such as aciclovir can reduce the severity and duration of disease if started within 72 hours of the appearance of the rash.
Apart from the rash, most symptoms can occur also in other conditions.
Classic textbook descriptions state that VZV reactivation in the CNS is restricted to immunocompromised individuals and the elderly, however, recent studies have found that most patients are immunocompetent, and less than 60 years old.
The vaccine reduced incidence of persistent, severe pain after shingles (i.e., PHN) by 66% in people who contracted shingles despite vaccination.
In Arabic its name means "belt of fire", while in Spanish it means "small snake", and in Hindi it means "big rash".
Symptoms vary, and there is significant overlap in symptoms with herpes-simplex symptoms.
Adults also receive an immune boost from contact with children infected with varicella (chicken pox), a boosting method that prevents about a quarter of shingles cases among unvaccinated adults, but that is becoming less common in the U.S. now that children are routinely vaccinated against varicella.
This was finally proved by the first isolation of the virus in cell cultures, by the Nobel laureate Thomas Huckle Weller, in 1953.
