The marriage became troubled; and Temple divorced Agar on December 5, 1949.
Black managed television station KABC-TV in Los Angeles, and Temple became a homemaker.
Dubček fell out of favor with the Soviets after a series of reforms known as the Prague Spring.
Most of the Shirley Temple films were cheaply made at $200,000 or $300,000 per picture and were comedy-dramas with songs and dances added, sentimental and melodramatic situations, and little in the way of production values.
Her box-office popularity waned as she reached adolescence.
She announced the results of the operation on  radio and television and in a February 1973 article for the magazine ''McCall's''.
''Curly Top'' and ''The Littlest Rebel'' were named to ''Variety''s list of top box office draws for 1935.
The divorce was finalized on December 5, 1950.
Nineteen writers, known as the Shirley Temple Story Development team, made 11 original stories and some adaptations of the classics for her.
On December 21, 1933, her contract was extended to a year at the same $150/week with a seven-year option and her mother Gertrude was hired on at $25/week as her hairdresser and personal coach.
Temple, who was stranded at a hotel as the tanks rolled in, sought refuge on the roof of the hotel.
She was lent to Tower Productions for a small role in her first feature film (''The Red-Haired Alibi'') in 1932 and, in 1933, to Universal, Paramount, and Warner Bros., for various parts.
She appeared in two wartime hits: ''Since You Went Away'' and ''I'll Be Seeing You''.
''Junior Miss'' debuted March 4, 1942, with her in the title role.
Temple was the recipient of numerous awards and honors, including the Kennedy Center Honors and a Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award.
She acted in three of the sixteen hour-long episodes, and her son made his acting debut in the Christmas episode, "Mother Goose".
In any case, the Cowan project was shelved by the producer.
The film was a critical and commercial hit.
One persistent rumor that was especially prevalent in Europe was  that Shirley was not a child but a 30-year-old dwarf due in part to her stocky body type.
The only other Shirley Temple film released in 1937 was ''Heidi''.
Her film titles are a clue to the way she was marketed—''Curly Top'' and ''Dimples'', and her "little" pictures such as ''The Little Colonel'' and ''The Littlest Rebel''.
Fox also publicized her as a natural talent with no formal acting or dance training.
She served as the United States Ambassador to Czechoslovakia (August 23, 1989 – July 12, 1992), having been appointed by President George H. W. Bush.
Temple was a witness to two crucial moments in the history of Czechoslovakia's fight against Communism.
After Educational Pictures declared bankruptcy in 1933, her father purchased her contract for $25.
She made guest appearances on television shows in the early 1960s and filmed a sitcom pilot that was never released.
The latter two were panned by the critics, and ''Corner'' was the first of her films to show a slump in ticket sales.
In February 1980, Temple was honored by the Freedoms Foundation of Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, along with U.S.
In 1972, at age 44, Temple was diagnosed with breast cancer.
She endorsed Postal Telegraph, Sperry Drifted Snow Flour, the Grunow Teledial radio, Quaker Puffed Wheat, General Electric and Packard automobiles.
In 1936, her income topped $200,000 from royalties.
Temple got her start in foreign service after her failed run for Congress in 1967, when Henry Kissinger overheard her talking about Namibia at a party, he was surprised that she knew anything about it.
He budgeted the film at $1.5 million (twice the amount of ''Corner'') and chose it to be her first Technicolor feature.
Within months, she became the symbol of wholesome family entertainment.
Licensed merchandise that capitalized on her wholesome image included dolls, dishes, and clothing.
At the studio, the girl's bungalow was renovated, all traces of her tenure expunged, and the building reassigned as an office.
She sat on the boards of corporations and organizations including The Walt Disney Company, Del Monte Foods and the National Wildlife Federation.
She saw this as the collapse of any serious attempt by the studio to build upon the dramatic role from the previous movie ''Wee Willie Winkie''.
The settlement remained in trust for the girl in an English bank until she turned twenty-one, when it was donated to charity and used to build a youth center in England.
Successful Shirley Temple items included a line of girls' dresses, accessories, soap, dishes, cutout books, sheet music, mirrors, paper tablets, and numerous other items.
The following year, Zanuck secured the rights to the children's novel, ''A Little Princess'', believing the book would be an ideal vehicle for the girl.
Her family stated only that she died of natural causes.
Motivated by the popularity of ''Storybook'' and television broadcasts of Temple's films, the Ideal Toy Company released a new version of the Shirley Temple doll and Random House published three fairy tale anthologies under her name.
During the making of ''Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm'', news spread that she was going to do extended scenes without her trademark curls.
According to biographer Robert Windeler, her 1947–49 films neither made nor lost money, but "had a cheapie B look about them and indifferent performances from her".
On July 18, 1934, the contractual salary was raised to $1,000 a week and her mother's salary was raised to $250 a week, with an additional $15,000 bonus for each movie finished.
She was the first and only female US ambassador to Czechoslovakia.
The family moved to Washington DC, when Black was recalled to the Navy at the outbreak of the Korean War.
Conservative and patrician, he was the son of James Black, president and later chairman of Pacific Gas and Electric, and reputedly one of the richest young men in California.
After auditioning for and losing the role of Peter Pan on the Broadway stage in August 1950, Temple took stock, admitted her recent movies had been poor fare, and announced her retirement from films on December 16, 1950.
So prevalent were these rumors that the Vatican dispatched Father Silvio Massante to investigate if she were indeed a child.
Sponsored by Procter & Gamble, ''Junior Miss'' was directed by Gordon Hughes, with David Rose as musical director.
Ideal Toy and Novelty Company in New York City negotiated a license for dolls with the company's first doll wearing the polka-dot dress from ''Stand Up and Cheer!''.
Her image also began to appear on numerous commercial products without approval and without compensation.
A succession of films followed: ''The Little Colonel'', ''Our Little Girl'', ''Curly Top'' (with the signature song "Animal Crackers in My Soup"), and ''The Littlest Rebel'' in 1935.
Her mother supported her infant daughter's singing, dancing, and acting talents, and in September 1931, enrolled her in Meglin's Dance School in Los Angeles.
In 1943, 15-year-old Shirley Temple met John Agar (1921–2002), an Army Air Corps sergeant, physical training instructor, and member of a Chicago meat-packing family.
Fox Films merged with Twentieth Century Pictures to become 20th Century Fox in 1935.
Rumors also spread about her hair color, namely that she wasn't a natural blonde.
Temple was extensively involved with the Commonwealth Club of California, a public-affairs forum headquartered in San Francisco.
She was the studio's greatest asset.
To underwrite production costs at Educational, she and her child co-stars modeled for breakfast cereals and other products.
The show lacked the special effects necessary for fairy tale dramatizations, sets were amateurish, and episodes were telecast in no regular time-slot, making it hard for another.
Midway through the shooting of the movie, the dream sequence was added into the script.
As a way of explaining how she knew stylized buck and weave dancing, she was enrolled in the Elisa Ryan School of Dancing for two weeks.
Her signature song, "On the Good Ship Lollipop", was introduced in the film and sold 500,000 sheet-music copies.
In 1940 Lester Cowan, an independent film producer, bought F. Scott Fitzgerald's short story, "Babylon Revisited and Other Stories" for $80 which was a bargain.
There were reports that the little actress was behind the dream sequence and that she was enthusiastically pushing for it but in her autobiography she vehemently denied it.
She took the unusual step of personally accompanying Havel on his first official visit to Washington, riding along on the same plane.
Recognizing her from the screen, he arranged for her to have a tryout for the movie ''Stand Up and Cheer!''.
The series was based on stories by Sally Benson.
Between January and December 1958, Temple hosted and narrated a successful NBC television anthology series of fairy-tale adaptations called ''Shirley Temple's Storybook''.
She was awarded custody of their daughter.
''Curly Top'' was Shirley's last film before the merger of 20th Century and Fox.
Shirley often played a fixer-upper, a precocious Cupid, or the good fairy in these films, reuniting her estranged parents or smoothing out the wrinkles in the romances of young couples.
At the height of her popularity, Shirley Temple was often the subject of  myths and rumors, some propagated by 20th Century Fox/Fox Films.
The nightly process she went through in the setting of her curls was tedious and grueling, with once a week vinegar rinses burning her eyes.
In 1934, she found international fame in ''Bright Eyes'', a feature film designed specifically for her talents.
She later said she wished all she had to do was wear a wig.
Convinced that the girl would successfully move from child star to teenage actress, Zanuck declined a substantial offer from MGM to star her as Dorothy in ''The Wizard of Oz'' and cast her instead in ''Susannah of the Mounties'', her last money-maker for Twentieth Century-Fox.
The tumor was removed and a modified radical mastectomy performed.
The family was of English, German, and Dutch ancestry.
Her biggest trademark, her hair, also was subject of rumors.
She ran as a conservative and lost to law school professor Pete McCloskey.
Many Shirley Temple-inspired products were manufactured and released during the 1930s.
As the girl matured into a pre-adolescent, the formula was altered slightly to encourage her naturalness, naïveté, and tomboyishness to come forth and shine while her infant innocence, which had served her well at six but was inappropriate for her tweens (or later childhood years), was toned down.
About this time, her mother began styling her daughter's hair in ringlets.
It faced stiff competition from ''Maverick'', ''Lassie'', ''Dennis the Menace'', the 1960 telecast of ''The Wizard of Oz'', and the Walt Disney anthology television series however, and was canceled at season's end in September 1961.
Temple served on boards of directors of large enterprises and organizations such as The Walt Disney Company, Del Monte Foods, Bank of America, the Bank of California, BANCAL Tri-State, Fireman's Fund Insurance, the United States Commission for UNESCO, the United Nations Association and the National Wildlife Federation.
She is 18th on the American Film Institute's list of the greatest female American screen legends of Classic Hollywood cinema.
When acting, she wore dental plates and caps to hide the gaps in her teeth.
Shirley Temple dolls realized $45 million in sales before 1941.
Cease and desist letters were sent out to many companies and the process was begun for awarding corporate licenses.
Based on Shirley Temple's many screen successes, Zanuck increased budgets and production values for her films.
While at Meglin's, she was spotted by Charles Lamont, a casting director for Educational Pictures.
Her contract gave neither her nor her parents any creative control over the movies she was in.
In June, her success continued with a loan-out to Paramount for ''Little Miss Marker''.
She appeared in a few films of varying quality in her mid-to-late teens, and retired from films in 1950 at the age of 22.
Before 1935 ended, the girl's income from licensed merchandise royalties would exceed $100,000, doubling her income from her movies.
Arriving for the audition on December 7, 1933, she won the part and was signed to a $150-per-week contract guaranteed for two weeks by Fox Film Corporation.
Senator Jake Garn of Utah, actor James Stewart, singer John Denver, and Tom Abraham, a businessman from Canadian, Texas, who worked with immigrants seeking to become U.S. citizens.
Her films were seen as generating hope and optimism, and President Franklin D. Roosevelt said, "It is a splendid thing that for just fifteen cents an American can go to a movie and look at the smiling face of a baby and forget his troubles."
After finishing the screenplay, Scott was told by Cowan that he would not do the film unless Shirley Temple starred in the lead of the youngster Honoria.
Shirley offered a natural solution: to open one's heart."
The specific cause, according to her death certificate released on March 3, 2014,  was chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
She was appointed Representative to the 24th United Nations General Assembly by President Richard M. Nixon (September – December 1969), and was appointed United States Ambassador to Ghana (December 6, 1974 – July 13, 1976) by President Gerald R. Ford.
Temple played a critical role in hastening the end of the Communist regime by openly sympathizing with anti-Communist dissidents and later establishing formal diplomatic relations with the newly elected government led by Václav Havel.
That year ''Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm'', ''Little Miss Broadway'' and ''Just Around the Corner'' were released.
After her departure from Twentieth Century-Fox, MGM signed Shirley for her comeback, and made plans to team her with Judy Garland and Mickey Rooney for the Andy Hardy series.
She later reported that it was from here she saw an unarmed woman on the street gunned down by Soviet forces, a sight that stayed with her for the rest of her life.
The series was popular but faced issues.
In 1940, Shirley starred in two flops at Twentieth Century-Fox, ''The Blue Bird'' and ''Young People''.
Elements of the traditional fairy tale were woven into her films: wholesome goodness triumphing over meanness and evil, for example, or wealth over poverty, marriage over divorce, or a booming economy over a depressed one.
One rumor that circulated was she wore a wig.
The Independent Theatre Owners Association paid for an advertisement in the ''Hollywood Reporter'' in May 1938 that included Shirley Temple on a list of actors who deserved their salaries while others, such as Katharine Hepburn and Joan Crawford, were described as "whose box-office draw is nil".
''Miss Annie Rooney'' followed for United Artists in 1942, but was unsuccessful.
She began her diplomatic career in 1969, with an appointment to represent the United States at a session of the United Nations General Assembly.
Producer and studio head Darryl F. Zanuck focused his attention and resources upon cultivating Shirley's superstar status.
Biographer Anne Edwards writes about the tone and tenor of Shirley Temple films, "This was mid-Depression, and schemes proliferated for the care of the needy and the regeneration of the fallen.
On December 28, 1934, ''Bright Eyes'' was released.
The fact that she never seemed to miss any teeth led some people to conclude she had all her adult teeth.
F. Scott Fitzgerald was later credited for the use of the original story for ''The Last Time I Saw Paris'', starring Elizabeth Taylor.
First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt and Shirley Temple in July 1938
Later, after she became ambassador to Czechoslovakia, she was present in the Velvet Revolution, which brought about the end of Communism in Czechoslovakia.
In 1988, she published her autobiography, ''Child Star''.
In February 1935, Shirley Temple became the first child star to be honored with a miniature Juvenile Oscar for her film accomplishments, and she added her foot- and handprints to the forecourt at Grauman's Chinese Theatre a month later.
The couple were married for 54 years until his death on August 4, 2005, at home in Woodside, California of complications from a bone marrow disease.
As a result, her only film for Metro became ''Kathleen'' in 1941, a story about an unhappy teenager.
Educational Pictures were about to launch their ''Baby Burlesks'', multiple short films satirizing recent film and political events, using preschool children in every role.
After the success of her first three movies, the Temples realized Shirley was not being paid enough.
Selznick suggested she move abroad, gain maturity as an actress, and even change her name.
Fitzgerald thought his screenwriting days were over and with some hesitation accepted Cowan's offer to write the screenplay, titled "Cosmopolitan," based on the short story.
Her charm was evident to Fox heads, as she was ushered into corporate offices almost immediately after finishing ''Baby Take a Bow'' song and dance number she did with James Dunn.
The idea was quickly abandoned, with MGM teaming her with Garland and Rooney for the musical ''Babes on Broadway''.
However, her mother demurred.
Temple and Black were married in his parents' Del Monte, California, home on December 16, 1950, before a small assembly of family and friends.
Selznick however became involved with Jennifer Jones and lost interest in developing Shirley's career.
She was appointed first female Chief of Protocol of the United States (July 1, 1976 – January 21, 1977), and was in charge of arrangements for President Jimmy Carter's inauguration and inaugural ball.
The actress retired for almost two years from films, focusing on school and activities.
The film was not a success and her MGM contract was canceled after mutual consent.
In 1967, she ran unsuccessfully in a special election in California's 11th congressional district to fill the seat left vacant by the death of eight-term Republican J. Arthur Younger from leukemia.
Temple continued to work on television, making guest appearances on ''The Red Skelton Show'', ''Sing Along with Mitch'', and other shows.
She was lent to other studios with ''Kiss and Tell'', ''The Bachelor and the Bobby-Soxer'', and ''Fort Apache'' being her few good films at the time.
In 1937, John Ford was hired to direct the sepia-toned ''Wee Willie Winkie'' (Temple's own favorite) and an A-list cast was signed that included Victor McLaglen, C. Aubrey Smith and Cesar Romero.
More than once, fans yanked her hair to test the theory.
Released in May 1934, ''Stand Up and Cheer!''
In doing so, she became one of the first prominent women to speak openly about breast cancer.
Temple returned to show business in 1958 with a two-season television anthology series of fairy tale adaptations.
The role then was a breakthrough performance for her.
She was typecast, he warned her, and her career was in perilous straits.
became Shirley's breakthrough film.
Shirley Temple died on February 10, 2014, at age 85.
Following the war's end and Black's discharge from the Navy, the family returned to California in May 1953.
It was the first feature film crafted specifically for the girl's talents and the first where her name appeared over the title.
Their daughter Lori was born on April 9, 1954; Lori went on to be a bassist in the multi-genre band the Melvins.
A mug, a pitcher, and a cereal bowl in cobalt blue with a decal of the little actress were given away as a premium with Wheaties.
Agar became an actor, and the couple made two films together: ''Fort Apache'' (1948, RKO) and ''Adventure in Baltimore'' (1949, RKO).
In 1936, ''Captain January'', ''Poor Little Rich Girl'', ''Dimples'', and ''Stowaway'' were released.
Shirley Temple began her film career in 1932 at age 3.
But they all required endless paperwork and demeaning, hours-long queues, at the end of which an exhausted, nettled social worker dealt with each person as a faceless number.
''The Little Princess'' was a 1939 critical and commercial success with Shirley's acting at its peak.
The show was reworked and released in color in September 1960 in a regular time-slot as ''The Shirley Temple Show''.
In the contract they signed in July 1934, Shirley's parents agreed to four films a year (rather than the three they wished).
Shirley Temple was born on April 23, 1928, in Santa Monica, California.
Temple had their son, Charles Alden Black, Jr., in Washington, D.C., on April 28, 1952.
During production, she also caught a cold which caused her to miss a couple days.
''Baby Burlesks'' was a series of one-reelers; another series of two-reelers called ''Frolics of Youth'' followed, with Shirley playing Mary Lou Rogers, a youngster in a contemporary suburban family.
She had two brothers, George Francis, Jr., and John Stanley.
The girl was actually losing her teeth regularly through her days with 20th Century Fox, most notably during the sidewalk ceremony in front of Grauman's Theatre, where she took off her shoes and placed her bare feet in the cement to take attention away from her face.
By the end of 1935, her salary was $2,500 a week.
On January 30, 1948, the young wife bore a daughter, Linda Susan.
Although Shirley hid behind the piano while in the studio, Lamont took a shine to her, invited her to audition, and in 1932, signed her to a contract.
After her venture into television, Temple became active in the Republican Party in California.
The film was successful, but because she made only two films in 1939 instead of three or four, Shirley dropped from number one box-office favorite in 1938 to number five in 1939.
Her parents bought up the remainder of her contract and sent her at the age of 12 to Westlake School for Girls, an exclusive country day school in Los Angeles.
To get control over the corporate unlicensed use of her image and to negotiate with Fox, the girl's parents hired the lawyer Loyd Wright to represent them.
Edwards points out that the characters created for the little actress would change the lives of the cold, the hardened, and the criminal with positive results.
After meeting Shirley in July, Fitzgerald changed his mind and tried to persuade her mother to let her star in the film.
A lifelong smoker, she avoided revealing her habit in public to avoid setting a bad example for her fans.
In 1939, she was the subject of the Salvador Dalí painting ''Shirley Temple, The Youngest, Most Sacred Monster of the Cinema in Her Time'' and she was animated and was with Donald Duck in ''The Autograph Hound''.
On September 19, 1945, when Temple was 17, they married before five hundred guests in an Episcopal ceremony at Wilshire Methodist Church in Los Angeles.
300,000 dolls were sold within six months and 225,000 books between October and December 1958.
but British writer and critic Graham Greene muddied the waters in October 1937 when he wrote in a British magazine that the actress was a "complete totsy" and accused her of being too nubile for a nine-year-old:  Shirley Temple and Twentieth Century-Fox sued for libel and won.
She was in Prague in August 1968, as a representative of the International Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies and was going to meet with Czechoslovakian party leader Alexander Dubček on the very day that Soviet-backed forces invaded the country.
In September 1954, Charles Sr. became director of business operations for the Stanford Research Institute, and the family moved to Atherton, California.
Fitzgerald objected, saying that at age 12, going on twenty, the actress was too worldly for the part and would detract from the aura of innocence otherwise framed by Honoria's character.
She spoke at many meetings through the years and was president in 1984.
Other merchandise included handbags and hats, coloring books, a toy theater, and a recreation of the ''Baby, Take a Bow'' polka-dot dress.
While walking out of the viewing of her last ''Frolics of Youth'' picture, Fox Film songwriter Jay Gorney saw the little girl dancing in the movie theater lobby.
In January 1950, Temple met Charles Alden Black, a WWII United States Navy intelligence officer and Silver Star recipient who was Assistant to the President of the Hawaiian Pineapple Company.
She received a special Juvenile Academy Award in February 1935 for her outstanding contribution as a juvenile performer to motion pictures during 1934, and film hits such as ''Curly Top'' and ''Heidi'' followed year after year during the mid-to-late 1930s.
In 1944, David O. Selznick signed Shirley Temple to a four-year contract.
In 1999, she hosted the ''AFI's 100 Years... 100 Stars'' awards show on CBS, and, in 2001, served as a consultant on an ABC-TV production of her autobiography, ''Child Star: The Shirley Temple Story.''
Elaborate sets were built at the famed Iverson Movie Ranch in Chatsworth, Calif., for the production, with a rock feature at the heavily filmed location ranch eventually being named the Shirley Temple Rock.
In January 1965, she portrayed a social worker in a pilot called ''Go Fight City Hall'' that was never released.
As a result, a false report originated in Britain that all of her hair was cut off.
Another rumor pertaining to her teeth was the idea that they were filed to make them appear like baby teeth.
Fearing that either of the latter two could easily upstage the girl, MGM replaced her with Virginia Weidler.
She was the daughter of Gertrude Amelia Temple, a homemaker, and George Francis Temple, a bank employee.
The actress had her own radio series on CBS.
