He is one of the five equivalent deities in Panchayatana puja of the Smarta tradition of Hinduism.
Regional festivals dedicated to Shiva include the Chittirai festival in Madurai around April/May, one of the largest festivals in South India, celebrating the wedding of Minakshi (Parvati) and Shiva.
However, in texts and artwork of either tradition, the mutual salutes are symbolism for complementarity.
In the ''Śatarudrīya'', some epithets of Rudra, such as  ("Of golden red hue as of flame") and  ("Flaming bright"), suggest a fusing of the two deities.
John Keay writes that "He may indeed be an early manifestation of Lord Shiva as Pashu- pati", but a couple of his specialties of this figure does not match with Rudra.
Some medieval era writers have called the Advaita Vedanta philosopher Adi Shankara as an incarnation of Shiva.
Philosophically, the Smarta tradition emphasizes that all idols (murti) are icons to help focus on and visualize aspects of Brahman, rather than distinct beings.
Dualistic Shaiva Agamas which consider soul within each living being and Shiva as two separate realities (dualism, ''dvaita''), are the foundational texts for Shaiva Siddhanta.
In some traditions, Shiva has daughters like the serpent-goddess Manasa and Ashokasundari.
She is identified with Devi, the Divine Mother; Shakti (divine energy) as well as goddesses like Tripura Sundari, Durga, Kali, Kamakshi and Minakshi.
Maha Shivaratri is a major festival in Hinduism, but one that is solemn and marks a remembrance of "overcoming darkness and ignorance" in life and the world.
For example, historical records suggest the tantric Kapalikas (literally, the "skull-men") co-existed with and shared many Vajrayana Buddhist rituals, engaged in esoteric practices that revered Shiva and Shakti wearing skulls, begged with empty skulls, used meat, alcohol and sexuality as a part of ritual.
Numismatics research suggests that numerous coins of the ancient Kushan Empire that have survived, were images of a god who is probably Shiva.
The consorts of Shiva are the source of his creative energy.
Bhairava "terrible" or "frightful" is a fierce form associated with annihilation.In contrast, the name , "beneficent" or "conferring happiness" reflects his benign form.
Those who visit temples, offer milk, fruits, flowers, fresh leaves and sweets to the lingam.
When he was young, before receiving his authority of power, his name was Sang Hyang Manikmaya.
The name is the Japanese equivalent of Mahākāla, the Buddhist name for Shiva.
The identification of Agni with Rudra is explicitly noted in the ''Nirukta'', an important early text on etymology, which says, "Agni is also called Rudra."
Shiva, along with Vishnu, is a revered god in the ''Devi Mahatmya'', a text of Shaktism considered by the tradition to be as important as the ''Bhagavad Gita''.
Some scholars, such as Wendy Doniger, view ''linga'' merely as an erotic phallic symbol, although this interpretation is disputed by others, including Swami Vivekananda, Sivananda Saraswati,  and S. N. Balagangadhara.
Rudra's evolution from a minor Vedic deity to a supreme being is first evidenced in the ''Shvetashvatara Upanishad'' (400-200 BC), according to Gavin Food.
The ''Tandava''-''Lasya'' dances are associated with the destruction-creation of the world.
Elements of this motif can include Shiva seated upon a deer-throne and surrounded by sages who are receiving his instruction.
The name Rudra is still used as a name for Shiva.
He is first of the children who hatched from the eggs laid by Manuk Patiaraja, wife of god Mulajadi na Bolon.
Abhinavagupta writes in his notes on the relevance of ideas related to Shiva and Yoga, by stating that "people, occupied as they are with their own affairs, normally do nothing for others", and Shiva and Yoga spirituality helps one look beyond, understand interconnectedness, and thus benefit both the individual and the world towards a more blissful state of existence.
The two most common forms of the dance are the Tandava, which later came to denote the powerful and masculine dance as Kala-Mahakala associated with the destruction of the world.
Some communities organize special dance events, to mark Shiva as the lord of dance, with individual and group performances.
According to Ellen Goldberg, the traditional Sanskrit name for this form is best translated as "the lord who is half woman", not as "half-man, half-woman".
During the Diwali festivities, Shaiva communities in Tamil Nadu mark ''Karttikai Deepam'' offering prayers to Shiva and Murugan during the festival of lights.
(2.20.3, 6.45.17, and 8.93.3.)
Another of Shiva's fearsome forms is as  "time" and  "great time", which ultimately destroys all things.
The Shaivism theology is broadly grouped into two: the popular theology influenced by Shiva-Rudra in the Vedas, Epics and the Puranas; and the esoteric theology influenced by the Shiva and Shakti-related Tantra texts.
She interprets what John Marshall interpreted as facial as not human but more bovine, possibly a divine buffalo-man.
In Dasam Granth, Guru Gobind Singh has mentioned two avtars of Rudra: Dattatreya Avtar and Parasnath Avtar.
This iconographic form for depicting Shiva in Indian art is mostly from Tamil Nadu.
In the Hindu tradition, the Shiva-linked ascetic warriors (''Nagas'') get the honor of starting the event by entering the ''sangam'' first for bathing and prayers.
Other scholars such as Robert Hume and Doris Srinivasan state that the ''Shvetashvatara Upanishad'' presents pluralism, pantheism, or henotheism, rather than being a text just on Shiva theism.
Shiva as we know him today shares many features with the Vedic god Rudra, and both Shiva and Rudra are viewed as the same personality in Hindu scriptures.
However, both traditions are pluralistic and revere both Shiva and Vishnu (along with Devi), their texts do not show exclusivism, and Vaishnava texts such as the ''Bhagavata Purana'' while praising Krishna as the Ultimate Reality, also present Shiva and Shakti as a personalized form and equivalent to the same Ultimate Reality.
A seal discovered during excavation of the Mohenjo-daro archaeological site in the Indus Valley has drawn attention as a possible representation of a "proto-Shiva" figure.
The ''Kaivalya Upanishad'' similarly, states Paul Deussen – a German Indologist and professor of Philosophy, describes the self-realized man as who "feels himself only as the one divine essence that lives in all", who feels identity of his and everyone's consciousness with Shiva (highest Atman), who has found this highest Atman within, in the depths of his heart.
''Lasya'' is regarded as the female counterpart of ''Tandava''.
Khandoba has been assimilated as a form of Shiva himself, in which case he is worshipped in the form of a lingam.
His epithet  ("The husband of ") refers to this idea, and Sharma notes that two other variants of this name that mean the same thing,  and , also appear in the sahasranama.
The Japuji Sahib of the Guru Granth Sahib says, "The Guru is Shiva, the Guru is Vishnu and Brahma; the Guru is Paarvati and Lakhshmi."
The similarities between the iconography and mythologies of Shiva with Greek and European deities have led to proposals for an Indo-European link for Shiva, or lateral exchanges with ancient central Asian cultures.
An example of assimilation took place in Maharashtra, where a regional deity named Khandoba is a patron deity of farming and herding castes.
The main iconographical attributes of Shiva are the third eye on his forehead, the serpent around his neck, the adorning crescent moon, the holy river Ganga flowing from his matted hair, the trishula as his weapon and the damaru.
Shiva is usually worshiped in the aniconic form of Lingam.
When it requires the world or universe to be destroyed, Shiva does it by the Tandava, and Lasya, which is graceful and delicate and expresses emotions on a gentle level and is considered the feminine dance attributed to the goddess Parvati.
The Ardhanarisvara concept co-mingles god Shiva and goddess Shakti by presenting an icon that is half man and half woman, a representation and theme of union found in many Hindu texts and temples.
A panel from Dandanwulike shows Shiva in His Trimurti form with Shakti kneeling on her right thigh.
Here Rudra-Shiva is identified as the creator of the cosmos and liberator of souls from the birth-rebirth cycle.
Shaivism is one of the four major sects of Hinduism, the others being Vaishnavism, Shaktism and the Smarta Tradition.
The term Shiva also appears in the Rigveda, but simply as an epithet that means "kind, auspicious", one of the adjectives used to describe many different Vedic deities.
In his fierce aspects, he is often depicted slaying demons.
According to Moriz Winternitz, the ''linga'' in the Shiva tradition is "only a symbol of the productive and creative principle of nature as embodied in Shiva", and it has no historical trace in any obscene phallic cult.
While Vedic religion was conceived mainly in terms of sacrifice, it was during the Epic period that the concepts of tapas, yoga, and asceticism became more important, and the depiction of Shiva as an ascetic sitting in philosophical isolation reflects these later concepts.
According to Vijay Nath, for example:
The ultimate goal in this practice is to transition past the use of icons, recognize the Absolute symbolized by the icons, on the path to realizing the nondual identity of one's Atman (soul, self) and the Brahman.
The Krama sub-tradition focussed on esoteric rituals around Shiva-Kali pair.
It is used as an adjective to characterize certain beliefs and practices, such as Shaivism.
Writing in 2002, Gregory L. Possehl concluded that while it would be appropriate to recognize the figure as a deity, its association with the water buffalo, and its posture as one of ritual discipline, regarding it as a proto-Shiva would "go too far."
The name  appears in the ''Shiva Sahasranama'', where it is translated by Ram Karan Sharma as "(the Supreme Lord of) Time."
These are depicted in various designs.
These include festivals dedicated to Annapurna such as ''Annakuta'' and those related to Durga.
This avatar is also worshiped in Malaysia.
Khandoba's varied associations also include an identification with Surya and Karttikeya.
According to Wendy Doniger, the Puranic Shiva is a continuation of the Vedic Indra.
His son Ganesha is worshipped throughout India and Nepal as the Remover of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings and Lord of Obstacles.
The names Nartaka ("dancer") and Nityanarta ("eternal dancer") appear in the Shiva Sahasranama.
His contrasting aspects such as being terrifying or blissful depending on the situation, are similar to those of the Greek god Dionysus, as are their iconic associations with bull, snakes, anger, bravery, dancing and carefree life.
The Tantric Shiva tradition ignored the mythologies and Puranas related to Shiva, and depending on the sub-school developed a spectrum of practices.
However, the ancient and medieval texts of Hinduism feature many triads of gods and goddesses, some of which do not include Shiva.
In the Rig Veda, Rudra is the father of the Maruts, but he is never associated with their warlike exploits as is Indra.
The Vaishnava (Vishnu-oriented) literature acknowledges and discusses Shiva.
The Vedic literature refers to a minor atmospheric deity, with fearsome powers called Rudra.
Some regional deities are also identified as Shiva's children.
Just as the Yajna (sacrificial) fire, its smoke, ashes, and flames, the ''Soma'' plant, and the ox that used to carry on its back the wood for the Vedic sacrifice gave place to the conceptions of the brightness of Shiva's body, his tawny matted hair, his blue throat, and the riding on the bull of the Shiva, the ''Yupa-Skambha'' gave place in time to the ''Shiva-Linga''.
This healing, nurturing, life-enabling aspect emerges in the Vedas as Rudra-Shiva, and in post-Vedic literature ultimately as Shiva who combines the destructive and constructive powers, the terrific and the pacific, as the ultimate recycler and rejuvenator of all existence.
As a family man and householder, he has a wife, Parvati and two sons, Ganesha and Kartikeya.
The ''Bhagavata Purana'' and the ''Vishnu Purana'' claim sage Durvasa to be a portion of Shiva.
Shiva is known by many names such Viswanathan (lord of the universe), Mahadeva, Mahesha, Maheshvara, Shankara, Shambhu, Rudra, Hara, Trilochana, Devendra (chief of the gods), Neelakanta, Subhankara, Trilokinatha (lord of the three realms), and Ghrneshwar (lord of compassion).
In the text ''Linga Purana'', the same hymn is expanded in the shape of stories, meant to establish the glory of the great Stambha and the superiority of Shiva as Mahadeva.
Agni is said to be a bull, and Lord Shiva possesses a bull as his vehicle, Nandi.
The Vedic beliefs and practices of the pre-classical era were closely related to the hypothesised Proto-Indo-European religion, and the pre-Islamic Indo-Iranian religion.
The term Shiva also connotes "liberation, final emancipation" and "the auspicious one", this adjective sense of usage is addressed to many deities in Vedic layers of literature.
The interconnections between the two deities are complex, and according to Stella Kramrisch:
It is observed by remembering Shiva and chanting prayers, fasting, doing Yoga and meditating on ethics and virtues such as self restraint, honesty, noninjury to others, forgiveness and the discovery of Shiva.
The Sanskrit word '''' means "relating to the god Shiva", and this term is the Sanskrit name both for one of the principal sects of Hinduism and for a member of that sect.
Kartikeya is worshipped in South India (especially in Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka) by the names Subrahmanya, Subrahmanyan, Shanmughan, Swaminathan and Murugan, and in Northern India by the names Skanda, Kumara, or Karttikeya.
As a result of this union, Shasta - identified with regional deities Ayyappan and Aiyanar - is born.
Some scholars such Yashodhar Mathpal and Ali Javid have interpreted early prehistoric paintings at the Bhimbetka rock shelters, carbon dated to be from pre-10,000 BCE period, as Shiva dancing, Shiva's trident, and his mount Nandi.
In the same chapter, it also says, "Shiva speaks, and the Siddhas listen."
The period of 200 BC to 100 AD also marks the beginning of the Shaiva tradition focused on the worship of Shiva as evidenced in other literature of this period.
Rudra, the god of the roaring storm, is usually portrayed in accordance with the element he represents as a fierce, destructive deity.
There is some uncertainity as the artwork that has survived is damaged and they show some overlap with meditative Buddha-related artwork, but the presence of Shiva's trident and phallic symbolism in this art suggests it was likely Shiva.
Both are associated with mountains, rivers, male fertility, fierceness, fearlessness, warfare, transgression of established mores, the Aum sound, the Supreme Self.
The word Shiva is used as an adjective in the Rig Veda, as an epithet for several Rigvedic deities, including Rudra.
In the Rig Veda the term '''' is used to refer to Indra.
His epithet Mahāyogi ("the great Yogi: '''' = "great", ''Yogi'' = "one who practices Yoga") refers to his association with yoga.
This practice consists of the use of icons or anicons of five deities considered equivalent, set in a quincunx pattern.
An iconographic representation of Shiva called Ardhanarishvara ('''') shows him with one half of the body as male and the other half as female.
They represent the dynamic extension of Shiva onto this universe.
Doniger gives several reasons for her hypothesis.
Shiva is a pan-Hindu deity, revered widely across India, Nepal and Sri Lanka.
When depicted as a yogi, he may be shown sitting and meditating.
According to Gavin Flood, "Shiva is a god of ambiguity and paradox," whose attributes include opposing themes.
In this depiction, Shiva is portrayed with a sacred halo and a sacred thread ("Yajnopavita").
The two names are used synonymously.
Daikokuten, one of the Seven Lucky Gods in Japan, is considered to be evolved from Shiva.
In medieval sculpture, both Agni and the form of Shiva known as Bhairava have flaming hair as a special feature.
At the highest level, Shiva is regarded as formless, limitless, transcendent and unchanging absolute Brahman, and the primal Atman (soul, self) of the universe.
The Vedic-Brahmanic Shiva theology includes both monist (''advaita'') and devotional traditions (''dvaita'') such as Tamil Shaiva Siddhanta and Lingayatism with temples featuring items such as linga, Shiva-Parvati iconography, bull Nandi within the premises, relief artwork showing mythologies and aspects of Shiva.
The Shiva-related Tantra literature, composed between the 8th and 11th centuries, are regarded in devotional dualistic Shaivism as Sruti.
The texts of Shaivism tradition similarly praise Vishnu.
The worship of the lingam originated from the famous hymn in the ''Atharva-Veda Samhitâ'' sung in praise of the ''Yupa-Stambha'', the sacrificial post.
The Trimurti is a concept in Hinduism in which the cosmic functions of creation, maintenance, and destruction are personified by the forms of Brahma the creator, Vishnu the maintainer or preserver and Shiva the destroyer or transformer.
Sharma presents another etymology with the Sanskrit root ''-'', which means "to injure" or "to kill", interprets the name to connote "one who can kill the forces of darkness".
The depiction of Shiva as Nataraja (Sanskrit: '''', "Lord of Dance") is popular.
The central figure is often described as a seated figure, possibly ithyphallic, surrounded by animals.
Shiva as ''Upaya'' and Shakti as ''Prajna''.
Shaivism was also popular in Sogdia and the Kingdom of Yutian as found from the wall painting from Penjikent on the river Zervashan.
''the auspicious one'') is one of the principal deities of Hinduism.
Shiva's name Tripurantaka ( ''''), "ender of Tripura", refers to this important story.
The texts and artwork of Jainism show Indra as a dancer, although not identical but generally resembling the dancing Shiva artwork found in Hinduism, particularly in their respective mudras.
Shiva's other form in Indonesian Hinduism is "Mahadewa" (Mahadeva).
The identification between Agni and Rudra in the Vedic literature was an important factor in the process of Rudra's gradual development into the later character as Rudra-Shiva.
In benevolent aspects, he is depicted as an omniscient Yogi who lives an ascetic life on Mount Kailash as well as a householder with wife Parvati and his two children, Ganesha and Kartikeya.
Popularized by Adi Shankara, many Panchayatana mandalas and temples have been uncovered that are from the Gupta Empire period, and one Panchayatana set from the village of Nand (about 24 kilometers from Ajmer) has been dated to belong to the Kushan Empire era (pre-300 CE).
Some authors associate the name with the Tamil word '''' meaning "red", noting that Shiva is linked to the Sun ('''', "the Red one", in Tamil) and that Rudra is also called ''Babhru'' (brown, or red) in the Rigveda.
Followers of Shaivism, called "Shaivas", revere Shiva as the Supreme Being.
Mythologies of both traditions include legends about who is superior, about Shiva paying homage to Vishnu, and Vishnu paying homage to Shiva.
Stella Kramrisch notes a different etymology connected with the adjectival form ''raudra'', which means "wild, of ''rudra'' nature", and translates the name ''Rudra'' as "the wild one" or "the fierce god".
Writing in 1997 Doris Meth Srinivasan rejected Marshall's package of proto-Shiva features, including that of three heads.
Similarly, the use of phallic symbol as anicon for Shiva is also found for Irish, Nordic, Greek (Dionysus) and Roman deities, as was the idea of this aniconic column linking heaven and earth among early Indo-Aryans, states Roger Woodward.
The Shaiva Upanishads are a group of 14 minor Upanishads of Hinduism variously dated from the last centuries of the 1st millennium BCE through the 17th century.
According to Monier Williams and Yudit Greenberg, ''linga'' literally means "mark, sign or emblem", and also refers to a "mark or sign from which the existence of something else can be reliably inferred".
The oldest surviving text of Hinduism is the Rig Veda, which is dated to between 1700 and 1100 BC based on linguistic and philological evidence.
He is clad in tiger skin while his attendants are wearing Sogdian dress.
The Vedic texts do not mention bull or any animal as the transport vehicle (''vahana'') of Rudra or other deities.
In Shaivism tradition, Shiva is the "creator, destroyer and regenerator".
It is also noted that Zoroastrian wind god Vayu-Vata took on the iconographic appearance of Shiva.
Other famed Shiva-related texts  influenced Hatha Yoga, integrated monistic (''Advaita Vedanta'') ideas with Yoga philosophy and inspired the theoretical development of Indian classical dance.
Kramrisch translates it as "the ravisher".
The various dualistic and monist Shiva-related ideas were welcomed in medieval southeast Asia, inspiring numerous Shiva-related temples, artwork and texts in Indonesia, Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Thailand and Malaysia, with syncretic integration of local pre-existing theologies.
The ancient Greek texts of the time of Alexander the Great call Shiva as "Indian Dionysius", or alternatively call Dionysius as "god of the Orient".
Shiva-related literature developed extensively across India in the 1st millennium CE and through the 13th century, particularly in Kashmir and Tamil Shaiva traditions.
The ambivalent nature of this deity is apparent in some of his names and the stories told about him.
The theory and practice of Yoga, in different styles, has been a part of all major traditions of Hinduism, and Shiva has been the patron or spokesperson in numerous Hindu Yoga texts.
The Skanda Purana, for example, states:
For example, in the Jain caves at Ellora, extensive carvings show dancing Indra next to the images of Tirthankaras in a manner similar to Shiva Nataraja.
Like Shaiva literature that presents Shiva as supreme, the Vaishnava literature presents Vishnu as supreme.
The hymn 10.92 of the Rigveda states that deity Rudra has two natures, one wild and cruel (rudra), another that is kind and tranquil (shiva).
Semi-circular shapes on the head are often interpreted as two horns.
Apart from anthropomorphic images of Shiva, he is also represented in aniconic form of a lingam.
According to Jones and Ryan, Maha Sivaratri is an ancient Hindu festival which probably originated around the 5th-century.
These ideas are estimated to be from or after the late centuries of the 1st millennium CE, and have survived as Yoga texts such as the ''Isvara Gita'' (literally, "Shiva's song"), which Andrew Nicholson – a professor of Hinduism and Indian Intellectual History – states have had "a profound and lasting influence on the development of Hinduism".
The Shiva in Kushan coins is referred to as Oesho of unclear etymology and origins, but the simultaneous presence of Indra and Shiva in the Kushan era artwork suggest that they were revered deities by the start of the Kushan Empire.
These extol Shiva as the metaphysical unchanging reality Brahman and the Atman (soul, self), and include sections about rites and symbolisms related to Shiva.
The Shiva-related tradition is a major part of Hinduism, found all over India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Bali (Indonesia).
Sharma translates the three as "one who captivates", "one who consolidates", and "one who destroys".
According to traditional etymologies, the Sanskrit name ''Rudra'' is derived from the root ''rud-'', which means "to cry, howl".
A few texts such as ''Atharvashiras Upanishad'' mention Rudra, and assert all gods are Rudra, everyone and everything is Rudra, and Rudra is the principle found in all things, their highest goal, the innermost essence of all reality that is visible or invisible.
Dakshinamurthy ''()'' literally describes a form ('''') of Shiva facing south ('''').
The overall meaning of these associations is summarized by Stella Kramrisch:
In addition to the specific iconographic form known as Nataraja, various other types of dancing forms (Sanskrit: '''') are found in all parts of India, with many well-defined varieties in Tamil Nadu in particular.
The figure of Shiva as we know him today may be an amalgamation of various older deities into a single figure.
The ardent devotees keep awake all night.
The Shaiva Puranas, particularly the Shiva Purana and the Linga Purana, present the various aspects of Shiva, mythologies, cosmology and pilgrimage (''Tirtha'') associated with him.
In contrast, the esoteric tradition within Kashmir Shaivism has featured the ''Krama'' and ''Trika'' sub-traditions.
The similarities in the dance iconography suggests that there may be a link between ancient Indra and Shiva.
He is not only the creator in Shaivism, he is the creation that results from him, he is everything and everywhere.
In Shaivism pilgrimage tradition, twelve major temples of Shiva are called Jyotirlinga, which means "linga of light", and these are located across India.
Indra, like Shiva, is likened to a bull.
Shiva is "the destroyer" within the Trimurti, the Hindu trinity that includes Brahma and Vishnu.
The horns of Agni, who is sometimes characterized as a bull, are mentioned.
In cosmologies of Buddhist tantra, Shiva is depicted as passive, with Shakti being his active counterpart.
In the Smarta tradition of Hinduism, Shiva is a part of its Panchayatana puja.
'''''Shiva''''' (; Sanskrit: , lit.
As one story goes, Shiva is enticed by the beauty and charm of Mohini, Vishnu's female avatar, and procreates with her.
The version appearing in Book 13 () of the ''Mahabharata'' provides one such list.
These three deities have been called "the Hindu triad" or the "Great Trinity".
The Kushan period set includes Shiva, Vishnu, Surya, Brahma and one deity whose identity is unclear.
Prior to it, the Upanishadic literature is monistic, and the ''Shvetashvatara'' text presents the earliest seeds of theistic devotion to Rudra-Shiva.
However, Howard Morphy states that these prehistoric rock paintings of India, when seen in their context, are likely those of hunting party with animals, and that the figures in a group dance can be interpreted in many different ways.
The ascetic, Vedic and Tantric sub-traditions related to Shiva, such as those that became ascetic warriors during the Islamic rule period of India, celebrate the Kumbha Mela festival.
The festival is one where both the Vaishnava and Shaiva communities join the celebrations, because Vishnu gives away his sister Minakshi in marriage to Shiva.
R. K. Sharma follows this alternate etymology and translates the name as "terrible".
Shiva is often depicted as an archer in the act of destroying the triple fortresses, ''Tripura'', of the Asuras.
The god enjoys an exalted position as a household deity in Japan and is worshipped as the god of wealth and fortune.
The name  (Sanskrit:  swam-on its own; bhu-burn/shine) "self-shining/ shining on its own", also reflects this benign aspect.
The ''Shri Rudram Chamakam'', also known as the ''Śatarudriya'', is a devotional hymn to Shiva hailing him by many names.
In the goddess tradition of Hinduism, the goddess is described as supreme, yet Shiva is revered along with Vishnu and Brahma, the goddess stated to be the energy and creative power (Shakti) of them, and an equal complementary partner of Shiva.
The earliest iconic artworks of Shiva may be from Gandhara and northwest parts of ancient India.
Shiva has many benevolent and fearsome depictions.
Sahasranama are medieval Indian texts that list a thousand names derived from aspects and epithets of a deity.
His association with dance and also with music is prominent in the Puranic period.
