Protective features may include steel-tipped toes and soles or ankle guards.
Eventually the modern shoe, with a sewn-on sole, was devised.
Notable British brands include: Church's English Shoes (est.
* Plain-toes: have a sleek appearance and no extra decorations on the vamp.
Dress shoes often have leather or resin rubber outsoles; casual or work-oriented shoes have outsoles made of natural rubber or a synthetic material like polyurethane.
Since the mid-20th Century, advances in rubber, plastics, synthetic cloth, and industrial adhesives have allowed manufacturers to create shoes that stray considerably from traditional crafting techniques.
Horsemen in Asia constructed horse booties from leather and plant material.
All shoes have a '''sole''', which is the bottom of a shoe, in contact with the ground.
They are fairly stiff to support the foot.
The upper is connected to the sole by a strip of leather, rubber, or plastic that is stitched between it and the sole, known as a welt.
A properly fitted boot and/or friction-reducing patches applied to troublesome areas ensures protection against blisters and other discomforts associated with long hikes on rugged terrain.
Until around 1800, welted rand shoes were commonly made without differentiation for the left or right foot.
These are commonly seen as the predecessor of the modern high-heeled shoe, while the poor and lower classes in Europe, as well as slaves in the New World, were barefoot.
Shoes specific to the sport of basketball were developed by Chuck Taylor, and are popularly known as Chuck Taylor All-Stars.
Some Native American tribes, such as the Cree or Salteaux, used dog shoes to protect their feet during activities such as dog sledding, since the ice could wear the pads on a dog's foot thin, sometimes resulting in bleeding.
In 2007, the global shoe industry had an overall market of $107.4 billion, in terms of revenue, and is expected to grow to $122.9 billion by the end of 2012.
Secondly, in 2008, United States President George W. Bush had a shoe thrown at him by a journalist as a statement against the war that was brought to Iraq and the lives that it has cost.
They may also be worn by individuals with diabetes or people with unequal leg length.
In 1812 he devised a scheme for making nailed-boot-making machinery that automatically fastened soles to uppers by means of metallic pins or nails.
Adidas started selling shoes with track spikes in them for running and soccer in 1925.
In 1968, Puma SE introduced the first pair of sneakers with Velcro straps in lieu of shoelaces, and these became popular by the 1980s, especially among children and the elderly.
The outsole may comprise a single piece, or may be an assembly of separate pieces, often of different materials.
Mexican huaraches are also very simple running shoes, similar to the shoes worn by the Tarahumara people of northern Mexico, who are known for their distance running abilities.
Only a few systems also take the width of the feet into account.
They were also worn in Jerusalem during the first century of the Common Era.
Though it has evolved over hundreds of thousands of years in relation to vastly varied terrain and climate conditions, the human foot is still vulnerable to environmental hazards such as sharp rocks and hot ground, against which, shoes can protect.
In the simplest cases, such as sandals or flip-flops, this may be nothing more than a few straps for holding the sole in place.
Athletic sneaker collection has also existed as a part of urban subculture in the United States for several decades.
These shoes became popular in Venice and throughout Europe, as a status symbol revealing wealth and social standing.
This part is often decorated or is made in a certain style to look attractive.
Soles can be made from a variety of materials, although most modern shoes have soles made from natural rubber, polyurethane, or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) compounds.
When various layers are used, soles may consist of an '''insole''', '''midsole''', and an '''outsole'''.
The sewing machine was introduced in 1846, and provided an alternative method for the mechanization of shoemaking.
Modern dog boots may also be used for other outdoor activities, such as hunting and hiking, to prevent slippage in wet or snowy weather as well as to keep snow from accumulating between the dog's toes.
The United States Rubber Company was founded the same year and produced rubber-soled and heeled shoes under a variety of brand names, which were later consolidated in 1916 under the name, Keds.
Termed as Minimalist shoes, their purpose is to allow one's feet and legs to feel more subtly the impacts and forces involved in running, allowing finer adjustments in running style.
The purpose of insole is to attach to the lasting margin of the '''upper''', which is wrapped around the last during the closing of the shoe during the lasting operation.
They were more commonly found in colder climates.
The '''medial''' is the part of the shoe closest to a person's center of symmetry, and the '''lateral''' is on the opposite side, away from their center of symmetry.
Insoles are usually made of cellulosic paper board or synthetic non woven insole board.
Most shoes have shoelaces on the upper, connecting the medial and lateral parts after one puts their shoes on and aiding in keeping their shoes on their feet.
Many moccasins were also decorated with various beads and other adornments.
Foster & Sons, which later become known as Reebok.
He developed machinery for the mass-production of boots for the soldiers of the British Army.
The 1985 comedy ''The Man with One Red Shoe'' features an eccentric man wearing one normal business shoe and one red shoe that becomes central to the plot.
Athletic shoes are designed for particular sports such as running, walking, or other sports.
In the late 2000s, some shoemakers picked up on the issue and began to produce shoes made entirely from degradable materials, such as the Nike Considered.
The majority of dress shoes have an upper covering, commonly made of leather, enclosing most of the lower foot, but not covering the ankles.
If the laces are not independently attached to the vamp, the shoe is known as a blucher shoe.
A Sneakerhead is a person who owns multiple pairs of shoes as a form of collection and fashion.
Orthopedic shoes are special types of footwear designed for individuals with particular foot problems or special needs.
At an observation memorializing the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks, 3,000 pairs of empty shoes were used to recognize those killed.
Inline skates are similar to ice skates but with a set of three to four wheels in lieu of the blade, which are designed to mimic ice skating on solid surfaces such as wood or concrete.
Leather, which had been the primary material in earlier styles, has remained standard in expensive dress shoes, but athletic shoes often have little or no real leather.
Golfers also use shoes with small metal spikes on their soles to prevent slipping during their swing.
This remains the standard for finer-quality dress shoes today.
One of these includes roller skates, which have metal or plastic wheels on the bottom specific for the sport of roller skating.
A shoemaker in Leicester, Tomas Crick, patented the design for a riveting machine in 1853.
Archaeologists estimate that the leather shoe was made between 1800 and 1100 BC, making it the oldest article of clothing discovered in Scandinavia.
For example, boots are typically designed for work or heavy outdoor use.
It is estimated that most mass-produced shoes require 1000 years to degrade in a landfill.
One pair found in Europe was made of papyrus leaves and dated to be approximately 1,500 years old.
* Derby shoe: the laces are tied to two pieces of leather independently attached to the vamp; also known as "open lacing" and is a step down in dressiness.
The Shoes on the Danube Bank is a memorial in Budapest, Hungary.
As bottlenecks opened up in the production line due to these innovations, more and more of the manufacturing stages, such as pegging and finishing, became automated.
They may also be glued.
Some shoes were developed with toggled flaps or drawstrings to tighten the leather around the foot for a better fit.
Units for shoe sizes vary widely around the world.
By 1000 AD, cast bronze horseshoes with nail holes had become common in Europe.
Shoes are considered to be dirty as they frequently touch the ground, and are associated with the lowest part of the body&nbsp;— the foot.
* Brogues (American: wing-tips): The toe of the shoe is covered with a perforated panel, the wing-tip, which extends down either side of the shoe.
Hiking boots are designed to provide extra ankle and arch support, as well as extra padding for comfort during hiking.
They were developed by J.W.
The Romans, who eventually conquered the Greeks and adopted many aspects of their culture, did not adopt the Greek perception of footwear and clothing.
These shoes typically have a low heel, tend to be wide with a particularly wide toe box, and have a firm heel to provide extra support.
His machine used an iron plate to push iron rivets into the sole.
Extra cushioning is often added for comfort (to control the shape, moisture, or smell of the shoe) or health reasons (to help deal with differences in the natural shape of the foot or positioning of the foot during standing or walking).
Surviving medieval turnshoes often fit the foot closely, with the right and left shoe being mirror images.
Usually, a high-topped shoe is secured by laces or zippers, although some styles have elastic inserts to ease slipping the shoe on.
By the 15th Century, pattens became popular by both men and women in Europe.
The shoes originate in the Catalonian region of Spain as early as the 13th century, and were commonly worn by peasants in the farming communities in the area.
The  design of shoes has varied enormously through time and from culture to culture, with appearance originally being tied to function.
As each man performs but one step in the process, which implies no knowledge of what is done by those who go before or follow him, so the persons employed are not shoemakers, but wounded soldiers, who are able to learn their respective duties in a few hours.
The term is French and comes from the esparto grass.
Roman soldiers were issued with chiral footwear.
The most common materials are steel and aluminum, but specialized shoes may include use of rubber, plastic, magnesium, titanium, or copper.
They are often made of the same material as the sole of the shoe.
1873), John Lobb Bootmaker (est.
In the movie adaption of the children's book ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'', a pair of red ruby slippers play a key role in the plot.
Some designs of dress shoes can be worn by either gender.
Ancient Egyptian sandals were made from papyrus and palm leaves.
On some shoes, the heel of the sole has a rubber plate for durability and traction, while the front is leather for style.
In India they were made from wood.
However, many manufacturers in Europe dominate the higher-priced, higher value-added end of the market.
For example, Cowboy boots are considered boots, but may also be worn in more formal occasions and used as dress shoes.
Other animals, such as dogs and horses, may also wear special shoes to protect their feet as well.
This practice dates back to pictures of them in ancient Egyptian murals from 4000 BC.
The '''upper''' helps hold the shoe onto the foot.
In Greek culture, empty shoes are the equivalent of the American funeral wreath.
The '''insole''' is the interior bottom of a shoe, which sits directly beneath the foot under the footbed (also known as sock liner).
In 1948, Mahlon Haines, a shoe salesman in Hallam, Pennsylvania, built an actual house shaped like a work boot as a form of advertisement.
Soles can be simple&nbsp;— a single material in a single layer&nbsp;— or they can be complex, with multiple structures or layers and materials.
These shoes became known as, "sneakers", because the rubber sole allowed the wearer to sneak up on another person.
They are typically made of leather or rubber, although they may be made from a variety of different materials.
The Air Jordan line of shoes sold $100 million in their first year.
Both John Lobb and Edward Green offer bespoke products.
This can be in reference to either the outsole or the '''vamp'''.
Athletic shoes are specifically designed to be worn for participating in various sports.
The remaining elite American companies are Allen Edmonds and Alden Shoe Company.
Horseshoes are available in a wide variety of materials and styles, developed for different types of horse and for the work they do.
They may be used for uniforms of the police or military, as well as for protection in industrial settings such as mining and construction.
Ötzi the Iceman's shoes, dating to 3300 BC, featured brown bearskin bases, deerskin side panels, and a bark-string net, which pulled tight around the foot.
The earliest known shoes are sandals dating from approximately 7000 or 8000 BC, found in the Fort Rock Cave in the US state of Oregon in 1938.
They became popular among cowboys in the western United States during the 19th century.
Formal high-end men's shoes are manufactured by several companies around the world, most notably in England, France, Italy, and America.
In the New Testament, the act of removing one's shoes symbolizes servitude.
In the Holy Bible's Old Testament, the shoe is used to symbolize something that is worthless or of little value.
Traditionally, shoes have been made from leather, wood or canvas, but are increasingly made from rubber, plastics, and other petrochemical-derived materials.
Cowboy boots are a specific style of riding boot which combines function with fashion.
The Egyptians and Hindus made some use of ornamental footwear, such as a soleless sandal known as a "Cleopatra", which did not provide any practical protection for the foot.
Men's shoes can also be decorated in various ways:
The ski/boot/binding combination is used to effectively transmit control inputs from the skier's legs to the snow.
They are generally made from sturdy leather uppers and non-leather outsoles.
The most notable French product is made by J.M.
These earliest designs were very simple in design, often mere "foot bags" of leather to protect the feet from rocks, debris, and cold.
* Cap-toes: has an extra layer of leather that "caps" the toe.
The shoe was then turned inside-out so that the grain was outside.
People with toe deformities, or individuals who experience toe swelling (such as long distance runners) usually require a larger toe box.
All the details are performed by the ingenious application of the mechanic powers; and all the parts are characterised by precision, uniformity, and accuracy.
Another well-known Italian company is Salvatore Ferragamo Italia S.p.A..
These boots support the ankle to avoid twisting but do not restrict the ankle's movement too much.
The '''vamp''' is the front part of the shoe, starting behind the toe, extending around the eyelets and tongue and towards back part of the shoe.
These systems differ in what they measure, what unit of measurement they use, and where the size 0 (or 1) is positioned.
The world's oldest leather shoe, made from a single piece of cowhide laced with a leather cord along seams at the front and back, was found in the Areni-1 cave complex in Armenia in 2008 and is believed to date to 3500 BC.
While thong sandals were commonly worn, many people in ancient times, such as the Egyptians, Hindus and Greeks, saw little need for footwear, and most of the time, preferred being barefoot.
The popular loafers are part of this category, as well as less popular styles, such as elastic-sided shoes.
Moccasins were not designed to be waterproof, and in wet weather and warm summer months, most Native Americans went barefoot.
The contract at which these shoes are delivered to Government is 6s.
A common casual shoe in the Pyrenees during the Middle Ages were espadrilles.
As a consequence, Brunel's system was no longer profitable and it soon ceased business.
In the same year, the use of screws and staples was patented by Richard Woodman.
Shoe manufacturers in the People's Republic of China account for 63% of production, 40.5% of global exports and 55% of industry revenue.
In 1969, Taylor was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in recognition of this development, and in the 1970s, other shoe manufacturers, such as Nike, Adidas, Reebok, and others began imitating this style of athletic shoe.
* Monk-straps: a buckle and strap instead of lacing
It is thought that shoes may have been used long before this, but because the materials used were highly perishable, it is difficult to find evidence of the earliest footwear.
The memorial represents their shoes left behind on the bank.
The removal of the shoe also symbolizes the act of giving up a legal right.
These shoes, first sold in 1917, are double-layer canvas shoes with rubber soles and toe caps, and a high heel (known as a "high top") for added support.
In 1964, the founding of Nike by Phil Knight and Bill Bowerman of the University of Oregon introduced many new improvements common in modern running shoes, such as rubber waffle soles, breathable nylon uppers, and cushioning in the mid-sole and heel.
In Arab culture, showing the sole of one's shoe is considered an insult, and to throw a shoe and hit someone with it is considered an even greater insult.
Additionally, fashion has often dictated many design elements, such as whether shoes have very high heels or flat ones.
Cycling shoes are similarly designed with rubber soles and a tight fit, but also are equipped with a metal or plastic cleat to interface with clipless pedals, as well as a stiff sole to maximize power transfer and support the foot.
Horseshoes are attached on the palmar surface of the hooves, usually nailed through the insensitive hoof wall that is anatomically akin to the human toenail, though much larger and thicker.
A boot is a special type of shoe which covers the foot and the ankle and extends up the leg, sometimes as far as the knee or even the hip.
Similarly, ice skates have a metal blade attached to the bottom for locomotion across ice.
Roman clothing was seen as a sign of power, and footwear was seen as a necessity of living in a civilized world, although the slaves and paupers usually went barefoot.
Even the gods and heroes were primarily depicted barefoot, and the hoplite warriors fought battles in bare feet and Alexander the Great conquered his vast empire with barefoot armies.
The '''outsole''' is the layer in direct contact with the ground.
Conceived by film director Can Togay, he created it on the east bank of the Danube River with sculptor Gyula Pauer to honor the Jews who were killed by fascist Arrow Cross militiamen in Budapest during World War II.
:"In another building I was shown his manufactory of shoes, which, like the other, is full of ingenuity, and, in regard to subdivision of labour, brings this fabric on a level with the oft-admired manufactory of pins.
The earliest rubber-soled athletic shoes date back to 1876 in the United Kingdom, when the New Liverpool Rubber Company made plimsolls, or sandshoes, designed for the sport of croquet.
In Arab custom, the removal of one's shoe also symbolized the dissolution of marriage.
The ancient Greeks largely viewed footwear as self-indulgent, unaesthetic and unnecessary.
Hiking boots incorporate many of the protective features of boots, but also provide the extra flexibility and comfort of many athletic shoes.
Brogues can be found in both balmoral and blucher styles, but are considered slightly less formal.
Dogs are another domesticated animal for which shoes have been constructed.
During the 16th century, royalty started wearing high-heeled shoes to make them look taller or larger than life, such as Catherine de Medici or Mary I of England.
Athletic shoes for women were also designed for their specific physiological differences.
This led archaeologists to deduce that wearing shoes resulted in less bone growth, resulting in shorter, thinner toes.
Since the 17th century, most leather shoes have used a sewn-on sole.
By studying the bones of the smaller toes (as opposed to the big toe), it was observed that their thickness decreased approximately 40,000 to 26,000 years ago.
Most uppers have a mechanism, such as laces, straps with buckles, zippers, elastic, velcro straps, buttons, or snaps, for tightening the upper on the foot.
Brunel's system was described by Sir Richard Phillips as a visitor to his factory in Battersea as follows:
Soles, which were once laboriously hand-stitched on, are now more often machine stitched or simply glued on.
This insult was demonstrated in Iraq, first when Saddam Hussein's statue was toppled in 2003, Iraqis gathered around it and struck the statue with their shoes.
Although, for some activities such as dancing or bowling, sliding is desirable, so shoes designed for these activities often have lower coefficients of friction.
Skate shoes have also been designed to provide a comfortable, flexible and durable shoe for the sport of skateboarding.
Iron horseshoes became common by the 13th or 14th century.
They are typically made of rubber or other water-resistant material, have multiple layers of insulation, and a high heel to keep snow out.
The turnshoe method was replaced by the welted method around 1500.
Since friction between the foot and the ground is an important force in most sports, modern athletic shoes are designed to maximize this force, and materials, such as rubber, are used.
Shoes were primarily worn in the theater, as a means of increasing stature, and many preferred to go barefoot.
Some of these shoes include the Vibram FiveFingers, Nike Free, and Saucony's Kinvara and Hattori.
Such shoes are now referred to as "straights".
The Masai of Africa made them out of rawhide.
This story tells about an old woman living in a shoe with a lot of children.
In Hebrew custom, the widow removed the shoe of her late husband's brother to symbolize that he had abandoned his duty.
While most shoes have historically been worn by humans, there are simple shoes that are designed to be worn by domesticated animals, such as dogs and horses.
This name is, in American English, often used about derbys.
He also introduced the use of steam-powered rolling-machines for hardening leather and cutting-machines, in the mid-1850s.
By the end of the 19th century, Spalding also manufactured these shoes as well.
European sizes are measured in ''Paris Points'', which are worth two-thirds of a centimeter.
Since then, it has served as an ice cream parlor, a bed and breakfast, and a museum.
By the late 1850s, the industry was beginning to shift towards the modern factory, mainly in the US and areas of England.
This piece of design is intended to alleviate the problem of the points catching the bottom of trousers and was first observed in the 1930s.
Many athletic shoes are designed with specific features for specific activities.
The UK and American units are approximately one-quarter of an inch, starting at 8¼ inches.
Thong sandals were worn by many civilizations and made from a wide variety of materials.
Athletes in the Ancient Olympic Games participated barefoot – and naked.
These are tight-fitting, soft-soled shoes typically made out of leather or bison hides.
