With the adoption of smaller bores and rifled barrels, the shotgun began to emerge as a separate entity.
This development was greatly overshadowed by two further innovations he introduced at the end of the 19th century.
'''Blank''' shells contain only a small amount of powder and no actual load.
Globally, shotguns are generally not as heavily regulated as rifles or handguns, likely because they lack the range of rifles and are not easily concealable as handguns are; thus, they are perceived as a lesser threat by legislative authorities.
This was British gunmaker T Murcott's 1871 action nicknamed the 'mousetrap' on account of its loud snap action.
The choke typically consists of a conical section that smoothly tapers from the bore diameter down to the choke diameter, followed by a cylindrical section of the choke diameter.
Barrels for shotguns have been getting longer as modern steels and production methods make the barrels stronger and lighter; a longer, lighter barrel gives the same inertia for less overall weight.
These weapons can cost US$5,000 or more; some elaborately decorated presentation guns have sold for up to US$100,000.
Constriction(inches)'''
In the US, law enforcement agencies often use riot shotguns, especially for crowd and riot control where they may be loaded with less-lethal rounds such as rubber bullets or bean bags.
Shot spreaders or diffusion chokes work opposite of normal chokes—they are designed to spread the shot more than a cylinder bore, generating wider patterns for very short range use.
They were available for aftermarket addition in the 1970s from companies like A & W Engineering.
Both skeet and trap competitions are featured at the Olympic Games.
For more information, see Gun politics in Australia.
In 1893, Browning produced the Model 1893 Pump Action Shotgun, introducing the now familiar pump action to the market.
Shotguns and similar weapons are simpler than long-range rifles, and were developed earlier.
The first significant encroachment on hammer guns was a hammerless patent which could be used with a conventional side-lock.
The direct ancestor to the shotgun, the blunderbuss, was also used in a similar variety of roles from self defence to riot control.
During its long history, the shotgun has been favored by bird hunters, guards, and law enforcement officials.
The visual effect it produces is impressive, similar to that of a short ranged flamethrower.
Similarly, the United States Navy used pump shotguns to guard ships when in port in Chinese harbors (e.g., Shanghai).
Within Australia, all shotguns manufactured after January 1, 1901 are considered firearms and are subject to registration and licensing.
Other specialized choke tubes exist as well.
'''Grenade''' rounds use exploding projectiles to increase long range lethality.
British gamekeepers have used rock salt shells to deter poachers.
Since then, it has been used in a variety of roles in civilian, law enforcement, and military applications.
But armies have "rediscovered" the shotgun for specialty uses many times.
Two major disadvantages plagued the system.
Prior to a SGC being issued an interview is conducted with the local Firearms Officer, in the past this was a duty undertaken by the local police although more recently this function has been "contracted out" to civilian staff.
For a shotgun to qualify as a section 2 shotgun, it must meet the following criteria:
The Russian Berdana shotgun was effectively a single-shot bolt-action rifle that became obsolete, and was subsequently modified to chamber 16 gauge shotgun shells for civilian sale.
The double-barreled shotgun has changed little since the development of the boxlock action in 1875.
Compared to "defense-caliber" handguns (chambered for 9mm Parabellum, .38 Special, .357 Magnum, .40 S&W, .45 ACP and similar), a shotgun has far more power and damage potential (up to 10 times the muzzle energy of a .45 ACP cartridge), allowing a "one-shot stop" that is more difficult to achieve with typical handgun loads.
Disadvantages versus a traditional slug include lower muzzle momentum due to reduced mass, reduced damage due to smaller bullet diameter, and significantly higher per-unit cost.
The applicant must nominate two referees who are known to the applicant to vouch for his or her character; a new 'variation' is required for each new caliber of gun to be owned; limits are set on how much ammunition a person can own at any one time; and an FAC can be denied if the applicant does not have sufficient 'good reason'.
Effective range (yd)
However, pump-action and semi-automatic shotguns are classed as "Category C" weapons; a licence for this type of firearm is, generally speaking, not available to the average citizen.
Oval chokes, which are designed to provide a shot pattern wider than it is tall, are sometimes found on combat shotguns, primarily those of the Vietnam War era.
On the other hand, the hit potential of a defensive shotgun is often overstated.
Marines tended to use pump shotguns, since the pump action was less likely to jam in the humid and dirty conditions of the Pacific campaign.
Some, such as the Franchi SPAS-12 and Benelli M3, are capable of switching between semi-automatic and pump action.
Some U.S. units in Iraq use shotguns with special frangible breaching rounds to blow the locks off doors when they are making a surprise entry into a dwelling.
These were used for commercial waterfowl hunting, to kill large numbers of birds resting on the water.
However, it has few tactical uses, mainly distraction/disorientation.
The "punch" effect of the bag is useful for knocking down targets; the rounds are used by police to subdue violent suspects.
One of the men most responsible for the modern development of the shotgun was prolific gun designer John Browning.
They normally contain pepper gas or tear gas.
In the United States, rock salt shells were and are sometimes still used by rural civilians to defend their property.
For example, a typical 12 gauge shotgun slug is a blunt piece of metal that could be described as an 18&nbsp;mm (.729&nbsp;inch) caliber that weighs 28&nbsp;grams (432 grains).
The use of interchangeable chokes has made it easy to tune the performance of a given combination of shotgun and shotshell to achieve the desired performance.
'Good reason' generally means hunting, collecting, or target shooting - though other reasons may be acceptable.
Most shotguns (including break-action, bolt-action and lever-action shotguns) are classed as "Category A" weapons and, as such, are comparatively easy to obtain a licence for, given a legally recognised 'legitimate reason' (compare to the British requirement for 'good reason' for a FAC), such as target shooting or hunting.
The U.S. military M26 is also a bolt-action weapon.
If it is desired to load the gun fully, a round may be loaded through the ejection port directly into the chamber, or cycled from the magazine, which is then topped off with another round.
Unlike rifles, however, the long shotgun barrel is not for ballistic purposes; shotgun shells use small powder charges in large diameter bores, and this leads to very low muzzle pressures (see internal ballistics) and very little velocity change with increasing barrel length.
Home-defense and law enforcement shotguns are usually chambered for 12-gauge shells, providing maximum shot power and the use of a variety of projectiles such as buckshot, rubber, sandbag and slug shells, but 20-gauge (common in bird-hunting shotguns) or .410 (common in youth-size shotguns) are also available in defense-type shotgun models allowing easier use by novice shooters.
A shotgun is generally a smoothbore firearm, which means that the inside of the barrel is not rifled.
The wide range of forms the shotgun can take leads to some significant differences between what is technically a shotgun and what is legally considered a shotgun.
The Ishapore Arsenal in India also manufactured a single-shot .410 bore shotgun based on the SMLE Mk III* rifle.
The 1728 '' Cyclopaedia'' defines a ''fowling piece'' as:
Offset chokes, where the pattern is intentionally slightly off of center, are used to change the point of impact.
Balancing this is the fact that shot spreads further upon entering the target, and the multiple wound channels of a defensive load are far more likely to produce a disabling wound than a rifle or handgun.
'''Riot gun''' has long been a synonym for a shotgun, especially a short-barrelled shotgun.
See also: Slug barrel
For hunting in dense brush, shorter barrel lengths are often preferred when hunting the same types of game.
Shotguns fitted in this fashion became known as ''trench guns'' by the United States Army.
It is used for hunting and for skeet.
The gauge number is determined by the weight, in fractions of a pound, of a solid sphere of lead with a diameter equal to the inside diameter of the barrel.
The shotgun remains a standard firearm for hunting throughout the world for all sorts of game from birds and small game to large game such as deer.
Single and double derringers have also been produced that are capable of firing either .45 (Long) Colt or .410 shotgun shells from the same chamber; they are commonly known as "snake guns", and are popular among some outdoorsmen in the South and Southwest regions of the United States.
Militants or insurgents may use shotguns in asymmetric engagements, as shotguns are commonly owned civilian weapons in many countries.
The typical use of a shotgun is against small and fast moving targets, often while in the air.
The brittle salt was unlikely to cause serious injury at long ranges, but would cause painful stinging injuries and served as a warning.
Shotgun-rifle combination guns with two, three, and occasionally even four barrels are available from a number of makers, primarily European.
These shotguns, although they have rifled barrels, still use a shotgun-style shell instead of a rifle cartridge and may in fact still fire regular multipellet shotgun shells, but the rifling in the barrel will affect the shot pattern.
However, in the 19th century, these weapons were largely replaced on the battlefield with breechloading rifled firearms, which were more accurate over longer ranges.
Coach guns are also more commonly associated with the American Old West or Australian Colonial period, and often used for hunting in bush, scrub, or marshland where a longer barrel would be unwieldy or impractical.
Some police forces are replacing shotguns in this role with carbine rifles such as AR-15s.
Typically, a sabot slug is used in these barrels for maximum accuracy and performance.
'''Slug''' rounds are rounds that fire a single solid slug.
Other well-known examples include the Remington 1100, Benelli M1, and Saiga-12.
The government provided amnesty from prosecution to shotgun and rifle owners if they fail to register non-restricted shotguns and rifles.
While the advent of new, more accurate slug technologies is making buckshot less attractive for hunting, it is still the most common choice for police, military, and home defense uses.
There are also some revolvers, such as the Taurus Judge, that are capable of shooting the .45LC/.410 rounds; but as with derringers, these are handguns that shoot .410 shotgun shells, and are not necessarily considered shotguns.
However, the small charge and typically tight choke make it more difficult to hit targets.
By contrast, in the Pacific theater, thick jungles and heavily fortified positions made the shotgun a favorite weapon of the United States Marines.
Many countries establish a legal minimum barrel length that precludes easy concealment (this length is  in the U.S. and 24 inches in the UK).
Larger shot sizes, up to the extreme case of the single projectile slug load, result in increased penetration, but at the expense of fewer projectiles and lower probability of hitting the target.
They have greater ranges than older Foster and Brenneke-type slugs.
The shotgun has fallen in and out of favor with military forces several times in its long history.
Shot, small and round and delivered without spin, is ballistically inefficient.
A constriction in the end of the barrel known as the choke is used to tailor the pattern for different purposes.
These involve shooting clay disks, known as clay pigeons, thrown in various ways.
These weapons are typically break-action .410 "gauge" (caliber), single-barrel designs with no magazine and no automatic ejection capability.
This is the only occasion the legality of the shotgun's use in warfare has been questioned.
Shotgun barrels may only be reduced in length to a minimum of .
A notable example is the Springfield Armory M6 Scout, a .410 / .22 issued to United States Air Force personnel as a "survival" gun in the event of a forced landing or accident in a wilderness area.
Shotguns generally have longer barrels than modern rifles.
Instead of having the action manually operated by a pump or lever, the action automatically cycles each time the shotgun is fired, ejecting the spent shell and reloading a fresh one into the chamber.
Shotguns are often used with rifled barrels in locations where it is not lawful to hunt with a rifle.
It arguably increased effectiveness in close range engagements against multiple targets.
The shotgun is popular for bird hunting (called "game-shooting" in the UK, where "hunting" refers to hunting mammals with a pack of hounds), it is also used for more general forms of hunting especially in semi-populated areas where the range of rifle bullets may pose a hazard.
The United States Army Air Forces also used pump shotguns to guard bombers and other aircraft against saboteurs when parked on airbases across the Pacific and on the West Coast of the United States.
This is well within the range of the majority of kill shots by experienced hunters using shotguns.
Hunting models generally have a barrel between 600 and 700&nbsp;mm (24"-28").
This product is expected to be released to market in 2008.
A typical round for defensive use would be a 12 gauge  length 00 buck shell, which contains 9 pellets roughly 8.4&nbsp;mm (.33&nbsp;inch) in diameter, each comparable to a .38 Special bullet in damage potential.
(c) is not a revolver gun.
Restricted and prohibited shotguns may be possessed with a PAL or POL than has been endorsed for restricted or prohibited grandfathered firearms.
Bolt-action shotguns are also used in conjunction with slug shells for the maximum possible accuracy from a shotgun.
According to Remington, modern powder in a shotgun burns completely in 25 (9.8425&nbsp;in) to 36 (14.173&nbsp;in)&nbsp;cm barrels.
Small game shotguns, for hunting game like rabbits and squirrels, or shotguns for use with buckshot for deer, are often .
Bolt-action shotguns, while uncommon, do exist.
Typically, goose guns have long barrels (up to 36&nbsp;inches), and small bolt-fed magazines.
They are available in low and high altitude versions.
Shotguns used by military, police, and other government agencies are regulated under the National Firearms Act of 1934; however, they are exempt from transfer taxes.
Shotguns are also used for target shooting sports such as skeet, trap, and sporting clays.
These provided flexibility, enabling the hunter to effectively shoot at flushing birds or more distant small mammals while only carrying one gun.
The sawed-off shotgun is sometimes known as a "Lupara" (in Italian a generic reference to the word "''lupo''" ("wolf")) in Southern Italy and Sicily.
Ammunition manufacturer CCI produces 9&nbsp;mm (.355 in.)
For example, the Brown Bess musket, in service with the British army from 1722 to 1838, had a 19&nbsp;mm (.75&nbsp;inch) smoothbore barrel, roughly the same as a 10 gauge shotgun, and was  long, just short of the above recommended 168&nbsp;cm (5 feet).
The wide spray of the shot ensured a large group would be hit, but the light shot would ensure more wounds than fatalities.
By the 1860s hammerless guns were increasingly used in Europe both in war and sport although hammer guns were still very much in the majority.
Rather than get into a physical confrontation, they stalk the poachers, making themselves known by a loud shout of "Run!"
Other examples include a variety of .410 / rifle "survival" guns manufactured in over/under designs.
For this reason, these types of rounds are referred to as less-lethal, as opposed to less-than-lethal.
Backpacker shotguns are popular for "home defense" purposes and as "survival" weapons.
This allows easy, fast use by novices.
Gas, inertia, or recoil operated actions are other popular methods of increasing the rate of fire of a shotgun; these are generally referred to as autoloaders or semi-automatics.
The common characteristics that make a shotgun unique center around the requirements of firing shot.
Special chokes for turkey hunting, which requires long range shots at the small head and neck of the bird, can go as high as 1500 micrometres (0.060&nbsp;inches).
Of course, depending on the barrel length, the amount of ''lead'' employed will vary for different barrel lengths, and must be learned by experience.
A skeet shooter shooting at close targets might use 127 micrometres (0.005&nbsp;inches) of constriction to produce a  diameter pattern at a distance of .
The guns combine the advantages of the break action (they can be proven to be safe by breaking open, there are no flying hulls) with those of the semi-automatic (low recoil, low barrel axis position hence low muzzle flip).
The minimum barrel length for shotguns in most of the U.S. is , and this barrel length (sometimes  to increase magazine capacity and/or ensure the gun is legal regardless of measuring differences) is the primary choice for riot shotguns.
There is also a class of break action guns called ''drillings'', which contain three barrels, usually two shotgun barrels of the same gauge and a rifle barrel, though the only common theme is that at least one barrel be a shotgun barrel.
This reduces the compression forces on the shot when it transitions from the chamber to the barrel.
On the other hand, records from the Plymouth colony show a maximum length of 137&nbsp;cm (4 feet) for fowling pieces, shorter than the typical musket.
Because of its very light recoil (approx 10 N), it is often used as a beginner's gun.
Shotguns are found aboard naval vessels for shipboard security, because the weapon is very effective at close range as a way of repelling enemy boarding parties.
The shotgun has become a ubiquitous firearm in the hunting community.
The development of more accurate and deadlier long-range rifles minimized the usefulness of the shotgun on the open battlefields of European wars.
'''Bolo''' rounds are made of two or more slugs molded onto steel wire.
Percentage of shotin a  circle at
Non-restricted shotguns may be possessed with any Possession and Acquisition Licence (PAL) or Possession-Only License (POL) and may be transported throughout the country without special authorization and may be used for hunting certain species at certain times of the year.
The shot pellets from a shotgun spread upon leaving the barrel, and the power of the burning charge is divided among the pellets, which means that the energy of any one ball of shot is fairly low.
In the United Kingdom, a Shotgun Certificate (SGC) is required to possess a "Section 2" shotgun.
In a naval setting, stainless steel shotguns are often used, because regular steel is more prone to corrosion in the marine environment.
It is favored by law enforcement for its low penetration and high stopping power.
'''Sabots''' are a common type of slug round.
Compared to a rifle, riot shotguns are easier to maneuver due to the shorter barrel, still provide better damage potential at indoor distances (generally 3–5 meters/yards), and reduce the risk of "overpenetration"; that is, the bullet or shot passing completely through the target and continuing beyond, which poses a risk to those behind the target through walls.
Some turkey hunting tubes have constrictions greater than "Super Full", or additional features like porting to reduce recoil, or "straight rifling" that is designed to stop any spin that the shot column might acquire when traveling down the barrel.
Shot was also used in warfare; the buck and ball loading, combining a musket ball with three or six buckshot, was used throughout the history of the smoothbore musket.
It is also frequently used by expert shooters because of the difficulty, especially in expensive side by side and over/under models for hunting small bird game such as quail and doves.
Usually a drilling containing more than one rifle barrel would have both rifle barrels in the same caliber, but examples do exist with different caliber barrels, usually a .22 long rifle and a centerfire cartridge.
Non-prohibited private citizens may own short-barreled shotguns by passing extensive background checks (state and local laws may be more restrictive) as well as paying a $200 federal tax and being issued a stamp.
A number of recent spreader chokes, such as the Briley "Diffusion" line, actually use rifling in the choke to spin the shot slightly, creating a wider spread.
The long gun portion of the registry was scrapped in 2011.
However, the most successful hammerless innovation of the 1870s was Anson and Deeley's boxlock patent of 1875.
When fired, the blanks provide the sound and flash of a real load, but with no projectile.
As the shot leaves the barrel it begins to disperse in the air.
A variety of specialty less-lethal or non-lethal ammunitions, such as tear gas shells, bean bags, flares, explosive sonic stun rounds, and rubber projectiles, all packaged into 12 gauge shotgun shells, are produced specifically for the law enforcement market.
Shotguns come in a wide variety of forms, from very small up to massive punt guns, and in nearly every type of firearm operating mechanism.
The second was that the shot would spread too quickly providing a limited effective zone.
There has been a notable uptick in lever-action shotgun sales in Australia since 1997, when pump-actions were effectively outlawed.
Certain states have restrictions on magazine capacity or design features under hunting or assault weapon laws.
These features are the features typical of a shotgun shell, namely a relatively short, wide cartridge, with straight walls, and operating at a relatively low pressure.
Modern innovations such as interchangeable chokes and subgauge inserts make the double-barreled shotgun the shotgun of choice in skeet, trap shooting, and sporting clays, as well as with many hunters.
But in all, 'tis essential the Barrel be well polish'd and smooth within; and the Bore all of a Bigness, from one End to another...''
During World War II, the shotgun was not heavily used in the war in Europe by official military forces.
There are some shotgun rounds designed specifically for police use that shoot effectively from  with a 20" diameter grouping of the balls.
By far the most common gauges are 12 (0.729 in, 18.5&nbsp;mm diameter) and 20 (0.614 in, 15.6&nbsp;mm), although .410 (= 67), 32, 28, 24, 16, and 10 (19.7&nbsp;mm) gauge also exist.
In fact during these decades a wide variety of ingenious weapons, including rifles, adopted what is now often known as a 'needle-fire' method of igniting the charge, where a firing pin or a longer sharper needle provided the necessary impact.
In reality the pattern is closer to a Gaussian, or normal distribution, with a higher density in the center that tapers off at the edges.
Since shotguns are generally used for shooting at small, fast moving targets, it is important to ''lead'' the target by firing slightly ahead of the target, so that when the shot reaches the range of the target, the target will have moved into the pattern.
In pump-action shotguns, a sliding forearm handle (the ''pump'') works the action, extracting the spent shell and inserting a new one while cocking the hammer or striker as the pump is worked.
and several other popular pistol calibers up to .45 ACP as well as .22 (5.5&nbsp;mm) for firing from handguns.
The rounds are fed in one by one through a port in the receiver, where they are lifted by a lever called the ''elevator'' and pushed forward into the chamber by the bolt.
The decline in military use of shotguns reversed in World War I. American forces under General Pershing employed 12-gauge pump action shotguns when they were deployed to the Western front in 1917.
The user loads the first shell by breaking the gun in the manner of a break-action shotgun, then closes it and inserts the second shell into a clip on the gun's right side.
The most common pump shotguns used for these duties were the 12 gauge Winchester Model 97 and Model 12.
'''Rubber slugs''' or '''rubber buckshot''' are similar in principle to the bean bag rounds.
Total spread at 40 yds  (in)
Some of the most common uses of shotguns are the sports of skeet shooting, trap shooting, and sporting clays.
These are currently experimental, but the British FRAG-12, which comes in both armor penetrating and fragmentary forms, is under consideration by military forces.
Barbs on the front attach the electroshock unit to the target, with a tassel deploying from the rear to widen the circuit.
U.S. Marines have used shotguns since their inception at the squad level, often in the hands of NCOs, while the U.S. Army often issued them to a squad's point man.
'''Rock salt''' shells are hand loaded with coarse rock salt crystals, replacing the standard lead or steel shot.
It was used to defend machine gun emplacements during the Korean War, American and French jungle patrols used shotguns during the Vietnam War, and shotguns saw extensive use as door breaching and close quarter weapons in the early stages of the Iraq War, and saw limited use in tank crews.
A rifled slug, with finned rifling designed to enable the projectile to be safely fired through a choked barrel, is an example of a single projectile.
When fired, the slugs separate, pulling the wire taut creating a flying blade, which could theoretically decapitate people and animals or amputate limbs.
The origins of the hammerless shotgun are European but otherwise obscure.
Size nine (#9) shot is the smallest size normally used for hunting and is used on small upland game birds such as dove and quail.
Use of a smooth bore shotgun with a rifled slug or, alternatively, a rifled barrel shotgun with a sabot slug, improves accuracy to  or more.
Before this time most shotguns were the 'break open' type.
Well-known examples include the Winchester Model 1897, Remington 870 and Mossberg 500/590.
After World War I, the United States military began referring to all shotguns as ''riot guns''.
The military value of shotguns was rediscovered in the First World War, when American forces used 12-gauge pump action shotguns in close-quarters trench fighting to great effect.
When fired, a gout of flame erupts from the barrel of the gun (up to 20&nbsp;ft).
Both types of double-barrel shotgun are used for hunting and sporting use, with the individual configuration largely being a matter of personal preference.
