The caridean family of pistol shrimp are characterized by big asymmetrical claws, the larger of which can produce a loud snapping sound.
were adapted for crawling or walking.
Shrimp are widespread and abundant.
Shrimp trawling can result in very high incidental catch rates of non-target species.
Males are usually much larger than females.
As shrimp fishing methods industrialised, parallel changes were happening in the way shrimp were processed.
A system of nets is used when trawling.
It was replaced by a penaeid white shrimp fishery on the South Atlantic and Gulf coasts.
The abdomens of crabs are small and short, whereas the abdomens of lobsters and shrimp are large and long.
Krill resemble miniature shrimp, and are sometimes called "krill shrimp".
Fairy shrimp belong to the class Anostraca.
After the maxilliped come more five pairs of appendages, the pereiopods.
For a good account of a specific species, see ''Caprella mutica''.
In this case, the shells are in two parts, like those of bivalves or clams.
Most shrimp are sold frozen and marketed based on their categorization of presentation, grading, colour, and uniformity.
In the 3rd century AD, the Greek author Athenaeus wrote in his literary work, ''Deipnosophistae''; "... of all fish the daintiest is a young shrimp in fig leaves."
Shrimp boats became larger, faster, and more capable.
One of these pairs is very long, and can be twice the length of the shrimp, while the other pair are quite short.
""For shrimp to develop into one of the world's most popular foods, it took the simultaneous development of the otter trawl... and the internal combustion engine."
Greenpeace has challenged the sustainability of tropical shrimp farming practices on the grounds that farming these species "has led to the destruction of vast areas of mangroves in several countries and over-fishing of juvenile shrimp from the wild to supply farms."
The largest exporting nation is Thailand.
Malacostraca comes from the Greek ''malakós'' meaning ''soft'' and ''óstrakon'' meaning ''shell''.
They produce eggs, called cysts, which can be stored in a dormant state for long periods and then hatched on demand.
This has led to the extensive use of brine shrimp as fish feed in aquaculture.
At the same time early European settlers, oblivious to the "protein-rich coasts" all about them, starved from lack of protein.
Some mantis shrimp are a foot long, and have bulging eyes, a flattened tail and formidable claws equipped with clubs or sharp spikes, which it can use to knock out its opponents.
It is a rigid forward extension of the carapace, and can be used for attack or defence.
Other significant producers are Thailand, Indonesia, India, Vietnam, Brazil, Ecuador and Bangladesh.
This group is identical to the traditional Natantia group, and contains decapods only.
Unlike crabs and lobsters, shrimp have well developed pleopods (swimmerets) and slender walking legs; they are more adapted for swimming than walking.
They are widespread in marine waters, and are also found in some brackish and freshwater habitats in the Northern hemisphere.
Mantis shrimp, so called because they resemble a praying mantis, make up the order Stomatopoda.
For example, the claim was made earlier in the nineteenth century for the Port of Brunswick in Georgia, and Fernandina and Saint Augustine in Florida.
They mostly inhabit relatively deep pelagic waters throughout the world.
Several types of shrimp are kept in home aquaria.
The evidence was circumstantial, because the chitinous shells of shrimp are so thin they degrade rapidly, leaving no fossil remains.
Dendrobranchiata, such as the giant tiger prawn pictured, typically have three pairs of claws, though their claws are less conspicuous than those of other shrimp.
Some shrimp species use them for brooding eggs, others have gills on them for breathing, and the males in some species use the first pair or two for insemination.
The uropods allow the shrimp to swim backwards, and function like rudders, steering the shrimp when it swims forward.
The farming accelerated during the 1980s as demand for shrimp exceeded supply, and as excessive bycatch and threats to endangered sea turtle became associated with trawling for wild shrimp.
Some are purely ornamental, while others are useful in controlling algae and removing debris.
The species in this suborder tend to be larger than the caridean shrimp species below, and many are commercially important.
In the 20th century, the canneries were replaced with freezers."
These shrimp burrow into the sand to hide, and can be present in high numbers without appearing to be so.
In 1991, archeologists suggested that ancient raised paved areas near the coast in Chiapas, Mexico, were platforms used for drying shrimp in the sun, and that adjacent clay hearths were used to dry the shrimp when there was no sun.
Power winches were connected to the engines, and only small crews were needed to rapidly lift heavy nets on board and empty them.
They are drought-resistant and can be found preying on fairy shrimp and small fish at the bottom of shallow lakes and temporary pools.
The numerous species in this infraorder are known as caridean shrimp, though only a few are commercially important.
They are not kosher and thus are forbidden in Jewish cuisine.
"On this basis, taxonomic classifications now divide the order Decapoda into the two suborders: Dendrobranchiata for the largest shrimp clade, and Pleocyemata for all other decapods.
* According to the Codex Alimentarius Commission of the FAO and WHO: "The term ''shrimp'' (which includes the frequently used term ''prawn'') refers to the species covered by the most recent edition of the FAO listing of shrimp, FAO Species Catalogue, Volume 1,  ''Shrimps and prawns of the world, an annotated catalogue of species of interest to fisheries'' FAO Fisheries Synopsis No.
About 75% of farmed shrimp are produced in Asia, in particular in China, Thailand and in the Philippines.
Freshwater shrimp commonly available for aquaria include the Bamboo shrimp, Japanese marsh shrimp (''Caridina multidentata,'' also called "Amano shrimp," as their use in aquaria was pioneered by Takashi Amano), cherry shrimp (''Neocaridina heteropoda''), and ghost or glass shrimp (''Palaemonetes'' spp.).
Popular saltwater shrimp include the cleaner shrimp ''Lysmata amboinensis'', the fire shrimp (''Lysmata debelius'') and the harlequin shrimp (''Hymenocera picta'').
Shrimp are slender with long muscular abdomens.
The small emperor shrimp has a symbiotic relationship with sea slugs and sea cucumbers, and may help keep them clear of ectoparasites.
Female carideans attach eggs to their pleopods and brood them there.
* The taxonomists De Grave and Fransen, 2011, recognise four major groups of shrimp: the suborder Dendrobranchiata and the infraorders Procarididea, Stenopodidea and Caridea".
Their threadlike slender bodies allow them to virtually disappear among fine filaments in seaweed.
Two bulbous eyes on stalks sit either side of the rostrum.
The muscular tails of many shrimp are edible to humans, and they are widely caught and farmed for human consumption.
In turn, the ''Species Catalogue'' says the highest category it deals with is "the suborder Natantia of the order Crustacea Decapoda to which all shrimps and prawns belong".
The antennae of crabs are short, whereas the antennae of lobsters and shrimp are usually long, reaching more than twice the body length in some shrimp species.
This includes the brine shrimp, clam shrimp, fairy shrimp and tadpole shrimp belonging to the branchiopods, the lophogastridan shrimp, opossum shrimp and skeleton shrimp belonging the Malacostraca; and seed shrimp which are ostracods.
Clam shrimp belong to the group Conchostraca.
"In the 19th century, sun dried shrimp were largely replaced by canneries.
Caridean shrimp, such as the pink shrimp pictured, typically have two pairs of claws.
Ostracod comes from the Greek ''óstrakon'' meaning ''shell''.
Some species have rudimentary pleopods, which give them some ability to swim, and like shrimp they can lobster with their tail to escape predators, but their primary mode of locomotion is walking, not swimming.
In the 1920s, diesel engine were adapted for use in shrimp boats.
A wide variety of non-decapod crustaceans are also commonly referred to as shrimp.
Some marine seed shrimp drift as pelagic plankton, but most live on the sea floor and burrow in the upper sediment layer.
These living fossils have not much changed since the Triassic.
Some of the biggest decapods are lobsters.
A minor sister group to the Caridea (immediately above)
They are called opossum shrimp because the females carry a brood pouch.
Clawed lobster have large claws while spiny lobsters don't, but have instead spiny antennae and a spiny carapace.
Known as boxer shrimp, the members of this infraorder are often cleaner shrimp.
Differences between shrimp, lobsters and crabs
The Reptantia or walkers included the crabs and lobsters.
These are compound eyes which have panoramic vision and are very good at detecting movement.
Together these four species account for nearly half of the total wild capture.
There is little agreement among taxonomists concerning the phylogeny of crustaceans.
The segments on their abdomens are even-sized, and there is no pronounced bend in the abdomen.
The body of the shrimp is divided into two main parts: the head and thorax which are fused together to form the cephalothorax, and a long narrow abdomen.
The second abdominal segment overlaps both the first and the third segment, and the abdomen shows a pronounced ''caridean bend''.
Crabs are adapted for walking on the seafloor.
They are usually small, nocturnal, difficult to find (they burrow in the sediment), and of interest mainly to marine biologists.
* All shrimp of commercial interest belong to the Natantia.
Different populations can be bisexual, unisexual or hermaphroditic.
The FAO determine the categories and terminology used in the reporting of global fisheries.
The first five segments each have a pair of appendages on the underside, which are shaped like paddles and are used for swimming forward.
The first three pairs, the maxillipeds, Latin for "jaw feet", are used as mouthparts.
Marine species are found at depths of up to , and from the tropics to the polar regions.
They grow up to  long, and can be vividly coloured.
Worldwide, shrimp trawl fisheries generate about 2% of the world's catch of fish in weight, but result in more than one third of the global bycatch total.
The diagram on the right and the following description refers mainly to the external anatomy of the common European shrimp, ''Crangon crangon'', as a typical example of a decapod shrimp.
The monophyly of the group is not certain; recent studies have suggested dividing the group into two infraorders, Gebiidea and Axiidea.
The appendices are called pleopods or swimmerets, and can be used for more purposes than just swimming.
They were defined by their abdomen which, together with its appendages was well adapted for swimming.
Shrimp are widespread, and can be found near the seafloor of most coasts and estuaries, as well as in rivers and lakes.
The Stenopodidea are a much smaller group than the Dendrobranchia and Caridea, and have no commercial importance.
Eight pairs of appendages issue from the cephlathorax.
These freshwater shrimp have a hinged bivalved carapace which can open and close.
They usually live from one to seven years.
This finding suggests that sperm competition and/or pre- and post-copulatory female choice occurs.
By 2010, the aquaculture harvest was 3.9 million tonnes, compared to 3.1 million tonnes for the capture of wild shrimp.
The longtail tadpole shrimp ''(pictured)'' has three eyes and up to 120 legs with gills on them.
Overfishing and pollution from gold mine tailings resulted in the decline of the fishery.
Major shrimp groups of the Natantia
Some taxonomists identify shrimp with the infraorder Caridea and prawns with the suborder Dendrobranchiata.
Skeleton shrimp, sometimes known as ghost shrimp, are amphipods.
They swim upside down with their belly uppermost, with swimming appendages that look like leaves.
Members of the Natantia (shrimp in the broader sense) were adapted for swimming while the Reptantia (crabs, lobsters, etc.)
Some have powerful spiked claws which they punch into their prey, stunning, spearing and dismembering them.
Various coastal settlements in the United States have claimed the title "Shrimp Capital of the World".
Branchiopoda comes from the Greek ''branchia'' meaning gills, and ''pous'' meaning ''feet''.
This results in a backward dart called the caridoid escape reaction (lobstering).
The chela can grasp food items and bring them to the mouth.
Two pairs of whiskers (antennae) also issue from the head.
Commercial shrimp species support an industry worth 50 billion dollars a year, and in 2010 the total commercial production of shrimp was nearly 7 million tonnes.
The catch was dried in the sun and was exported to China or sold to the Chinese community in the United States.
In 1997, the FAO found discard rates up to 20 pounds for every pound of shrimp.
Traditionally decapods were divided into two suborders: The Natantia or swimmers, and the Reptantia or walkers.
They look somewhat like large versions of shrimp.
Other decapod crustaceans also called shrimp, are the ghost or mud shrimp belonging to the infra-order Thalassinidea.
Under the broader definition, ''shrimp'' may be synonymous with ''prawn'', covering stalk-eyed swimming crustaceans with long narrow muscular tails (abdomens), long whiskers (antennae), and slender legs.
Their eggs can survive drought and temperature extremes for years, reviving and hatching after the rain returns.
In 1985 Quitmyer and others found direct evidence dating back to 600 AD for shrimping off the southeastern coast of North America, by successfully identifying shrimp from the archaeological remains of their mandibles (jaws).
Shrimp are swimming crustaceans with long narrow muscular abdomens and long antennae.
Shrimp and other shellfish are among the most common food allergens.
The carapace typically surrounds the gills, through which water is pumped by the action of the mouthparts.
Some are filter feeders, using their setose (bristly) legs as a sieve; some scrape algae from rocks.
There are numerous species, and usually there is a species adapted to any particular habitat.
Opossum shrimp belong to the order Mysida.
Shrimp trawling can capture shrimp in huge volumes by dragging a net along the seafloor.
Any small crustacean which resembles a shrimp tends to be called one.
They have pleopods, but they use them as an intromittent organ or to hold egg broods, and not for swimming.
Modern industrial shrimping methods originated in this area.
In recent years, the global capture of wild shrimp has been overtaken by the harvest from farmed shrimp.
Baited traps are common in parts of the Pacific Northwest.
There are many variations in the ways different types of shrimp look and behave.
In the 1970s, significant shrimp farming was initiated, particularly in China.
Most farmed shrimp is exported to the United States, the European Union and Japan.
Most shrimp are omnivorous, but some are specialised for particular modes of feeding.
Some freshwater mysids are found in groundwater and anchialine caves.
Crabs and lobsters have strong walking legs, whereas shrimp have thin fragile legs which they use primarily for perching.
Tadpole shrimp belong to the family Notostraca.
In the mid nineteenth century, Chinese immigrants arrived for the California Gold Rush, many from the Pearl River Delta where netting small shrimp had been a tradition for centuries.
If a shrimp is alarmed, it can flex its tail fan in a rapid movement.
The sixth segment terminates in the telson flanked by two pairs of appendages called the uropods.
Shrimp consumption, however, is considered healthy for the circulatory system because the lack of significant levels of saturated fat in shrimp means that the high cholesterol content in shrimp actually improves the ratio of LDL to HDL cholesterol and lowers triglycerides.
The banded coral shrimp ''(pictured)'' is popular in aquariums.
Their gills are branching, whereas the gills of caridean shrimp are lamellar.
Shrimp are often solitary, though they can form large schools during the spawning season.
Even within the core group of caridean shrimp, the small delicate Pederson's shrimp (above) looks and behaves quite unlike the large commercial pink shrimp or the snapping pistol shrimp.
The world average was 5.7 pounds for every pound of shrimp.
The class includes carnivores, herbivores, filter feeders and scavengers.
They look somewhat like small lobsters, but not like crabs.
Greenpeace has placed a number of the prominent tropical shrimp species that are farmed commercially on its seafood red list, including the whiteleg shrimp, Indian prawn and giant tiger shrimp.
The whiteleg shrimp is currently the dominant species in shrimp farming.
Clay vessels with shrimp decorations have been found in the ruins of Pompeii.
The carapace of crabs are wide and flat, whereas the carapace of lobsters and shrimp are more cylindrical.
They can be found feeding near the seafloor on most coasts and estuaries, as well as in rivers and lakes.
These form the ten decapod legs.
In 1583, the Dutch banned shrimp trawling in estuaries.
In 2007, the production of farmed shrimp exceeded the capture of wild shrimp.
A shrimp-based meal is also a significant source of cholesterol, from 122&nbsp;mg to 251&nbsp;mg per 100&nbsp;g of shrimp, depending on the method of preparation.
There are also freshwater and terrestrial species.
The most extensively fished species are the akiami paste shrimp, the northern prawn, the southern rough shrimp, and the giant tiger prawn.
Trawl nets in general, and shrimp trawls in particular, have been identified as sources of mortality for species of finfish and cetaceans.
By the 1960s, steel and fibreglass hulls further strengthened shrimp boats, so they could trawl heavier nets, and steady advances in electronics, radar, sonar, and GPS resulted in more sophisticated and capable shrimp fleets.
Larger boats trawled offshore and smaller boats worked bays and estuaries.
In China, prawns are cultured along with sea cucumbers and some fish species, in integrated multi-trophic systems.
Freshwater aquaria variant shrimp come in many colours
They define a shrimp as a "decapod crustacean of the suborder Natantia".
As with other seafood, shrimp is high in calcium, iodine and protein but low in food energy.
Compared to shrimp and lobsters, the carapace of crabs are particularly heavy, hard and mineralised.
This is a class of numerous small crustacean species which look like seeds, typically about one millimetre (0.04&nbsp;in) in size.
The Natantia was thought to be paraphyletic, that is, it was thought that originally all decapods were like shrimp.
In ''Crangon crangon'', the first pair, the maxillula, pumps water into the gill cavity.
The long antennae help the shrimp orient itself with regard to its immediate surroundings, while the short antennae help assess the suitability of prey.
It lives for 20–90 days.
The Natantia or swimmers included the shrimp.
Brine shrimp are sold as novelty gifts under the marketing name ''Sea-Monkeys''.
The shell which protects the cephlathorax is harder and thicker than the shell elsewhere on the shrimp, and is called the carapace.
They have prominent grasping claws as their front pair of limbs.
Shrimp have high levels of omega-3 fatty acids and low levels of mercury.
The muscular abdomen has six segments and has a thinner shell than the carapace.
Marine mysids can form large swarms and are an important source of food for many fish.
Many of these species look quite unlike like the commercial decapod shrimp that are eaten as seafood.
Like the related opossum shrimp, females lophogastrida carry a brood pouch.
In turn, shrimp are eaten by various animals, particularly fish and seabirds, and frequently host bopyrid parasites.
They have gills on their feet or mouthparts.
Other species groups commonly known as shrimp
In ''Crangon crangon'', the first two pairs of pereiopods have claws or chela.
Used broadly, it may cover any of the groups with elongated bodies and a primarily swimming mode of locomotion – most commonly Caridea and Dendrobranchiata.
This was the beginning of the American shrimping industry.
The total global production of farmed shrimp reached more than 1.6 million tonnes in 2003, representing a value of nearly 9 billion U.S. dollars.
Colonies of snapping shrimp are a major source of noise in the ocean and can interfere with sonar and underwater communication.
