Its members call themselves "men of honour", although the public often refers to them as "mafiosi".
The Mafia retaliated violently.
They questioned his commitment and his feelings regarding criminality and murder (despite his already having a history of such acts).
In a memoir written many years later, he described the initiation ritual which he underwent in the spring of 1893:
The Mafia's power comes from its reputation to commit violence, particularly murder, against virtually anyone.
Primogeniture was abolished, land could no longer be seized to settle debts, and one fifth of the land became private property of the peasants.
In this way, established Mafia clans have a powerful edge over newcomers who start from scratch; joining a clan as a soldier offers an aspiring mafioso a chance to build up his own reputation under the guidance and protection of senior mafiosi.
Falcone and Borsellino were killed by bombs in 1992.
This can cause clients to abandon the clan and turn to neighboring clans for protection.
Starting in 1975, Cosa Nostra set up heroin refineries around the island.
The public's association of the word with the criminal secret society was perhaps inspired by the 1863 play ''"I mafiusi di la Vicaria"'' ("The Mafiosi of the Vicaria") by Giuseppe Rizzotto and Gaetano Mosca.
In the east, the ruling elites were more cohesive and active during the transition from feudalism to capitalism.
The outcomes of such fights can be unpredictable (not to mention bloody), and neither racketeer could guarantee a victory for his client.
Omertà is a code of silence and secrecy that forbids mafiosi from betraying their comrades to the authorities.
The police were frustrated with the lack of help that they were receiving from witnesses and politicians.
Franchetti saw the Mafia as deeply rooted in Sicilian society and impossible to quench unless the very structure of the island's social institutions were to undergo a fundamental change.
Mori's campaign ended in June 1929 when Mussolini recalled him to Rome.
The 1950s saw the Mafia heavily penetrate the construction and cement industries.
The cement business was appealing to the Mafia because it allows high levels of local economic involvement and is a good front for illegitimate operations.
To ensure that this does not happen, a mafioso must never introduce himself to another mafioso whom he does not personally know, even if he knows the other through reputation.
In exchange for a commission, the mafioso promises to both the buyer and seller that if either of them tries to cheat the other, the cheater can expect to be assaulted or have his property vandalized.
Di Pisa accused the Americans of defrauding him, while the La Barberas accused Di Pisa of embezzling the missing heroin.
As Mafia informant Antonino Calderone reminisced: "The music changed.
The Catholic Church openly condemned the Mafia, and two churches were bombed and an anti-Mafia priest shot dead in Rome.
Kidnapping is also generally forbidden, even by non-mafiosi, as it attracts a great deal of public hostility and police attention.
Buscetta dismissed the word "mafia" as a mere literary creation.
but few people would trust their money to criminal gangs.
In the early 1980s, magistrates Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino began a campaign against ''Cosa Nostra''.
The result was a huge boom in landowners — from 2,000 in 1812 to 20,000 by 1861.
Some clans are so small that they don't even have decinas and capodecinas, and even in large clans certain soldiers may report directly to the boss.
They may even offer a few free favors as enticement.
The word "mafia" originated in Sicily, though its origins are uncertain.
The bill was to expire in 2002 but has been prolonged for another four years and extended to other crimes such as terrorism.
Heroin was often distributed to street dealers from Mafia-owned pizzerias, and the revenues could be passed off as restaurant profits (the so-called Pizza Connection).
To force suspects to surrender, they would take their families hostage, sell off their property, or publicly slaughter their livestock.
Early Mafia activity is strongly linked to Sicilian municipalities abundant in sulphur, Sicily's most valuable export commodity.
Rather, each Commission serves as a representative mechanism for consultation of independent clans who decide by consensus.
One of the first accounts of an initiation ceremony into the Mafia was given by Bernardino Verro, a leader of the Fasci Siciliani, a popular movement of democratic and socialist inspiration which arose in Sicily in the early 1890s.
In countryside towns that lacked formal constabulary, local elites responded to banditry by recruiting young men into "companies-at-arms" to hunt down thieves and negotiate the return of stolen property, in exchange for a pardon for the thieves and a fee from the victims.
Scholars such as Diego Gambetta and Leopoldo Franchetti have characterized the Sicilian Mafia as a "cartel of private protection firms", whose primary business is protection racketeering.
Any murder of a mafioso or prominent individual (police, lawyers, politicians, journalists, etc.)
It is estimated that the Sicilian Mafia costs the Sicilian economy more than €10 billion a year through protection rackets.
To prevent this, mafia clans negotiate territories in which they can monopolize the use of violence in settling disputes.
In 1864, Niccolò Turrisi Colonna, leader of the Palermo National Guard, wrote of a "sect of thieves" that operated throughout Sicily.
The human rights group Amnesty International has expressed concern that the 41-bis regime could, in some circumstances, amount to "cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment" for prisoners.
A mafioso in these regions could protect multiple small estates at once, which gave him great independence and leverage to charge high prices.
''Cosa Nostra'' is not a monolithic organization, but rather a loose confederation of about one hundred groups known alternately as "families", ''"cosche"'', ''"borgatas"'', or "clans."
The economic paradigm was prevalent when the Italian Penal Code definition of criminal conspiracy (Article 416) was extended by Pio La Torre.
Mafiosi approach potential clients in an aggressive but friendly manner, like a door-to-door salesman.
They also ensure that the smugglers operate in safety.
Sicilian and Neapolitan crime bosses negotiated a joint monopoly over the smuggling of cigarettes to Naples.
Traditionally, only men can become mafiosi, though in recent times there have been reports of women assuming the responsibilities of imprisoned mafiosi relatives.
Mafiosi themselves are generally forbidden from committing theft (though in practice they are merely forbidden from stealing from anyone connected to the Mafia).
A full member also gains more freedom to participate in certain rackets which the Mafia controls (particularly protection racketeering).
Consequently, a series of failures can completely ruin a mafioso's reputation, and with it his business.
An 1876 police report makes the earliest known description of the familiar initiation ritual.
Many buildings were illegally constructed before the city's planning was finalized.
The boss of a clan is typically elected by the rank-and-file soldiers (though violent successions do happen).
A mafioso's mere endorsement of a certain candidate can be enough for his clients, relatives, and associates to vote for that candidate.
He did not permanently crush the Mafia as the Fascist press proclaimed, but his campaign was nonetheless very successful at suppressing it.
Roughly 70 percent of Sicilian businesses pay protection money to ''Cosa Nostra''.
The act of murder is to prove his sincerity (i.e., he is not an undercover policeman) and to bind him into silence (i.e., he cannot break ''omertà'' without facing murder charges himself).
Since the transaction is essentially a black market deal, the agents cannot turn to the police or the courts if either of them cheats the other.
Mafiosi are known among themselves as "men of honour" or "men of respect".
Many mafiosi fled to the United States.
When they do, it is usually when the operations are especially risky.
To be part of the Mafia is highly desirable for many street criminals.
In another example, a mafioso acting on behalf of a coffee supplier might pressure local bars into serving only his client's coffee.
Mafia violence is most commonly directed at other Mafia families competing for territory and business.
He also halted the policy of murdering informants and their families, with a view instead to getting them to retract their testimonies and return to the fold.
Other than its members, ''Cosa Nostra'' makes extensive use of "associates".
Until the early 1980s, ''mafia'' was generally considered a unique Sicilian cultural attitude and form of power, excluding any corporate or organisational dimension.
According to Mafia turncoats (''pentiti''), the real name of the Mafia is "Cosa Nostra" ("Our Thing").
It is a loose association of criminal groups that share a common organisational structure and code of conduct.
According to historian Salvatore Lupo, "if everything is Mafia, nothing is Mafia."
It can even happen that a mafioso who loses his means to commit violence (e.g.
The Mafia was seen as an enterprise, and its economic activities became the focus of academic analyses.
Many payed a high price for their cooperation, usually through the murder of relatives.
In this case, they may induct smugglers into their clans in the hope of binding them more firmly.
There is no spectrum of quality when it comes to violent protection.
The Mafia is all of these but none of these exclusively.
Mafiosi might sometimes ask for favours instead of money, such as assistance in committing a crime.
Professionals such as lawyers and doctors do exist within the organization, and are employed according to whatever useful skills they have.
Clans are organized into districts (''mandamenti'') of three or four geographically adjacent clans.
Membership in ''Cosa Nostra'' is open only to Sicilian men.
Under Bernardo Provenzano's leadership, murders of state officials were halted.
Some mafiosi who had been on the losing end of Mafia feuds voluntarily cooperated with prosecutors, perhaps as a way of obtaining protection and revenge.
The elements of the ceremony have changed little over the Mafia's history.
Sicilian mafiosi moved to the United States to personally control distribution networks there, often at the expense of their U.S. counterparts.
For many businessmen in Sicily, they provide an essential service when they cannot rely on the police and judiciary to enforce their contracts and protect their properties from thieves (this is often because they are engaged in black market deals).
The Corleonesi bribed cash-strapped Palermo clans into the fold, subverted members of other clans, and secretly recruited new members.
Through reputation, mafiosi deter their enemies and enemies of their clients.
That said, mafiosi frequently bring their sons into the trade.
The emergence of a valuable natural resource in areas where law enforcement is weak or absent creates a demand for private protection (which mafia-type organizations can supply) and opportunities for extortion (by mafia-type organizations).
If the boss is killed or imprisoned, he takes over as leader.
The Mafia preferred to initiate relatives of existing mafiosi, believing them to be less prone to defection.
Mafiosi rarely directly involve themselves in smuggling operations.
Mafiosi receive a great deal of respect, for everyone knows that to offend a mafioso is to risk lethal retribution from him or his colleagues.
If a shopkeeper enters into a protection contract with a mafioso, the mafioso will make it publicly known that if any thief were foolish enough to rob his client's shop, he would track down the thief, beat him up, and, if possible, recover the stolen merchandise (mafiosi make it their business to know all the fences in their territory).
A prospective mafioso is carefully tested for obedience, discretion, courage, ruthlessness, and skill at espionage.
In fact, they have been known to spread deliberate lies about their past, and sometimes come to believe in their own myths.
Due to the small size of most Sicilian clans, the boss of a clan has intimate contact with all members, and doesn't receive much in the way of privileges or rewards as he would in larger organizations (such as the larger Five Families of New York).
In 1956, two Mafia-connected officials, Vito Ciancimino and Salvatore Lima, took control of Palermo's Office of Public Works.
The Mafia's protection is not restricted to illegal activities.
This would make their protection unreliable and of little value.
Scholars such as Diego Gambetta and Leopold Franchetti have characterized the Mafia as a "cartel of private protection firms".
must be approved by the commission.
In 1977, the Corleonesi had Gaetano Badalamenti expelled from the Commission on trumped-up charges of hiding drug revenues.
In a series of reports between 1898 and 1900, Ermanno Sangiorgi, the police chief of Palermo, identified 670 mafiosi belonging to eight Mafia clans that went through alternating phases of cooperation and conflict.
The penalty for transgression is death, and relatives of the turncoat may also be murdered.
Contrary to popular belief, the commissions do not serve as a centralized government for the Mafia.
Sicily was once an Islamic emirate, therefore "mafia" might have Arabic roots.
These extralegal protectors eventually organized themselves into the first Mafia clans.
He was brought into a room where several mafiosi were sitting around a table upon which sat a pistol, a dagger, and a piece of paper bearing the image of a saint.
If one is enjoying the benefits of Mafia protection, one does not want the police arresting one's mafioso.
After 1812, the feudal barons steadily sold off or rented their lands to private citizens.
Their big break came with the arrest of Tommaso Buscetta, a mafioso who chose to turn informant in exchange for protection from the Corleonesi, who had already murdered many of his friends and relatives.
In reference to a woman, however, the feminine-form adjective "mafiusa" means beautiful and attractive.
It is very rare for the Mafia to recruit an outsider for a single job, and such people are liable to be eliminated soon afterwards because they become expendable liabilities.
When a boss dies or retires, his clan's reputation often crumbles with his departure.
Manzella entrusted another boss Calcedonio Di Pisa to handle the heroin.
The inactivity plus money lost to legal fees and so forth reduced most mafiosi to poverty.
Mafiosi introduce known members to each other as belonging to ''cosa nostra'' ("our thing") or ''la stessa cosa'' ("the same thing"), meaning "he is the same thing as you — a mafioso."
It had special signals to recognize each other, offered protection services, scorned the law, and had a code of loyalty and non-interaction with the police known as ''umirtà'' ("code of silence").
According to Mafia historian Salvatore Lupo "the emphasis of the media on the definition of a 'capo di tutti capi' is without any foundation".
Mafiosi generally do not involve themselves in the management of the businesses they protect or arbitrate.
Other scholars such as Gaetano Mosca say:
He is almost always required to commit murder as his ultimate trial, even if he doesn't plan to be a career assassin.
Scholars such as Salvatore Lupo have identified these groups as "proto-Mafia".
After Riina's arrest, the Mafia began a campaign of terrorism on the Italian mainland.
These companies-at-arms were often made up of former bandits and criminals, usually the most skilled and violent of them.
Crime soared in the upheaval and chaos.
The La Barberas murdered Di Pisa and Manzella, triggering a war.
Hundreds of enemy mafiosi and their relatives were murdered, sometimes by traitors in their own clans.
The alleged deal included a repeal of 41 bis, among other anti-Mafia laws, in return for electoral support in Sicily.
The FBI even added the article ''la'' to the term, calling it ''La Cosa Nostra'' (in Italy, the article ''la'' is not used when referring to ''Cosa Nostra'').
In reference to a man, ''mafiusu'' in 19th century Sicily was ambiguous, signifying a bully, arrogant but also fearless, enterprising and proud, according to scholar Diego Gambetta.
The most notorious attack was the Portella della Ginestra massacre, when 11 persons were killed and 33 wounded during May Day celebrations on May 1, 1947.
Possible Arabic roots of the word include:
117 suspects were put on trial in 1968, but most were acquitted or received light sentences.
For instance, when mafioso Indelicato Amedeo returned to Sicily following his initiation in the United States in the 1950s, he could not announce his membership to his own mafioso father, but had to wait for a mafioso from the United States who knew of his induction to come to Sicily and introduce the son to the father.
The Sicilian Mafia Commission sided with Di Pisa, to the open anger of the La Barberas.
The genesis of ''Cosa Nostra'' is hard to trace because mafiosi are very secretive and do not keep historical records of their own.
By 1928, more than 11,000 suspects were arrested.
If his replacement has a weaker reputation, clients may lose confidence in the clan and defect to its neighbours, causing a shift in the balance of power and possible conflict.
Mafiosi used their allies in government to avoid prosecution as well as persecute less well-connected rivals.
In the end, though, they couldn't stop the process, and many landowners chose to sell their land to mafiosi, who offered more money than the government.
Charges of Mafia association were typically leveled at poor peasants and gabellotti (farm leaseholders), but were avoided when dealing with major landowners.
The mistrust and fear of being cheated with no recourse might prevent these two agents from making a profitable transaction.
At the funeral of a policeman murdered by mafiosi in 1985, policemen insulted and spat at two attending politicians, and a fight broke out between them and military police.
Mussolini felt humiliated and outraged.
He is the boss' most trusted right-hand man and second-in-command.
Antonino Giuffrè is a close confidant of Provenzano who turned ''pentito'' shortly after his capture in 2002.
The Sicilian Mafia Commission was dissolved; it did not re-form until 1969.
In a 2007 publication, the Italian small-business association Confesercenti reported that about 25.2 percent of Sicilian businesses were indebted to loan sharks, who collected around €1.4 billion a year in payments.
Nevertheless, Giuffrè's declarations have not yet been confirmed.
An associate is considered by the mafiosi nothing more than a tool, someone that they can "use", or "nothing mixed with nil."
Mafia activity fell as clans disbanded and mafiosi went into hiding.
The report mentioned initiation rituals and codes of conduct, as well as criminal activities that included counterfeiting, kidnappings for ransom, murder, robbery, and witness intimidation.
For instance, a mafioso will not call the police when he is a victim of a crime.
Mafia bosses reformed their clans, absorbing some of the marauding bandits into their ranks.
It is a sect with little or no fear of public bodies, because its members believe that they can easily elude this."
Many non-mafiosi were killed in the crossfire.
Sicily's murder rate sharply declined.
For example, Francesco Marino Mannoia's mother, aunt, and sister were murdered.
preventing embezzlement).
The highly fragmented and shaky Italian political system allowed cliques of Mafia-friendly politicians to exert a lot of influence.
After Italy annexed Sicily in 1860, it redistributed a large share of public and church land to private citizens.
Sociologist Diego Gambetta points out that the Mafia, being a secretive criminal organization, cannot risk having its recruits sign application forms and written contracts which might be seized by the police.
This makes them more trusted by their clients, who need not fear their businesses being taken over.
Likewise, cattle are very easy to steal.
In 1943, nearly half a million Allied troops invaded Sicily.
Modern scholars believe that the seeds were planted in the upheaval of Sicily's transition out of feudalism beginning in 1812 and its later annexation by mainland Italy in 1860.
A protection racketeer cannot tolerate competition within his sphere of influence from another racketeer.
Construction companies unconnected with the Mafia were forced to pay protection money.
The primary activity of the Mafia is to provide protection and guarantee trust in areas of the Sicilian economy where the police and courts cannot be relied upon.
Mafiosi sometimes protect businessmen from competitors by threatening their competitors with violence.
In April 1963, several bystanders were wounded during a shootout in Palermo.
The early Mafia was heavily involved with citrus growers and cattle ranchers, as these industries were particularly vulnerable to thieves and vandals and thus badly needed protection.
A particularly influential mafioso can bring in thousands of votes for a candidate; such is the respect that a mafioso can command.
When he affirmed himself, Salvatore Riina, then the most powerful boss of ''Cosa Nostra'', took a needle and pricked Brusca's finger.
A clan is led by a "boss" (''capofamiglia'' or ''rappresentante'') who is aided by an underboss (''capo bastone'' or ''sotto capo'') and supervised by one or more advisers (''consigliere'').
Citrus plantations had a fragile production system that made them quite vulnerable to sabotage.
Mafiosi generally do not associate with police (aside perhaps from corrupting individual officers as necessary).
By 1982, the Sicilian Mafia controlled about 80 percent of the heroin trade in the northeastern United States.
The Mafia also maintained funds to support the families of imprisoned members and pay defense lawyers.
Following waves of emigration, the Mafia has spread to other countries such as the United States, Canada, and Australia.
Civilians who buy their protection or make other deals are expected to be discreet, on pain of death.
As Brusca juggled the burning image in his hands, Riina said to him: "If you betray Cosa Nostra, your flesh will burn like this saint."
In the end, the Corleonesi faction won and Riina effectively became the "boss of bosses" of the Sicilian Mafia.
The Sicilian Families had all been broken up."
In 1988, they murdered a Palermo judge and his son; three years later, a prosecutor and an anti-mafia businessman were also murdered.
* ''mu'afa'' = safety, protection
In June, six military officers and a policeman in Ciaculli were killed while trying to dispose of a car bomb.
Alternatively, the commission has the power to appoint a regent for the clan until it can elect a new boss.
There is no strict age limit; boys as young as sixteen have been initiated.
Most new bosses are not related to their predecessor.
Furthermore, the land in the east was generally divided into a smaller number of large estates so that there were fewer landowners, and their large estates often required its guardians to patrol it full-time.
He saw the Mafia as an "industry of violence" and described the designation of the term "mafia":
Brusca smeared his blood on the image of the saint, which he held in his cupped hands as Riina set it alight.
