The Nebrodi Mountains Regional Park, established on 4 August 1993 and covering , is the largest protected natural area of Sicily; and contains the largest forest in Sicily, the Caronia.
Sicily has a good variety of fauna.
A crusade was launched in August 1283 against Peter III and the Aragon Kingdom by Pope Martin IV (a pope from Île-de-France), but it failed.
Rosario Crocetta is the current President since 2012.
Many award-winning and acclaimed films of Italian cinema have been filmed in Sicily, amongst the most noted of which are: Visconti's ''"La Terra Trema"'' and ''"Il Gattopardo"'', Pietro Germi's ''"Divorzio all'Italiana''" and ''"Sedotta e Abbandonata''".
According to the Regional Agency for Waste and Water, on 10 August 1999, the weather station of Catenanuova (EN) recorded a maximum temperature of , which is the highest temperature ever recorded in Europe by the use of reliable instruments.
Ferdinand III the Bourbon was forced to retreat to Sicily which he was still in complete control of with the help of British naval protection.
The Muslim conquest of Sicily was a see-saw affair and met with much resistance.
The governance was by the rule of law, so there was justice.
From 28 September to 9 October 2005 Trapani was the location of Acts 8 and 9 of the Louis Vuitton Cup.
This attracted scholars, scientists, poets, artists, and artisans of all kinds.
This eventually led to the crown of Sicily being passed on to the Hohenstaufen Dynasty, who were Germans from Swabia.
Further migrations by the Vandals, Normans and Saracens have affected the ethnic composition of the Sicilian people.
Palermo was initially ruled by the Aghlabids; later it was the centre of Emirate of Sicily under the nominal suzerainty of the Fatimid Caliphate.
It is also home to important archaeological and ancient sites, such as the Necropolis of Pantalica, the Valley of the Temples, and Selinunte.
The touristic town of Erice is also an important science place thanks to the Ettore Majorana Foundation and Centre for Scientific Culture which
The main agricultural products are wheat, citrons, oranges ''(Arancia Rossa di Sicilia IGP)'', lemons, tomatoes ''(Pomodoro di Pachino IGP)'', olives, olive oil, artichokes, Opuntia ficus-indica ''(Fico d'India dell'Etna DOP)'', almonds, grapes, pistachios ''(Pistacchio di Bronte DOP)'' and wine.
There is also a notable small minority of Eastern-rite Byzantine Catholics which has a mixed congregation of ethnic Albanians; it is operated by the Italo-Albanian Catholic Church.
The most important colony was in Syracuse; others were located at Akragas, Selinunte, Gela, Himera and Zancle.
Many stories passed down from generation to generation involve a character named "Giufà".
*Sicels/Sicans/Elymians: Segesta, Eryx, Cava Ispica, Thapsos, Pantalica.
Both the partial Italian land reform and special funding from the Italian government's ''Cassa per il Mezzogiorno'' (Fund for the South) from 1950 to 1984 helped the Sicilian economy.
It currently stands  high, though this varies with summit eruptions; the mountain is  lower now than it was in 1981.
The Messina earthquake of 28 December 1908 killed more than 80,000 people.
At first Sicily was able to remain as an independent kingdom under personal union, while the Bourbons ruled over both from Naples.
However the use of Sicilian is limited to informal contexts (mostly in family) and in a majority of cases it is replaced by the so-called ''regional Italian of Sicily'', an Italian dialect that is a kind of mix between Italian and Sicilian.
The Mafia's origins are still uncertain, but it is generally accepted that it emerged in the 18th century initially in the role of private enforcers hired to protect the property of landowners and merchants from the groups of bandits (''briganti'') who frequently pillaged the countryside and towns.
File:Sicilian Landscape.jpg|Sicilian landscape
The '''Opera dei Pupi''' (Opera of the Puppets; Sicilian: Òpira dî pupi) is a marionette theatrical representation of Frankish romantic poems such as the Song of Roland or ''Orlando furioso'' that is one of the characteristic cultural traditions of Sicily.
Although Sicilian cuisine is commonly associated with sea food, meat dishes, including goose, lamb, goat, rabbit, and turkey, are also found in Sicily.
The history of prestige in this field can be traced back to Greek philosopher Archimedes, a Syracuse native who has gone on to become renowned as one of the greatest mathematicians of all time.
The three volcanoes of Vulcano, Vulcanello and Lipari are also currently active, although the latter is usually dormant.
The Phoenician settlements in the western part of the island predates the Greeks.
Nowadays it is in north-west Sicily, around Palermo and Trapani, that Norman Y-DNA is the most common, with 8 to 15% of the lineages belonging to haplogroup I.
The Athenian army and ships were destroyed, with most of the survivors being sold into slavery.
Spices used include saffron, nutmeg, clove, pepper, and cinnamon, which were introduced by the Arabs.
In terms of the church, it became completely Roman Catholic; previously, it had been more Eastern Christian under the Byzantines.
In 1894, organizations of workers and peasants known as the ''Fasci Siciliani'' protested against the bad social and economic conditions of the island, but they were suppressed in a few days.
The most popular sport on Sicily is football, which came to the fore in the late 19th century under the influence of the English.
As dhimmis, the native Eastern Orthodox Christians were allowed freedom of religion, but had to pay a tax, the jizya, and experienced some limitations to actively participate in public affairs.
Some of the oldest football clubs in all of Italy are from Sicily: the three most successful are Palermo, Messina, and Catania, who have all, at some point, played in the Serie A.
In the 1980s, the Mafia was deeply weakened by a second important campaign led by magistrates Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino.
Sicily is now governed by a center-left coalition between Democratic Party and the center-party Union of Christian and Centre Democrats.
This was a literary language in Sicily created under the auspices of Frederick II and his court of notaries, or ''Magna Curia'', which, headed by Giacomo da Lentini, also gave birth to the Sicilian School, widely inspired by troubadour literature.
Previously, in motorsport, Sicily held the prominent Targa Florio sports car race that took place in the Madonie Mountains, with the start-finish line in Cerda.
Important historical evidence has been discovered in the form of cave drawings by the Sicani, dated from the end of the Pleistocene epoch around 8000 BC.
The opera of the puppets and the Sicilian tradition of ''cantastorî'' (singers of tales) are rooted in the Provençal troubadour tradition in Sicily during the reign of Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, in the first half of the 13th century.
Laws were issued in the language of the community to whom they were addressed in Norman Sicily, still with heavy Arab influence.
Terracotta ceramics from the island are well known, the art of ceramics on Sicily goes back to the original ancient peoples named the Sicanians, it was then perfected during the period of Greek colonisation and is still prominent and distinct to this day.
By 826, Euphemius, the Byzantine commander in Sicily, had apparently killed his wife and forced a nun to marry him.
Cattle and sheep are raised.
At age twelve, he dismissed Innocent's deputy regent and took over the government; at fifteen he married Constance of Aragon, and began his reclamation of the imperial crown.
Amatori Catania have competed in the top Italian national rugby union league called National Championship of Excellence.
It is well known that the Mediterranean region went through a quite intricate prehistory, so much so that it is difficult to piece together the muddle of different peoples who have followed each other.
Sicilian religious festivals also include the ''presepe vivente'' (living nativity scene), which takes place at Christmas time.
Its linguistic and poetic heritage was later assimilated into the Florentine by Dante Alighieri, the father of modern Italian who, in his , claims that "In effect this vernacular seems to deserve a higher praise than the others, since all the poetry written by Italians can be called Sicilian".
Between 1990 and 2005, the unemployment rate fell from about 23% to 11%.
In the 1920s, the Fascist regime began a stronger military action against the Mafia, which was led by prefect Cesare Mori who was known as the "Iron Prefect" because of his iron-fisted campaigns.
Garibaldi's march was completed with the Siege of Gaeta, where the final Bourbons were expelled and Garibaldi announced his dictatorship in the name of Victor Emmanuel II of Kingdom of Sardinia.
A walled suburb, called the Al-Kasr (the palace), is the center of Palermo to this day, with the great Friday mosque on the site of the later Roman cathedral.
Sicily's famous scientists include also Stanislao Cannizzaro (chemist), Giovanni Battista Hodierna and Niccolò Cacciatore (astronomers).
Frequencies (in %) of Y-chromosome (n=236) and mtDNA (n=313) haplogroups
It took over a century for Byzantine Sicily to be conquered; Syracuse held out for a long time and Taormina fell in 902.
Emperor Michael II caught wind of the matter and ordered general Constantine to end the marriage and cut off Euphemius' head.
Syracuse gained Sparta and Corinth as allies and, as a result, the Athenian expedition was defeated.
The Baroque style in Sicily was largely confined to buildings erected by the church, and palazzi built as private residences for the Sicilian aristocracy.
It is the highest mountain in Italy south of the Alps.
Oral tradition plays a large role in Sicilian folklore.
Linguistically, the island became Latinised.
The Elymians, thought to be from the Aegean Sea, were the next tribe to join the Sicanians on Sicily.
The following year, he launched an assault from Sicily against the Lombard Duchy of Benevento, which then occupied most of southern Italy.
Fishing is another fundamental resource for Sicily.
Throughout this reign, revolts by Byzantine Sicilians continuously occurred, especially in the east, and parts of the island were re-occupied before being quashed.
Familiar as an ancient symbol of the region, the Triskelion is also featured on Greek coins of Syracuse, such as coins of Agathocles (317–289 BC).The symbol dates back to when Sicily was part of Magna Graecia, the colonial extension of Greece beyond the Aegean.
The wars continued until the peace of Caltabellotta in 1302, which saw Peter's son Frederick III recognised as king of the Isle of Sicily, while Charles II was recognised as the king of Naples by Pope Boniface VIII.
Sicily is a melting pot of a variety of different cultures and ethnicities, including the original Italic people, the Greeks, Romans, Byzantines, Saracens, Normans, Swabians, Aragonese, Lombards, Spaniards, French, and Albanians, each contributing to the island's culture and genetic makeup.
Other minor Italic groups who settled in Sicily were the Ausones (Aeolian Islands, Milazzo) and the Morgetes of Morgantina.
In general, the southern and southeast coast receives the least rainfall (less than ), and the northern and northeastern highlands the most (over ).
Furthermore, in Sicily high quality wines are also produced using non-native varietals like Syrah, Chardonnay and Merlot.
The politics of Sicily takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democracy, whereby the President of Regional Government is the head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system.
Here is a short list of the major archeological sites:
Even though it has never been formally disbanded, today the movement is no longer part of the politics of Sicily.
The Sicilian marionette theater Opera dei Pupi was proclaimed in 2001 and inscribed in 2008 in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists.
Rumors that the capital of the empire was to be moved to Syracuse probably cost Constans his life, as he was assassinated in 668.
The terrain of inland Sicily is mostly hilly and is intensively cultivated wherever possible.
His mother's will had asked Pope Innocent III to undertake the guardianship of her son.
As the power of the Byzantine Empire waned, Sicily was invaded by the Arab forces of Caliph Uthman in 652.
Mount Etna is widely regarded as a cultural symbol and icon of Sicily.
Before the invasion of the Normans, Sicily was predominantly Eastern Orthodox, of which few adherents still remain today.
Byzantine Emperor Constans II decided to move from the capital Constantinople to Syracuse in Sicily during 660.
Frederick was four when, at Palermo, he was crowned King of Sicily in 1198.
Palermo and Catania have a heated rivalry and compete in the Sicilian derby together: to date, Palermo is the only football team in Sicily to have played on the European stage, in the UEFA Cup.
In the ''Observatory of Palermo'' the astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi discovered the first and the largest asteroid to be identified Ceres (today considered a dwarf planet) on 1 January 1801; Catania has two observatories, one of which is situated on Mount Etna at 1,800 m.
The pope gladly accepted the role, as it allowed him to detach Sicily from the rest of The Holy Roman Empire, thus ending the specter of the Papal States being surrounded.
One can, however, admire the richest collection of marionettes at the Museo Internazionale delle Marionette Antonio Pasqualino and at the Museo Etnografico Siciliano Giuseppe Pitrè in Palermo.
Christianity first appeared in Sicily during the years following AD 200; between this time and AD 313, Constantine the Great finally lifted the prohibition on Christianity, but not before  a significant number of Sicilians had become martyrs, including Agatha, Christina, Lucy, and Euplius.
Normally these events are concluded with fireworks.
Every part of Sicily has its speciality (for example Cassata is typical of Palermo, even if available everywhere in Sicily, as is Granita, a Catania speciality).
Greece had begun to make peace with the Roman Republic in 262 BC, and the Romans sought to annex Sicily as their republic's first province.
On almost any average day, temperatures in Sicily may rise up to .
The Zingaro Natural Reserve is one of the best examples of unspoiled coastal wilderness in Sicily.
On the political side notable philosophers include Gaetano Mosca and Giovanni Gentile who wrote ''The Doctrine of Fascism''.
Sicily was the first part of Italy to be taken by general Belisarius, who was commissioned by Eastern Emperor Justinian I as part of an ambitious attempt to restore the whole Roman Empire, thereby uniting the Eastern and the Western halves.
However, Sicily continues to have a GDP per capita below the Italian average and more unemployment than the rest of Italy.
Plans for a bridge linking Sicily to the mainland have been discussed since 1865.
Christianity grew rapidly in Sicily over the next two centuries.
The most important traditional event in Sicily is the carnival.
To the east, it is separated from the Italian mainland by the Strait of Messina, about  wide in the north, and about  wide in the southern part.
It is located between the coast of Agrigento and the island of Pantelleria (which itself is a dormant volcano).
The ingredients are typically rich in taste while remaining affordable to the general public The savory dishes of Sicily are viewed to be healthy, using fresh vegetables and fruits, such as tomatoes, artichokes, olives (including olive oil), citrus, apricots, aubergines, onions, beans, raisins commonly coupled with seafood, freshly caught from the surrounding coastlines, including tuna, sea bream, sea bass, cuttlefish, swordfish, sardines, and others.
Most people still attend church weekly or at least for religious festivals, and many people get married in churches.
Noto provides one of the best examples of the Baroque architecture brought to Sicily.
Studies of genetic records reveal that peoples from various parts of the Mediterranean Basin mixed with the ancient inhabitants of Sicily, including Egyptians and Iberians.
In October 1347, in Messina, Sicily, the Black Death first arrived in Europe.
This increased the attraction of Sicily as a tourist destination.
The Sicels are thought to have originated in Liguria; they arrived from mainland Italy in 1200 BC and forced the Sicanians to move back across Sicily and settle in the middle of the island.
In 535, Emperor Justinian I made Sicily a Byzantine province and, for the second time in Sicilian history, the Greek language became a familiar sound throughout the island.
However, new Ostrogoth king Totila drove down the Italian peninsula, plundering and conquering Sicily in 550.
Subsequently, due to Muslim rebellions, Frederick II destroyed Arab presence in Sicily, between 1221 and 1226 he moved all the Muslims of Sicily to the city of Lucera in Apulia.
The capital of Sicily is Palermo.
Etna covers an area of  with a basal circumference of .
The local agriculture is also helped by the pleasant climate of the island.
The best known local varietal is Nero d'Avola, named for a small town not far from Syracuse; the best wines made with these grapes come from Noto, a famous old city close to Avola.
In preparation for the invasion, the Allies revitalised the Mafia to aid them.
As in most Italian regions, Christian Roman Catholicism is the most predominant religious denomination in Sicily, and the church still plays an important role in the lives of most people.
Agricultural items such as oranges, lemons, pistachio and sugarcane were brought to Sicily.
In the first century after the Italian Unification, Sicily had one of the most negative net migration rates among the regions of Italy because of the emigration of millions of people to other European countries, North America, South America and Australia.
In Northern Sicily, there are three important forests; near Mount Etna, in the Nebrodi Mountains and in the Bosco della Ficuzza's Natural Reserve near Palermo.
88% of the lines (1.209&nbsp;km) are single-track and only  are double-track serving the two main routes, Messina-Palermo (Tyrrhenian) and Messina-Catania-Syracuse (Ionian).
In the southeast lie the lower Hyblaean Mountains, .
In 70 BC, noted figure Cicero condemned the misgovernment of Verres in his oration ''In Verrem''.
It is characterized by the presence of the ''trinacria'' (triskelion) in its middle, the (winged) head of Medusa and three wheat ears.
The elder Roger was married to Adelaide, who ruled until her son came of age in 1112.
However, in 1849 the Bourbons retook the control of the island and dominated it until 1860.
This gradually dried the climate, leading to a decline in rainfall and the drying of rivers.
By around 750 BC, Sicily had three Phoenician and a dozen Greek colonies and, for the next 600 years, it was the site of the Sicilian Wars and the Punic Wars, which ended with the Roman Republic's destruction of Carthage at the battle of Carthage (c. 149 BC).
Conflict between the Hohenstaufen house and the Papacy led, in 1266, to Pope Innocent IV crowning the French prince Charles, count of Anjou and Provence, as the king of both Sicily and Naples.
The Normans finished their conquest in 1091, when they captured Noto, which was the last Arab stronghold.
From about 750 BC, the Greeks began to live in Sicily (Σικελία – ''Sikelia''), establishing many important settlements.
Ragusa is noted for its honey (''Miele Ibleo'') and chocolate (''Cioccolato di Modica IGP'') productions.
However, much of the Jewish community faded away when they were expelled from the island in 1492.
Roger died in 1101 and was succeeded by his son Roger II, who was the first King of Sicily.
The Sicilian economy (and the wider ''mezzogiorno'' economy) remained relatively underdeveloped  after the Italian Unification, in spite of the strong investments made by the Kingdom of Italy in terms of modern infrastructure, and this caused an unprecedented wave of emigration.
Deftly combining religion and folklore, it is a constructed mock 19th century Sicilian village, complete with a nativity scene, and has people of all ages dressed in the costumes of the period, some impersonating the Holy Family, and others working as artisans of their particular assigned trade.
The Norman Hauteville family, who were descendants of Vikings, came to appreciate and admire the rich and layered culture in which they now found themselves.
During the war, the Sicilians turned to Peter III of Aragon, son-in-law of the last Hohenstaufen king, for support after being rejected by the Pope.
Mount Etna is the largest active volcano in Europe and still casts black ash over the island with its ever present eruptions.
Traditionally, Sicily gives centre-right results during election.
The event was started in 1906 by Sicilian industrialist and automobile enthusiast Vincenzo Florio, and ran until it was cancelled due to safety concerns in 1977.
Sicily served a level of high importance for the Romans, as it acted as the empire's granary.
The tourist season peaks in the summer months, although people visit the island all year round.
Some scenes of famous Hollywood and Cinecittà films were shot in Sicily.
The island has a typical Mediterranean climate.
Today Sicily is investing a large amount of money on structures of the hospitality industry, in order to make tourism more competitive.
They failed, and Rome was even more unrelenting in its annihilation of the invaders this time; Roman consul M. Valerian told the Roman Senate in 210 BC that "no Carthaginian remains in Sicily".
Sicily is an important habitat for the survival of several species, an example being the subspecies of hooded crow ''Corvus cornix'' which is only found in Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica.
The Expedition of the Thousand led by Giuseppe Garibaldi captured Sicily in 1860, as part of the .
He also oversaw the restoration of ancient sites at Segesta, Selinunte, Siracusa and Taormina.
Today, there are only a few troupes that maintain the tradition.
Other noted players include Giuseppe Furino, Pietro Anastasi, Francesco Coco, Christian Riganò, and Roberto Galia.
The Emirate of Sicily began to fragment as intra-dynastic quarreling fractured the Muslim regime.
The earthquake in 1693 took an estimated 60,000 lives.
The Ostrogothic conquest of Sicily (and Italy as a whole) under Theodoric the Great began in 488.
The colours, instead, respectively represent the cities of Palermo and Corleone, at those times an agricultural city of renown.
The triskelion was revived, as a neoclassic – and non-Bourbon – emblem for the new Napoleonic Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, by Joachim Murat in 1808.
The Vandals had already invaded parts of Roman France, Spain, and Portugal, asserting themselves as an important power in Western Europe.
Although football is by far the most popular sport in Sicily, the island also has participants in other fields.
In Catania there is an underground railway service (metropolitana di Catania); in Palermo the national railway operator Trenitalia operates a commuter rail (Palermo metropolitan railway service), the Sicilian Capital is also served by 4 AMAT (Comunal Public Transport Operator)  tramlines; Messina is served by a tramline.
*Arabs: Palermo, Mazara del Vallo.
Today, mostly due to immigration to the island, there are also several religious minorities, such as Jehovah's Witnesses, Islam, Judaism, and Sikhism.
Mount Etna, the beaches, the archeological sites, and major cities such as Palermo, Catania, Syracuse and Ragusa are the favourite tourist destinations, but the old town of Taormina and the neighbouring seaside resort of Giardini Naxos draw visitors from all over the world, as do the Aeolian Islands, Erice, Cefalù, Agrigento, the Pelagie Islands and Capo d'Orlando.
A Muslim army was then sent to the island consisting of Arabs, Berbers, Spaniards of Al-Andalus (which was then an Islamic region), Cretans, and Persians.
Sicilian wood carver George Petralia states that horses were mostly used in the city and flat plains, while donkeys or mules were more often used in rough terrain for hauling heavy loads.
The suburb of al-Khalisa (modern Kalsa) contained the Sultan's palace, baths, a mosque, government offices, and a private prison.
The Arabs failed to make any permanent gains and returned to Syria after gathering some booty.
There are also a fair number of Evangelical Church members and practitioners who reside on the island.
Normans, Bretons, Anglo-Saxons, Swabians and especially mainland Italians have repopulated the island with a male contribution around 8% (Haplogroup I).
However, even at this early stage, provincial architects had begun to incorporate certain vernacular features of Sicily's older architecture.
Many Mediterranean cruise ships stop in Sicily, and many wine tourists also visit the island.
After a century, the Norman Hauteville dynasty died out; the last direct descendant and heir of Roger, Constance, married Emperor Henry VI.
The island was used as a base of power numerous times, being occupied by slave insurgents during the First and Second Servile Wars, and by Sextus Pompey during the Sicilian revolt.
There have also been some noted managers from the island, such as Carmelo Di Bella and Franco Scoglio.
In 1068, Roger was victorious at Misilmeri, but the most crucial battle was the siege of Palermo, which led to most of Sicily coming under Norman control in 1072.
Politics on the island was intertwined with that of Greece; Syracuse became desired by the Athenians who set out on the Sicilian Expedition during the Peloponnesian War.
The most prominent and by far the earliest of these was the Sicani, who were said by Thucydides to have arrived from the Iberian Peninsula (perhaps Catalonia).
Nowadays, Caltagirone is one of the most important centres in Sicily for the artistic production of ceramics and terra-cotta sculptures.
The Aeolian Islands in the Tyrrhenian Sea, to the northeast of mainland Sicily form a volcanic complex, and include Stromboli.
While the Austrians were concerned with the War of the Polish Succession, a Bourbon prince, Charles from Spain was able to conquer Sicily and Naples.
Although the language is extinct in Sicily, it has developed into what is now the Maltese language on the islands of Malta today.
During this time, there was also a minor Jewish presence.
Along the northern coast, the mountain ranges of Madonie, , Nebrodi, , and Peloritani, , are an extension of the mainland Apennines.
It is in this language that appeared the first sonnet, whose invention is attributed to Giacomo da Lentini himself.
There are petroleum, natural gas and asphalt fields in the Southeast (mostly near Ragusa) and massive deposits of halite in Central Sicily.
The Norman conquest of southern Italy led to the creation of the Kingdom of Sicily, which was subsequently ruled by the Hohenstaufen, the Capetian House of Anjou, Spain, the House of Habsburg, and then finally unified under the House of Bourbon with the Kingdom of Naples as the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
Recent discoveries of dolmens on the island (dating to the second half of the third millennium BC) seems to offer new insights into the culture of primitive Sicily.
Italy became a Republic in 1946 and, as part of the Constitution of Italy, Sicily was one of the five regions given special status as an autonomous region.
Major revolutionary movements occurred in 1820 and 1848 against the Bourbon government with Sicily seeking independence; the second of which, the 1848 revolution resulted in a short period of independence for Sicily.
First used by English nobles during the late 18th century, the ''tascu'' began being used in Sicily in the early 20th century as a driving cap, usually worn by car drivers.
In the 1970s there was a growth of the industrial sector through the creation of some factories.
embraces 123 schools from all over the world, covering all branches of science, offering courses, seminars, workshops and annual meetings.
