Since armies could not live off the land indefinitely, Napoleon Bonaparte always sought a quick end to any conflict by pitched battle.
Other examples include the Invasion of Banu Qurayza in February–March 627 and the Siege of Ta'if in January 630.
Sir John Meldrum put forward just such an argument to the Parliamentary Committee of Both Kingdoms, to justify his slighting of Gainsborough in Lincolnshire.
Planning and maintaining a siege is just as difficult as fending one off.
An attacker – aware of a prolonged siege's great cost in time, money, and lives – might offer generous terms to a defender who surrendered quickly.
Particular attention would be paid to defending entrances, with gates protected by drawbridges, portcullises, and barbicans.
Two of them embraced Islam, Yameen bin ‘Amr and Abu Sa‘d bin Wahab, and so they retained their personal wealth.
The stone and mud brick houses of Kot Diji were clustered behind massive stone flood dikes and defensive walls, for neighbouring communities quarrelled constantly about the control of prime agricultural land.
Towers were reformed into triangular bastions.
This resulted in the later construction of fortress works across Europe, such as the massive fortifications at Verdun.
The shells (''phao'') are made of cast iron, as large as a bowl and shaped like a ball.
Many stand to this day.
food, to cities under blockade, as with Charleston, South Carolina during the American Civil War.
Sieges of cities are widespread in the Syrian civil war.
By about 3500&nbsp;BC, hundreds of small farming villages dotted the Indus River floodplain.
In some instances, catapults or similar weapons were used to fling diseased animals over city walls in an early example of biological warfare.
The final line would be constructed only 30 to 60 meters from the fortress.
In 1972, the Easter offensive, the Siege of An Lộc Vietnam occurred.
This escalated to a chain of revenge killings, and enmity grew between Muslims and the Banu Qaynuqa, leading to the siege of their fortress.
This line would contain the mortars and would act as a staging area for attack parties once the walls were breached.
Many were bankrupted in the process of building them; others, such as Siena, spent so much money on fortifications that they were unable to maintain their armies properly, and so lost their wars anyway.
The Germans, through the use of huge artillery bombardments, flamethrowers, and infiltration tactics, were able to capture both Vaux and Douaumont, but were never able to take the city, and eventually lost most of their gains.
A Muslim killed a Jew in retaliation, and the Jews in turn killed the Muslim man.
Both were skilled in conducting sieges and defences themselves.
However, the Prussian and other German armies were delayed for months at the Siege of Metz and the Siege of Paris, due to the greatly increased firepower of the defending infantry, and the principle of detached or semi-detached forts with heavy-caliber artillery.
Once siege guns were developed, the techniques for assaulting a town or fortress became well known and ritualized.
Many of these settlements had fortifications and planned streets.
The inner circumvallation, , held in Vercingetorix's forces, while the outer contravallation kept relief from reaching them.
If they did not comply, the besieging army would surround the town with temporary fortifications to stop sallies from the stronghold or relief getting in.
Unlike the ancient Minoan civilization, the Mycenaean Greeks emphasized the need for fortifications alongside natural defences of mountainous terrain, such as the massive Cyclopean walls built at Mycenae and other adjacent Late Bronze Age (c. 1600–1100 BC) centers of central and southern Greece.
Great effort was expended to ensure a good water supply inside the city in case of siege.
The legionary armies of the Roman Republic and Empire are noted as being particularly skilled and determined in siege warfare.
A city that was allowed to surrender with minimal loss of life was much better off than a city that held out for a long time and was brutally butchered at the end.
The Siege of Sevastopol during the Crimean War and the Siege of Petersburg (1864&ndash;1865) during the American Civil War showed that modern citadels, when improved by improvised defences, could still resist an enemy for many months.
During the Renaissance and the early modern period, siege warfare continued to dominate the conduct of the European wars.
Police make use of trained negotiators, psychologists, and, if necessary, force, generally being able to rely on the support of their nation's armed forces if required.
During the process of circumvallation, the attacking force can be set upon by another force of enemies due to the lengthy amount of time required to starve a position.
If the forlorn hope stormed the breach successfully, the defenders could expect no mercy.
When the commander of the garrison Hermann Kusmanek finally surrendered, his troops were eating their horses and the first attempt of large-scale air supply had failed.
This derives from ''sedere'', Latin for "to sit".
These civilizations probably relied more on the defence of their outer borders or sea shores.
Two of his most impressive achievements in siegecraft took place in the Siege of Tyre and the Siege of the Sogdian Rock.
In the west, apart from the Battle of the Atlantic, the sieges were not on the same scale as those on the European Eastern front; however, there were several notable or critical sieges: the island of Malta, for which the population won the George Cross, Tobruk.
Though a single shell could have disastrous local effect, the guns were susceptible to air attack in addition to being slow to move.
At the same time, diseases, especially typhus, were a constant danger to the encamped armies outside the fortress, and often forced a premature retreat.
Later, the walls of Babylon, reinforced by towers, moats, and ditches, gained a similar reputation.
It has been speculated that this operation may have been responsible for the advent of the Black Death in Europe.
The reports from these cities and the streaming hordes of refugees not only reduced the morale of the inhabitants and garrison of the principal city, it also strained their resources.
In a panic, military strategy was completely rethought throughout the Italian states of the time, with a strong emphasis on the new fortifications that could withstand a modern siege.
An entire campaign, or longer, could be used in a single siege (for example, Ostend in 1601&ndash;04; La Rochelle in 1627&ndash;28).
Examples of their styles of fortifications are Arras (Vauban) and the no-longer-existent fortress of Bergen op Zoom (Van Coehoorn).
Moats and other water defences, whether natural or augmented, were also vital to defenders.
Vauban and Van Coehoorn refined besieging to a science with a methodical process that, if uninterrupted, would break even the strongest fortifications.
This technique is commonly called entrenchment.
The 1993 police siege on the Branch Davidian church in Waco, Texas, lasted 51 days, an atypically long police siege.
When the main objective of the campaign had been fulfilled, the Hittite army returned to Carchemish and the city fell after an eight-day siege.
During the Franco-Prussian War, the battlefield front-lines moved rapidly through France.
A '''siege''' is a military blockade of a city or fortress with the intent of conquering by attrition or assault.
Thus, these lines (known as saps) needed to be sharply jagged.
However, the cost of building such vast modern fortifications was incredibly high, and was often too much for individual cities to undertake.
During World War II, ''trace italienne'' fortresses could still present a formidable challenge, for example, in the last days of World War II, during the Battle in Berlin, that saw some of the heaviest urban fighting of the war, the Soviets did not attempt to storm the Spandau Citadel (built between 1559 and 1594), but chose to invest it and negotiate its surrender.
Ancient cities in the Middle East show archaeological evidence of having had fortified city walls.
However, the Chinese were not completely defenceless, and from AD 1234 until 1279, the Southern Song Chinese held out against the enormous barrage of Mongol attacks.
Even when in the end the New Model Army—a regular professional army—developed the original decision-compelling spirit permeated the whole organisation, as was seen when pitched against regular professional continental troops the Battle of the Dunes during the Interregnum.
Ladders could be used to escalade over the defences.
Along with the battles of Tanga, Sandfontein, Gallipoli, and Namakura, it would be one of Britain's numerous embarrassing colonial defeats of the war.
Although there are numerous ancient accounts of cities being sacked, few contain any clues to how this was achieved.
Arrowslits (also called arrow loops or loopholes), sally ports (airlock-like doors) for sallies, and deep water wells were also integral means of resisting siege at this time.
During the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s, Republika Srpska forces besieged Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Amongst the other booty he managed to capture, there were 50 armours, 50 helmets, and 340 swords.
Soon, what was once a formidable undertaking became easy.
The attackers would then build a length of trenches parallel to the defences (these are known as the "First parallel") and just out of range of the defending artillery.
Some settlements in the Indus Valley Civilization were also fortified.
The trenches connecting the various lines of the besiegers could not be built perpendicular to the walls of the fortress, as the defenders would have a clear line of fire along the whole trench.
In case of refusal, however, the inner lines would have to be stormed by the attacker and the attacking troops would be seen to be justified in sacking the city.
The Hittite siege of a rebellious Anatolian vassal in the 14th century BC ended when the queen mother came out of the city and begged for mercy on behalf of her people.
The Siege of Khe Sanh displays typical features of modern sieges, as the defender has greater capacity to withstand the siege, the attacker's main aim is to bottle operational forces or create a strategic distraction, rather than take the siege to a conclusion.
During the peak of the battle, ARVN had access to only one 105&nbsp;mm howitzer to provide close support, while the enemy attack was backed by an entire artillery division.
In 1453, the great walls of Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, were broken through in just six weeks by the 62 cannons of Mehmed II's army.
According to ''The Sealed Nectar'', the siege did not last long; the Banu Nadir Jews willingly offered to comply with the Muhammad's order and leave Madinah.
In Jûzjânî, there are several episodes in which the Mongols constructed hundreds of siege machines in order to surpass the number which the defending city possessed.
Experienced commanders on both sides in the English Civil War recommended the abandonment of garrisoned fortifications for two primary reasons.
They are sent flying towards the enemy camp from an eruptor (''mu phao''); and when they get there a sound like a thunder-clap is heard, and flashes of light appear.
Use of aircraft for siege running, bringing supplies to areas under siege, would nevertheless prove useful in many sieges to come.
Fortresses built in this style throughout the 16th century did not become fully obsolete until the 19th century, and were still in use throughout World War I (though modified for 20th-century warfare).
If the main objective of a campaign was not the conquest of a particular city, it could simply be passed by.
ARVN prevailed after over two months of continuous fighting.
The Chinese of the Song period also discovered the explosive potential of packing hollowed cannonball shells with gunpowder.
Usually, a citadel was a "mini fortress" within the larger fortress, sometimes designed as a reduit, but more often as a means of protecting the garrison from potential revolt in the city.
During the Vietnam War, the battles of Dien Bien Phu (1954) and Khe Sanh (1968) possessed siege-like characteristics.
The development of the armoured tank and improved infantry tactics at the end of World War I swung the pendulum back in favour of manoeuvre, and with the advent of Blitzkrieg in 1939, the end of traditional siege warfare was at hand.
The site for constructing the walls and the thickness of the walls in Beijing's Forbidden City were favoured by the Chinese Yongle Emperor (r. 1402–1424) because they were in pristine position to resist cannon volley and were built thick enough to withstand attacks from cannon fire.
Thus, 'old fashioned' walls – that is, high and, relatively, thin – were excellent targets, and, over time, easily demolished.
Most conquerors before him had found Tyre, a Phoenician island-city about 1&nbsp;km from the mainland, impregnable.
Food and water reserves were taxed by the sudden influx of refugees.
In France and Germany, the prolongation of a war meant continued employment for the soldiers, but in England, both sides were looking to end the war quickly.
During the Warring States era of ancient China, there is both textual and archaeological evidence of prolonged sieges and siege machinery used against the defenders of city walls.
At the end of the 17th century, two influential military engineers, the French Marshal Vauban and the Dutch military engineer Menno van Coehoorn, developed modern fortification to its pinnacle, refining siege warfare without fundamentally altering it: ditches would be dug; walls would be protected by glacis; and bastions would enfilade an attacker.
In some cases, long tunnels were constructed to carry water into the city.
The relatively rare attempts at forcing pitched battles (Gustavus Adolphus in 1630; the French against the Dutch in 1672 or 1688) were almost always expensive failures.
The Hittite campaign against the kingdom of Mitanni in the 14th century BC bypassed the fortified city of Carchemish.
In the European Middle Ages, virtually all large cities had city walls—Dubrovnik in Dalmatia is a well-preserved example—and more important cities had citadels, forts, or castles.
Much of this success in defense lay in the world's first use of gunpowder (i.e.
The Romans held the ground in between the two walls.
A sufficient supply of food and water was also important to defeat the simplest method of siege warfare: starvation.
The initial German advance into Belgium produced four major sieges: the Battle of Liège, the Battle of Namur, the Siege of Maubeuge, and the Siege of Antwerp.
Complex systems of underground tunnels were used for storage and communications in medieval cities like Tábor in Bohemia, similar to those used much later in Vietnam during the Vietnam War.
City walls and fortifications were essential for the defence of the first cities in the ancient Near East.
In Britain, if the siege involves perpetrators who are considered by the British Government to be terrorists, and if an assault is to take place, the civilian authorities hand command and control over to the military.
The importance of siege warfare in the ancient period should not be underestimated.
A besieging army must be prepared to repel both sorties from the besieged area and also any attack that may try to relieve the defenders.
Conditions did not improve greatly under Turkish imprisonment.
At Dien Bien Phu, the French were unable to use air power to overcome the siege and were defeated.
Unlike traditional military sieges, police sieges tend to last for hours or days, rather than weeks, months, or years.
Some popular tales existed on how the cunning heroes succeeded in their sieges.
The tribe eventually surrendered to Muhammad, who initially wanted to kill the members of Banu Qaynuqa, but ultimately yielded to Abdullah ibn Ubayy's insistence and agreed to expel the Qaynuqa.
However, few rulers paid any attention to his theories.
ARVN troops and U.S. advisers and air power successfully defeated communist forces.
For many years, defensive and offensive tactics were well balanced, leading to protracted and costly wars such as Europe had never known, involving more and more planning and government involvement.
As General Paul Vanuxem, a French veteran of the Indochina War, wrote in 1972 after visiting the liberated city of An Lộc: "An Lộc was the Verdun of Vietnam, where Vietnam received as in baptism the supreme consecration of her will."
ARVN had no tanks, the NVA communist forces had two armoured regiments.
More traditional sieges of fortifications took place in addition to trench sieges.
It made campaigns in these areas very hard to successfully conduct, considering even minor cities had to be captured by siege within the span of the campaigning season.
In ancient China, sieges of city walls (along with naval battles) were portrayed on bronze 'hu' vessels, like those found in Chengdu, Sichuan in 1965, which have been dated to the Warring States period (5th to 3rd centuries BC).
Italian engineers were in enormous demand throughout Europe, especially in war-torn areas such as the Netherlands, which became dotted by towns encircled in modern fortifications.
The first use was during the Invasion of Banu Qaynuqa.
The walls were  in length, and up to  in height.
The Siege of Plevna during the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78) proved that hastily constructed field defences could resist attacks prepared without proper resources, and were a portent of the trench warfare of World War I.
Fire was often used as a weapon when dealing with wooden fortifications.
During the English Civil War, anything which tended to prolong the struggle, or seemed like want of energy and avoidance of a decision, was bitterly resented by the men of both sides.
The best-known is the Trojan Horse of the Trojan War, and a similar story tells how the Canaanite city of Joppa was conquered by the Egyptians in the 15th century BC.
The airbridge methods which were developed and used extensively in the Burma Campaign for supplying the Chindits and other units, including those in sieges such as Imphal, as well as flying the Hump into China, allowed the western powers to develop airlift expertise, which would prove vital during the Cold War Berlin Blockade.
With the invention of gunpowder, cannon and mortars and howitzers (in modern times), the traditional methods of defence became less effective against a determined siege.
If sufficiently desperate as the siege progressed, defenders and civilians might have been reduced to eating anything vaguely edible – horses, family pets, the leather from shoes, and even each other.
Due to logistics, long-lasting sieges involving a minor force could seldom be maintained.
In the South-East Asian Theatre, there was the siege of Singapore, and in the Burma Campaign, sieges of Myitkyina, the Admin Box, Imphal, and  Kohima, which was the high-water mark for the Japanese advance into India.
The greatest advantage of cannons over other siege weapons was the ability to fire a heavier projectile, further, faster, and more often than previous weapons.
Cannons were first used in Song dynasty China during the early 13th century, but did not become significant weapons for another 150 years or so.
To end a siege more rapidly, various methods were developed in ancient and medieval times to counter fortifications, and a large variety of siege engines were developed for use by besieging armies.
During the Roman-Persian Wars, siege warfare was extensively being used by both sides.
As a result, he could defeat virtually any city or state, no matter how well defended.
He proposed that walls be "built in uneven lines, like the teeth of a saw."
Under the theories of Erich von Falkenhayn, it is more distinguishable as purely attrition with a coincidental presence of fortifications on the battlefield.
In addition to launching projectiles at the fortifications or defenders, it was also quite common to attempt to undermine the fortifications, causing them to collapse.
On the third day, he would use a black tent: no quarter would be given.
It was one of the few great victories obtained by either side during the war; 110,000 Austro-Hungarian prisoners were marched back to Russia.
All three would prove crushing German victories, at Liège and Namur against the Belgians, at Maubeuge against the French and at Antwerp against a combined Anglo-Belgian force.
The other major siege outside Europe during the First World War was in Mesopotamia, at the Siege of Kut.
The main differences between the two lay in the difference in terrain on which Vauban and Van Coehoorn constructed their defences: Vauban in the sometimes more hilly and mountainous terrain of France, Van Coehoorn in the flat and floodable lowlands of the Netherlands.
At the siege of Aleppo, Hulagu used twenty catapults against the Bab al-Iraq (Gate of Iraq) alone.
The German losses were not worth the potential capture of the city, and the French casualties were not worth holding the symbol of her defence.
The most important siege was the Siege of Leningrad, that lasted over 29 months, about half of the duration of the entire Second World War.
Another element of a fortress was the citadel.
Battering rams and siege hooks could also be used to force through gates or walls, while catapults, ballistae, trebuchets, mangonels, and onagers could be used to launch projectiles to break down a city's fortifications and kill its defenders.
This process is known as mining.
The balance was that, while siege warfare was extremely expensive and very slow, it was very successful&mdash;or, at least, more so than encounters in the field.
If this helps keep them safe from harm, this is considered to be a good thing, but there have been cases where hostages have tried to shield the captors during an assault or refused to cooperate with the authorities in bringing prosecutions.
Furthermore, the development of steamships availed greater speed to blockade runners, ships with the purpose of bringing cargo, e.g.
The densely populated areas of Northern Italy and the United Provinces (the Netherlands) were infamous for their high degree of fortification of cities.
The resistance of US forces was assisted by the PAVN and PLAF forces' decision to use the Khe Sanh siege as a strategic distraction to allow their mobile warfare offensive, the first Tet Offensive, to unfold securely.
In the 20th century, the significance of the classical siege declined.
The Chinese invention of the hand-held, trigger-mechanism crossbow during this period revolutionized warfare, giving greater emphasis to infantry and cavalry and less to traditional chariot warfare.
In the early 15th century, Italian architect Leon Battista Alberti wrote a treatise entitled ''De Re aedificatoria'', which theorized methods of building fortifications capable of withstanding the new guns.
At the second Siege of Przemyśl, the Austro-Hungarian garrison showed an excellent knowledge of siege warfare, not only waiting for relief, but sending sorties into Russian lines and employing an active defence that resulted in the capture of the Russian General Lavr Kornilov.
Until the invention of gunpowder-based weapons (and the resulting higher-velocity projectiles), the balance of power and logistics definitely favoured the defender.
The first, as for example proposed by the Royalist Sir Richard Willis to King Charles, was that by abandoning the garrisoning of all but the most strategic locations in one's own territory, far more troops would be available for the field armies, and it was the field armies which would decide the conflict.
The main fortifications were Fort Douaumont, Fort Vaux, and the fortified city of Verdun itself.
The siege of Leningrad resulted in the deaths of some one million of the city's inhabitants.
The besieged Gauls, facing starvation, eventually surrendered after their relief force met defeat against Caesar's auxiliary cavalry.
In 1346, the bodies of Mongol warriors of the Golden Horde who had died of plague were thrown over the walls of the besieged Crimean city of Kaffa (now Feodosiya).
On 15 April 1746, the day before the Battle of Culloden, at Dunrobin Castle, a party of William Sutherland's militia conducted the last siege fought on the mainland of Great Britain against Jacobite members of Clan MacLeod.
Modern sieges are more commonly the result of smaller hostage, militant, or extreme resisting arrest situations.
Sieges involve surrounding the target and blocking the reinforcement or escape of troops or provision of supplies (a tactic known as "investment"), typically coupled with attempts to reduce the fortifications by means of siege engines, artillery bombardment, mining (also known as sapping), or the use of deception or treachery to bypass defences.
Charles VIII invaded Italy with an army of 18,000 men and a horse-drawn siege-train.
It was a battle that, despite the French ability to fend off the Germans, neither side won.
The Battle of An Lộc pitted some 6,350 ARVN men against a force three times that size.
The disease-carrying fleas from the bodies would then infest the city, and the plague would spread, allowing the city to be easily captured, although this transmission mechanism was not known at the time.
If necessary, using the first artillery fire for cover, this process would be repeated until guns were close enough to be laid accurately to make a breach in the fortifications.
In particular, medieval fortifications became progressively stronger—for example, the advent of the concentric castle from the period of the Crusades—and more dangerous to attackers—witness the increasing use of machicolations and murder-holes, as well the preparation of hot or incendiary substances.
Van Coehoorn developed a small and easily movable mortar named the coehorn, variations of which were used in sieges until the 19th century.
The citadel was used in wartime and peacetime to keep the residents of the city in line.
Once within artillery range, another parallel (the Second Parallel) trench would be dug with gun emplacements.
It was thus usual to construct lines of trenches and defenses facing in both directions.
The Biblical Book of Joshua contains the story of the miraculous Battle of Jericho.
Initially, walls were lowered and backed, in front and behind, with earth.
Moreover, if an attacking army had a reputation of killing and pillaging regardless of a surrender, then other cities' defensive efforts would be redoubled.
While traditional sieges do still occur, they are not as common as they once were due to changes in modes of battle, principally the ease by which huge volumes of destructive power can be directed onto a static target.
One of the complications facing police in a siege involving hostages is Stockholm syndrome, where sometimes hostages can develop a sympathetic rapport with their captors.
In Shang Dynasty China, at the site of Ao, large walls were erected in the 15th century BC that had dimensions of  in width at the base and enclosed an area of some  squared.
The other argument was that by slighting potential strong points in one's own territory, an enemy expeditionary force, or local enemy rising, would find it more difficult to consolidate territorial gains against an inevitable counterattack.
Advances in firearms technology without the necessary advances in battlefield communications gradually led to the defence again gaining the ascendancy.
As a siege progressed, the surrounding army would build earthworks (a line of circumvallation) to completely encircle their target, preventing food, water, and other supplies from reaching the besieged city.
An attacker's army was poorly served, incurring the high casualties that a direct assault on a fortress would entail.
In the Napoleonic era, increasing use of ever more powerful cannon reduced the value of fortifications.
If all else failed, a besieger could claim the booty of his conquest undamaged, and retain his men and equipment intact, for the price of a well-placed bribe to a disgruntled gatekeeper.
The attacking army would surround a town.
The British attempts to resupply the force via the Tigris river failed, and rationing was complicated by the refusal of many Indian troops to eat cattle products.
In his ''Commentarii de Bello Gallico'' (''Commentaries on the Gallic War''), Caesar describes how, at the Battle of Alesia, the Roman legions created two huge fortified walls around the city.
Then the town would be asked to surrender.
On occasion, the defenders would drive 'surplus' civilians out to reduce the demands on stored food and water.
