In 1995 Defence Headquarters was established, and the Sierra Leone Air Wing formed.
They reinstated the constitution and returned power to Stevens, who at last assumed the office of Prime Minister.
Senior NPRC commander Lieutenant Sahr Sandy, a trusted ally of Strasser, was assassinated, allegedly by Major S.I.M.
The Sierra Leone Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation is responsible for foreign policy of Sierra Leone.
The vice-president is elected jointly with the president as his or her running mate.
The Military of Sierra Leone also has a Chief of the Defence Staff who is a uniformed military official responsible for the administration and the operational control of the Sierra Leone military.
Sierra Leone is a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US military (as covered under Article 98).
Sir Albert's leadership was briefly challenged by Sierra Leone's Foreign Minister John Karefa-Smart, who questioned Sir Albert's succession to the SLPP leadership position.
In 1978, the APC dominant parliament approved a new constitution making the country a one-party state.
Sierra Leone is also a member of the United Nations and its specialised agencies, the African Union, the African Development Bank (AFDB), the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), and the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
In 2007, a pay-per-view service was also introduced by GTV as part of a pan-African television service in addition to the nine-year-old sub-Saharan Digital satellite television service (DStv) originating from Multichoice Africa in South Africa.
He cancelled Juxon-Smith's construction of a church and mosque on the grounds of Victoria Park.
The vast majority of Sierra Leonean Muslims are adherent to the Sunni doctrine.
In November 1951, Margai oversaw the drafting of a new constitution, which united the separate Colonial and Protectorate legislatures and – most importantly – provided a framework for decolonisation.
The Settlers built Freetown in the styles they knew from their lives in the American South; they also continued American fashion and American manners.
The vast majority of Limba support the All People's Congress (APC) political party.
Some of Sierra Leonean international footballers include Mohamed Kallon, Mohamed Bangura, Rodney Strasser, Kei Kamara, Ibrahim Teteh Bangura, Mustapha Dumbuya, Christian Caulker, Alhassan Bangura, Sheriff Suma, Mohamed Kamara, Umaru Bangura and Julius Gibrilla Woobay
In 1799 some of the Settlers revolted.
Mining of diamonds in the east and other minerals expanded, drawing labourers there from other parts of the country.
The Sierra Leone National Premier League is the top professional football league in Sierra Leone and is controlled by the Sierra Leone Football Association.
Brigadier General Bangura, who had reinstated Stevens as Prime Minister, was widely considered the only person who could put the brakes on Stevens.
It became an affiliate member of the International Cricket Council in 2002.
In addition, many continued to practice Methodism in Freetown.
The majority of newspapers are privately run and are often critical of the government.
There is high unemployment, particularly among the youth and ex-combatants.
Some of the recaptives who were not sold as apprentices were forced to join the Navy.
In 1792 nearly 1200&nbsp;persons from Nova Scotia crossed the Atlantic to build the second (and only permanent) Colony of Sierra Leone and the settlement of Freetown on 11&nbsp;March 1792.
The climate changed considerably during that time, and boundaries among different ecological zones changed as well, affecting migration and conquest.
Sir Albert was opposed to the colonial legacy of allowing executive powers to the Paramount Chiefs, many of whom had been key allies of his late brother Sir Milton.
Descendants of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Fulani migrant settlers from the Fouta Djalon region of Guinea, they live primarily in the northeast and the western area of Sierra Leone.
These Liberated Africans or ''recaptives'' were sold for $20 a head as apprentices to the white settlers, Nova Scotian Settlers, and the Jamaican Maroons.
Sierra Leoneans have been described as "The World's Most Resilient People".
The fourth largest ethnic group are the Fula at around 7% of the population.
The Sierra Leone Police is headed by the Inspector General of Police, the professional head of the Sierra Leone Police force, who is appointed by the President of Sierra Leone.
At about the same time (following the abolition of the slave trade in 1807), British crews delivered thousands of formerly enslaved Africans to Freetown, after liberating them from illegal slave ships.
Aside from the human cost, the outbreak was severely eroding the economy.
In the 1970s and early 1980s, economic growth rate slowed because of a decline in the mining sector and increasing corruption among government officials.
Fourteen clubs from across the country compete in the Sierra Leone Premier League.
Elements of the British Army, together with administrators and politicians, remain in Sierra Leone to this day, helping train the armed forces, improve the infrastructure of the country and administer financial and material aid.
Sierra Leone Police was established by the British colony in 1894; it is one of the oldest police forces in West Africa.
This proxy war left more than 50,000 people dead, much of the country's infrastructure destroyed, and over two million people displaced as refugees in neighbouring countries.
Colonel Frederic Cardew, military governor of the Protectorate, in 1898 established a new tax on dwellings and demanded that the chiefs use their peoples to maintain roads.
As the Krio language is spoken by 90% of the country's population, it unites all the different ethnic groups, especially in their trade and interaction with each other.
Sierra Leone is home to about sixteen ethnic groups, each with its own language.
Krio culture reflects the Western culture and ideals within which many of their ancestors originated - they also had close ties with British officials and colonial administration during years of development.
Significant portions of Sierra Leonean Muslims are Ahmadi, non-denominational Muslims; and a small numbers of Shia Muslims.
The current members of Parliament of Sierra Leone were elected in the 2012 Sierra Leone parliamentary election.
President Kabbah took power with a great promise of ending the civil war.
The defeat of the Temne and Mende in the Hut Tax war ended large-scale organised resistance to the Protectorate and colonial government.
Tony Blair, the Prime Minister of Britain at the time of the British intervention, is regarded as a hero by the people of Sierra Leone, many of whom are keen for more British involvement.
Helicopters are also available from the airport to other major cities in the country.
The Mende predominate in South-Eastern Sierra Leone (with the exception of Kono District).
The British Crown reorganised the Sierra Leone Company as the African Institution; it was directed to improve the local economy.
Israel grants scholarships to Sierra Leone students as part of its international development cooperation program.
But the Islamic faith, introduced by Susu traders, merchants and migrants from the north and east, became widely adopted in the 18th century.
Sierra Leone developed as the educational centre of British West Africa.
However, oftentimes the documentations of the recaptives would be overwhelmingly subjective and would result in inaccurate entries on the recaptives and would make them difficult to track.
They predominate in the large towns, most notably Karina, in Bombali District in the north; Kabala and Falaba in Koinadugu District in the north; and Yengema, Kono District in the east of the country.
Sierra Leone current Finance Minister Kaifala Marah is an ethnic Kuranko.
The national capital Freetown sits on a coastal peninsula, situated next to the Sierra Leone Harbour, the world's third largest natural harbour.
The largest and most influential are the Temne at about 35%, and the Mende at about 31%.
The Sherbro are virtually all Christians, and their paramount chiefs had a history of intermarriage with British colonists and traders.
The Crown subdued the revolt by bringing in forces of more than 500&nbsp;Jamaican Maroon people, whom they transported from Trelawny Town via Nova Scotia in 1800.
Each of the country's fourteen districts is represented in parliament.
Football is by far the most popular sport in Sierra Leone.
Domestic slavery, which continued to be practised by local African elites, was abolished in 1928.
The service began broadcasting television in 1963, with coverage extended to all the districts in the country in 1978.
The NPRC Junta immediately suspended the constitution, banned all political parties, limited freedom of speech and freedom of the press and enacted a rule-by-decree policy, in which soldiers were granted unlimited powers of administrative detention without charge or trial, and challenges against such detentions in court were precluded.
Nearly 20,000 Liberian refugees voluntarily returned to Liberia over the course of 2007.
On 18 April 1968 a group of senior military officers in the Sierra Leone Army who called themself the Anti-Corruption Revolutionary Movement (ACRM), led by Brigadier General John Amadu Bangura, overthrew the NRC junta.
Former President Siaka Stevens' government had sought closer relations with other West African countries under the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) a policy continued by the current government.
The Spanish rendering of this geographic formation is ''Sierra Leona'', which later was adapted and, misspelled, became the country's current name.
Because of their trading, the Fulas are found in nearly all parts of the country.
Sierra Leone has the largest natural harbour on the African continent, allowing international shipping through the Queen Elizabeth II Quay in the Cline Town area of eastern Freetown or through Government Wharf in central Freetown.
The Vai are largely Muslim, while the Kru are largely Christian.
The Military of Sierra Leone, officially the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces (RSLAF), are the unified armed forces of Sierra Leone responsible for the territorial security of Sierra Leone's border and defending the national interests of Sierra Leone within the framework of its international obligations.
Mental healthcare in Sierra Leone is almost non-existent.
After the return to civilian rule, by-elections were held (beginning in autumn 1968) and an all-APC cabinet was appointed.
An accusation Seargent Musa denied.
He appointed government officials to represent various ethnic groups.
The Sierra Leone Civil War resulted in the destruction of 1,270 primary schools, and in 2001, 67% of all school-age children were out of school.
A small community of Orthodox Christians resides in the capital Freetown.
The UN mission were restructured in 2008 and it was decided that the UN Radio would be merged with SLBS to form the new Sierra Leone Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC).
These problems became so severe that the SLPP boycotted the 1973 general election; as a result the APC won 84 of the 85 elected seats.
On 23 March 1971, a group of soldiers loyal to the executed Brigadier Bangura held a mutiny in the capital Freetown and in some other parts of the country in opposition of Stevens' government.
Sierra Leone has a total area of  and a population of 7,075,641 (based on 2015 national census).
In the 2004 census, Waterloo had a population of 34,079.
There are 11,300 kilometres of highways in Sierra Leone, of which  are paved (about 8% of the roads).
On paper, 55 protected areas covered 4.5% of Sierra Leone as of 2003.
Charles Taylor – then leader of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia – reportedly helped form the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) under the command of former Sierra Leonean army corporal Foday Saybana Sankoh, an ethnic Temne from Tonkolili District in Northern Sierra Leone.
This left them traumatised, with an estimated 400,000 people (by 2009) being mentally ill. Thousands of former child soldiers have fallen into substance abuse as they try to blunt their memories.
The coast has areas of low-lying Guinean mangroves swamp.
There are a number of systems of transport in Sierra Leone, which has a road, air and water infrastructure, including a network of highways and several airports.
As a result of migration to cities, the population is becoming more urban with an estimated rate of urbanisation growth of 2.9% a year.
This is due to substandard safety standards.
Current NBA youngstar Victor Oladipo is of Sierra Leonean descent, as his father is a native of Sierra Leone.
There are several main internet service providers (ISPs) operating in the country.
The climate is tropical, with two seasons determining the agricultural cycle: the rainy season from May to November, and a dry season from December to May, which includes harmattan, when cool, dry winds blow in off the Sahara Desert and the night-time temperature can be as low as .
In the west, Sierra Leone has some  of Atlantic coastline, giving it both bountiful marine resources and attractive tourist potential.
The Inter-Religious Council of Sierra Leone, estimated that 77% of Sierra Leone's population are Muslims; 21% are Christians; and 2% are followers of traditional African religion.
The Mandika are predominantly found in the east and the northern part of the country.
Following the Berlin Conference of 1884-1885, the UK decided that it needed to establish more dominion over the inland areas, to satisfy what was described by the European powers as "effective occupation" of territories.
In 2007 there were 15 daily newspapers in the country, as well as those published weekly.
In 2001, UN forces moved into rebel-held areas and began to disarm rebel soldiers.
The judicial power of Sierra Leone is vested in the judiciary, headed by the Chief Justice and comprising the Sierra Leone Supreme Court, which is the highest court in the country and its ruling therefore cannot be appealed; the High Court of Justice; the Court of Appeal; the magistrate courts; and traditional courts in rural villages.
Bai Bureh was allowed to return in 1905, when he resumed his chieftaincy of Kasseh.
NBA superstars LeBron James, Kobe Bryant and Kevin Durant are popular among Sierra Leone's youthful population.
In Sierra Leone they were called the ''Nova Scotian Settlers'', the ''Nova Scotians'', or the ''Settlers''.
The other airports have unpaved runways, and seven have runways 914 to 1,523 metres long; the remaining two have shorter runways.
Between 1991 and 2001, about 50,000 people were killed in Sierra Leone's civil war.
According to a 2013 UNICEF report, 88% of women in Sierra Leone have undergone female genital mutilation.
Many of the national team footballers are celebrities across Sierra Leone and they are often well known by the general population.
This ended its 16&nbsp;years of running the Colony.
Koroma was re-elected president for a second (and final) term in November 2012.
The British were the catalyst for the ceasefire that ended the civil war.
It works to prevent crime, protect life and property, detect and prosecute offenders, maintain public order, ensure safety and security, and enhance access to justice.
Sierra Leone's third president Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, and Sierra Leone's first Vice-President Sorie Ibrahim Koroma were both ethnic Mandingo.
Sierra Leone has good relations with the West, including the United States, and has maintained historical ties with the United Kingdom and other former British colonies through membership in the Commonwealth of Nations.
The coup plot led to the execution of seventeen soldiers.
According to the ''World Refugee Survey 2008'', published by the US Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, Sierra Leone had a population of 8,700 refugees and asylum seekers at the end of 2007.
However, the British exceeded their original mandate, and took full military action to finally defeat the rebels and restore order.
The largest mosque in Sierra Leone is the Freetown Central Mosque, located in the capital Freetown.
The Sierra Leone national football team, popularly known as the Leone Stars, represents the country in international competitions.
Sargent Solomon Musa, a childhood friend of Strasser, became the deputy chairman and deputy leader of the NPRC junta government.
On 19 April 1971, when Sierra Leone became a republic, the Royal Sierra Leone Military Forces were renamed the Republic of Sierra Leone Military Force (RSLMF).
Margai used his conservative ideology to lead Sierra Leone without much strife.
In May 1962, Sierra Leone held its first general election as an Independent nation.
Upon Sir Milton's unexpected death in 1964, his half-brother, Sir Albert Margai, was appointed as Prime Minister by parliament.
The amount of illegal fishing has significantly depleted fish stocks, depriving local fishing communities of an important resource for survival.
The Limba are close political allies of the neighbouring Temne.
They built a flourishing trade in flowers and beads on the West African coast.
President Momoh's strong links with the army and his verbal attacks on corruption earned him much needed initial support among Sierra Leoneans.
In April 1971, a new republican constitution was adopted under which Stevens became President.
The Kissi live further inland in South-Eastern Sierra Leone.
The Islamic holidays of Eid al-Fitr, Eid al-Adha and Maulid-un-Nabi (Birthday of the Prophet Muhammad) are observed as national holidays in Sierra Leone; the Christian holidays of Christmas, Boxing Day, Good Friday and Easter are also national holidays in Sierra Leone.
In October 2000, a UN-approved certification system for exporting diamonds from the country was put in place and led to a dramatic increase in legal exports.
The situation has improved considerably since then with primary school enrolment doubling between 2001 and 2005 and the reconstruction of many schools since the end of the war.
Most of Sierra Leone's ethnic groups are Muslim majority, including the countrys's two largest ethnic groups, the Mende and Temne.
Other minority ethnic groups are the Kuranko, who are related to the Mandingo, and are largely Muslims.
The soldiers immediately released Koroma from prison and installed him as their chairman and Head of State.
Some of these policies by the SLPP and the NRC were said to have left the country in an economically deprived state.
This means that no airline registered in Sierra Leone may operate services of any kind within the European Union.
On 29 March 1970, Brigadier Bangura was executed by hanging in Freetown.
The Kru predominate in the Kroubay neighbourhood in the capital Freetown.
By the 1990s economic activity was declining and economic infrastructure had become seriously degraded.
Mining and slash and burn for land conversion – such as cattle grazing – dramatically diminished forested land in Sierra Leone since the 1980s.
Muslims and Christians collaborate and interact with each other peacefully.
The Sierra Leone Company, controlled by London investors, refused to allow the settlers to take freehold of the land.
It is hoped that a new dam in Orugu, for which China committed financing in 2009, will alleviate water scarcity.
The army was devoted to Bangura, and it was believed in some quarters that this made him potentially dangerous to Stevens.
Religious violence is very rare in the country.
The group set up the National Reformation Council (NRC), with Brigadier Andrew Juxon-Smith as its chairman and Head of State of the country.
Several soldiers were arrested for their involvement in the mutiny, including Corporal Foday Sankoh who was convicted and jailed for seven years at Freetown's Pademba Road Prison.
Hundreds of thousands of people were forced from their homes and many became refugees in Guinea and Liberia.
The third-largest ethnic group are the Limba at about 8% of the population.
Following the Revolution, more than 3,000 Black Loyalists had also been settled in Nova Scotia, where they were finally granted land.
Sir Albert resorted to increasingly authoritarian actions in response to protests and enacted several laws against the opposition All People's Congress (APC), whilst attempting to establish a one-party state.
By the end of 2014 there were nearly 3000 deaths and 10 thousand cases of the disease in Sierra Leone.
About 400 blacks and 60 whites reached Sierra Leone on 15&nbsp;May 1787.
Before Sierra Leone gained independence in 1961, the military was known as the Royal Sierra Leone Military Force.
After a trial that lasted a few months, Bangura was convicted and sentenced to death.
He was later unfairly portrayed as a prime instigator of the Hut Tax war in 1898.
Sierra Leone has relied on mining, especially diamonds, for its economic base.
Stevens is generally criticised for dictatorial methods and government corruption, but on a positive note, he kept the country stable and from going into civil war.
The Criminal Libel Law, including Seditious Libel Law of 1965, is used to control what is published in the media.
Stations mainly consist of local commercial stations with a limited broadcast range, combined with a few stations with national coverage – Capital Radio Sierra Leone being the largest of the commercial stations.
The leader of the main opposition All People's Congress (APC), Siaka Stevens, along with Isaac Wallace-Johnson, another outspoken critic of the SLPP government, were arrested and placed under house arrest in Freetown, along with sixteen others charged with disrupting the independence celebration.
Sierra Leone's current Vice-President Alhaji Samuel Sam-Sumana is an ethnic Kono.
The Dutch and French also set up trade here, and each nation used Sierra Leone as a trading point for slaves brought by African traders from interior areas.
The country's population is mostly young, with an estimated 41.7% under 15, and rural, with an estimated 62% of people living outside the cities.
For more than a century, it was the only European-style university in western Sub-Saharan Africa.
In March 1976, Stevens was elected without opposition for a second five-year term as president.
Though some people happily embraced these changes because they considered it as being part of the community, some were not happy with these changes and wanted to keep their own identity.
Strasser replaced Musa as deputy NPRC chairman with Captain Julius Maada Bio, who was instantly promoted by Strasser to Brigadier.
Many senior officers in the Sierra Leone Army were greatly disappointed with Stevens' policies; but none could confront Stevens.
The populations quoted above for the five largest cities are from the 2004 census.
Most of the Islamic madrassa schools of thought across Sierra Leone are based within Sunni Islam.
The president appoints and heads a cabinet of ministers, which must be approved by the Parliament.
Print media is not widely read in Sierra Leone, especially outside Freetown and other major cities, partially due to the low levels of literacy in the country.
Strasser became the world's youngest Head of State when he seized power just three days after his 25th birthday.
Stevens had campaigned on a platform of bringing the tribes together under socialist principles.
The Colony was Freetown and its coastal area; the Protectorate was defined as inland areas dominated by tribal chiefs.
Soon after Sintra's expedition, Portuguese traders arrived at the harbour.
The president of Sierra Leone is the Commander in Chief of the military, with the Minister of Defence responsible for defence policy and the formulation of the armed forces.
The Operation was successful with Indian and British Special Forces being the main contingents.
During the Civil War (1991–2002), many soldiers took part in atrocities and many children were forced to fight.
Compared to the 2000 survey access has increased in urban areas, but has declined in rural areas, possibly because facilities have broken down because of a lack of maintenance.
They have no tradition of origin, and it is believed that they have lived in Sierra Leone since before the European encounter.
Outside the capital Freetown and other major cities, television is not watched by a great many people, although Bo, Kenema and Makeni are served by their own relays of the main SLBC service.
According to an Overseas Development Institute report, private health expenditure accounts for 85.7% of total spending on health.
Sir Milton was very popular among Sierra Leoneans during his time in power.
The first of the 6,000-member force began arriving in December, and the UN Security Council voted in February 2000 to increase the force to 11,000, and later to 13,000.
On 27 April 1961, Sir Milton Margai led Sierra Leone to independence from Great Britain and became the country's first Prime Minister.
By 1495 they had built a fortified trading post.
Njala University was established as the Njala Agricultural Experimental Station in 1910 and became a university in 2005.
He based the government on the rule of law and the separation of powers, with multiparty political institutions and fairly viable representative structures.
The Mende are also Muslim majority, though with a large Christian minority.
Koroma was sworn in as President for his second and final term by Chief Justice Umu Hawa Tejan Jalloh at State House in Freetown; the same day he was declared the winner of the election.
He removed the SLPP party from competitive politics in general elections, some believed, through the use of violence and intimidation.
In politics, the vast majority of Sierra Leoneans support candidates regardless of their religion.
