The igneous series are made up of formations of plutonic and volcanic rock, which would later be exposed.
The surface of the plateau is made up of a second series of volcanic ignimbrites, covered mostly by clay rich organic soils.
The Permian clastics contain some detrital rock that sit alongside low-grade metamorphosed sedimentary and volcanic rocks with serpentinite.
As sites opened for mining, missionaries came to the areas and had a strong presence by 1595.
The southern extent of the Sonoran mountain kingsnake's range is the Chihuahuan desert into the mountains.
The mountains act as a source of water, in an otherwise arid environment from the increased precipitation from the mountain range.
Rivers cut valleys into the plateau, following folds in the rocks.
Many settlements consist of single families or small family groups near agricultural fields.
This revolt began in 1616 in the town of Santa Catarina de Tepehuanes in Durango and lasted for two years.
Along the more arid eastern slopes of the mountains, the Nazas River and Aguanaval River drain the mountains into a closed basin.
Around five or six units have been identified, mostly around the Copper Canyon area.
These mountains are generally considered to be part of the much larger American cordillera, the mountains extending from Alaska down to these across Western North America.
In order to construct irrigation projects in the lowlands below the valleys, irrigation projects were never completed in the Sonoran hills; instead, the Yaqui River was dammed in the 1930s.
The mountains cause convection during the following monsoon season, during which nocturnal winds at low levels in the atmosphere move moisture overnight.
Many of these are thought to be hydrothermal deposits To the east of these units is a belt of more mercury deposits, followed by another belt of manganese deposits, although these deposits are mostly limited to Chihuahua and Hidalgo.
On the other hand, mountain lion and bobcat are more common.
Railroads came to the area starting in the 1880s and 1890s, which allowed many old mines in the region to reopen at a profit.
The 1910 revolution began in Chihuahua and spread over the mountains throughout the winter of 1910–1911.
Some intrusions in the area have deposited ore veins that are commercially viable.
The need for water to irrigate prompted the construction of dams, which has been the source of several environmental concerns in  the area.
The surface of the plateau is almost exclusively from the second series of flows causing the rock that is most visible to be ignimbrites with lava flow layers.
As such, rivers that have headwaters in the mountains provide water for irrigation in the surrounding lands.
The Jesuits renewed missionary activity in the 1630s, with a new program that increased in scope until around 1650.
Native ungulates include the white tailed deer, mule deer, and collared peccary.
This forest and canyon land provided a place for a variety of indigenous people to live, until Spanish settlers with associated Mestizos came into the area to found towns for the silver mines in the area.
There are many carnivorous and omnivorous mammals native to the area, although several are extirpated or are part of threatened populations.
Each period is marked by different volcanic processes.
Acidic soils may have lower calcium content, leading to lower plant soil quality.
The tuffs are above a thick formation of lava rock.
Mesozoic limestone also occurs in northern portion of the mountains, mostly from the Cretaceous.
A possible cause of this is that these bodies were roof pendants which were uplifted by plutons.
Fissure-vein deposits have been divided into two groups of fissure vein deposits, which are divided geographically into an eastern and western series.
In the northern canyons birds may be divided into different habitats, or more specifically, the different types of forest, leading to differences in range by altitude.
The migratory birds often use the area to the west as an overwintering area, and migrate north along the western slopes.
The area between this boundary and the Aguascalientes fault is filled with numerous grabens and half-grabens, as well an east west left shear zone, the El Roble shear zone.
Typically these deposits are divided from overlying ignimbrites by breccia, which may also contain ore.
Oak forests are the predominant plant life and extend into the low land deserts.
In the Western slopes of the range, cloud forest also occurs, mostly on mid-elevation slopes with little exposure to wind or sun in the southern end of the range.
There are also grasslands on some mountain tops, surrounded by the forest that occur in those areas.
Along the Pacific there the numerous skarn and replacement deposits mentioned above with relation to gold.
Seasonal variation in humidity is also present with average May and June relative humidity around 50%, with 25% possible during the day.
The railroad went up for sale in 1996, but no transaction was ever completed.
It contains a lower formation made up of pillow basalts with pillow breccias, tuffs, and shales underlying a group of pelagic limestones, oozes, and turbidites.
During the period estimated for Mogollon abandonment, the Rio Sonora culture began agricultural developments along the Rio Sonora and rivers flowing into it.
In 1767, Jesuits were expelled from New Spain, ending the mission program.
The exact elevations of the highest peaks are not known within accurate enough ranges to determine the relative elevation of peaks.
Cerro Gordo, at , may have an elevation between  and .
The first meeting with the Tarahumara came in 1607, when a missionary went up the valley to meet them.
The lava has formed a series of mafic rock that form the Southern Cordilleran Basaltic Andesite Suite.
Subranges of this area include the Sierra de Alica and the Sierra Pajaritos both in Nayarit.
Gold and silver deposits most commonly occur in the altered andesites of the early volcanics, typically these deposits are between 30 and 50 million years old.
Canyons cut by the rivers of the wet western slopes exist in addition to those of the northeast slopes, notably the Copper Canyon.
The range extends from northern Sonora state near the Mexico-U.S. border at Arizona, southeastwards to the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt and Sierra Madre del Sur ranges.
Some theorize that this is a section of the Mojave–Sonora Megashear, but this theory is not universally accepted; however, the Megashear is important, and, in fact, is necessary for reconstructions of the opening of the Gulf of California, as of 2003.
The Sierra Madre Occidental is a high plateau of volcanic rock that is eroded in areas to reveal a basement composed of plutonic and sedimentary rocks underlying the two groups of extrusive volcanics.
Basaseachic Falls National Park is a national park in the mountains containing the highest waterfalls in the country.
This has led to the former drainage lakes in the area drying up, and soil depletion from the elimination of the river as a source of soil.
Dams were also constructed on the Mayo river.
The Río Grande de Santiago drains 100000&nbsp;km2 from the southern slopes of the Sierra Madre.
Rodents and lagomorphs include the eastern cottontail, which lives in the forests of the western slopes, cliff chipmunk, rock squirrel, Mexican fox squirrel, and various species of Cricetidae.
Bird species endemic to the Sierra Madre Occidental include tufted jay, the "gray-eared" subspecies of red warbler, eared quetzal, thick-billed parrot, and formerly included the imperial woodpecker, which now may be extinct.
During the Miocene, three periods of volcanism marked separate events in the Sierras.
Monsoon season is the largest of these effects, with leaf buds following only a few months after the rains begin.
Most of the gold and silver deposits are also in these rocks.
Problems with soil degradation have been aggravated by the cultivation of drug crops, leading to deforestation of many areas.
The climate varies considerably between the northern and southern extents of this long mountain range.
The northern extent of the Sierra Madre is the Cortés Terrane, although the northern extreme of this contains a small portion of the Carborca Terrane.
General John Pershing began to follow Pancho Villa in 1916 and entered the mountains, however, he received no information from the local population.
In addition, 1000 people live in the village of Huajimic in Nayarit.
The mountains range from  from the Gulf of California in the north, but begin to approach within  of the Pacific in the south.
Due to the early flowering, fruit is ripe and seeds are dispersed at the beginning of the rains.
Many species of bats live in the mountains also.
Dividing the Guerrero Terrane from the rest of the Sierra Madre terranes is a boundary that is thought to represent the Early Cretaceous Arperos Basin, a marine basin which separated the island arc that came to form the Guerrero terrane from the accretions that came to form the Sierra Madre terrane.
The Río Grande de Santiago has also been dammed including the Aguamilpa dam begun in 1991 and the El Cajón Dam (Mexico) upstream from it.
Precipitation varies on both annual and seasonal scales in the Sierra Madre.
The Bolaños River valley of Jalisco is populated with mining communities, such as San Martín de Bolaños, which has a population of around 3000.
Few paved roads cross the mountains, meaning that travel times can be long, even between cities that are relatively close.
Raccoons, hog-nosed skunk, and hooded skunk live in the mountains.
Some also occur as epithermal deposits.
Dams continued to be constructed in the 1940s and 1950s on the Yaqui River and its tributaries with the largest reservoir, behind the Oviachic dam, completed in 1952.
Three of these calderas are in Copper Canyon.
A smallpox epidemic caused a revolt in 1645.
By 1919 the raids subsided and Villa returned peacefully to the foothills.
The more southern one is the north–south Aguascalientes fault extending  from Altos de Jalisco to near Zacatecas, where it joins the more northern northwest–southeast trending San Luis–Tepehuanes fault extending from Guanajuato to Durango.
These tuffs have allowed wide ranging correlation with formations in other geographical areas, for example Death Valley.
Sites date the emergence of the culture to around 900 AD and abandonment to around 1000–1100 AD.
The major industries in the area now are agriculture and forestry, which have become contentious because of land degradation and the native population's opposition to these practices.
Air pressure changes in Northwestern Mexico and the Southwest United States are the main causes of seasonal variation in the Sierra Madre.
The Sierra Madre is part of the American Cordillera, a chain of mountain ranges (cordillera) that consists of an almost continuous sequence of mountain ranges that form the western "backbone" of North America, Central America, South America and Antarctica.
This plateau is formed from volcanic rock overlying a basement of metamorphic rock.
By 1800, raiding had essentially ended.
Grabens have formed in the north, and some of these are filled with volcanic and sedimentary floors, and long depressions have formed in the southern Sierra Madre.
This name comes from the Tarahumara natives.
In the north there is an unknown boundary between the Cortes Terrane and the Guerrero Composite Terrane.
Other problems include overgrazing, which has led to terracing from cattle paths and the formation of a soil crust, and soil acidification, which poses a risk to some grasslands as of 2002.
In the Oligocene, ash flows became the predominant deposit of the area, with interbedded lava flows between.
The mountains create a diverse setting for plants and animals by creating a different set of conditions from the surroundings.
The Yaqui drains into the Gulf of California as do the Humaya River in Sinaloa and the Fuerte River further south.
Humidity in the mountains varies at wide levels as does rainfall.
Faults in the area tend to be younger than the upper volcanics, excluding those associated with calderas, but do occur in distinct periods.
This may be a distinct second occurrence of the same process, placing silica-rich lava above Oligocene rocks.
This region undergoes a seasonal variety with two wet seasons, including a summer monsoon, and two dry seasons each year.
Numerous small populations live in Copper Canyon, some of them around old missions.
There are two faults dividing the Sierra Madre from the central Mexican Plateau.
Mean annual temperatures are between  above .
Preservation efforts in the modern day, include those from Edwin Bustillos.
The last major revolt began in March 1690 among the Tarahumara and ended in 1698.
These ash flows began the second series of high magmatism formations.
The mountains are made up at the surface of large scale ignimbrite sheet which have been incised by rivers flowing from rainfall in the mountains.
Also during the day, relative humidity drops and cloud levels rise as temperatures rise.
Most soil in the mountains is covered by an organic rich layer over layers rich in clay.
A drought caused a pair of revolutions in 1650 and 1652.
Other snakes and frogs live in the mountains, and many species live in the western slopes.
To provide irrigation water for farming the dry basin, the Nazas river was dammed in the 1930s and 40s.
On the western side of the mountains, which are affected by the largest change in precipitation between the dry season and monsoon season, in the monsoon season rainfall can exceed  in a single month.
This water-source forms watersheds that provide the arid surroundings with water that makes it possible to irrigate and farm crops.
This culture produced pottery and lived in pit houses, until 1150 to 1200 when they began to construct surface dwellings.
In the mountains the La Entrada al Pacifico Corridor is an incomplete road intended to connect Los Mochis, Sinaloa and Chihuahua.
The Mexican wolf's range in the mountains is limited to the foothills of Durango or may have been extirpated the black bear population is small, and the Mexican grizzly bear that once resided here is confirmed extinct.
At the west end of these grabens and half-grabens are the Pochotitan and the more northerly San Pedro fault systems, which form the western boundary of the faults in the southern mountains.
Birds frequent the mountains, some as a migratory path and others as native species.
This uplift has caused changes in weather patterns; increased rainfall occurring in the mountains has provided areas where ecosystems can form in wetter areas than surrounding land.
The Sierras are believed to be a thick core covered by volcanics and eroded by numerous rivers.
Rock have been broken off of the slopes, forming rocky sides.
The main subterranes of the Guerrero Composite Terrane that are within the Sierra Madre are the Tahue and Zihuatanejo terranes.
Because of the dams, soil conditions fell, and more works were required to improve soil quality.
This rise in humidity accompanies the monsoon.
The Sierra Tarahumara or Tarahumara range is the name for the region of the Sierra Madre beginning at the Durango border and extending north.
After leaving San Carlos in fall of 1881 Geronimo and other Apache moved to the mountains, and became known as the ''Nednai'', sometimes referred to as the "Pinery Apache" or "Bronco Apache".
In 1648 a revolt arose, primarily among the Tarahumara.
In these areas, tin occurs in rhyolitic ignimbrites in many, possibly over 1000, small deposits of cassiterite.
Construction of these houses ended around AD1550.
In the early morning before dawn, the air is almost saturated (often over 90% relative humidity) near the mountain tops with low clouds over the range.
In the east, the gold and silver are accompanied by lead and zinc.
Episodes of volcanism continued into the Quaternary.
The southern part of the range contains none of the volcanism that is apparent in the northern range.
As the high pressure over New Mexico breaks down, rainfall in the Sierra Madre ends.
In the dry season dew points are low at high elevations (500 hPa), around −22&nbsp;°C in the south of the range and −24&nbsp;°C to −26&nbsp;°C in the north in May.
The highest elevations occur in the Tarahumara range.
The faulting decreases in the center of the range where the faults are mostly small normal faults, but increases once again on the western slope.
The Sierra Madre Occidental pine-oak forests are found at elevations of  throughout the range, but the forests in the mountains vary by elevation and place in the range.
South of the Cortes and Carborca Terranes is the San José de García Terrane, which is a combination of Cretaceous arc volcanics and volcaniclastics, which may be thrusting over the Cortes terrane.
The range allows higher dew points throughout these periods than the surrounding low lands.
Tarahumara moved further into the mountains in order to escape the conditions.
Plants in the area typically have large responses to the change in climate with each season.
The large faults along the eastern slope have caused the slope to be made up of large escarpments that face into the interior basins.
This culture began to decline in the ninth century.
The southern region receives more of the rainfall than the northern.
A new colonial official José de Gálvez came to New Spain and established new laws that caused a boom in silver mining activity in the 1770s.
The discovery of silver at Parral in 1631 led to the northern limit of settlement moving into Tarahumara lands.
These populations may be native, although this is not universally accepted.
Durango and Mazatlan are connected by highway 40, around 24 degrees north latitude.
After the high pressure breaks down, wind patterns return to those prior to the monsoon season.
Flowering season occurs in the months preceding the summer monsoon.
Iron occurs in Durango in the form of magnetite lava flows, which are often surrounded by smaller hematite deposits, thought to be ash flows.
The elevation and latitude in the range are the major determining factors in the dominant plants.
This high pressure belt is associated with the mechanics that form the Bermuda High.
This plateau has an average elevation of  with most of the more eroded canyons on the western slope, due to the higher moisture content.
Some of the northern end may also be underlain by a Precambrian basement placed around the same time as the Grenville Orogeny.
The climate in the mountains is mild.
The first was a continuation of the Oligocene flare-up, which lasted through the early Miocene.
In the south, the Bolaños mine district is contained with the Bolaños Graben.
After the Apache faced heightened resistance to raiding from the Spanish in Chihuahuan, they moved down to the Sierra Madre in 1794.
The thickness of soil layers also increases.
Also, some gold occurs along with copper in Cenozoic iron-oxide skarn and replacement deposits along the Pacific.
Loggers began arriving in the mountains in the late 1800s.
In 1554 Francisco de Ibarra came to Durango and began to settle the area.
Some oak species even continue into the surrounding ecosystems.
Additionally there are reserves such as La Michilia in the southern Sierra Madre, or the Tutuaca reserve in western Chihuahua, which was established in 2000 under a new system of management.
However, these canal projects failed due to the resistance that the natives of the valleys put up against the projects.
Geronimo eventually surrendered in 1886.
In May there is very little large scale wind current through the mountains, most circulates around the mountains, although onshore flow is present.
The high pressure begins to breakdown and move south during September or October; however, the breakdown is usually at a slower pace than the movement north.
Beginning in the early Miocene and continuing into the middle, an arc of andesite was placed during the spreading of the Gulf of California.
Invasive fish compete with the native species which has been a cause of concern among researchers, along with concerns about the effects of logging on these species.
The humidity of the range is also influenced by the same seasonal changes as rainfall.
Estimates for the height of the mountain start around  and go up to .
Silver mines were forced to make payments to the rebels, but were allowed to continue operating.
In fact, the major normal faults tend to diverge around the center of the core and join at either end.
This is only the peak flowering season, with plants flowering throughout the year.
This is a dramatic landscape of steep mountains formed by a high plateau that has been cut through with canyons including Copper Canyon, larger and, in places, deeper than the Grand Canyon.
Some of these faults may have allowed ignimbrites to erupt from the surface, and so there may be some association between the ignimbrite occurrence and faults; this can be used to find out information about different kinds of basement rock present.
In the center of the range, some of these rock have been deformed by tectonic forcing that occurred at the same time.
Also in the early Miocene more intermediate Basaltic andesites occur along faults and in grabens.
Lower in the range, air is not as near saturated in the morning.
Demands from labor drafts increased in the 1720s, placing a new pressure on missions.
The ignimbrite formations in this area cover the largest area of any known series, with ten calderas identified in the province.
Since 1979 there has also been a national park in the transition between the Chihuahuan Desert and the Sierra, the Cumbres de Majalca National Park.
Some have suggested that the basement of the mountains have numerous intrusions made by mafic magma.
This causes east winds bringing moisture from the Gulf of Mexico.
Eocene volcanism formed a series of andesitic and rhyolitic formations in the area, with spatial and temporal variations throughout.
The Chihuahuan Desert is found to the northeast and east, the Meseta Central matorral and Central Mexican matorral to the southeast, and the Sinaloan dry forests to the west and southwest.
However, the terrane is mostly covered by volcanics and sedimentary deposits, so it is only visible where erosion has revealed it.
This ecoregion is noted for its high biodiversity and large number of endemic species, and for allowing some species to extend their range.
Along many rivers the arid conditions have caused courses to be dammed to provide water for irrigation.
Near these sediments late Oligocene to early Miocene granite and granodiorite intrusive bodies occur.
The range trends from the north to southeast.
These dams have caused concerns along with those caused by other activities.
These formations ended in the Paleocene.
The range runs parallel to the Pacific coast of Mexico, from just south of the Arizona-Sonora border southeast through eastern Sonora, western Chihuahua, Sinaloa, Durango, Zacatecas, Nayarit, Jalisco, Aguascalientes to Guanajuato, where it joins with the Sierra Madre del Sur and the Eje Volcánico Transversal (Transverse Volcanic Axis) of central Mexico after crossing .
