Both were invited to Vienna following the Salzburg Congress and a division of labour was agreed with Brill given the translation rights for Freud's works, and Jones, who was to take up a post at the University of Toronto later in the year, tasked with establishing a platform for Freudian ideas in North American academic and medical life.
He believed that cocaine was a cure for many mental and physical problems, and in his 1884 paper "On Coca" he extolled its virtues.
The event, at which Freud was awarded an Honorary Doctorate, marked the first public recognition of Freud's work and attracted widespread media interest.
The Committee continued to function until 1927 by which time institutional developments within the IPA, such as the establishment of the International Training Commission, had addressed concerns about the transmission of psychoanalytic theory and practice.
He found that when, with his encouragement, she told fantasy stories in her evening states of ''absence'' her condition improved, and most of her symptoms had disappeared by April 1881.
Kahane had attended the same secondary school and both he and Reitler went to university with Freud.
Formed in the autumn of 1912, the Committee comprised Freud, Jones, Abraham, Ferenczi, Rank, and Hanns Sachs.
When Schur replied that he had not forgotten, Freud said, "I thank you," and then "Talk it over with Anna, and if she thinks it's right, then make an end of it."
Freud came to treat Nietzsche's writings "as texts to be resisted far more than to be studied."
Freud lived and worked in Vienna, having set up his clinical practice there in 1886.
Upon completing his habilitation in 1885, he was appointed a docent in neuropathology and became an affiliated professor in 1902.
The patients were subjected to considerable pressure to "reproduce" infantile sexual abuse "scenes" that Freud was convinced had been repressed into the unconscious.
Lacan believed that Freud's essential work had been done prior to 1905 and concerned the interpretation of dreams, neurotic symptoms, and slips, which had been based on a revolutionary way of understanding language and its relation to experience and subjectivity, and that ego psychology and object relations theory were based upon misreadings of Freud's work.
Neo-Freudian analysis places more emphasis on the patient's relationship with the analyst and less on exploration of the unconscious.
Mitchell is criticized by Jane Gallop in ''The Daughter's Seduction'' (1982).
The departure from Vienna began in stages throughout April and May 1938.
In 1905, he stated that clitoral orgasms are purely an adolescent phenomenon and that, upon reaching puberty, the proper response of mature women is a change-over to vaginal orgasms, meaning orgasms without any clitoral stimulation.
Eckstein was disfigured for life.
In Freud's original view, what really happened to a person (the "actual") determined the resulting neurotic disposition.
He was born with a caul, which his mother saw as a positive omen for the boy's future.
When overburdened or threatened by its tasks, it may employ defence mechanisms including denial, repression, undoing, rationalization, and displacement.
In 1899 he published ''The Interpretation of Dreams'' in which, following a critical review of existing theory, Freud gives detailed interpretations of his own and his patients' dreams in terms of wish-fulfillments made subject to the repression and censorship of the "dream work".
Horney had the influential support of Melanie Klein and Ernest Jones who coined the term "phallocentrism" in his critique of Freud's position.
Freud ordered that his correspondence with Fliess be destroyed.
In early 1939 Anton Sauerwald arrived to see Freud, ostensibly to discuss matters relating to the assets of the IPA.
The philosopher Donald Levy agrees with Grünbaum that Freud's theories are falsifiable but disputes Grünbaum's contention that therapeutic success is only the empirical basis on which they stand or fall, arguing that a much wider range of empirical evidence can be adduced if clinical case material is taken into consideration.
This fact, combined with the observation that such behavior could be artificially induced by hypnosis, in which ideas were inserted into people's minds, suggested that ideas were operative in the original cases, even though their subjects knew nothing of them.
The object of Jungian therapy was to mend such splits.
Representatives of the Royal Society called with the Society's Charter for Freud, who had been elected a Foreign Member in 1936, to sign himself into membership.
Freud, however, later came to the conclusion that Eckstein's hemorrhage was caused by hysterical "longing" to have Freud by her side.
The super-ego is the moral component of the psyche, which takes into account no special circumstances in which the morally right thing may not be right for a given situation.
1864), Alexander (b.
His objective was to allow people to experience the split-off aspects of themselves, such as the anima (a man's suppressed female self), the animus (a woman's suppressed male self), or the shadow (an inferior self-image), and thereby attain wisdom.
Marcuse criticized neo-Freudian revisionism for discarding seemingly pessimistic theories such as the death instinct, arguing that they could be turned in a utopian direction.
His research work in cerebral anatomy led to the publication of a seminal paper on the palliative effects of cocaine in 1884 and his work on aphasia would form the basis of his first book ''On the Aphasias: a Critical Study'', published in 1891.
Jeffrey Masson claims that the Eckstein incident led to Freud's belief that sexual fantasies, rather than past trauma, are the main causes of neurotic behavior.
The close relationship she formed with Freud led to rumours, started by Carl Jung, of an affair.
Lacan saw desire as more important than need and considered it necessarily ungratifiable.
Freud used pseudonyms in his case histories.
Kahane broke with Freud and left the Wednesday Psychological Society in 1907 for unknown reasons and in 1923 committed suicide.
Paul Stepansky, while noting that psychoanalysis remains influential in the humanities, records the "vanishingly small number of psychiatric residents who choose to pursue psychoanalytic training" and the "nonanalytic backgrounds of psychiatric chairpersons at major universities" among the evidence he cites for his conclusion that "Such historical trends attest to the marginalisation of psychoanalysis within American psychiatry."
By the 1940s, it had come to be seen as conservative by the European and American intellectual community.
IV The Interpretation of Dreams (I) (1900)
Prior to the completion of her studies, Spielrein had been a patient of Jung at the Burghölzli and the clinical and personal details of their relationship became the subject of an extensive correspondence between Freud and Jung.
In the phenomenon of repetition, Freud saw a psychic trend to work over earlier impressions, to master them and derive pleasure from them, a trend was prior to the pleasure principle but not opposed to it.
Their analysis of research literature supported Freud's concepts of oral and anal personality constellations, his account of the role of Oedipal factors in certain aspects of male personality functioning, his formulations about the relatively greater concern about loss of love in women's as compared to men's personality economy, and his views about the instigating effects of homosexual anxieties on the formation of paranoid delusions.
The goal of Freudian therapy, or psychoanalysis, was to bring repressed thoughts and feelings into consciousness in order to free the patient from suffering repetitive distorted emotions.
He proved an outstanding pupil and graduated from the Matura in 1873 with honors.
Jones had met Jung at a conference the previous year and they met up again in Zürich to organize the Congress.
In 1915, Freud expanded that statement into a more ambitious metapsychological paper, entitled "The Unconscious".
In ''Civilization and Its Discontents'' (1930), he quotes his friend Romain Rolland, who described religion as an "oceanic sensation", but says he never experienced this feeling.
Freud presented his first systematic statement of his hypotheses about unconscious mental processes in 1912, in response to an invitation from the London Society of Psychical Research to contribute to its ''Proceedings''.
While for Freud there was a hierarchy of danger situations, for Janov the key event in the child's life is awareness that the parents do not love it.
Its background was Freud's earlier ''Project for a Scientific Psychology'', where he had defined the principle governing the mental apparatus as its tendency to divest itself of quantity or to reduce tension to zero.
"Mourning and Melancholia" was one of the papers that resulted from Freud’s communications with Karl Abraham, who was studying depressive psychosis as a condition of unresolved mourning.
They would also have a substantial effect on the content of psychoanalytic ideas "particularly in respect of the rationalist values to which it committed itself."
In October 1885, Freud went to Paris on a fellowship to study with Jean-Martin Charcot, a renowned neurologist who was conducting scientific research into hypnosis.
Unlike Freud, Reich retained the idea that actual experience, especially sexual experience, was of key significance.
Despite its surface similarity to Freud's ideas, Janov's theory lacks a strictly psychological account of the unconscious and belief in infantile sexuality.
Contrasting the process of “normal” mourning to the pathological state, Freud intended this treatise to be recognized for its important focus on the complicated aspects of melancholia and its relationship to his earlier studies on depression and hysteria.
XIX The Ego and the Id and Other Works (1923–1925)
Putnam's subsequent public endorsement of Freud's work represented a significant breakthrough for the psychoanalytic cause in the United States.
He found that while nursing her dying father, she had developed a number of transitory symptoms, including visual disorders and paralysis and contractures of limbs, which he also diagnosed as hysterical.
In 1912, Jung published ''Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido'' (published in English in 1916 as ''Psychology of the Unconscious'') making it clear that his views were taking a direction quite different from those of Freud.
A journal, the ''Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologishe Forschungen'', was launched in 1909 under the editorship of Jung.
In the same year, his medical textbook, ''Outline of Internal Medicine for Students and Practicing Physicians,'' was published.
There is a body of research findings which support the efficacy of psychodynamic therapies in treating a wide range of psychological disorders.
He explained these at first as having the function of "fending off" memories of infantile masturbation, but in later years he wrote that they represented Oedipal fantasies, stemming from innate drives that are sexual and destructive in nature.
The title "professor extraordinarius"  was important to Freud for the recognition and prestige it conferred, there being no salary or teaching duties attached to the post (he would be granted the enhanced status of "professor ordinarius" in 1920).
Seymour Fisher and Roger P. Greenberg concluded in 1977 that some of Freud's concepts were supported by empirical evidence.
In addition to that trend, there was also a principle at work that was opposed to, and thus "beyond" the pleasure principle.
Betty Friedan criticizes Freud and what she considered his Victorian view of women in ''The Feminine Mystique'' (1963).
Prior to the war, Freud believes, fiction had constituted a different mode of relation to death, a place of compensation in which "the condition for reconciling ourselves to death is fulfilled, namely, if beneath all vicissitudes of life a permanent life still remains to us".
Freud originally allowed that repression might be a conscious process, but by the time he wrote his second paper on the "Neuro-Psychoses of Defence" (1896), he apparently believed that repression, which he referred to as "the psychical mechanism of (unconscious) defense", occurred on an unconscious level.
XXII New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis and Other Works (1932–1936)
Deutsch saw that further surgery would be required, but did not tell Freud that he had cancer because he was worried that Freud might wish to commit suicide.
Following the death of her father in that month her condition deteriorated again.
Solms and his colleagues have argued for neuro-scientific findings being "broadly consistent" with Freudian theories pointing out brain structures relating to Freudian concepts such as libido, drives, the unconscious, and repression.
Fromm calls Freud, Marx, and Einstein the "architects of the modern age", but rejects the idea that Marx and Freud were equally significant, arguing that Marx was both far more historically important and a finer thinker.
Plans for an international association of psychoanalysts were put in place and these were implemented at the Nuremberg Congress of 1910 where Jung was elected, with Freud's support, as its first president.
Like his contemporary Eugen Bleuler, he emphasized brain function rather than brain structure.
Camille Paglia has also been influenced by Freud, whom she calls "Nietzsche's heir" and one of the greatest sexual psychologists in literature, but has rejected the scientific status of his work in her ''Sexual Personae'' (1990), writing, "Freud has no rivals among his successors because they think he wrote science, when in fact he wrote art."
Research projects designed to test Freud's theories empirically have led to a vast literature on the topic.
The discovery of a Swiss hotel log of 13 August 1898, signed by Freud whilst travelling with his sister-in-law, has been presented as evidence of the affair.
Freud, like Josef Breuer, found the hypothesis that hysterical manifestations were generated by ideas to be not only warranted, but given in observation.
Ernest Gellner argues that Freud's theories are an inversion of Plato's.
Freud began smoking tobacco at age 24; initially a cigarette smoker, he became a cigar smoker.
The couple had six children: Mathilde (b.
By mid-September 1939, Freud's cancer of the jaw was causing him increasingly severe pain and had been declared to be inoperable.
Freud's early followers met together formally for the first time at the Hotel Bristol, Salzburg on 27 April 1908.
Freud's Russian followers were the first to benefit from translations of his work, the 1904 Russian translation of ''The Interpretation of Dreams'' appearing nine years before Brill's English edition.
'''Sigmund Freud''' ( ; ; born '''Sigismund Schlomo Freud'''; 6 May 1856 – 23 September 1939) was an Austrian neurologist and the founder of psychoanalysis, a clinical method for treating psychopathology through dialogue between a patient and a psychoanalyst.
Freud stated explicitly that the concept of the unconscious was based on the theory of repression.
According to Freud's later accounts of this period, as a result of his use of this procedure most of his patients in the mid-1890s reported early childhood sexual abuse.
To distinguish his system from psychoanalysis, Jung called it analytical psychology.
He loved literature and was proficient in German, French, Italian, Spanish, English, Hebrew, Latin and Greek.
Freud quipped: "What progress we are making.
Toril Moi has developed a feminist perspective on psychoanalysis proposing that it is a discourse that "attempts to understand the psychic consequences of three universal traumas: the fact that there are others, the fact of sexual difference, and the fact of death".
She replaces Freud's term of castration with Stanley Cavell's concept of "victimization" which is a more universal term that applies equally to both sexes.
Freud hoped to prove that his model was universally valid and turned to ancient mythology and contemporary ethnography for comparative material arguing that totemism reflected a ritualized enactment of a tribal Oedipal conflict.
Psychologist Frank Sulloway contends "Freud's case histories are rampant with censorship, distortions, highly dubious 'reconstructions,' and exaggerated claims."
Breuer began to see his patient almost every day as the symptoms increased and became more persistent, and observed that she entered states of ''absence''.
By the end of the month, arrangements for Freud's own departure for London had become stalled, mired in a legally tortuous and financially extortionate process of negotiation with the Nazi authorities.
In 1927 Ernst Simmel founded the Schloss Tegel Sanatorium on the outskirts of Berlin, the first such establishment to provide psychoanalytic treatment in an institutional framework.
Both Kahane and Reitler were childhood friends of Freud.
Figes tries in ''Patriarchal Attitudes'' (1970) to place Freud within a "history of ideas".
Freud's audience included the distinguished neurologist and psychiatrist James Jackson Putnam, Professor of Diseases of the Nervous System at Harvard, who invited Freud to his country retreat where they held extensive discussions over a period of four days.
After helping found the American Psychoanalytic Association in 1911, Ernest Jones returned to Britain from Canada in 1913 and founded the London Psychoanalytic Society the same year.
Amongst his principal concerns in the 1880s was the anatomy of the brain, specifically the medulla oblongata.
Richard Skues rejects this interpretation, which he sees as stemming from both Freudian and anti-psychoanalytical revisionism, that regards both Breuer's narrative of the case as unreliable and his treatment of Anna O. as a failure.
By 1906, the group had grown to sixteen members, including Otto Rank, who was employed as the group's paid secretary.
This produces the "manifest content" of the dream as recounted in the dream narrative.
Then, black coffee and cakes were served; cigar and cigarettes were on the table and were consumed in great quantities.
"Obsessive Actions and Religious Practices" (1907) notes the likeness between faith (religious belief) and neurotic obsession.
Later, he said he had not yet opened them.
Thereafter, they established a small psychoanalytic group in Zürich.
Brill founded the New York Psychoanalytic Society the same year.
Ellen Bass and Laura Davis, co-authors of ''The Courage to Heal'' (1988), are described as "champions of survivorship" by Frederick Crews, who considers Freud the key influence upon them, although in his view they are indebted not to classic psychoanalysis but to "the pre-psychoanalytic Freud... who supposedly took pity on his hysterical patients, found that they were all harboring memories of early abuse... and cured them by unknotting their repression."
In a footnote of his 1909 work, ''Analysis of a Phobia in a Five year old Boy'', Freud theorized that the universal fear of castration was provoked in the uncircumcised when they perceived circumcision and that this was "the deepest unconscious root of anti-Semitism".
In 1901, Kahane, who first introduced Stekel to Freud's work, had opened an out-patient psychotherapy institute of which he was the director in Bauernmarkt, in Vienna.
In 1917 Sigmund Freud wrote "Mourning and Melancholia" to explain the morbid disposition of unresolved mourning.
Its premise was a regulatory principle that has been described as "the principle of psychic inertia", "the Nirvana principle", and "the conservatism of instinct".
Fritz Perls, who helped to develop Gestalt therapy, was influenced by Reich, Jung and Freud.
Brentano discussed the possible existence of the unconscious mind in his ''Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint'' (1874).
This prospect and the shock of the detention and interrogation of Anna Freud by the Gestapo finally convinced Freud it was time to leave Austria.
Patients were generally unconvinced that their experiences of Freud's clinical procedure indicated actual sexual abuse.
Perls rejected the verbal approach of classical psychoanalysis; talking in gestalt therapy serves the purpose of self-expression rather than gaining self-knowledge.
The dream researcher G. William Domhoff has disputed claims of Freudian dream theory being validated.
1861), Adolfine (b.
His interest in philosophy declined after he had decided on a career in neurology.
Freud regarded the monotheistic God as an illusion based upon the infantile emotional need for a powerful, supernatural pater familias.
This was followed in 1910 by the monthly ''Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse'' edited by Adler and Stekel, in 1911 by ''Imago'', a journal devoted to the application of psychoanalysis to the field of cultural and literary studies edited by Rank and in 1913 by the ''Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse'', also edited by Rank.
By this time his speech had become seriously impaired by the prosthetic  device he needed as a result of a series of operations on his cancerous jaw.
Crews sees Freud as having anticipated the recovered memory movement by emphasizing "mechanical cause-and-effect relations between symptomatology and the premature stimulation of one body zone or another", and with pioneering its "technique of thematically matching a patient's symptom with a sexually symmetrical 'memory.'"
Ernest Jones, the then president of the International Psychoanalytical Association (IPA), flew into Vienna from London via Prague on 15 March determined to get Freud to change his mind and seek exile in Britain.
Several scholars see Freud as parallel to Plato, writing that they hold nearly the same theory of dreams and have similar theories of the tripartite structure of the human soul or personality, even if the hierarchy between the parts of the soul is almost reversed.
Another important element of psychoanalysis is transference, the process by which patients displace onto their analysts feelings and ideas which derive from previous figures in their lives.
This model represents the roles the Id, Ego, and Super Ego play in relation to conscious and unconscious thought.
Deutsch advised Freud to stop smoking and have the growth excised.
There was the atmosphere of the foundation of a religion in that room.
Freud in effect readopted the original definition in ''Beyond the Pleasure Principle'', this time applying it to a different principle.
Jones left for London the following week with a list provided by Freud of the party of émigrés for whom immigration permits would be required.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty considers Freud to be one of the anticipators of phenomenology, while Theodor W. Adorno considers Edmund Husserl, the founder of phenomenology, to be Freud's philosophical opposite, writing that Husserl's polemic against psychologism could have been directed against psychoanalysis.
Anna Freud wanted to postpone her father's death, but Schur convinced her it was pointless to keep him alive and on 21 and 22 September administered doses of morphine that resulted in Freud's death around 3am on 23 September 1939.
This group was called the Wednesday Psychological Society (''Psychologische Mittwochs-Gesellschaft'') and it marked the beginnings of the worldwide psychoanalytic movement.
Freud read William Shakespeare in English throughout his life, and it has been suggested that his understanding of human psychology may have been partially derived from Shakespeare's plays.
The 1910 Moscow Psychoanalytic Society became the Russian Psychoanalytic Society and Institute in 1922.
He published several medical papers on the topic, and showed that the disease existed long before other researchers of the period began to notice and study it.
Moreover, he perceived religion, with its suppression of violence, as mediator of the societal and personal, the public and the private, conflicts between Eros and Thanatos, the forces of life and death.
From the autumn of 1902, a number of Viennese physicians who had expressed  interest in Freud's work were invited to meet at his apartment every Wednesday afternoon to discuss issues relating to psychology and neuropathology.
Freud credited Breuer with opening the way to the discovery of the psychoanalytical method by his treatment of the case of Anna O.
This allowed Sauerwald to sign the necessary exit visas for Freud, his wife Martha and daughter Anna.
In the Freuds' new home—20 Maresfield Gardens, Hampstead, North London—Freud's Vienna consulting room was recreated in faithful detail.
Crews believes that Freud's confidence in accurate recall of early memories anticipates the theories of recovered memory therapists such as Lenore Terr, which in his view have led to people being wrongfully imprisoned or involved in litigation.
He had introduced cocaine to his friend Ernst von Fleischl-Marxow who had become addicted to morphine taken to relieve years of excruciating nerve pain resulting from an infection acquired while performing an autopsy.
If repetition is a necessary element in the binding of energy or adaptation, when carried to inordinate lengths it becomes a means of abandoning adaptations and reinstating earlier or less evolved psychic positions.
He died in exile in the United Kingdom in 1939.
The concept of the unconscious was central to Freud's account of the mind.
There were, as Jones records, "forty-two present, half of whom were or became practicing analysts."
In February 1923, Freud detected a leukoplakia, a benign growth associated with heavy smoking, on his mouth.
Tatiana Rosenthal and Sabina Spielrein were both Russian psychiatrists and graduates of the Zürich University medical school.
It is also claimed that in moving beyond the "orthodoxy of the not so distant past...new ideas and new research has led to an intense reawakening of interest in psychoanalysis from neighbouring disciplines ranging from the humanities to neuroscience and including the non-analytic therapies".
Freud himself was its new prophet who made the heretofore prevailing methods of psychological investigation appear superficial.
His analysis of dreams as wish-fulfillments provided him with models for the clinical analysis of symptom formation and the underlying mechanisms of repression.
Freud applied that idea both to infants and to adults.
XV Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Parts I and II) (1915–1916)
The treatment of one particular patient of Breuer's proved to be transformative for Freud's clinical practice.
Freud postulated the existence of libido, an energy with which mental processes and structures are invested and which generates erotic attachments, and a death drive, the source of compulsive repetition, hate, aggression and neurotic guilt.
Rank eventually settled in the United States where his revisions of Freudian theory were to influence a new generation of therapists uncomfortable with the orthodoxies of the IPA.
Freud later saw Felix Deutsch, who saw that the growth was cancerous; he identified it to Freud using the euphemism "a bad leukoplakia" instead of the technical diagnosis epithelioma.
The unconscious was first introduced in connection with the phenomenon of repression, to explain what happens to ideas that are repressed.
Fliess shared Freud's views on the importance of certain aspects of sexuality—masturbation, coitus interruptus, and the use of condoms—in the etiology of what were then called the "actual neuroses," primarily neurasthenia and certain physically manifested anxiety symptoms.
Described as Anna O., she was invited to talk about her symptoms while under hypnosis (she would coin the phrase "talking cure" for her treatment).
He was later to recall the experience of this stay as catalytic in turning him toward the practice of medical psychopathology and away from a less financially promising career in neurology research.
He reported that even after a supposed "reproduction" of sexual scenes the patients assured him emphatically of their disbelief.
Critics outside the psychoanalytic movement, whether on the political left or right, saw Freud as a conservative.
In creating psychoanalysis, Freud developed therapeutic techniques such as the use of free association and discovered transference, establishing its central role in the analytic process.
Instead, he suggested that complications in birth were only a symptom.
This is why, according to Freud, religious beliefs are "illusions".
In defending Freud against this critique, feminist scholar Jacqueline Rose has argued that it presupposes a more normative account of female sexual development than that given by Freud.
He returned to Vienna to drive Freud's Viennese cancer specialist, Hans Pichler, to London to operate on the worsening condition of Freud's cancerous jaw.
The surgery proved disastrous, due to Fliess' incompetence in leaving a half-metre of gauze in her nasal cavity.
Many famous names were soon to call on Freud to pay their respects, notably Salvador Dalí, Stefan Zweig, Leonard Woolf, Virginia Woolf and H. G. Wells.
Fleischl-Marxow developed an acute case of "cocaine psychosis", and soon returned to using morphine, dying a few years later after more suffering from intolerable pain.
In ''The Dialectic of Sex'' (1970), Firestone argues that Freud was a "poet" who produced metaphors rather than literal truths; in her view, Freud, like feminists, recognized that sexuality was the crucial problem of modern life, but ignored the social context and failed to question society itself.
In the light of his self-analysis, Freud abandoned the theory that every neurosis can be traced back to the effects of infantile sexual abuse, now arguing that infantile sexual scenarios still had a causative function, but it did not matter whether they were real or imagined and that in either case they became pathogenic only when acting as repressed memories.
Fromm nevertheless credits Freud with permanently changing the way human nature is understood.
His place on the committee was taken by Anna Freud.
The neo-Freudians, a group including Alfred Adler, Otto Rank, Karen Horney, Harry Stack Sullivan and Erich Fromm, rejected Freud's theory of instinctual drive, emphasized interpersonal relations and self-assertiveness, and made modifications to therapeutic practice that reflected these theoretical shifts.
The "dissolution" of the Oedipus Complex is then achieved when the child's rivalrous identification with the parental figure is transformed into the pacifying identifications of the Ego ideal which assume both similarity and difference and acknowledge the separateness and autonomy of the other.
According to Freud, "Elimination of clitoral sexuality is a necessary precondition for the development of femininity, since it is immature and masculine in its nature."
Freud set out his case in favour in 1926 in his ''The Question of Lay Analysis''.
In works which would win him a more general readership, Freud applied his theories outside the clinical setting in ''The Psychopathology of Everyday Life'' (1901) and ''Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious'' (1905).
Other viewpoints include those of Hans Eysenck, who writes in ''Decline and Fall of the Freudian Empire'' (1985) that Freud set back the study of psychology and psychiatry "by something like fifty years or more", and Malcolm Macmillan, who concludes in ''Freud Evaluated'' (1991) that "Freud's method is not capable of yielding objective data about mental processes".
Crews believes that psychoanalysis has no scientific or therapeutic merit.
Arthur Janov's primal therapy, which has been an influential post-Freudian psychotherapy, resembles psychoanalytic therapy in its emphasis on early childhood experience, but has also differences with it.
Fromm had argued that several aspects of psychoanalytic theory served the interests of political reaction in his ''The Fear of Freedom'' (1942), an assessment confirmed by sympathetic writers on the right.
Jean-Paul Sartre critiques Freud's theory of the unconscious in ''Being and Nothingness'' (1943), claiming that consciousness is essentially self-conscious.
the acceptance of non-medically qualified candidates for psychoanalytic training.
Chodorow, writing against the masculine bias of psychoanalysis, "replaces Freud's negative and derivative description of female psychology with a positive and direct account of her own."
