Typologically significant differences have been found between sign languages.
In his study, Brown found that when children were taught signs that had high levels of iconic mapping they were significantly more likely to recall the signs in a later memory task than when they were taught signs that had little or no iconic properties.
As a sign language develops, it sometimes borrows elements from spoken languages, just as all languages borrow from other languages that they are in contact with.
The abstract target meaning is "learning."
Variations also arise within a 'national' sign language which don't necessarily correspond to dialect differences in the national spoken language; rather, they can usually be correlated to the geographic location of residential schools for the deaf.
The only comprehensive classification along these lines going beyond a simple listing of languages dates back to 1991.
* Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language, Israel
Common linguistic features of many sign languages are the occurrence of classifiers, a high degree of inflection by means of changes of movement, and a topic-comment syntax.
Frenchman Charles-Michel de l'Épée published his manual alphabet in the 18th century, which has survived basically unchanged in France and North America until the present time.
Deaf-community sign languages, on the other hand, arise where deaf people come together to form their own communities.
Home sign is amorphous and generally idiosyncratic to a particular family, where a deaf child does not have contact with other deaf children and is not educated in sign.
Different handshapes are stored in other categories.
Sign language is sometimes provided for television programmes.
South Africa, which has 11 official spoken languages and a similar number of other widely used spoken languages, is a good example of this.
ASL and BSL use similar non-manual marking for yes/no questions, for example.
* Lyons Sign Language may be the source of Flemish Sign Language (VGT) though this is unclear.
In this view, iconicity is grounded in a language user's mental representation ("construal" in Cognitive Grammar).
For a native signer, sign perception influences how the mind makes sense of their visual language experience.
In this way, the Israeli Sign Language (ISL) sign for ASK has parts of its form that are iconic ("movement away from the mouth" means "something coming from the mouth"), and parts that are arbitrary (the handshape, and the orientation).
Though they recognized that certain aspects of the language seemed iconic, they considered this to be merely extralinguistic, a property which did not influence the language.
by the use of space, two manual articulators, and the signer's face and body.
A '''sign language''' (also '''signed language''') is a language which chiefly uses manual communication to convey meaning, as opposed to acoustically conveyed sound patterns.
Spoken language is by and large linear; only one sound can be made or received at a time.
One author has speculated that Adamorobe Sign Language, a village sign language of Ghana, may be related to the "gestural trade jargon used in the markets throughout West Africa", in vocabulary and areal features including prosody and phonetics.
Some sign languages have obtained some form of legal recognition, while others have no status at all.
Influence from the surrounding spoken languages is not improbable.
Now called Gallaudet University, it is still the only liberal arts university for deaf people in the world.
Many of these are either precursors to natural sign languages or are derived from them.
One theory of the evolution of human language states that it developed first as a gestural system, which later shifted to speech.
Although there are also some significant differences between signed and spoken languages, such as how they use space grammatically, sign languages show the same linguistic properties and use the same language faculty as do spoken languages.
Home sign arises due to the absence of any other way to communicate.
Hearing people may also develop sign to communicate with speakers of other languages, as in Plains Indian Sign Language; this was a contact signing system or pidgin that was evidently not used by deaf people in the Plains nations, though it presumably influenced home sign.
Informal, rudimentary sign systems are sometimes developed within a single family.
Similarly, the sign languages of Spain and Mexico are very different, despite Spanish being the national language in each country, and the sign language used in Bolivia is based on ASL rather than any sign language that is used in a Spanish-speaking country.
For a similar group of intransitive verbs (especially motion verbs), it is the subject which is incorporated.
These include school sign, such as Nicaraguan Sign Language, which develop in the student bodies of deaf schools which do not use sign as a language of instruction, as well as community languages such as Bamako Sign Language, which arise where generally uneducated deaf people congregate in urban centers for employment.
While iconicity is more systematic and widespread in sign languages than in spoken ones, the difference is not categorical.
He described codes for both English and Latin.
The mind detects handshape contrasts but groups similar handshapes together in one category.
The cognitive linguistics perspective allows for some signs to be fully iconic or partially iconic given the number of correspondences between the possible parameters of form and meaning.
On the whole, though, sign languages are independent of spoken languages and follow their own paths of development.
By 1720, the British manual alphabet had found more or less its present form.
in this way, since subjects of intransitives are treated similarly to objects of transitives, incorporation in sign languages can be said to follow an ergative pattern.
* Indian Sign Language ISL is similar to Pakistani Sign Language.
Aside from the pidgin International Sign, each country generally has its own, native sign language, and some have more than one (although there are also substantial similarities among all sign languages).
The pioneers of sign language linguistics were yoked with the task of trying to prove that ASL was a real language and not merely a collection of gestures or "English on the hands."
Further, sign languages, just like spoken languages, depend on linear sequencing of signs to form sentences; the greater use of simultaneity is mostly seen in the morphology (internal structure of individual signs).
One of the prevailing beliefs at this time was that 'real languages' must consist of an arbitrary relationship between form and meaning.
There are a number of sign languages that emerged from French Sign Language (LSF), or are the result of language contact between local community sign languages and LSF.
Since the addressee in a signed conversation must be watching the signer, a signer can avoid letting the other person have a turn by not looking at them, or can indicate that the other person may have a turn by making eye contact.
Methods are being developed to assess the language vitality of sign languages.
They should not be confused with body language, which is a kind of non-linguistic communication.
No type of home sign is recognized as a full language.
The signer usually appears in the bottom corner of the screen, with the programme being broadcast full size or slightly shrunk away from that corner.
The use of two manual articulators is subject to motor constraints, resulting in a large extent of symmetry or signing with one articulator only.
An example of this sort of lexical distinction is the sign translated 'not yet', which requires that the tongue touch the lower lip and that the head rotate from side to side, in addition to the manual part of the sign.
The ASL sign LEARN has this three way correspondence.
Typically for press conferences such as those given by the Mayor of New York City, the signer appears to stage left or right of the public official to allow both the speaker and signer to be in frame at the same time.
The 2013 edition of Ethnologue lists 137 sign languages.
* French Sign Language family.
The term for these mini-languages is home sign (sometimes "homesign" or "kitchen sign").
There are estimates indicating that as many as 2% of Native Americans are seriously or completely deaf, a rate more than twice the national average.
With video relay service (VRS), the sign language user, the interpreter, and the hearing person are in three separate locations, thus allowing the two clients to talk to each other on the phone through the interpreter.
Clerc went to the United States with Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet to found the American School for the Deaf in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1817.
In 1755, Abbé de l'Épée founded the first school for deaf children in Paris; Laurent Clerc was arguably its most famous graduate.
The mind ignores some of the similarities between different perceptual categories, at the same time preserving the visual information within each perceptual category of handshape variation.
A common misconception is that sign languages are somehow dependent on spoken languages: that they are spoken language expressed in signs, or that they were invented by hearing people.
As in spoken languages, these meaningless units are represented as (combinations of) features, although often also crude distinctions are made in terms of Handshape (or Handform), Orientation, Location (or Place of Articulation), Movement, and Non-manual expression.
In other words, over time, the natural processes of regularization in the language obscures any iconically motivated features of the sign.
For these signs there are three way correspondences between a form, a concrete source and an abstract target meaning.
Babies can usually produce signs before they can speak.
For instance, when hearing parents with no sign language skills have a deaf child, the child may develop a system of signs naturally, unless repressed by the parents.
They have complex grammars of their own, and can be used to discuss any topic, from the simple and concrete to the lofty and abstract.
Still, this kind of system is inadequate for the intellectual development of a child and it comes nowhere near meeting the standards linguists use to describe a complete language.
Some advanced equipment enables a person to remotely control the other person's video camera, in order to zoom in and out or to point the camera better to understand the signing.
+ Wittmann classification of sign languages
That means, that one syllable (i.e.
Legal requirements covering sign language on television vary from country to country.
Sign languages, like spoken languages, organize elementary, meaningless units (once called cheremes in the case of sign languages, by analogy to the phonemes of spoken languages) into meaningful semantic units.
* Japanese Sign Language, Taiwanese Sign Language and Korean Sign Language are thought to be members of a Japanese Sign Language family.
It is doubtful whether most of these are languages in their own right, rather than manual codes of spoken languages, though a few such as Yolngu Sign Language are independent of any particular spoken language.
The special videophones that are designed for sign language communication may provide better quality than 'off-the-shelf' services and may use data compression methods specifically designed to maximize the intelligibility of sign languages.
Creolization is seen as enriching overt morphology in sign languages, as compared to reducing overt morphology in spoken languages.
The concrete source is putting objects into the head from books.
As a result, iconicity as a whole was largely neglected in research of sign languages.
* Sign languages of Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine, and Iraq (and possibly Saudi Arabia) may be part of a sprachbund, or may be one dialect of a larger Eastern Arabic Sign Language.
Prototype-R languages are languages that are remotely modelled on a prototype-A language (in many cases thought to have been French Sign Language) by a process Kroeber (1940) called "stimulus diffusion".
Indian Sign Language is similar to International Sign Language.
A pidgin sign language arose among tribes of American Indians in the Great Plains region of North America (see Plains Indian Sign Language).
Another aspect of typology that has been studied in sign languages is their systems for cardinal numbers.
The interpreter communicates with the sign language user via a video telecommunications link, and with the hearing person by an audio link.
They are or were especially highly developed among the Warlpiri, Warumungu, Dieri, Kaytetye, Arrernte, and Warlmanpa, and are based on their respective spoken languages.
This decreases the confusion between parents when trying to figure out what their child wants.
When Deaf and Hearing people interact, signing systems may be developed that use signs drawn from a natural sign language but used according to the grammar of the spoken language.
VRI can be used for situations in which no on-site interpreters are available.
There are especially users today among the Crow, Cheyenne, and Arapaho.
In non-signing communities, home sign is not a full language, but closer to a pidgin.
Within the span of a single lifetime and without the support or feedback of a community, the child naturally invents signs to help meet his or her communication needs, and may even develop a few grammatical rules for combining short sequences of signs.
After a few months the non-manuals reappear, this time being used the way adult signers would use them.
Notable examples of animals who have learned signs include:
Many Australian Aboriginal sign languages arose in a context of extensive speech taboos, such as during mourning and initiation rites.
Some emerging television technologies allow the viewer to turn the signer on and off in a similar manner to subtitles and closed captioning.
so much so that it is difficult to speak of a separate "Deaf" community.
These include: French Sign Language, Italian Sign Language, Quebec Sign Language, American Sign Language, Irish Sign Language, Russian Sign Language, Dutch Sign Language (NGT), Spanish Sign Language, Mexican Sign Language, Brazilian Sign Language (LIBRAS), Catalan Sign Language, Ukrainian Sign Language, Austrian Sign Language (along with its twin Hungarian Sign Language and its offspring Czech Sign Language) and others.
Sign languages vary in word-order typology.
It needs to be noted that the term classifier is not used by everyone working on these constructions.
Psychologist Roger Brown was one of the first to document this benefit.
Without these features it would be interpreted as 'late'.
Typically this happens in small, tightly integrated communities with a closed gene pool.
However, VRI cannot be used for situations in which all parties are speaking via telephone alone.
For instance, in ASL a slightly open mouth with the tongue relaxed and visible in the corner of the mouth means 'carelessly,' but a similar sign in BSL means 'boring' or 'unpleasant.'
Sign languages tend to be incorporating classifier languages, where a classifier handshape representing the object is incorporated into those transitive verbs which allow such modification.
Such systems are not generally passed on from one generation to the next.
These Deaf communities are very widespread in the world, associated especially with sign languages used in urban areas and throughout a nation, and the cultures they have developed are very rich.
** A subset of this group includes languages that have been heavily influenced by American Sign Language (ASL), or are regional varieties of ASL.
On the BBC, many programmes that broadcast late at night or early in the morning are signed.
A village sign language is a local indigenous language that typically arises over several generations in a relatively insular community with a high incidence of deafness, and is used both by the deaf and by a significant portion of the hearing community, who have deaf family and friends.
There are a number of communication systems that are similar in some respects to sign languages, while not having all the characteristics of a full sign language, particularly its grammatical structure.
Thus, if ASL consisted of signs that had iconic form-meaning relationship, it could not be considered a real language.
At a certain point the non-manual features are dropped and the word is produced with no facial expression.
The form is a grasping hand moving from an open palm to the forehead.
The metaphorical correspondence is between concrete source and abstract target meaning.
* Known isolates include Nicaraguan Sign Language, Turkish Sign Language, Kata Kolok, Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language and Providence Island Sign Language.
* German Sign Language (DGS) gave rise to Polish Sign Language; it also at least strongly influenced Israeli Sign Language, though it is unclear whether the latter derives from DGS or from Austrian Sign Language, which is in the French family.
Descendants of this alphabet have been used by deaf communities (or at least in classrooms) in former British colonies India, Australia, New Zealand, Uganda and South Africa, as well as the republics and provinces of the former Yugoslavia, Grand Cayman Island in the Caribbean, Indonesia, Norway, Germany and the USA.
In the United Kingdom, the Broadcasting Act 1996 addressed the requirements for blind and deaf viewers, but has since been replaced by the Communications Act 2003.
They are shown through raised eyebrows and a forward head tilt.
One example of an endangered sign language is Hawai'i Sign Language, which is almost extinct except for a few elderly signers.
As with any spoken language, sign languages are also vulnerable to becoming endangered.
Sign languages exploit the unique features of the visual medium (sight), but may also exploit tactile features (tactile sign languages).
Some adjectival and adverbial information is conveyed through non-manual signs, but what these signs are varies from language to language.
Similarly, countries which use a single spoken language throughout may have two or more sign languages, or an area that contains more than one spoken language might use only one sign language.
The visual modality allows the human preference for close connections between form and meaning, present but suppressed in spoken languages, to be more fully expressed.
The most famous of these is probably the extinct Martha's Vineyard Sign Language of the US, but there are also numerous village languages scattered throughout Africa, Asia, and America.
Others possibly influenced by ASL include Ugandan Sign Language, Kenyan Sign Language, Philippine Sign Language and Malaysian Sign Language.
A common misconception is that all sign languages are the same worldwide or that sign language is international.
Some researchers have suggested that the properties of ASL give it a clear advantage in terms of learning and memory.
* Gorillas: Koko and Michael
More generally, both sign and spoken languages share the characteristics that linguists have found in all natural human languages, such as transitoriness, semanticity, arbitrariness, productivity, and cultural transmission.
* Danish Sign Language and its descendants Norwegian Sign Language and Icelandic Sign Language are largely mutually intelligible with Swedish Sign Language.
However, home sign may also be closer to full language in communities where the hearing population has a gestural mode of language; examples include various Australian Aboriginal sign languages and gestural systems across West Africa, such as Mofu-Gudur in Cameroon.
Classifiers allow a signer to spatially show a referent's type, size, shape, movement, or extent.
Sign languages are not mime—in other words, signs are conventional, often arbitrary and do not necessarily have a visual relationship to their referent, much as most spoken language is not onomatopoeic.
Where they are passed on, creolization would be expected to occur, resulting in a full language.
Since the muscles in babies' hands grow and develop quicker than their mouths, signs can be a beneficial option for better communication.
* BSL, Auslan and NZSL are usually considered to be a language known as BANZSL.
Many early sign language linguists rejected the notion that iconicity was an important aspect of the language.
Thai Sign Language is a mixed language derived from ASL and the native sign languages of Bangkok and Chiang Mai, and may be considered part of the ASL family.
Sign language interpreters who can translate between signed and spoken languages that are not normally paired (such as between LSE and English), are also available, albeit less frequently.
* Martha's Vineyard Sign Language, USA
For example, a sign language used by a small community may be endangered and even abandoned as users shift to a sign language used by a larger community.
This is most commonly used for proper names of people and places; it is also used in some languages for concepts for which no sign is available at that moment, particularly if the people involved are to some extent bilingual in the spoken language.
Maritime Sign Language and South African Sign Language are also related to BSL.
Visual perception allows processing of simultaneous information.
The prototype-A class of languages includes all those sign languages that seemingly cannot be derived from any other language.
Grammatical structure that is shown through non-manual signs includes questions, negation, relative clauses, boundaries between sentences, and the argument structure of some verbs.
In the 1500s, a Spanish expeditionary, Cabeza de Vaca, observed natives in the western part of modern-day Florida using sign language, and in the mid-16th century Coronado mentioned that communication with the Tonkawa using signs was possible without a translator.
Because the concrete source is connected to two correspondences linguistics refer to metaphorical signs as "double mapped."
While recent studies claim that International Sign is a kind of a pidgin, they conclude that it is more complex than a typical pidgin and indeed is more like a full sign language.
Only in a very few sign languages (for instance Japanese Sign Language) are agents ever incorporated.
Brentari classifies sign languages as a whole group determined by the medium of communication (visual instead of auditory) as one group with the features monosyllabic and polymorphemic.
Gallaudet's son, Edward Miner Gallaudet founded a school for the deaf in 1857 in Washington, D.C., which in 1864 became the National Deaf-Mute College.
Discourse functions such as turn taking are largely regulated through head movement and eye gaze.
The iconic correspondence is between form and concrete source.
It is not clear how many sign languages there are.
The grammars of sign languages do not usually resemble that of spoken languages used in the same geographical area; in fact, in terms of syntax, ASL shares more with spoken Japanese than it does with English.
For example, Austrian Sign Language, Japanese Sign Language and Indo-Pakistani Sign Language are Subject-object-verb while ASL is Subject-verb-object.
Brow=B), and vowels were located on the fingertips as with the other British systems.
The large focus on the possibility of simultaneity in sign languages in contrast to spoken languages is sometimes exaggerated, though.
Language contact and creolization is common in the development of sign languages, making clear family classifications difficult&nbsp;– it is often unclear whether lexical similarity is due to borrowing or a common parent language, or whether there was one or several parent languages, such as several village languages merging into a Deaf-community language.
This group may also include Romanian, Bulgarian, and Polish sign languages.
At first, Deaf-community sign languages are not generally known by the hearing population, in many cases not even by close family members.
In ASL (American Sign Language), some signs have required facial components that distinguish them from other signs.
Today, linguists study sign languages as true languages, part of the field of linguistics.
It has only one sign language with two variants due to its history of having two major educational institutions for the deaf which have served different geographic areas of the country.
Sign languages share many similarities with spoken languages (sometimes called "oral languages", which depend primarily on sound), which is why linguists consider both to be natural languages.
More than spoken languages, sign languages can convey meaning by simultaneous means, e.g.
However, linguists generally point out that this does not constitute knowledge of a human ''language'' (as a complete system, rather than simply signs/words).
It is defined as a fully grammatical and central aspect of a sign language rather than a peripheral phenomenon.
The interpretation flow is normally between a sign language and a spoken language that are customarily used in the same country, such as French Sign Language (LSF) and spoken French in France, Spanish Sign Language (LSE) to spoken Spanish in Spain, British Sign Language (BSL) and spoken English in the U.K., and American Sign Language (ASL) and spoken English in the USA and most of anglophone Canada (since BSL and ASL are distinct sign languages both used in English-speaking countries), etc.
Whether or not these gesture systems reached the stage at which they could properly be called languages is still up for debate.
The correlation between sign and spoken languages is complex and varies depending on the country more than the spoken language.
She concluded that though originally present in many signs, iconicity is degraded over time through the application of grammatical processes.
Bolivian Sign Language is sometimes considered a dialect of ASL.
The same report suggested a "cluster" of sign languages centered around Czech Sign Language, Hungarian Sign Language and Slovak Sign Language.
Interpreters may be physically present with both parties to the conversation but, since the technological advancements in the early 2000s, provision of interpreters in remote locations has become available.
Danish SL has French SL influence and Wittmann (1991) places them in that family, though he proposes that Swedish, Finnish, and Portuguese SL are instead related to British Sign Language.
In video remote interpreting (VRI), the two clients (a sign language user and a hearing person who wish to communicate with each other) are in one location, and the interpreter is in another.
However, they may grow, in some cases becoming a language of instruction and receiving official recognition, as in the case of ASL.
In particular, when people devise one-for-one sign-for-word correspondences between spoken words (or even morphemes) and signs that represent them, the system that results is a manual code for a spoken language, rather than a natural sign language.
The first studies on iconicity in ASL were published in the late 1970s, and early 1980s.
The families of BSL, DGS, JSL, LSF (and possibly LSG) were the products of creolization and relexification of prototype languages.
On occasion, where the prevalence of deaf people is high enough, a deaf sign language has been taken up by an entire local community, forming what is sometimes called a "village sign language" or "shared signing community".
Finnish Sign Language, and Portuguese Sign Language derive from Swedish SL, though with local admixture in the case of mutually unintelligible Finnish SL.
Sign languages vary in how and how much they borrow from spoken languages.
Sarah Batterbury has argued that sign languages should be recognized and supported not merely as an accommodation for the disabled, but as the communication medium of language communities.
When the child begins to speak, signing is usually abandoned, so the child does not progress to acquiring the grammar of the sign language.
One way in which many sign languages take advantage of the spatial nature of the language is through the use of classifiers.
Instead, sign languages, like all natural languages, are developed by the people who use them, in this case, deaf people, who may have little or no knowledge of any spoken language.
This is often called duality of patterning.
