Devout Sikhs are encouraged to begin the day with private meditations on the name of God.
The Jaap Sahib asserts that God is the cause of conflict as well as peace, and of destruction as well as creation.
Before Ramdaspur, Amritsar was known as Guru Da Chakk.
The first morning prayer is Guru Nanak's ''Jap Ji''.
and Hindu-Sikh conflicts in Punjab, as a reaction to Operation Blue Star and the assassination.
All boys are given the last name Singh, and all girls are given the last name Kaur (this was once a title which was conferred on an individual upon joining the Khalsa).
Sikh festivals such as Vaisakhi and Bandi Chhor (the Sikh version of the Hindu festival Diwali) are celebrated in those Canadian cities by the largest groups of followers in the world outside the Punjab.
One, according to Cole and Sambhi, is based on hagiographical Janamsakhis, and states that Nanak's teachings and Sikhism were a revelation from God, and not a social protest movement nor any attempt to reconcile Hinduism and Islam in the 15th century.
Sikhs believe the world is currently in a state of ''Kali Yuga'' (Age of Darkness) because the world is led astray by the love of and attachment to Maya.
Goindval became an important centre for Sikhism during the guruship of Guru Amar Das.
The text is printed in Gurumukhi script, believed to have been developed by Guru Angad, but it shares the Indo-European roots found in numerous regional languages of India.
The last of these is ''sach khaṇḍ'' (''The Realm of Truth'')—the final union of the spirit with God.
He also established the system of the langar, or communal kitchen, in order to demonstrate the need to share and have equality between all people.
A Sikh couple that wishes to divorce may be able to do so in a civil court.
Guru Nanak's teachings are founded not on a final destination of heaven or hell but on a spiritual union with the Akal which results in salvation or ''Jivanmukta'' (liberation whilst alive), a concept also found in Hinduism.
He is an illumined soul."
Smaller populations of Sikhs are found within many countries in Western Europe, Mauritius, Malaysia, Fiji, Nepal, China, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iraq, Singapore, Mexico, the United States and many other countries.
To get closer to God: Sikhs avoid the evils of ''Maya'', keep the everlasting truth in mind, practice ''Shabad Kirtan'', meditate on ''Naam'', and serve humanity.
The newly formed governments were completely unequipped to deal with migrations of such staggering magnitude, and massive violence and slaughter occurred on both sides of the border.
Amar Das also established the ''manji'' (comparable to a diocese) system of clerical supervision.
It is installed in Sikh ''Gurdwara'' (temple), many Sikhs bow or prostrate before it on entering the temple, and just like Rama or Krishna symbols are cared for in some large Hindu temples, the Guru Granth Sahib is installed every morning and put to bed at night in many ''Gurdwaras''.
Nanak claimed to be God's mouthpiece, God's slave and servant and even God's dog, but maintained that he was only a guide and teacher, was neither a reincarnation of God nor in any way related to God.
Guru Granth Sahib is considered by Sikhs to be the eleventh and the final Guru of Sikhism.
He would not partake in religious rituals or customs and oddly meditated alone.
Guru Har Rai was the seventh guru, known as a gentle man who cared for animals and the environment.
Guru Nanak's teachings emphasised the pursuit of salvation; Guru Amar Das began building a cohesive community of followers with initiatives such as sanctioning distinctive ceremonies for birth, marriage, and death.
Being one of the youngest amongst the major world religions, with 25-28 million adherents worldwide, Sikhism is the ninth-largest religion in the world.
The Sikh empire had its capital in Lahore, spread over almost  comprising what is now Afghanistan, Pakistan and Northern India.
The term guru comes from the Sanskrit ''gurū'', meaning teacher, guide, or mentor.
It was from this moment that Nanak would begin to spread the teachings of what was then the beginning of Sikhism.
Guru Tegh Bahadur was executed by Aurangzeb for helping to protect one's right to freedom of religion, after a delegation of Kashmiri Pandits came to him for help when the Emperor began to persecute those who refused to convert to Islam.
However, Sikhism also accepts ''saguni'' concept, that is a divine with qualities and form.
People eat together, and the kitchen is maintained and serviced by Sikhs.
#Eating meat : Sikhs are strictly prohibited from eating meat from animals slaughtered by halal method, known as Kutha meat, where the animal is killed by exsanguination (via throat-cutting).
In contrast, while other faiths have been arguing in recent times on female priest ordination, women have been leading prayers at Sikh temples since the founding of Sikhism.
The Ādi Granth was compiled primarily by Bhai Gurdas under the supervision of Guru Arjan between the years 1603 and 1604.
''Jēṭhā'' became Guru Ram Das and vigorously undertook his duties as the new guru.
:ISO 15919 transliteration: ''Ika ōaṅkāra sati nāmu karatā purakhu nirabha'u niravairu akāla mūrati ajūnī saibhaṅ gura prasādi.''
His desire to explore the mysteries of life eventually led him to leave home and take missionary journeys.
The vision in the Guru Granth Sahib, states Torkel Brekke, is a society based on divine justice without oppression of any kind.
In Sikhism, the concept of "God" is ''Vāhigurū''—is shapeless, timeless, and sightless (i.e., unable to be seen with the physical eye): ''niraṅkār'', ''akaal'', and ''alakh''.
While emphasizing Bhakti, the Sikh Gurus also taught that the spiritual life and secular householder life are intertwined.
Sikhs celebrate it because on this day which fell on 30 March 1699, the tenth Guru, Gobind Singh, inaugurated the Khalsa, the 11th body of Guru Granth Sahib and leader of Sikhs till eternity.
Baptised Sikhs ritually wear five items, called the Five Ks (in Punjabi known as ''pañj kakkē'' or ''pañj kakār''), at all times.
The essence of Sikh teaching is summated by Guru Nanak's words: "Realization of Truth is higher than all else.
The ''kīrtan sōhilā'' and ''ardās'' prayers are performed during the funeral ceremony (known as ''antim sanskār'').
Shabad Kirtan is the singing of Gurbani.
Gobind Singh killed the attacker with his sword.
There are two competing theories on Guru Nanak's teachings.
The order, traditions and discipline developed over centuries culminated at the time of Ranjit Singh to give rise to a common religious and social identity.
In some small Sikh Sects, i.e.
This contemplation is done through ''Nām Japna'' (repetition of the divine name) or ''Naam Simran'' (remembrance of the divine Name through recitation).
Guru Angad continued the work started by Guru Nanak and is widely credited for standardising the Gurmukhī script as used in the sacred scripture of the Sikhs.
Large communities of Sikhs live in the neighboring states such as Indian State of Haryana which is home to the second largest Sikh population in India with 1.1 million Sikhs as per 2001 census, and large communities of Sikhs can be found across India.
Observant Sikhs adhere to long-standing practices and traditions to strengthen and express their faith.
Nanak conferred his choice at the town of Kartarpur on the banks of the river Ravi, where Nanak had finally settled down after his travels.
The Sikh revelations include the words of non-Sikh bhagats, some who lived and died before the birth of Nanak, and whose teachings are part of the Sikh scriptures.
The Sikh scripture uses Hindu terminology extensively, with hundreds of references to the Vedas, and the names of gods and goddesses in Hindu bhakti movement traditions, such as Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma, Parvati, Lakshmi, Saraswati, Rama, Krishna in order to explain its divine message.
The main language used in the scripture is known as ''Sant Bhāṣā'', a language related to both Punjabi and Hindi and used extensively across medieval northern India by proponents of popular devotional religion (bhakti).
The term revelation, clarify Cole and Sambhi, in Sikhism is not limited to the teachings of Nanak, they include all Sikh Gurus, as well as the words of past, present and future men and women, who possess divine knowledge intuitively through meditation.
The three morning prayers for Sikhs consist of Japji Sahib, Jaap Sahib and Tav-Prasad Savaiye.
When Guru, or Satguru (The true guru) is used in ''Gurbani'' it is often referring to the internal soul rather than a living Guru.
In June 1984, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi ordered the Indian army to launch Operation Blue Star to remove Bhindranwale and his followers from the Darbar Sahib.
The fundamental beliefs of Sikhism, articulated in the sacred scripture Guru Granth Sahib, include faith and meditation on the name of the one creator, unity and equality of all humankind, engaging in selfless service, striving for social justice for the benefit and prosperity of all, and honest conduct and livelihood while living a householder's life.
Each guru added to and reinforced the message taught by the previous, resulting in the creation of the Sikh religion.
Though Sri Chand was not an ambitious man, the Udasis believed that the Guruship should have gone to him, since he was a man of pious habits in addition to being Nanak's son.
Guru Nanak, states Sonali Marwaha, described living an "active, creative, and practical life" of "truthfulness, fidelity, self-control and purity" as being higher than the metaphysical truth.
In 1567, Emperor Akbar sat with the ordinary and poor people of the Punjab to have laṅgar.
Sikh teachings also stress the concept of sharing—''vaṇḍ chakkō''—through the distribution of free food at Sikh gurdwaras (''laṅgar''), giving charitable donations, and working for the good of the community and others (''sēvā'').
Nanak stated that the human Guru is mortal and not divine, who is to be respected and loved but not worshipped.
The anglicized word 'Sikhism' is derived from the Punjabi verb ''Sikhi'', with roots in ''Sikhana'' (to learn), and ''Sikhi'' connotes the "temporal path of learning".
Guru Amar Das also encouraged the practice of langar and made all those who visited him attend laṅgar before they could speak to him.
The initiated Sikh, considered reborn, is referred to as Khalsa Sikh, while those who do not get baptized are referred to as Sahajdhari Sikhs.
Khalsa (meaning "Sovereign") is the collective name given by Guru Gobind Singh to those Sikhs who have been initiated by taking part in a ceremony called ''ammrit sañcār'' (nectar ceremony).
Although some scholars question the use of the term 'genocide' with respect to the Partition massacres, much of the violence manifested as having genocidal tendencies.
In addition, Nanak wrote that there are many worlds on which it has created life.
Sikhs do not believe in converting people but converts to Sikhism by choice are welcomed.
Sikhism regards "Justice" and "Restorative Justice" and "divine justice" as trumping any subjective codes of moral order.
''Māyā''—defined as a temporary illusion or "unreality"—is one of the core deviations from the pursuit of God and salvation: where worldly attractions which give only illusory temporary satisfaction and pain which distract the process of the devotion of God.
Guru Nanak's ideal is the total exposure of one's being to the divine Name and a total conforming to Dharma or the "Divine Order".
:Simplified transliteration: Ik ōaṅgkār sat nām kartā purkh nirbha'u nirvair akāl mūrat ajūnī saibhaṅ gur prasād.
'' (literally, ''edict'' or ''royal order'') is often used interchangeably with the term gurmatā.
They are encouraged to have a ''chaṛdī kalā'', or ''optimistic'' - ''resilience'', view of life.
Using the Guru's teaching remembrance of ''nām'' (the divine Word or the Name of the Lord) leads to the end of egotism.
Guru Nanak stressed now ''kirat karō'': that a Sikh should balance work, worship, and charity, and should defend the rights of all human beings.
Sikhs believe that before creation, all that existed was "God" and "God's" ''hukam'' (will or order).
Typically meat is not served in community free meals such as langar.
'''Sikhism''' (), or '''Sikhi''' ( '''', , from ''Sikh'', meaning a "disciple", or a "learner"), is a monotheistic religion that originated in the Punjab region of South Asia during the 15th century.
The Khalsa is a disciplined community that combines its spiritual purpose and goals with political and military duties.
The text played a significant role in Sikh history, but in modern times parts of the text have seen antipathy and discussion among Sikhs.
It is written in the Gurmukhī script, which is a descendant of the Laṇḍā script used in the Punjab at that time.
Although the exact account of his itinerary is disputed, hagiographic accounts state he made five major journeys, spanning thousands of miles, the first tour being east towards Bengal and Assam, the second south towards Andhra and Tamil Nadu, the third north towards Kashmir, Ladakh, and to Mount Sumeru in Tibet, and the fourth tour west towards Baghdad and Mecca.
In the early twentieth century a significant community began to take shape on the west coast of the United States.
There is one primary scripture for the Sikhs: the Gurū Granth Sāhib.
The tenth guru of Sikhism, Guru Gobind Singh,  inaugurated the Khalsa (the collective body of all initiated Sikhs) as the Sikh temporal authority in the year 1699.
The Mul Mantar, the opening line of the Guru Granth Sahib and each subsequent raga, mentions Ik Oankar:
Sikhs also migrated to East Africa, West Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, the United Kingdom as well as United States and Australia.
Nehru and liquat visited Lahore, Ambala, Jilandur and Amritsar together to see for themselves what was going on and to appeal for peace.
Sikhs grew as an organized community and under the 10th Guru the Sikhs developed a trained fighting force to defend their independence.
The predominant bulk of Guru Granth Sahib is compositions by seven Sikh Gurus – Guru Nanak, Guru Angad, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, Guru Arjan, Guru Teg Bahadur and Guru Gobind Singh.
This was developed into the concept of the Saint Soldier by the 10th Sikh Guru, Gobind Singh.
Chronologically, however, the Ādi Granth – literally, ''The First Volume'', refers to the version of the scripture created by Guru Arjan in 1604.
Guru Amar Das became the third Sikh guru in 1552 at the age of 73.
The Dasam Granth is largely versions of Hindu mythology from the Puranas, secular stories from a variety of sources called ''Charitro Pakhyan'' – tales to protect careless men from perils of lust.
Some scholars call Sikhism a Bhakti sect of Indian traditions, adding that it emphasizes "nirguni Bhakti", that is loving devotion to a divine without qualities or physical form.
While the Granth acknowledges and respects the God in the Vedas, Puranas and Quran, it does not imply a syncretic bridge between Hinduism and Islam, but emphasizes focusing on Japu (repeating mantra with the name of God), instead of Muslim practices such as circumcision or praying on carpet, or Hindu rituals such as wearing thread or praying in river.
However, Nanak emphasised māyā as not a reference to the unreality of the world, but of its values.
Even though the core Sikh spiritual philosophy was never affected, the followers now began to develop a political identity.
Before he died in 1574 aged 95, he appointed his son-in-law Jēṭhā, a Khatri of the Sodhi clan, as the fourth Sikh guru.
This spirit has no gender in Sikhism, though translations may present it as masculine.
Bhindranwale and his accompanying followers, as well as many innocent Sikhs visiting the temple, were killed during the army's operations.
The thirteen Hindu bhagats whose teachings were entered into the text included Ramananda, Namdev, Pipa, Ravidas, Beni, Bhikhan, Dhanna, Jaidev, Parmanand, Sadhana, Sain, Surdas, Trilochan, while the two Muslim bhagats were Kabir and Sufi saint Farid.HS Singha (2009), The Encyclopedia of Sikhism, Hemkunt Press, ISBN 978-8170103011, page 8
Over 60% of Sikhs belong to the Jat caste, which is a rural caste.
The bulk of the scripture is classified into thirty one ''rāgas'', with each Granth rāga subdivided according to length and author.
Guru Nanak (1469–1539), the founder of Sikhism, was born in the village of ''Rāi Bhōi dī Talwandī'', now called Nankana Sahib (in present-day Pakistan).
Many adherents of Sikhism do not undergo this ceremony, but still adhere to some components of the faith and identify as Sikhs.
Upon death, the body of a Sikh is usually cremated.
The first time that this ceremony took place was on Vaisakhi, which fell on 30 March 1699 at Anandpur Sahib in Punjab.
Though a European surgeon stitched the Guru's wound, the wound re-opened as the Guru tugged at a hard strong bow after a few days, causing profuse bleeding that led to Gobind Singh's death.
Men and women are equal in Sikhism and share the same rights.
He is not an incarnation of God, not even a prophet.
Sikhs believe in reincarnation and karma concepts found in Hinduism and Buddhism.
Sikhs are joined in wedlock through the ''anand kāraj'' ceremony.
God in Sikhism is known as Ik Onkar, the One Supreme Reality.
The Empire was eventually annexed by the United Kingdom, bringing the Punjab under the British Raj.
In October, Indira Gandhi was assassinated by two of her Sikh bodyguards.
Banda Singh was executed by the emperor Farrukh Siyar after refusing the offer of a pardon if he converted to Islam.
While the Guru Granth Sahib is an unquestioned scripture in Sikhism, another important religious text, the Dasam Granth, does not enjoy universal consensus, and is considered a secondary scripture by many Sikhs.
Guru Nanak taught that living an "active, creative, and practical life" of "truthfulness, fidelity, self-control and purity" is above the metaphysical truth, and that the ideal man is one who "establishes union with God, knows His Will, and carries out that Will".
In the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee, 20 of the 140 seats are reserved for low-caste Sikhs.
Like combing hair, hearing and reciting the sacred word is used as a way to comb all negative thoughts out of the mind.
Some Sikh sects outside the Punjab-region of India, such as those found in Maharashtra and Bihar, practice Aarti with lamps during bhakti in a Sikh Gurdwara.
He reappeared three days later and declared: "There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim" (in Punjabi, "''nā kōi hindū nā kōi musalmān''").
The ardās recalls past sufferings and glories of the community, invoking divine grace for all humanity.
Guru Angad succeeded Guru Nanak.
Guru Gobind Singh was the final guru in human form.
Upon a child's birth, the Guru Granth Sahib is opened at a random point and the child is named using the first letter on the top left hand corner of the left page.
After the death of the tenth Guru, Guru Gobind Singh, the Sikh scripture, Guru Granth Sahib, became the literal embodiment of the eternal, impersonal Guru, where the scripture's word serves as the spiritual guide for Sikhs.
Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale emerged as a leader of the Damdami Taksal in 1977 and promoted a more militant solution to the problem.
Guru Nanak stated that his Guru is God who is the same from the beginning of time to the end of time.
However, a hukamnāmā formally refers to a hymn from the Gurū Granth Sāhib which is a given order to Sikhs.
The Gurmukhī script was standardised by Guru Angad, the second guru of the Sikhs, for use in the Sikh scriptures and is thought to have been influenced by the Śāradā and Devanāgarī scripts.
There are numerous eyewitness accounts of the maiming and mutilation of victims.
The recitation of the eighteenth century ''ardās'' is also customary for attending Sikhs.
According to Guru Nanak the supreme purpose of human life is to reconnect with Akal (The Timeless One), however, egotism is the biggest barrier in doing this.
A Sikh is expected to embody the qualities of a "Sant-Sipāhī" a saint-soldier.
It is also ''Akaal Purkh'' (beyond time and space) and ''Nirankar'' (without form).
Conflict with Mughal authorities escalated during the lifetime of Guru Teg Bahadur and Guru Gobind Singh.
They tend to be either birthdays or celebrations of Sikh martyrdom.
* Hola Mohalla occurs the day after Holi and is when the Khalsa gather at Anandpur and display their individual and team warrior skills, including fighting and riding.
Guru Har Krishan helped to heal many sick people.
According to the 9th Sikh Guru, Tegh Bahadur, the ideal Sikh should have both Shakti (power that resides in the temporal), and Bhakti (spiritual meditative qualities).
Once truth starts to shine in a person's heart, the essence of current and past holy books of all religions is understood by the person.
At the age of thirty, Nanak went missing and was presumed to have drowned after going for one of his morning baths to a local stream called the ''Kali Bein''.
The hagiographical ''Janamsakhis'' were not written by Nanak, but by later followers without regard for historical accuracy, and contain numerous legends and myths created to show respect for Nanak.
Scholars state that in its origins, Sikhism was influenced by the ''nirguni'' (formless God) tradition of Bhakti movement in medieval India.
He preached the principle of equality for women by prohibiting purdah and sati.
If this is not possible, any respectful means of disposing the body may be employed.
Sikhism is a monistic form of monotheistic (panentheistic) religion.
Approximately 75% of Sikhs live in the Punjab, where they constitute about 60% of the state's population.
Jap, meaning "recitation", refers to the use of sound, as the best way of approaching the divine.
The Sikh nation's embrace of military and political organisation made it a considerable regional force in 19th century India and allowed it to retain control of the Sikh Empire in the face of numerous local uprisings.
High still is truthful living".
In his early teens, Nanak caught the attention of the local landlord Rai Bular Bhatti, who was moved by his amazing intellect and divine qualities.
Two of the Sikh gurus – Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh Bahadur, after they refused to convert to Islam, were tortured and executed by the Mughal rulers.
But it has a pivotal concept of Guru.
The Dasam Granth is important to a great number for Sikhs, however it does not have the same authority as Adi Granth.
While dalits would be allowed entry into the village gurudwaras they would not be permitted to cook or serve langar (communal meal).
The other states, Nanak was a Guru.
:Transliteration: Sabb sikkhaṇ kō hukam hai gurū mānyō granth.
One connects with ''guru'' only with accumulation of selfless search of truth.
In Sikh worldview, the everyday world is part of the Infinite Reality, increased spiritual awareness leads to increased and vibrant participation in the everyday world.
Baptized Sikhs - Amritdharis, rise early and meditate and then recite all the Five Banis of Nitnem before breakfast.
Estimates of the number of deaths vary, with low estimates at 200,000 and high estimates at 1,000,000.
The confederacy of Sikh warrior bands known as ''misls'' alongside the development of the Dal Khalsa achieved a series of sweeping military and diplomatic victories, eventually creating a Sikh Empire in the Punjab under the emperor, Maharaja Ranjit Singh in 1799.
However, the exponents of these are rarely to be found amongst the Sikhs who are conversant with all the Ragas in the Guru Granth Sahib.
However, in Sikhism both karma and liberation "is modified by the concept of God's grace" (''nadar, mehar, kirpa, karam'' etc.).
The creation of a Sikh Empire began when Guru Gobind Singh sent a Sikh general, Banda Singh Bahadur, to fight the Mughal rulers of India and those who had committed atrocities against Pir Buddhu Shah.
The Janamsākhīs (literally ''birth stories''), are writings which profess to be biographies of Nanak.
Nanak stressed that god must be seen from "the inward eye", or the "heart", of a human being: devotees must meditate to progress towards enlightenment of heavenly life.
The Dasam Granth is a scripture of Sikhs which contains texts attributed to the Tenth Guru.
He taught, states Jon Mayled, that the most important form of worship is Bhakti.
As Ik Onkar is universally immanent, ''guru'' is indistinguishable from "Akal" and are one and the same.
The Granth is revered as eternal ''gurbānī'' and the spiritual authority.
In his last and final tour, he returned to the banks of the Ravi River to end his days.
* Nagar Kirtan involves the processional singing of holy hymns throughout a community.
Since 2011 the Gurpurb of Guru Har Rai (March 14) has been celebrated as Sikh Vatavaran Diswas (Sikh Environment Day).
Each new outrage, each new massacre brought the thirst for revenge and desperate need to flee from the terror as the scale of disaster mounted, Tara Singh and other Sikh leaders toured the province in military vehicles, appealing to stop the violence, but their followers had tasted blood, and it was too late for Tara Singh to stop what he had begun.
His persecution and death inspired his successors to promote a military and political organization of Sikh communities to defend themselves against the attacks of Mughal forces.
Guru Amar Das's successor and son-in-law Guru Ram Das founded the city of Amritsar, which is home of the Harimandir Sahib and regarded widely as the holiest city for all Sikhs.
Traditionally, the procession is led by the saffron-robed Panj Piare (the five beloved of the Guru), who are followed by the Guru Granth Sahib, the holy Sikh scripture, which is placed on a float.
Rai Bular Bhatti was witness to many incidents in which Nanak enchanted him and as a result Rai Bular Bhatti and Nanak's sister Bibi Nanki, became the first persons to recognise the divine qualities in Nanak.
#Adultery is forbidden.
The meat eaten by Sikhs is sourced from Jhatka method of producing meat.
Sikhism does not subscribe to the theory of incarnation or the concept of prophethood, states Singha, but "it has a pivotal concept of Guru; He is not an incarnation of God, not even a prophet; He is an illumined soul."
Sikhism emphasizes simran (meditation on the words of the Guru Granth Sahib), that can be expressed musically through kirtan or internally through Nam Japo as a means to feel God's presence, and to have control over the "Five Thieves" (lust, rage, greed, attachment and conceit).
Guru Tegh Bahadur became guru in 1665 and led the Sikhs until 1675.
It also contains the traditions and teachings of thirteen Hindu Bhakti movement ''sants'' (saints) such as Ramananda, Namdev among others, and two Muslim saints namely Kabir and the Sufi Sheikh Farid.
Hand in hand, secular life is considered to be intertwined with the spiritual life.
While practiced at any time, it is customary in the month of Visakhi (or Vaisakhi).
