In History, Sikkim is known as ''Indrakil'', the garden of the war god Indra.
Sikkim has furthermore invested in a fledgling gambling industry, promoting both casinos and online gambling.
The Indian Army has control over a large part of the state, as Sikkim forms part of a sensitive border area with China.
Chamling and his party have since held on to power by winning the 1999, 2004,2009 and 2014 elections.
Nepali is the lingua franca of Sikkim, while Sikkimese (Bhutia) and Lepcha are spoken in certain areas.
Among the animals more commonly found in the alpine zone are yaks, mainly reared for their milk, meat, and as a beast of burden.
In 1890, Sikkim became a British protectorate by means of a convention signed with China, although neither the governments of Sikkim nor Tibet was consulted.
About a third of the state is heavily forested.
In 1700, Sikkim was invaded by the Bhutanese with the help of the half-sister of the Chogyal, who had been denied the throne.
However, some hill slopes have been converted into terrace farms.
The sex ratio is 889 females per 1,000 males, with a total of 321,661 males and 286,027 females recorded in 2011.
This, combined with the state's heavy rainfall, causes extensive soil erosion and the loss of soil nutrients through leaching.
A daily helicopter service run by the Sikkim Helicopter Service connects Gangtok to Bagdogra; the flight is thirty minutes long, operates only once a day, and can carry four people.
''Avyakta'', ''Bilokan'', the ''Journal of Hill Research'', ''Khaber Khagaj'', ''Panda'', and the ''Sikkim Science Society Newsletter'' are among other registered publications.
The southern urban areas of Sikkim have English, Nepali and Hindi daily newspapers.
Beer, whiskey, rum and brandy are widely consumed in Sikkim, as is tongba, a millet-based alcoholic beverage which is also popular in Nepal and Darjeeling.
The name is believed to be a reference to the palace built by the state's first ruler, Phuntsog Namgyal.
A variant of the Poinsettia, locally known as "Christmas Flower", can be found in abundance in the mountainous state.
Sikkim currently does not have any operational airports or railheads because of its rough terrain.
The predominant religions are Hinduism and Vajrayana Buddhism.
The governor also appoints cabinet ministers on the advice of the Chief Minister.
The pass, which had previously been closed since the 1962 Sino-Indian War, was an offshoot of the ancient Silk Road.
Sikkim University began operating in 2008 at Yangang, which is situated about  from Singtam.
The state has five seasons: winter, summer, spring, autumn, and a monsoon season between June and September.
Trade through the pass remains hampered by Sikkim's limited infrastructure and government restrictions in both India and China, though the volume of traded goods has been steadily increasing.
The governor's appointment is largely ceremonial, and his or her main role is to oversee the swearing-in of the Chief Minister.
First, the 35th Amendment laid down a set of conditions that made Sikkim an "Associate State", a special designation not used by any other state.
At an altitude of  above sea level, it will be one of the five highest airports in India.
In 2011 Sikkim's adult literacy rate was 82.2 per cent: 87.29 per cent for males and 76.43 per cent for females.
Sikkim came under the suzerainty of India, which controlled its external affairs, defence, diplomacy and communications, but Sikkim otherwise retained administrative autonomy.
Towns in southern and western Sikkim are connected to the hill stations of Kalimpong and Darjeeling in northern West Bengal.
In 1979, after a period of instability, a popular ministry headed by Nar Bahadur Bhandari, leader of the Sikkim Sangram Parishad Party, was sworn in.
In April of that year, the Indian Army took over the city of Gangtok and disarmed the Chogyal's palace guards.
In 1849, two British physicians, Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker and Dr. Archibald Campbell, the latter being in charge of relations between the British and Sikkimese governments, ventured into the mountains of Sikkim unannounced and unauthorised.
Sikkim also has a rich diversity of arthropods, many of which remain unstudied; the most studied Sikkimese arthropods are butterflies.
Other languages include Dzongkha, Groma, Gurung, Limbu, Magar, Majhi, Majhwar, Nepal Bhasa, Rai, Sherpa, Sunuwar, Tamang, Thulung, Tibetan, and Yakha.
In 1947, when India became independent, a popular vote rejected Sikkim's joining the Indian Union, although a treaty was made between India and Sikkim in 1950, in the interest of Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
The main service providers include Dish TV, Doordarshan and Nayuma.
By 2006, the state had achieved 100 per cent rural electrification.
The Chief Minister, who holds the real executive powers, is the head of the party or coalition garnering the largest majority in the state elections.
Many areas are restricted to foreigners, and official permits are needed to visit them.
The five-station line is intended to support both economic development and Indian Army operations, and was initially planned to be completed by 2015, though as of 2013 its construction has met with delays.
This type of soil tends to support evergreen and deciduous forests.
In addition, the Ministry of Railways proposed plans in 2010 for railway lines linking Mirik to Ranipool.
There exist many Hindu temples.
English is also spoken and understood in most of Sikkim.
Bhandari held on to power in the 1984 and 1989 elections.
Phuntsog Namgyal was succeeded in 1670 by his son, Tensung Namgyal, who moved the capital from Yuksom to Rabdentse (near modern Pelling).
Nearly 81 per cent of the area of Sikkim comes under the administration of its forest department.
Indigenous Nepali rock and Lepcha music are also popular.
Between 1717 and 1733, the kingdom faced many raids by the Nepalese in the west and Bhutanese in the east, culminating with the destruction of the capital Rabdentse by the Nepalese.
The airport will be capable of operating ATR aircraft.
With around 98,000 inhabitants as of 2011, the capital Gangtok is the most significant urban area in the mostly rural state; in 2005, the urban population in Sikkim constituted around 11.06 per cent of the total.
Orchids, figs, laurel, bananas, sal trees and bamboo grow in the Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests of the lower altitudes of Sikkim.
In the 19th century, it allied itself with British India, eventually becoming a British protectorate.
The average annual temperature for most of Sikkim is around .
Many students, however, migrate to Siliguri, Kolkata, Bangalore and other Indian cities for their higher education.
Over the next 150 years, the kingdom witnessed frequent raids and territorial losses to Nepalese invaders.
The Nepalese attacked Sikkim, overrunning most of the region including the Terai.
The Bhutanese were driven away by the Tibetans, who restored the throne to the Chogyal ten years later.
Sikkim is allocated one seat in each of the two chambers of India's national bicameral legislature, the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha.
However, the voltage remains unstable and voltage stabilisers are needed.
Sikkim's Namgyal dynasty was established in 1642.
Tibetans reside mostly in the northern and eastern reaches of the state.
In 2015, Sikkim fully implemented organic farming statewide, becoming India's first "organic state", while in 2016, it restricted the usage of plastic water bottles (in government functions and meetings) and styrofoam products, becoming India's "cleanest state".
Sikkim is home to around 5,000 species of flowering plants, 515 rare orchids, 60 primula species, 36 rhododendron species, 11 oak varieties, 23 bamboo varieties, 16 conifer species, 362 types of ferns and ferns allies, 8 tree ferns, and over 424 medicinal plants.
The Tibetan name for Sikkim is ''Drenjong'' (Wylie-transliteration: ''´bras ljongs''), which means "valley of rice", while the Bhutias call it ''Beyul Demazong'', which means '"the hidden valley of rice".
A fifth-generation descendant of Khye Bumsa, Phuntsog Namgyal, became the founder of Sikkim's monarchy in 1642, when he was consecrated as the first Chogyal, or priest-king, of Sikkim by the three venerated lamas at Yuksom.
The Lower Himalayas, lying in the southern reaches of the state, are the most densely populated.
The state government has promoted biogas and solar power for cooking, but these have received a poor response and are used mostly for lighting purposes.
Chinese officials were in a quandary on this issue, as any protests to India would mean an explicit endorsement of India's governance of Sikkim, which China still recognised as an independent state occupied by India.
Although tensions between the Lepchas and the Nepalese escalated during the merger of Sikkim with India in the 1970s, there has never been any major degree of communal religious violence, unlike in other Indian states.
In recent years, the government of Sikkim has extensively promoted tourism.
Later, the 36th Amendment repealed the 35th Amendment, and made Sikkim a full state, adding its name to the First Schedule of the Constitution.
However, it has a high population growth rate, averaging 12.36% per cent between 2001 and 2011.
The Chinese government eventually recognised Sikkim as an Indian state in 2003, on the condition that India officially recognise Tibet as a part of China; New Delhi had originally accepted Tibet as a part of China in 1953 during the government of Jawaharlal Nehru.
For the most part, the land is unfit for agriculture because of the rocky, precipitous slopes.
The majority of Sikkim's residents are of Nepali ethnic origin.
In 2000, the seventeenth Karmapa, Urgyen Trinley Dorje, who had been confirmed by the Dalai Lama and accepted as a tulku by the Chinese government, escaped from Tibet, seeking to return to the Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim.
* Legislature: Sikkim has a unicameral legislature, the Sikkim Legislative Assembly, like most other Indian states.
Sikkim is a popular tourist destination, owing to its culture, scenery and biodiversity.
The High Court, located at Gangtok, has a Chief Justice along with two permanent justices.
The rock consists of phyllites and schists, and is highly susceptible to weathering and erosion.
The hills of Sikkim mainly consist of gneissose and half-schistose rocks, producing generally poor and shallow brown clay soils.
In 1791, China sent troops to support Sikkim and defend Tibet against the Gorkha Kingdom.
The Guru is reported to have blessed the land, introduced Buddhism, and foretold the era of monarchy that would arrive in Sikkim centuries later.
Located in the Himalayan mountains, the state is bordered by Nepal to the west, China's Tibet Autonomous Region to the north and east, and Bhutan to the east.
Momos – steamed dumplings filled with vegetables, buffalo meat or pork and served with soup – are a popular snack.
Among the state's most notable hot springs are those at Phurchachu, Yumthang, Borang, Ralang, Taram-chu and Yumey Samdong.
The closest major railway stations are Siliguri and New Jalpaiguri in neighbouring West Bengal.
The summit of Kangchenjunga—the world's third-highest peak—is the state's highest point, situated on the border between Sikkim and Nepal.
Sikkim has 75 Buddhist monasteries, the oldest dating back to the 1700s.
* Executive: As with all states of India, a governor stands at the head of the executive power of state, just like the president is the head of the executive power in the Union, and is appointed by the President of India.
Sikkim is nonetheless geographically diverse due to its location in the Himalayas; the climate ranges from subtropical to high alpine, and Kangchenjunga, the world's third-highest peak, is located on Sikkim's border with Nepal.
It is being constructed by the Airports Authority of India on 200 acres of land.
The doctors were detained by the Sikkimese government, leading to a punitive British expedition against the kingdom, after which the Darjeeling district and Morang were annexed to British India in 1853.
In the 1994 elections, Pawan Kumar Chamling of the Sikkim Democratic Front became the Chief Minister of the state.
To enable the incorporation of the new state, the Indian Parliament amended the Indian Constitution.
During the monsoon, heavy rains increase the risk of landslides.
In 2003, Sikkim decided to convert fully to organic farming statewide, and achieved this goal in 2015, becoming India's first "organic state".
A state council was established in 1953 to allow for constitutional government under the Chogyal.
Because of its hilly terrain and poor transport infrastructure, Sikkim lacks a large-scale industrial base.
There are two state-run polytechnical schools, the Advanced Technical Training Centre (ATTC) and the Centre for Computers and Communication Technology (CCCT), which offer diploma courses in various branches of engineering.
Sikkim has 11 official languages: Nepali (which is its lingua franca), Sikkimese, Hindi, Lepcha, Tamang, Limbu, Newari, Rai, Gurung, Magar, Sunwar and English.
The invasion led to the Chogyal of Sikkim becoming a titular ruler under the directive of the British governor.
* Judiciary: The judiciary consists of the Sikkim High Court and a system of lower courts.
Higher up are Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows, home to a broad variety of rhododendrons and wildflowers.
Twelve colleges and other institutions in Sikkim offer higher education.
Traditional local festivals, such as Maghe Sankranti and Bhimsen Puja, are also popular.
Each of Sikkim's districts is overseen by a Central Government appointee, the district collector, who is in charge of the administration of the civilian areas of the district.
Sikkim has the third-highest per capita alcoholism rate amongst all Indian states, behind Punjab and Haryana.
Important local dailies and weeklies include ''Hamro Prajashakti'' (Nepali daily), ''Himalayan Mirror'' (English daily), the ''Samay Dainik'', ''Sikkim Express'' (English), ''Sikkim Now'' (English), ''Kanchanjunga Times'' (Nepali weekly), ''Pragya Khabar'' (Nepali weekly) and ''Himalibela''.
Sikkim has four districts – East Sikkim, West Sikkim, North Sikkim and South Sikkim.
The most widely accepted origin theory of the name ''Sikkim'' is that it is a combination of two Limbu words: ''su'', which means "new", and ''khyim'', which means "palace" or "house".
Losar, Loosong, Saga Dawa, Lhabab Duechen, Drupka Teshi and Bhumchu are among the Buddhist festivals celebrated in Sikkim.
These four districts are further divided into subdivisions; Pakyong and Rongli are the subdivisions of the East district, Soreng is the subdivision of the West district, Chungthang is the subdivision of the North district and Ravongla is the subdivision of the South district.
The airport is located about  from Gangtok, and frequent buses connect the two.
rect 84 383 132 456 West Sikkim
Furthermore, the state receives regional editions of national English newspapers such as ''The Statesman'', ''The Telegraph'', ''The Hindu'' and ''The Times of India''.
The state government maintains  of roadways that do not fall under the BRO's jurisdiction.
The major languages spoken as per census 2001 are Nepali (338,606), Sikkimese (41,825), Hindi (36,072), Lepcha (35,728), Limbu (34,292), Sherpa (13,922), Tamang (10,089), etc.
According to legend, the Buddhist guru Padmasambhava visited Sikkim in the 8th century CE, introduced Buddhism and foretold the era of the Sikkimese monarchy.
In 1975, after the abrogation of Sikkim's monarchy, the Indian National Congress gained a majority in the 1977 elections.
The Gangtok helipad is the only civilian helipad in the state.
The record for the longest period of continuous rain in Sikkim is 11&nbsp;days.
In 1973, riots in front of the Chogyal's palace led to a formal request for protection from India.
Privately run bus, tourist taxi and jeep services operate throughout Sikkim, and also connect it to Siliguri.
Internet cafés are well established in the district capitals, but broadband connectivity is not widely available.
These streams combine into the major Teesta River and its tributary, the Rangeet, which flow through the state from north to south.
rect 189 413 232 479 South Sikkim
Sikkim produces more cardamom than any other Indian state, and is home to the largest cultivated area of cardamom.
The Noble Dendrobium is the official flower of Sikkim, while the rhododendron is the state tree.
Sikkim's hot springs are renowned for their medicinal and therapeutic values.
Currently, the Governor of Sikkim is Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil.
The opening of the Nathu La pass on 6 July 2006, connecting Lhasa, Tibet, to India, was billed as a boon for Sikkim's economy.
However, Pakyong Airport, the state's first airport, located at a distance of  from Gangtok, is expected to become operational in March 2016, after its completion was delayed from the original target of 2014.
The tundra-type region in the north is snowbound for four months every year, and the temperature drops below  almost every night.
The 2003 agreement led to a thaw in Sino-Indian relations, and on 6 July 2006, the Sikkimese Himalayan pass of Nathu La was opened to cross-border trade, becoming the first open border between India and China.
Sikkim's economy is largely dependent on agriculture and tourism, and  the state had the third-smallest GDP among Indian states, although it is also among the fastest-growing.
The earliest historical mention of Sikkim is a record of the passage of the Buddhist saint Padmasambhava, also known as Guru Rinpoche, through the land in the 8th century.
Most of the inhabited regions of Sikkim experience a temperate climate, with temperatures seldom exceeding  in summer.
Sikkim's Nepalese majority celebrate all major Hindu festivals, including Diwali and Dussera.
Meanwhile, the Sikkim National Congress demanded fresh elections and greater representation for Nepalis in Sikkim.
The fauna of Sikkim include the snow leopard, musk deer,  Himalayan tahr, red panda, Himalayan marmot, Himalayan serow, Himalayan goral, muntjac, common langur, Asian black bear, clouded leopard, marbled cat, leopard cat, dhole, Tibetan wolf, hog badger, binturong, and Himalayan jungle cat.
In the temperate elevations above  there are Eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests, where oaks, chestnuts, maples, birches, alders, and magnolias grow in large numbers, as well as Himalayan subtropical pine forests, dominated by Chir pine.
The state's economy is largely agrarian, based on the terraced farming of rice and the cultivation of crops such as maize, millet, wheat, barley, oranges, tea and cardamom.
Sikkim's most popular sports are football and cricket, although hang gliding and river rafting have also grown popular as part of the tourism industry.
With 607,688 inhabitants as of the 2011 census, Sikkim is the least populous state in India and the second-smallest state after Goa in total area, covering approximately .
The state's first casino, the Casino Sikkim, opened in March 2009, and the government subsequently issued a number of additional casino licences and online sports betting licenses.
ATTC is situated at Bardang, Singtam, and CCCT at Chisopani, Namchi.
The avifauna of Sikkim include the impeyan pheasant, crimson horned pheasant, snow partridge, Tibetan snowcock, bearded vulture and griffon vulture, as well as golden eagles, quails, plovers, woodcocks, sandpipers, pigeons, Old World flycatchers, babblers and robins.
According to legend, Khye Bumsa, a 14th-century prince from the Minyak House in Kham in eastern Tibet, received a divine revelation instructing him to travel south to seek his fortunes.
Sikkim is also one of the least densely populated Indian states, with only 86 persons per square kilometre.
In 1975, a referendum abolished the Sikkimese monarchy, and the territory instead became part of India.
The Indian state of West Bengal lies to the south.
Hinduism is the state's major religion and is practised mainly by ethnic Nepalis; an estimated 57.75 per cent of the total population are adherents of the religion.
''Himalaya Darpan'', a Nepali daily published in Siliguri, is one of the leading Nepali daily newspapers in the region.
Nepali-language newspapers, as well as some English newspapers, are locally printed, whereas Hindi and English newspapers are printed in Siliguri.
Sikkim is situated in an ecological hotspot of the lower Himalayas, one of only three among the ecoregions of India.
English is taught in schools and used in government documents.
The largest institution is the Sikkim Manipal University of Technological Sciences, which offers higher education in engineering, medicine and management.
During the Losar (Tibetan New Year), most offices and educational institutions are closed for a week.
This prompted the British East India Company to attack Nepal, resulting in the Gurkha War of 1814.
Western rock music and Indian pop have gained a wide following in Sikkim.
In 2011, the average per capita income in Sikkim stood at 81,159 (US$1,305).
The state has 28 mountain peaks, more than 80 glaciers, 227 high-altitude lakes (including the Tsongmo, Gurudongmar and Khecheopalri Lakes), five major hot springs, and more than 100 rivers and streams.
'''Sikkim''' () is a landlocked state of India, the last to give up its monarchy and fully integrate into India, in 1975.
Sikkim's climate ranges from sub-tropical in the south to tundra in the north.
Almost 25% of the state is covered by the Khangchendzonga National Park.
National Highway 31A and National Highway 31 link Siliguri to Gangtok.
The traditional religions of the native Sikkimese account for much of the remainder of the population.
rect 242 167 304 241 North Sikkim
Brewing, distilling, tanning and watchmaking are the main industries, and are mainly located in the southern regions of the state, primarily in the towns of Melli and Jorethang.
Numerous snow-fed streams have carved out river valleys in the west and south of the state.
Sikkim's nominal state gross domestic product (GDP) was estimated at US$1.57 billion in 2014, constituting the third-smallest GDP among India's 28 states.
Channels served are largely the same as those available in the rest of India, although Nepali-language channels are also available.
The roads in southern Sikkim are in relatively good condition, landslides being less frequent in this region.
The soil is coarse, with large concentrations of iron oxide; it ranges from neutral to acidic and is lacking in organic and mineral nutrients.
The average temperature of the water in these hot springs is .
Nestling in the Himalayan mountains, the state of Sikkim is characterised by mountainous terrain.
Treaties signed between Sikkim and Nepal resulted in the return of the territory annexed by the Nepalese in 1817.
On 16 May 1975, Sikkim became the 22nd state of the Indian Union, and the monarchy was abolished.
On 18 September 2011, a magnitude 6.9Mw earthquake struck Sikkim, killing at least 116 people in the state and in Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh and Tibet.
The native Sikkimese consist of the Bhutias, who migrated from the Kham district of Tibet in the 14th century, and the Lepchas, who are believed to have migrated from the Far East.
Sikkim's roads are maintained by the Border Roads Organisation (BRO), an offshoot of the Indian Army.
Sikkim's capital and largest city is Gangtok.
Sikkim receives most of its electricity from 19 hydroelectric power stations.
Vajrayana Buddhism, which accounts for 27.3 per cent of the population, is Sikkim's second-largest, yet most prominent religion.
Migrant resident communities include Biharis, Bengalis and Marwaris, who are prominent in commerce in South Sikkim and Gangtok.
Fog affects many parts of the state during winter and the monsoons, making transportation perilous.
The ''Sikkim Herald'' is an official weekly publication of the government.
That Indo-Sikkim treaty gave Sikkim an Indian protectorate status.
The Sikkim High Court is the smallest state high court in the country.
Almost the entire state is hilly, with an elevation ranging from  to .
Satellite television channels through dish antennae are available in most homes in the state.
Sikkimese Muslims celebrate Eid ul-Fitr and Muharram.
In addition, a small mining industry exists in Sikkim, extracting minerals such as copper, dolomite, talc, graphite, quartzite, coal, zinc and lead.
rect 310 410 361 475 East Sikkim
The Lepcha people, the original inhabitants of Sikkim, called it ''Nye-mae-el'', meaning "paradise".
Christmas has also been promoted in Gangtok to attract tourists during the off-season.
