In September 2013, during a visit to Kazakhstan, Chinese President Xi Jinping introduced a plan for creating a New Silk Road from China to Europe.
Many barbarian tribes became skilled warriors able to conquer rich cities and fertile lands and to forge strong military empires.
During the early 13th century Khwarezmia was invaded by the early Mongol Empire.
As the number of members within the Sangha increased, it became costly so that only the larger cities were able to afford having the Buddha and his disciples visit.
This belief was affirmed by Seneca the Younger in his Phaedra and by Virgil in his Georgics.
However, in 1370 Samarkand saw a revival as the capital of the new Timurid Empire.
The Tang dynasty established a second Pax Sinica, and the Silk Road reached its golden age, whereby Persian and Sogdian merchants benefited from the commerce between East and West.
In 1500, an armada led by Pedro Álvares Cabral also linked for the first time on this new route the New World (South America) and Asia.
Trade was the primary motivation for Portuguese explorations of the Indian Ocean, including the sea of China, resulting in the arrival in 1513 of the first European trading ships to the coasts of China, under Jorge Álvares and Rafael Perestrello, sent by Afonso de Albuquerque.
Valerie Hansen (2012) believed that earliest Roman coins found in China date to the 4th century, during Late Antiquity and the Dominate period, and come from the Byzantine Empire.
Although the Silk Road from China to the West was initially formulated during the reign of Emperor Wu of Han (141 – 87 BCE), it was reopened by the Tang Empire in 639 when Hou Junji conquered the Western Regions, and remained open for almost four decades.
The last link in one of these two railway routes was completed in 1990, when the railway systems of China and Kazakhstan connected at Alataw Pass (Alashan Kou).
During Emperor Taizong's reign alone, large campaigns were launched against not only the Göktürks, but also separate campaigns against the Tuyuhun, the Xiyu states, and the Xueyantuo.
Because the Mongols came to control the trade routes, trade circulated throughout the region, though they never abandoned their nomadic lifestyle.
In its heyday, it sustained an international culture that strung together groups as diverse as the Magyars, Armenians, and Chinese.
When he discovered America, it was believed he had reached Asia and the search was interrupted.
At this time caravans of Sogdians travelling to Upper Mongolia are mentioned in Chinese sources.
Although the Byzantines had already procured silkworm eggs from China by this point, the quality of Chinese silk was still far greater than anything produced in the West, a fact that is perhaps emphasized by the discovery of coins minted by Justin II found in a Chinese tomb of Shanxi province dated to the Sui Dynasty (581-618).
Merchants also helped to establish diaspora within the communities they encountered, and over time their cultures became based on Buddhism.
His tales, documented in ''The Travels of Marco Polo'', opened Western eyes to some of the customs of the Far East.
Most importantly, silk was used as currency for trade along the silk road.
Ptolemy's map of the Ganges Delta, a remarkably accurate effort, showed that his informants knew all about the course of the Brahmaputra River, crossing through the Himalayas then bending westward to its source in Tibet.
Soon after the Roman conquest of Egypt in 30 BCE, regular communications and trade between China, Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East, Africa, and Europe blossomed on an unprecedented scale.
Navigator Willem Barents left Amsterdam with two ships to search for the Northeast passage, north of Siberia and on to eastern Asia.
The Persian Samanid Empire (819–999) centered in Bukhara (Uzbekistan) continued the trade legacy of the Sogdians.
Richard Foltz, Xinru Liu, and others have described how trading activities along the Silk Road over many centuries facilitated the transmission not just of goods but also ideas and culture, notably in the area of religions.
After the defeat of the Xiongnu, however, Chinese armies established themselves in Central Asia, initiating the Silk Route as a major avenue of international trade.
In June 2014 UNESCO designated the Chang'an-Tianshan corridor of the Silk Road as a World Heritage Site.
The ''History of Ming'' preserves an account where the Hongwu Emperor, after founding the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), had a supposed Byzantine merchant named Nieh-ku-lun (捏古倫) deliver his proclamation about the establishment of a new dynasty to the Byzantine court of John V Palaiologos in September 1371.
It also stressed getting rid of material desire to a certain point; this was often difficult for followers to understand.
He reached the west coast of Novaya Zemlya and followed it northwards but was finally forced to turn back when confronted with its northern extremity.
File:Green glass Roman cup unearthed at Eastern Han tomb, Guixian, China.jpg|Green Roman glass cup unearthed from an Eastern Han Dynasty (25-220 CE) tomb, Guangxi, southern China
Roman artisans began to replace yarn with valuable plain silk cloths from China.
These unlikely events of cross-cultural contact allowed both cultures to adapt to each other as an alternative.
With control of these trade routes, citizens of the Roman Empire would receive new luxuries and greater prosperity for the Empire as a whole.
Other Roman glasswares have been found in Eastern-Han-era tombs (25-220 CE) more further inland in Nanjing and Luoyang.
The northern route travelled northwest through the Chinese province of Gansu from Shaanxi Province and split into three further routes, two of them following the mountain ranges to the north and south of the Taklamakan Desert to rejoin at Kashgar, and the other going north of the Tian Shan mountains through Turpan, Talgar, and Almaty (in what is now southeast Kazakhstan).
The Chinese subsequently sent numerous embassies, around ten every year, to these countries and as far as Seleucid Syria.
By the time of Herodotus (c. 475 BCE), the Royal Road of the Persian Empire ran some  from the city of Susa on the Karun ( east of the Tigris) to the port of Smyrna (modern İzmir in Turkey) on the Aegean Sea.
The Mongol ruler Genghis Khan had the once vibrant cities of Bukhara and Samarkand burned to the ground after besieging them.
Turkmeni marching lords seized land around the western part of the Silk Road from the decaying Byzantine Empire.
He also made reports on neighbouring countries that he did not visit, such as Anxi (Parthia), Tiaozhi (Mesopotamia), Shendu (Pakistan) and the Wusun.
In addition to economic trade, the Silk Road was a route for cultural trade among the civilizations along its network.
The expansion of Scythian cultures, stretching from the Hungarian plain and the Carpathian Mountains to the Chinese Kansu Corridor, and linking the Middle East with Northern India and the Punjab, undoubtedly played an important role in the development of the Silk Road.
It has been suggested that the Chinese crossbow was transmitted to the Roman world on such occasions, although the Greek gastraphetes provides an alternative origin.
Zhang Qian visited directly the kingdom of Dayuan in Ferghana, the territories of the Yuezhi in Transoxiana, the Bactrian country of Daxia with its remnants of Greco-Bactrian rule, and Kangju.
For instance, Warwick Ball contends that the maritime spice trade with India and Arabia was far more consequential for the economy of the Roman Empire than the silk trade with China, which at sea was conducted mostly through India and on land was handled by numerous intermediaries such as the Sogdians.
The travels of the priest Xuanzang were fictionalized in the 16th century in a fantasy adventure novel called ''Journey to the West'', which told of trials with demons and the aid given by various disciples on the journey.
Harper asserts that a 2nd or 3rd-century Roman gilt silver plate found in Jingyuan, Gansu, China with a central image of the Greco-Roman god Dionysus resting on a feline creature, most likely came via Greater Iran (i.e.
The Dharmaguptakas and the Sarvastivadins were two of the major Nikaya schools.
Silk was also a representation of art, serving as a religious symbol.
A maritime Silk Route opened up between Chinese-controlled Giao Chỉ (centred in modern Vietnam, near Hanoi), probably by the 1st century.
Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Buddhism, Christianity, Manichaeism, and Islam all spread across Eurasia through trade networks that were tied to specific religious communities and their institutions.
The margin of Chinese victory appears to have been their crossbows, whose bolts and darts seem easily to have penetrated Roman shields and armour."
This extension came around 130 BCE, with the embassies of the Han dynasty to Central Asia following the reports of the ambassador Zhang Qian (who was originally sent to obtain an alliance with the Yuezhi against the Xiongnu).
When Christopher Columbus sailed across the Atlantic Ocean in 1492, he was searching for an alternative trade route to China from Spain.
In exchange, the caravans sent back bolts of silk brocade, lacquer-ware, and porcelain.
Ban Chao expanded his conquests across the Pamirs to the shores of the Caspian Sea and the borders of Parthia.
The fragmentation of the Mongol Empire loosened the political, cultural, and economic unity of the Silk Road.
Others say that Emperor Wu was mainly interested in fighting the Xiongnu and that major trade began only after the Chinese pacified the Hexi Corridor.
The Silk Road was the most important pre-modern Eurasian trade route.
Another branch road travelled from Herat through Susa to Charax Spasinu at the head of the Persian Gulf and across to Petra and on to Alexandria and other eastern Mediterranean ports from where ships carried the cargoes to Rome.
The Mongol diplomat Rabban Bar Sauma visited the courts of Europe in 1287–88 and provided a detailed written report to the Mongols.
Speaking of the ''bombyx'' or silk moth, he wrote in his Natural Histories "They weave webs, like spiders, that become a luxurious clothing material for women, called silk."
Many scholars have attributed this to Greek influence.
The Roman Empire, and its demand for sophisticated Asian products, crumbled in the West around the 5th century.
"China snatched control of the Silk Road from the Hsiung-nu", when the Chinese general Cheng Ki "installed himself as protector of the Tarim at Wu-lei, situated between Kara Shahr and Kucha."
The Roman Empire connected with the Central Asian Silk Road through their ports in Barygaza (known today as Bharuch ) and Barbaricum (known today as the cities of Karachi, Sindh, and Pakistan ) and continued along the western coast of India.
Chinese envoys had been sailing through the Indian Ocean to India since perhaps the 2nd century BCE, yet it was during the Tang dynasty that a strong Chinese maritime presence could be found in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea, into Persia, Mesopotamia (sailing up the Euphrates River in modern-day Iraq), Arabia, Egypt, Aksum (Ethiopia), and Somalia in the Horn of Africa.
From the 4th century CE onward, Chinese pilgrims also started to travel on the Silk Road to India to get improved access to the original Buddhist scriptures, with Fa-hsien's pilgrimage to India (395–414), and later Xuanzang (629–644) and Hyecho, who traveled from Korea to India.
Chinese wealth grew as they delivered silk and other luxury goods to the Roman Empire, whose wealthy Roman women admired their beauty.
This Pacific line was connected overland through Mexico with an Atlantic line, the Spanish West Indies Fleet, which in turn linked the Americas with Spain.
Gemstones and other merchandise from Thailand and Java were traded in the delta and through it.
Perhaps most surprising of the cultural exchanges between China and the Xiongnu, Chinese soldiers would sometimes defect and convert to the Xiongnu way of life and stay in the steppes for fear of punishment.
Crossing the high mountains, it passed through northern Pakistan, over the Hindu Kush mountains, and into Afghanistan, rejoining the northern route near Merv, Turkmenistan.
This form of Buddhism highlighted, as stated by Xinru Liu, "the elusiveness of physical reality, including material wealth."
The Silk Road gave rise to the clusters of military states of nomadic origins in North China, ushered the Nestorian, Manichaean, Buddhist, and later Islamic religions into Central Asia and China.
Though this section does not complete the Silk Road–style overland connection between China and Europe, plans are underway to extend the route past Tehran, through Istanbul, into Europe.
The Romans traded spices, perfumes, and silk.
Trade between East and West also developed across the Indian Ocean, between Alexandria in Egypt and Guangzhou in China.
Merchants found the moral and ethical teachings of Buddhism to be an appealing alternative to previous religions.
The Uyghur Nestorian Christian diplomat Rabban Bar Sauma, who set out from his Chinese home in Khanbaliq (Beijing) and acted as a representative for Argun (a grandnephew of Kublai Khan), traveled throughout Europe and attempted to secure military alliances with Edward I of England, Philip IV of France, Pope Nicholas IV, as well as the Byzantine ruler  Andronikos II Palaiologos.
There are indications that he may have led expeditions as far as Kashgar in Chinese Turkestan, leading to the first known contacts between China and the West around 200 BCE.
The Greek Seleucids were exiled to Iran and Central Asia because of a new Iranian Dynasty called the Parthians at the beginning of the 2nd century BCE, and as a result the Parthians became the new middle men for trade in a period when the Romans were major customers for silk.
The fall of the Soviet Union and 'Iron Curtain' in 1989 led to a surge of public and academic interest in Silk Road sites and studies in the former Soviet republics of Central Asia.
Its main trade centre on the Silk Road, the city of Merv, in due course and with the coming of age of Buddhism in China, became a major Buddhist centre by the middle of the 2nd century.
There were many different schools of Buddhism travelling on the Silk Road.
The Netherlands made an unsuccessful attempt to find a northern sea route to Asia in 1594.
It was maintained and protected by the Achaemenid Empire (c. 500–330 BCE) and had postal stations and relays at regular intervals.
Ottoman rulers of the day were anti-western, countering the crusades and aware of the loss of Andalusia in the west.
In 848 the Tang Chinese, led by the commander Zhang Yichao, were only able to reclaim the Hexi Corridor and Dunhuang in Gansu from the Tibetans.
The Mahayana, which was more of a "pan-Buddhist movement" than a school of Buddhism, appears to have begun in northwestern India or Central Asia.
The Greco-Roman trade with India started by Eudoxus of Cyzicus in 130 BCE continued to increase, and according to Strabo (II.5.12), by the time of Augustus, up to 120 ships were setting sail every year from Myos Hormos in Roman Egypt to India.
Starting in July 2011 the line has been used by a freight service that connects Chongqing, China with Duisburg, Germany, cutting travel time for cargo from about 36 days by container ship to just 13 days by freight train.
Although the term was coined in the 19th century, it did not gain widespread acceptance in academia or popularity among the public until the 20th century.
Persian Sassanid coins emerged as a means of currency, just as valuable as silk yarn and textiles.
Contemporary Tang authors noted how the dynasty had gone into decline after this point.
The Silk Road stopped serving as a shipping route for silk about 1453 with the Ottoman supremacy at Constantinople.
As a result, merchants supported Buddhist monasteries along the silk roads, and in return the Buddhists gave the merchants somewhere to stay as they traveled from city to city.
Parthian scholars were involved in one of the first ever Buddhist text translations into the Chinese language.
Other European powers followed over the next centuries, which caused the eventual demise of the Silk Road, or its global diversification by trans-oceanic routes from the western Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean, via the Indian Ocean.
The latest iterations of this plan, dubbed "One Belt, One Road" (OBOR), includes a land-based Silk Road Economic Belt and Maritime Silk Road, with primary points in Ürümqi, Dostyk, Astana, Gomel, Brest, and the Polish cities of Małaszewicze and Łódź, which would be hubs of logistics and transshipment to other countries of Europe.
In 1557 the settlement of the Portuguese in Macau, who paid an annual lease of 500 taels (20 kilograms) of silver to the Emperor of China, established the first permanent European maritime trade post between Europe and China.
It also brought an end to the dominance of the Islamic Caliphate over world trade.
The Silk Road essentially came into being from the 1st century BCE, following these efforts by China to consolidate a road to the Western world and India, both through direct settlements in the area of the Tarim Basin and diplomatic relations with the countries of the Dayuan, Parthians and Bactrians further west.
The first missionaries and translators of Buddhists scriptures into Chinese were either Parthian, Kushan, Sogdian, or Kuchean.
The Chinese took great interest in the safety of their trade products and extended the Great Wall of China to ensure the protection of the trade route.
At the same time, the Chinese empire welcomed foreign cultures, making it very cosmopolitan in its urban centres.
These were both eventually displaced by the Mahayana, also known as "Great Vehicle".
Greco-Buddhist art represents one of the most vivid examples of this interaction.
During this period Buddhism began to spread throughout Southeast, East, and Central Asia.
Both routes joined the main southern route before reaching ancient Merv, Turkmenistan.
The voluntary conversion of Chinese ruling elites helped the spread of Buddhism in East Asia and led Buddhism to become widespread in Chinese society.
The Hellenistic world and Classical Greek philosophy mixed with Eastern philosophies, leading to syncretisms such as Greco-Buddhism.
The Netherlands and Britain followed beginning in the 17th century.
Chinese missionaries were able to assimilate Buddhism, to an extent, to native Chinese Daoists, which would bring the two beliefs together.
They expressed their displeasure by embargoing trade with the west.
Chinese archaeological writer Bin Yang and some earlier writers and archaeologists, such as Janice Stargardt, strongly suggest this route of international trade as Sichuan-Yunnan-Burma-Bangladesh route.
Notably, established Buddhist monasteries along the Silk Road offered a haven, as well as a new religion for foreigners.
Another branch of the northern route turned northwest past the Aral Sea and north of the Caspian Sea, then and on to the Black Sea.
Under its strong integrating dynamics on the one hand and the impacts of change it transmitted on the other, tribal societies previously living in isolation along the Silk Road, and pastoralists who were of barbarian cultural development, were drawn to the riches and opportunities of the civilisations connected by the routes, taking on the trades of marauders or mercenaries.
The Chinese were also strongly attracted by the tall and powerful horses (named "Heavenly horses") in the possession of the Dayuan (literally the "Great Ionians", the Greek kingdoms of Central Asia), which were of capital importance in fighting the nomadic Xiongnu.
The Sogdians dominated the East-West trade after the 4th century up to the 8th century, with Suyab and Talas ranking among their main centres in the north.
Extensive contacts started in the 2nd century, probably as a consequence of the expansion of the Kushan empire into the Chinese territory of the Tarim Basin, due to the missionary efforts of a great number of Buddhist monks to Chinese lands.
They continued to expand eastward, especially during the reign of Euthydemus (230–200 BCE), who extended his control beyond Alexandria Eschate to Sogdiana.
What mainly issued from Muslim Central Asia was the trade of the Samanids, which resumed the northwestern road leading to the Khazars and the Urals and the northeastern one toward the nearby Turkic tribes.
In 2008 the line was used to connect the cities of Ürümqi in China's Xinjiang Province to Almaty and Astana in Kazakhstan.
The disruptions of trade were curtailed in that part of the world by the end of the 10th century and conquests of Central Asia by the Turkic Islamic Kara-Khanid Khanate, yet Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, and Buddhism in Central Asia virtually disappeared.
Going as far as to call the whole thing a "myth" of modern academia, Ball argues that there was no coherent overland trade system and no free movement of goods from East Asia to the West until the period of the Mongol Empire.
The tomb of a Scythian prince near Stuttgart, Germany, dated to the 6th century BCE, was excavated and found to have not only Greek bronzes but also Chinese silks.
The Tang dynasty (along with Turkic allies) conquered and subdued Central Asia during the 640s and 650s.
According to Bin Yang, especially from the 12th century the route was used to ship bullion from Yunnan (gold and silver are among the minerals in which Yunnan is rich), through northern Burma, into modern Bangladesh, making use of the ancient route, known as the 'Ledo' route.
By having fresh horses and riders ready at each relay, royal couriers could carry messages the entire distance in nine days, while normal travellers took about three months.
However, the ''History of Yuan'' claims that a Byzantine man became a leading astronomer and physician in Khanbaliq, at the court of Kublai Khan, Mongol founder of the Yuan dynasty (1271-1368) and was even granted the noble title 'Prince of Fu lin' (Chinese: 拂菻王; Fú lǐn wáng).
"China's control of the Silk Road at the time of the later Han, by ensuring the freedom of transcontinental trade along the double chain of oases north and south of the Tarim, favoured the dissemination of Buddhism in the river basin, and with it Indian literature and Hellenistic art."
Use of the term 'Silk Road' is not without its detractors.
While the term is of modern coinage, the Silk Road derives its name from the lucrative trade in Chinese silk carried out along its length, beginning during the Han dynasty (207 BCE – 220 CE).
By the end of the 17th century, the Russians re-established a land trade route between Europe and China under the name of the Great Siberian Road.
This style is particularly reflected in the rectangular belt plaques made of gold and bronze, with other versions in jade and steatite.
The Silk Road transmission of Buddhism essentially ended around the 7th century with the rise of Islam in Central Asia.
This movement of Buddhism first gained influence in the Khotan region.
It extended, via ports on the coasts of India and Sri Lanka, all the way to Roman-controlled ports in Roman Egypt and the Nabataean territories on the northeastern coast of the Red Sea.
Some remnants of what was probably Chinese silk dating from 1070 BCE have been found in Ancient Egypt.
Tensions with the west had eased a bit a century later, and Venice was able to cut an uneasy deal with the Ottomans, regaining for a time some of their economic clout as middlemen.
However, Warwick Ball (2016) highlights the recent discovery of sixteen Principate-era Roman coins found in Xi'an (formerly Chang'an, one of the two Han capitals) that were minted during the reigns of Roman emperors spanning from Tiberius to Aurelian (i.e.
The Xiongnu adopted Chinese agricultural techniques, dress style, and lifestyle, while the Chinese adopted Xiongnu military techniques, some dress style, music, and dance.
While Europeans were entering China from its southern coast, by the sea route, the question arose whether it was the same country as Cathay, which Marco Polo had reached by the overland route.
From Merv, it followed a nearly straight line west through mountainous northern Iran, Mesopotamia, and the northern tip of the Syrian Desert to the Levant, where Mediterranean trading ships plied regular routes to Italy, while land routes went either north through Anatolia or south to North Africa.
The Islamic world was expanded into Central Asia during the 8th century, under the Umayyad Caliphate, while its successor the Abbasid Caliphate put a halt to Chinese westward expansion at the Battle of Talas in 751 (near the Talas River in modern-day Kyrgyzstan).
One example was the encounter with the Chinese and Xiongnu nomads.
These different schools and movements of Buddhism were a result of the diverse and complex influences and beliefs on the Silk Road.
On 15 February 2016, with a change in routing, the first train dispatched under the OBOR scheme arrived from eastern Zhejiang Province to Tehran.
Roman golden medallions made during the reign of Antoninus Pius and quite possibly his successor Marcus Aurelius have been found at Óc Eo in southern Vietnam, which was then part of the Kingdom of Funan bordering the Chinese province of Jiaozhi in northern Vietnam.
See Dayuan (''Ta-yuan''; ; literarily "Great Ionians").
The emerging evidence of the ancient cities of Bangladesh, in particular Wari-Bateshwar ruins, Mahasthangarh, Bhitagarh, Bikrampur, Egarasindhur, and Sonargaon, are believed to be the international trade centers in this route.
The Han dynasty expanded Central Asian sections of the trade routes around 114 BCE, largely through missions and explorations of the Chinese imperial envoy, Zhang Qian.
These artistic influences can be seen in the development of Buddhism where, for instance, Buddha was first depicted as human in the Kushan period.
This later became a major staging point on the northern Silk Route.
The Han army regularly policed the trade route against nomadic bandit forces generally identified as Xiongnu.
Several ''Fu-lin'' embassies were recorded for the Tang period, starting in 643 with an alleged embassy by Constans II (transliterated as ''Bo duo li'', 波多力, from his nickname "Kōnstantinos Pogonatos") to the court of Emperor Taizong of Tang.
By c. 1600, the Jesuits stationed in China, led by Matteo Ricci, were pretty sure that it was, but others were not convinced.
However, after the end of the Uighur Empire, Sogdian trade went through a crisis.
Mahayana, Theravada, and Tibetan Buddhism are the three primary forms of Buddhism that spread across Asia via the Silk Road.
It is believed that under the control of the Kushans, Buddhism was spread to China and other parts of Asia from the middle of the first century to the middle of the third century.
With the rise of Mahayana Buddhism, the initial direction of Buddhist development changed.
Tremendous profits were to be obtained by anyone who could achieve a direct trade connection with Asia.
Strabo, the 1st-century Roman writer, mentions the deltaic lands: "Regarding merchants who now sail from Egypt...as far as the Ganges, they are only private citizens..." His comments are interesting as Roman beads and other materials are being found at Wari-Bateshwar ruins, the ancient city with roots from much earlier, before the Bronze Age, presently being slowly excavated beside the Old Brahmaputra in Bangladesh.
From this revelation monks were sent by the Byzantine Emperor Justinian (ruled 527 - 565) as spies on the Silk Road from Constantinople to China and back to steal the silkworm eggs, resulting in silk production in the Mediterranean, particularly in Thrace in northern Greece, and giving the Byzantine Empire a monopoly on silk production in medieval Europe.
The western voyage from Europe to Asia was finally completed with the Spanish expedition of 1519-1522, led by the Portuguese Ferdinand Magellan, the first European voyage to cross the Pacific Ocean, and the first world circumnavigation in a single expedition, finished by 18 men led by Juan Sebastián Elcano.
A route for caravans, the northern Silk Road brought to China many goods such as "dates, saffron powder and pistachio nuts from Persia; frankincense, aloes and myrrh from Somalia; sandalwood from India; glass bottles from Egypt, and other expensive and desirable goods from other parts of the world."
In 2013 Hewlett-Packard began moving large freight trains of laptop computers and monitors along this rail route.
It was closed after the Tibetans captured it in 678, but in 699, during Empress Wu's period, the Silk Road reopened when the Tang reconquered the Four Garrisons of Anxi originally installed in 640, once again connecting China directly to the West for land-based trade.
Scythians accompanied the Assyrian Esarhaddon on his invasion of Egypt, and their distinctive triangular arrowheads have been found as far south as Aswan.
Gottfried Leibniz, echoing the prevailing perception in Europe until the Industrial Revolution, wrote in the 17th century that, "Everything exquisite and admirable comes from the East Indies...
The disintegration of the Silk Road following the reign of the Mongols stimulated Europeans to reach the prosperous Chinese empire via a sea route.
The eastern trade routes from the earlier Hellenistic powers and the Arabs that were part of the Silk Road were inherited by the Roman Empire.
According to Chinese dynastic histories, it is from this region that the Roman embassies arrived in China, beginning in 166 CE during the reigns of Marcus Aurelius and Emperor Huan of Han.
The Eurasian Land Bridge (a railway through China, Kazakhstan, Mongolia and Russia) is sometimes referred to as the "New Silk Road".
The ''History of Song'' describes the final embassy and its arrival in 1081, apparently sent by Michael VII Doukas (transliterated as ''Mie li sha ling kai sa'', 滅力沙靈改撒, from his name and title Michael VII Parapinakēs Caesar) to the court of Emperor Shenzong of the Song dynasty (960-1279).
Andronikos II had two half-sisters who were married to great-grandsons of Genghis Khan, which made him an in-law with the Yuan-dynasty Mongol ruler in Beijing, Kublai Khan.
As it extended westwards from the ancient commercial centres of China, the overland, intercontinental Silk Road divided into northern and southern routes bypassing the Taklimakan Desert and Lop Nur.
It is doubtless that this delta was a major international trading center, almost certainly from much earlier than the Common Era.
These nomadic peoples were dependent upon neighbouring settled populations for a number of important technologies, and in addition to raiding vulnerable settlements for these commodities, they also encouraged long-distance merchants as a source of income through the enforced payment of tariffs.
Their trade, with some interruptions, continued in the 9th century within the framework of the Uighur Empire, which until 840 extended across northern Central Asia and obtained from China enormous deliveries of silk in exchange for horses.
The German terms '''' and '''' ("the Silk Road(s)") were coined by Ferdinand von Richthofen, who made seven expeditions to China from 1868 to 1872.
Soghdian Scythian merchants played a vital role in later periods in the development of the Silk Road.
As a result, merchants spread Buddhism to foreign encounters as they traveled.
They were the main caravan merchants of Central Asia.
The Roman Senate issued, in vain, several edicts to prohibit the wearing of silk, on economic and moral grounds: the import of Chinese silk caused a huge outflow of gold, and silk clothes were considered to be decadent and immoral.
Byzantine Empire) was virtually identical to the previous ''Daqin'' (大秦; i.e.
The transmission of Buddhism to China via the Silk Road began in the 1st century CE, according to a semi-legendary account of an ambassador sent to the West by the Chinese Emperor Ming (58–75).
These were followed by the diplomatic and commercial mission of Fernão Pires de Andrade and Tomé Pires in 1517, under the orders of Manuel I of Portugal, which formally opened relations between the Portuguese Empire and the Ming dynasty during the reign of the Zhengde Emperor.
The Great Oasis cities of central Asia played a crucial role in the effective functioning of the Silk Road trade.
Though silk was certainly the major trade item exported from China, many other goods were traded, and religions, syncretic philosophies, and various technologies, as well as diseases, also spread along the Silk Routes.
Bishkek and Almaty each have a major east-west street named after the Silk Road (, ''Jibek Jolu'' in Bishkek, and , ''Jibek Joly'' in Almaty).
Buddha's community of followers, the Sangha, consisted of male and female monks and laity.
The southern route or Karakoram route was mainly a single route running from China through the Karakoram mountains, where it persists in modern times as the international paved road connecting Pakistan and China as the Karakoram Highway.
Sogdiana (modern Bukhara), east of the Oxus River, on the Polytimetus River, was apparently the most easterly penetration ever made by Roman forces in Asia.
He had been preceded by numerous Christian missionaries to the East, such as William of Rubruck, Benedykt Polak, Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, and Andrew of Longjumeau.
To check the situation on the ground, Bento de Góis, a Portuguese former soldier and explorer who had joined the Jesuits as a Lay Brother in Goa, India, travelled in 1603–1605 from India via Afghanistan on one of the routes of the traditional Silk Road (via Badakhshan, the Pamirs, Yarkand, Kucha, and Turpan to the border of Ming China in Suzhou, Gansu).
