Like copper, silver reacts with sulfur and its compounds; in their presence, silver tarnishes in air to form the black silver sulfide (copper forms the green sulfate instead, while gold does not react).
The precipitation of copper in ancient silver can be used to date artifacts.
It must be noted despite the above formulations that most silver compounds have significant covalent character due to the small size and high first ionization energy (730.8&nbsp;kJ/mol) of silver.
Silver is an extremely soft, ductile and malleable transition metal, though it is slightly less malleable than gold.
It is incorporated into clothing or shoes either by integrating silver nanoparticles into the polymer from which yarns are made or by coating yarns with silver.
According to the Silver Institute, silver's recent gains have greatly stemmed from a rise in investor interest and an increase in fabrication demand.
In 2014, Mexico was the top producer of silver (5,000 tonnes or 18.7% of the world's total of 26,800 t), followed by China (4,060 t) and Peru (3,780 t).
Handmade solid silver tableware is now much less common.
Unlike copper, for which the larger hydration energy of Cu2+ as compared to Cu+ is the reason why the former is the more stable in aqueous solution and solids despite lacking the stable filled d-subshell of the latter, silver is large enough that this factor has a much smaller effect, and furthermore the second ionisation energy of silver is greater than that for copper.
In the 19th century, the threat to the balance of payments of the United Kingdom from Chinese merchants who required payment in silver for tea, silk, and porcelain led to the Opium War; Britain addressed the imbalance of payments by selling opium from British India to China.
This process is called "flashing".
Silver metal dissolves readily in nitric acid () to produce silver nitrate (), also called 'lunar caustic', a transparent crystalline solid that is photosensitive and readily soluble in water.
Silver halides are soluble in solutions of sodium thiosulfate (), which is used as a photographic fixer to remove excess silver halide from photographic emulsions after image development.
The fungus ''Aspergillus niger'' found growing in a gold mining solution was found to contain cyano metal complexes, such as gold, silver, copper, iron, and zinc.
Silver (on some suitable support) is probably the only catalyst available today that converts ethylene to ethylene oxide (CH2-O-CH2) in the synthesis of ethylene glycol (used to produce polyesters) and polyethylene terephthalate.
Silver readily forms alloys with copper and gold, as well as zinc.
Ores include argentite (Ag2S), chlorargyrite (AgCl, which includes horn silver), and pyrargyrite (Ag3SbS3).
Printed circuits and RFID antennas are made with silver paints, and computer keyboards use silver electrical contacts.
Silver has a brilliant white metallic luster that can take a high polish, and which is so characteristic that the name of the metal itself has become a colour name.
In some languages, including Sanskrit, Spanish, French, and Hebrew, the word for ''silver'' may be used to mean ''money''.
In Central Asia, Tajikistan is known to have some of the largest silver deposits in the world.
The +1 state is by far the most common, followed by the reducing +2 state.
The oval "racetracks" had silver bus bars with a cross-section of one square foot.
Silver does not react with air, even at red heat, and thus was considered by alchemists as a noble metal along with gold.
Its purity is typically measured on a per-mille basis; a 94%-pure alloy is described as "0.940 fine".
Increasing the electron concentration further leads to body-centred cubic (electron concentration 1.5), complex cubic (1.615), and hexagonal close-packed phases (1.75).
In the US, only alloys at least 0.900-fine silver can be sold as "silver" (frequently stamped 900).
During the 19th century, the bimetallism that prevailed in most countries was undermined by the discovery of large deposits of silver in the Americas; fearing a sharp decrease in the value of silver and inflation of the currency, most states moved to a gold standard by 1900.
Not until 1963 did the price of silver rise above the threshold of $1.29 per ounce, at which time the silver content of pre-1965 United States coins was equal in value to the face value of the coins themselves.
The name of the pound sterling (£) reflects the fact it originally represented the value of one pound Tower weight of sterling silver; the names of other historical currencies, such as the French livre, have similar origins.
Silver, in protected or enhanced coatings, is expected to be the next generation metal coating for reflective telescope mirrors.
Silver halides are highly insoluble in aqueous solutions and are used in gravimetric analytical methods.
Mild forms of argyria are sometimes mistaken for cyanosis.
In large doses, silver and compounds containing it can be absorbed into the circulatory system and become deposited in various body tissues, leading to argyria, which results in a blue-grayish pigmentation of the skin, eyes, and mucous membranes.
Brass instruments, such as trumpets and baritone horns, are commonly plated in silver.
Very high electrical and thermal conductivity is common to the elements in group 11, because their single s electron is free and does not interact with the filled d subshell, as such interactions (which occur in the preceding transition metals) lower electron mobility.
Silver is used industrially in electrical contacts and conductors, in specialized mirrors, window coatings, and in catalysis of chemical reactions.
Silver metal is used in many premodern monetary systems in bullion coins, sometimes alongside gold: while it is more abundant than gold, it is much less abundant as a native metal.
Silver compounds are used in photographic film and X-rays.
Its symbol is '''Ag''', from the Latin '''', derived from the Greek ''ὰργὀς'' (literally "shiny" or "white"), and ultimately from a Proto-Indo-European language root reconstructed as *''h2erǵ-'', "grey" or "shining".
Silver also has the lowest contact resistance of any metal.
While silver is not attacked by non-oxidizing acids, the metal dissolves readily in hot concentrated sulfuric acid, as well as dilute or concentrated nitric acid.
In 2014 researchers invented a mirror-like panel that, when mounted on a building, works as an air conditioner.
This distinctive electron configuration, with a single electron in the highest occupied s subshell over a filled d subshell, accounts for many of the singular properties of metallic silver.
Silver has numerous meta states, the most stable being 108mAg (t1/2 = 418 years), 110mAg (t1/2 = 249.79 days) and 106mAg (t1/2 = 8.28 days).
Indeed, silver(III) fluoride is usually obtained by reacting silver or silver monofluoride with the strongest known oxidizing agent, krypton difluoride.
In the early 15th century, the price of silver is estimated to have surpassed $1,200 per ounce, based on 2011 dollars.
:2 AgNO3 + 2 OH− → Ag2O + H2O + 2 NO3−
Previously, silver was alloyed with mercury at room temperature to make amalgams widely used for dental fillings.
One of the earliest silver extraction centres in Europe was Sardinia in early Chalcolithic.
Hence, Ag+ is the stable species in aqueous solution and solids, with Ag2+ being much less stable as it oxidizes water.
The first layer is silver, the most reflective substance known.
Both isotopes of silver are produced in stars via the s-process (slow neutron capture), as well as in supernovae via the r-process (rapid neutron capture).
Silver is similar in its physical and chemical properties to its two vertical neighbours in group 11 of the periodic table, copper and gold.
The dental amalgam achieves initial hardness within minutes and sets hard in a few hours.
Silver artifacts undergo three forms of deterioration, the most common of which is the formation of a black film of silver sulfide tarnish.
Top near-term mine development projects through 2015 are Pascua Lama (Chile), Navidad (Argentina), Jaunicipio (Mexico), Malku Khota (Bolivia), and Hackett River (Canada).
Silver stains are used to stain proteins in gel electrophoresis and polyacrylamide gels, either as primary stains or to enhance the visibility and contrast of colloidal gold stain.
The price of silver is important in Judaic law.
Silver metal does not react with sulfuric acid, a fact useful to jewelers, who clean and remove copper oxide firescale from silver articles after silver soldering or annealing.
At wavelengths shorter than 450&nbsp;nm, silver's reflectivity is inferior to that of aluminium and drops to zero near 310&nbsp;nm.
Because even when tarnished, silver has superior electrical conductivity, it is used in some electrical and electronic products, notably high quality connectors for RF, VHF, and higher frequencies, particularly in tuned circuits such as cavity filters where conductors cannot be scaled by more than 6%.
By contrast, fine silver particles form the dense black in photographs and in silverpoint drawings.
However, the amount of silver-coated glass worldwide is hundreds of millions of square meters per year, leading to silver consumption on the order of 10 cubic meters or 100 metric tons/year.
107Pd–107Ag correlations observed in bodies that have clearly been melted since the accretion of the solar system must reflect the presence of unstable nuclides in the early solar system.
Historically, silversmiths are usually called goldsmiths and are usually members of the same guild.
Commercial-grade fine silver is at least 99.9% pure, and purities greater than 99.999% are available.
Silver and silver alloys are used in some high-quality musical wind instruments.
Silver investments of various types are available on stock markets, including mining, silver streaming, and silver-backed exchange-traded funds.
Top silver-producing mines are Cannington (Australia), Fresnillo (Mexico), San Cristóbal (Bolivia), Antamina (Peru), Rudna (Poland), and Penasquito (Mexico).
Unlike the preceding transition metals, the +1 oxidation state of silver is stable even in the absence of π-acceptor ligands.
In group 11, silver has the lowest first ionization energy (showing the instability of the 5s orbital), but has higher second and third ionization energies than copper and gold (showing the stability of the 4d orbitals), so that the chemistry of silver is predominantly that of the +1 oxidation state, reflecting the increasingly limited range of oxidation states along the transition series as the d-orbitals fill and stabilize.
Silver was used in nickels during the war to save that metal for use in steel alloys.
The 20th century saw a gradual movement to fiat currency, with most of the world monetary system losing its link to precious metals after the United States dollar came off the gold standard in 1971; the last currency backed by gold was the Swiss franc, which became a pure fiat currency on 1 May 2000; the issues of 1967 and 1969 (for the 5 franc piece) and 1967 (for the others) were the last Swiss coins minted with silver.
Unlike blacksmiths, silversmiths do not shape the metal while it is softened with heat, but work it at room temperature with gentle and carefully placed hammer blows.
Protected silver has greater optical reflectivity than aluminium at all wavelengths longer than ~450&nbsp;nm.
Silver itself is not toxic to humans, but most silver salts are.
The discovery of massive silver deposits in the New World during the succeeding centuries has caused the price to diminish greatly.
The contrast between the bright white color of silver and other materials makes silver useful to the visual arts.
Islam permits Muslim men to wear silver rings on the little finger of either hand.
Silver nitrate is used as the starting point for the synthesis of many other silver compounds, as an antiseptic, and as a yellow stain for glass in stained glass.
These layers improve the reflectivity, but also turn the mirror into a thermal radiator.
:4 Ag + O2 + 2 H2S → 2 Ag2S + 2 H2O
Silver coin and bullion is an investment vehicle used by some people to guard against inflation and devaluation of the currency.
Silver has no known natural biological function in humans, and possible health effects of silver are a disputed subject.
In World War II during a shortage of copper, silver was borrowed from the United States Treasury for electrical windings by several production facilities, including those of the Manhattan Project; see below under History, WWII.
Later, silver was refined and coined in its pure form.
The ''Kohen'' will often give those silver coins back as a gift for the child to inherit.
Financial officials of the Roman Empire worried about the loss of silver to pay for silk from Sinica (China), which was in high demand.
Silver halides are photosensitive and are remarkable for their ability to record a latent image that can later be developed chemically.
Silver is a constituent of almost all colored carat gold alloys and carat gold solders, giving the alloys paler color and greater hardness.
Isotopes of silver range in relative atomic mass from 92.950&nbsp;u (93Ag) to 129.950&nbsp;u (130Ag); the primary decay mode before the most abundant stable isotope, 107Ag, is electron capture and the primary mode after is beta decay.
Silver iodide has been used in attempts to seed clouds to produce rain.
In 1964 the United States stopped minting the silver dime and quarter; the last circulating silver coin was the 1970 40% half-dollar.
One important application was the bus bars in new aluminium plants for aircraft parts.
During World War II in the US,  tons of silver were used in electromagnets for enriching uranium, mainly because of the wartime shortage of copper.
Silver is used in numerous applications other than currency, such as solar panels, water filtration, jewelry, ornaments, high-value tableware and utensils (hence the term silverware), and as an investment medium (coins and bullion).
The ratio has varied from  to  in the past 100 years.
It tarnishes when it is exposed to air or water containing ozone or hydrogen sulfide, the latter forming a black layer of silver sulfide that can be removed with dilute hydrochloric acid.
Sterling silver (stamped 925) is harder than pure silver and has a lower melting point (893&nbsp;°C) than either pure silver or pure copper.
The word "silver" appears in Anglo-Saxon in various spellings, such as ''seolfor'' and ''siolfor''.
Silver color seen in architectural glass and tinted windows on vehicles is produced by sputtered chrome, stainless steel or other alloys.
It is also used high-capacity silver-zinc and silver-cadmium batteries.
Camillo Golgi used silver stains to study cells of the nervous system and the Golgi apparatus.
It is also used in the Oddy test to detect reduced sulfur compounds and carbonyl sulfides.
These compounds are used in photography to bleach silver images, converting them to silver bromide that can either be fixed with thiosulfate or redeveloped to intensify the original image.
The electrical conductivity of silver is the greatest of all metals, greater even than copper, but it is not widely used for this property because of the higher cost.
100 million ounces () of silver are projected for use by solar energy in 2015.
Silver is a rather unreactive metal.
As one of the seven metals of antiquity, silver has had an enduring role in most human cultures.
Its value as a precious metal was long considered second only to gold.
Silver chloride () is precipitated from solutions of silver nitrate in the presence of chloride ions, and the other silver halides used in the manufacture of photographic emulsions are made in the same way, with bromide or iodide salts.
The silver ion () is bioactive and in sufficient concentration readily kills bacteria ''in vitro''.
Some manufacturers produce audio connector cables, speaker wires, and power cables with silver conductors, which have a 6% higher conductivity than those of copper with identical dimensions, despite increased cost.
In 2009, scientists at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) and SkyFuel teamed to develop large curved sheets of metal that have the potential to be 30% less expensive than today's best collectors of concentrated solar power by replacing glass mirrors with a silver polymer sheet that has the same performance as the heavy glass, but at much less cost and weight, and much easier to deploy and install.
Zinc-silver alloys with low zinc concentration may be considered as face-centred cubic solid solutions of zinc in silver, as the structure of the silver is largely unchanged while the electron concentration rises as more zinc is added.
Wound dressings containing silver sulfadiazine or silver nanomaterials are used to treat external infections.
The patented alloy Argentium sterling silver is formed by the addition of germanium, having improved properties including resistance to firescale.
Silver jewelry can also be plated with rhodium (for a bright shine) or gold (silver gilt).
Silver is the reflective coating of choice for concentrated solar power reflectors.
At levels of 10&nbsp;mg/m3, silver is immediately dangerous to life and health.
The mirror is built from several layers of wafer-thin materials.
:2 AgNO3 + Na2CO3 → Ag2CO3 + 2 NaNO3
Because silver is so malleable, silversmiths have many choices for working the metal.
Silver sulfide  also forms silver whiskers when silver electrical contacts are used in an atmosphere rich in hydrogen sulfide.
Slag heaps found in Asia Minor and on the islands of the Aegean Sea indicate silver was being separated from lead as early as the 4th millennium BC.
A soft, white, lustrous transition metal, it exhibits the highest electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, and reflectivity of any metal.
White 9-carat gold contains 62.5% silver and 37.5% gold, while 22-carat gold contains a minimum of 91.7% gold and 8.3% silver or copper or other metals.
Silver is used as a currency by many individuals, and is legal tender in the US state of Utah.
The chemical symbol Ag is from the Latin word for "silver", ''argentum'' (compare Ancient Greek ἄργυρος, ''árgyros''), from the Proto-Indo-European root *''h₂erǵ-'' (formerly reconstructed as''*arǵ-''), meaning "white" or "shining".
In late April 2011, silver reached an all-time high of $49.76/ozt.
Silver is stable in pure air and water.
Silver has been used for thousands of years for ornaments, utensils, and trade, and as the basis for many monetary systems.
Pure silver has the highest thermal conductivity of any metal, although the conductivity of carbon (in the diamond allotrope) and superfluid helium-4 are even higher.
Though the issue is debated, many hi-fi enthusiasts believe silver wires improve sound quality.
Because silver readily absorbs free neutrons, it is commonly added to control rods to regulate the fission chain reaction in pressurized water nuclear reactors, generally in the form of an alloy containing 80% silver, 15% indium, and 5% cadmium.
The atomic weight is 107.8682(2) u; this value is very important because of the importance of silver compounds, particularly halides, in gravimetric analysis.
Silver coins are still minted by several countries as commemorative or collectible items, not intended for general circulation.
Some time after Silver Thursday, the price was back to $10/oz troy.
Silver has long been valued as a precious metal.
In a Jewish tradition, still continuing today, on the first birthday of a first-born son, the parents pay the price of five pure-silver coins to a ''Kohen'' (priest).
Sterling silver jewelry is often plated with a thin coat of .999-fine silver to create a shiny finish.
Silver ions are added to water purification systems in hospitals, community water systems, pools and spas, displacing chlorination.
Argyria is rare, and so far as is known, does not otherwise harm a person's health, though it is disfiguring and usually permanent.
Silver, in the form of electrum (a gold–silver alloy), was coined around 700&nbsp;BC by the Lydians.
The Chinese Empire during most of its history used primarily silver as a means of exchange.
Silver fulminate (), a powerful, touch-sensitive explosive used in percussion caps, is made by reaction of silver metal with nitric acid in the presence of ethanol ().
Historically, the training and guild organization of goldsmiths included silversmiths, and the two crafts remain largely overlapping.
In 1980, the silver price rose to a peak for modern times of US$49.45 per&nbsp;troy ounce (ozt) due to market manipulation of Nelson Bunker Hunt and Herbert Hunt ().
Silver metal is attacked by strong oxidizers such as potassium permanganate () and potassium dichromate (), and in the presence of potassium bromide ().
Silver is also used in plasmonic solar cells.
The palladium isotope 107Pd decays by beta emission to 107Ag with a half-life of 6.5 million years.
This is fixed at  of pure, unrefined silver, at market price.
'''Silver''' is the metallic element with the atomic number 47.
Alkaline solutions of silver nitrate can be reduced to silver metal by reducing sugars such as glucose, and this reaction is used to silver glass mirrors and the interior of glass Christmas ornaments.
Its 47 electrons are arranged in the configuration Kr4d105s1, similarly to copper (Ar3d104s1) and gold (Xe4f145d106s1); group 11 is one of the few groups in the d-block which has a completely consistent set of electron configurations.
Silver is also used in some medical applications, such as urinary catheters (where tentative evidence indicates it reduces catheter-related urinary tract infections) and in endotracheal breathing tubes (where evidence suggests it reduces ventilator-associated pneumonia).
Coins that had been made of silver were changed to cupro-nickel in 1947; existing coins were not withdrawn, but ceased circulating as the silver content came to exceed the face value.
Above this are alternating layers of silicon dioxide and hafnium oxide.
Reaching a peak production of 200 t per year, an estimated silver stock of 10,000 t circulated in the Roman economy in the middle of the second century AD, five to ten times larger than the combined amount of silver available to medieval Europe and the Caliphate around 800 AD.
As of 4 April 2016, the price of silver was US$482.42 per kilogram (US$15.01 per troy ounce).
Jewelry and silverware are traditionally made from sterling silver (standard silver), an alloy of 92.5% silver with 7.5% copper.
Silver inhibits the growth of bacteria and fungi on clothing (such as socks) and is sometimes added to reduce odors and the risk of bacterial and fungal infections.
Iron meteorites are the only objects with a high-enough palladium-to-silver ratio to yield measurable variations in 107Ag abundance.
Flutes, in particular, are commonly constructed of silver alloy or silver-plated, both for appearance and for the surface friction properties of silver.
Traditional Indian dishes sometimes include decorative silver foil known as ''vark'', and in various other cultures, silver ''dragée'' are used to decorate cakes, cookies, and other dessert items.
In the presence of air, and especially in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, silver dissolves readily in aqueous solutions of cyanide.
From 2001 to 2010, the price moved from $4.37 to $20.19 (average London US$/oz).
Traditionally, silversmiths mostly made "silverware" (cutlery, tableware, bowls, candlesticks and such).
The metal is primarily produced as a byproduct of electrolytic copper refining, gold, nickel, and zinc refining, and by application of the Parkes process on lead bullion from ore that also contains silver.
Silver was also used in aircraft master rod (and other) bearings.
Silver salts have been used since the Middle Ages to produce a yellow or orange color in stained glass, and more complex decorative color reactions can be produced by incorporating silver metal in blown, kilnformed or torchworked glass.
Unlike metals with incomplete d-shells, metallic bonds in silver are lacking a covalent character and are relatively weak.
The principal sources of silver are the ores of copper, copper-nickel, lead, and lead-zinc obtained from Peru, Bolivia, Mexico, China, Australia, Chile, Poland and Serbia.
Silver forms cyanide complexes (silver cyanide) that are soluble in water in the presence of an excess of cyanide ions.
Silver reacts readily with sulfur or hydrogen sulfide  to produce silver sulfide, a dark-colored tarnish that commonly appears on silver coins and other objects.
Fresh silver chloride, formed when silver objects are immersed for long periods in salt water, is pale yellow colored, becoming purplish on exposure to light and projects slightly from the surface of the artifact or coin.
During World War II, the shortage of copper led to the substitution of silver in many industrial applications.
Using a process called sputtering, silver, along with other optically transparent layers, is applied to glass, creating low emissivity coatings used in high-performance insulated glazing.
The United States government loaned out silver from its massive reserve located in the West Point vaults to a wide range of industries.
The amount of silver used per window is small because the silver layer is only 10–15 nanometers thick.
The silver catalyzes oxygen and sanitizes the water, replacing chlorination.
The discoverers suggest the coalescence and differentiation of iron-cored small planets may have occurred 10 million years after a nucleosynthetic event.
Silver, made in Syria.
Furthermore, silver's Pauling electronegativity of 1.93 is higher than that of lead (1.87), and its electron affinity of 125.6&nbsp;kJ/mol is much higher than that of hydrogen (72.8&nbsp;kJ/mol) and not much less than that of oxygen (141.0&nbsp;kJ/mol).
Silver oxide (), produced by treating silver nitrate solution with a base, is used as a positive electrode (anode) in watch batteries.
Silver cadmium oxide is used in high-voltage contacts because it withstands arcing.
Naturally occurring silver is composed of two stable isotopes, 107Ag and 109Ag, with 107Ag being slightly more abundant (51.839% natural abundance).
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.01&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.
The loss of silver during washing varies between textile technologies, and the effect on the environment is not yet fully known.
Today, the Israel mint fixes the coins at  of silver.
Silver is used in the manufacture of crystalline solar photovoltaic panels.
The Manhattan Project (to develop the atomic bomb) used about 14,700 tons of silver borrowed from the United States Treasury for calutron windings for the electromagnetic separation process in the Y-12 National Security Complex at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
The metal is found in the Earth's crust in the pure, free elemental form ("native silver"), as an alloy with gold and other metals, and in minerals such as argentite and chlorargyrite.
This equates to approximately  the price of gold at that time.
Due to its full d-subshell, silver in its main +1 oxidation state exhibits relatively few properties of the transition metals proper from groups 4 to 10, forming rather unstable organometallic compounds, forming linear complexes showing very low coordination numbers like 2, and forming an amphoteric oxide as well as Zintl phases like the post-transition metals.
Unlike copper, silver will not react with the halogens, with the exception of the notoriously reactive fluorine gas, with which it forms the difluoride.
Dilute silver nitrate solutions and other silver compounds are used as disinfectants and microbiocides (oligodynamic effect), added to bandages and wound-dressings, catheters, and other medical instruments.
Many nations used silver as the basic unit of monetary value.
Silver concentrations in whole blood, plasma, serum, or urine may be monitored for safety in exposed workers, to confirm a diagnosis in suspected poisonings, or to assist the forensic investigation of a fatal overdose.
