The 110-page publication describes Best Management Practices, first by general principles, then by sensitive sites.
Even a broadcast slash fire in a clearcut does not give a uniform burn over the whole area.
When natural regeneration or artificial seeding has resulted in dense, overstocked young stands, natural thinning will in most cases eventually reduce stocking to more silviculturally desirable levels.
It may not always be economically viable or biologically desirable to re-enter the stand to remove the remaining seed trees.
Silvicultural thinning is a powerful tool that can be used to influence stand development, stand stability, and the characteristics of the harvestable products.
In order to germinate, a seed requires suitable conditions of temperature, moisture, and aeration.
By November, fall frosts had reduced shading, eliminating the differential.
When the diameter distribution of a stand is unknown, an estimate of slash weight and size distribution can be obtained from average stand diameter, number of trees per unit area, and merchantable cubic foot volume.
The method was based on the fact that through careful, selective harvesting, the productivity of the residual stand can be improved, because timber is removed as a cultural operation.
Herbs, brambles very dense, vigorous, no moss
In Germany, for instance, since the beginning of the nineteenth century under the influence of G.L.
sunlight, temperature, and moisture) that influence tree seedling growth.
Such change can be effected intentionally by various silvicultural means, or incidentally by default e.g., when high-grading has removed the coniferous content from a mixedwood stand, which then becomes exclusively self-perpetuating aspen.
It also provides an opportunity to capture mortality and cull the commercially less desirable, usually smaller and malformed, trees.
:c) Current annual volume increment culminates sooner at closer than at wider spacings.
Clear felling had no significant influence on air temperature at 2 m above the ground surface, but the daily air temperature maxima at 10&nbsp;cm were greater in the clear-felled area than in the uncut forest, while the daily minima at 10&nbsp;cm were lower.
Today, with the trend of intensifying forest management and productivity in most countries, the ideas and application of careful, continuous treatment of stands with the aid of the volume check method are meeting with ever-growing interest.
From operational or economic standpoints, however, there are disadvantages to the shelterwood system: harvesting costs are higher; trees left for deferred cutting may be damaged during the regeneration cut or related extraction operations; the increased risk of blowdown threatens the seed source; damage from bark beetles is likely to increase; regeneration may be damaged during the final cut and related extraction operations; the difficulty of any site preparation would be increased; and incidental damage to regeneration might be caused by any site preparation operations.
The dearth of seed and a deficiency of receptive seedbeds were recognized as major reasons for the lack of success of clearcut harvesting.
On sunny days, daytime surface temperature maxima on the mound and organic mat reached 25&nbsp;°C to 60&nbsp;°C, depending on soil wetness and shading.
(2001) developed statistical models to predict the natural establishment and height growth of understorey white spruce in the boreal mixedwood forest in Alberta using data from 148 permanent sample plots and supplementary information about height growth of white spruce regeneration and the amount and type of available substrate.
Increases in seedling establishment, survival, and growth on the burned sites were probably the result of slight reductions in the depth of the organic layer, minor increases in soil temperature, and marked improvements in the efficiency of the planting crews.
Finned drums were commonly used on jack pine–spruce cutovers on fresh brushy sites with a deep duff layer and heavy slash, and they needed to be teamed with a tractor pad unit to secure good distribution of the slash.
The single-tree selection method is an uneven-aged regeneration method most suitable when shade tolerant species regeneration is desired.
"Uneven-aged and even-aged methods differ in the scale and intensity of disturbance.
Silviculture also focuses on making sure that the treatment(s) of forest stands are used to preserve and to better their productivity.
This miniature greenhouse increases air humidity, reduces soil desiccation, and raises air and soil temperatures to levels more favourable to germination and seedling growth than those offered by unprotected conditions.
Comparable data are generated by espacement trials, in which trees are planted at a range of densities.
The purpose is to facilitate the regeneration of that site by the chosen method.
These trails must be carefully located to ensure that the trees remaining meet the desired quality criteria and stocking density.
Brace articulated a widespread concern: "The need for protection of spruce as a component of boreal mixedwoods goes beyond concern for the future commercial softwood timber supply.
It is typical for older and diseased trees to be removed, thus thinning the stand and allowing for younger, healthy trees to grow.
More or less uneven-aged, mixed forests of preponderantly native species, on the other hand, treated along natural lines, have proved to be healthier and more resistant to all kinds of external dangers; and in the long run such stands are more productive and easier to protect.
Drag type units designed and constructed by Ontario's Department of Lands and Forests used anchor chain or tractor pads separately or in combination, or were finned steel drums or barrels of various sizes and used in sets alone or combined with tractor pad or anchor chain units.
There is also an alternative silvicultural tradition which developed in Japan and thus created a different biocultural landscape called satoyama.
Avoidance of damage to the understorey will always be a desideratum.
Tenth-year stem volumes of trees on south, east, and west-facing microsites were significantly greater than those of trees on north-facing and untreated microsites.
Forest managers interested in the application of prescribed burning for hazard reduction and silviculture, were shown a method for quantifying the slash load by Kiil (1968).
Thinning is an operation that artiﬁcially reduces the number of trees growing in a stand with the aim of hastening the development of the remainder.
Development of management techniques that allowed for stand development to be monitored and guided into sustainable paths were in part a response to past experience, particularly in Central European countries, of the negative effects of pure, uniform stands with species often unsuited to the site, which greatly increased the risk of soil degradation and biotic diseases.
Unlike regeneration treatments, thinnings are not intended to establish a new tree crop or create permanent canopy openings.
Damage by ravens was only 0.13% on unburned but otherwise similar areas.
The greater seed source from uncut trees between the cut strips, and the disturbance to the forest floor within the cut strips could be expected to increase the amount of natural regeneration.
(2003), though aimed primarily at the boreal forest in Ontario, merit wider consideration.
In the seed-tree method, 2-12 seed trees per acre (5-30/ha) are left standing in order to regenerate the forest.
'''Percent cover (%)'''
This prompted efforts to see what might be done about growing aspen and white spruce on the same landbase by protecting existing white spruce advance growth, leaving a range of viable crop trees during the first cut, then harvesting both hardwoods and spruce in the final cut.
Daily soil temperatures at 5&nbsp;cm depth were 2&nbsp;°C to 3&nbsp;°C greater in the clear-felled area than in the uncut forest, and temperatures at depths of 50&nbsp;cm and 100&nbsp;cm were 3&nbsp;°C to 5&nbsp;°C greater.
The increases correlated well with the amounts of slash (both total and ≥7&nbsp;cm diameter) consumed.
A series of intermediate cuts at intervals of 10–20 years has been recommended for intensively managed stands.
However, irregular stands of this type are definitely more difficult to manage—new methods and techniques had to be sought particularly for the establishment of inventories, as well as increment control and yield regulation.
Illustrations are plentiful and are well chosen to complement this excellent text.
Damage averaged 68% with cones and 50% with funnels on an upland area, and 26% with funnels on a floodplain area.
Shaded slash from the initial cut, together with an increase in the number of windthrown trees in the leave strips, provided conditions ideally suited to the beetle.
The differences between the clear-felled and uncut areas did not diminish during the 12 years following cutting.
A close relative of coppicing is pollarding.
The group selection method can still result in residual stand damage in dense stands, however directional falling can minimize the damage.
Row and spot seeding confer greater ability to control seed placement than does broadcast seeding.
No matter how forestry as a science is constituted, the kernel of the business of forestry is silviculture, as it includes direct action in the forest, and in it all economic objectives and technical considerations ultimately converge.
Initially, close spacing might even provide a positive nurse effect to offset any negative response to competition.
Spacings of 1.25 m, 1.50 m, 1.75 m, 2.00 m, 2.50 m, and 3.00 m on 4 site classes were used in the 1922 trial at Petawawa, Ontario.
The process of natural regeneration involves the renewal of forests by means of self-sown seeds, root suckers, or coppicing.
Harvesting cutblocks where only a portion of the trees are to be removed is very different from clearcutting.
Following are some common methods:
The average control microsite was exposed to levels of light above the compensation point for only 3 hours, i.e., one-quarter of the daily light period, whereas mounds received light above the compensation point for 11 hours, i.e., 86% of the same daily period.
Detrimental results can be expected from scarification that impoverishes the rooting zone or exacerbates edaphic or climatic constraints.
Donaren trenching slightly reduced the mortality of black spruce but significantly increased the mortality of white spruce.
The shelter is designed to break down after a few years of exposure to ultraviolet radiation.
The method's objective is to establish new forest reproduction under the shelter of the retained trees.
The sample trees in Kiil's study had full symmetrical crowns.
**- Femelschlag (Femelschlagverfahren) - The Femel selection cutting (Group selection cutting),
Feller-buncher operators concentrate on the width of the felled swath, the number of trees in a bunch, and the alignment of the bunch.
Kubin and Kemppainen (1991), for instance, measured temperatures in northern Finland from 1974 through 1985 in 3 clear-felled areas and in 3 neighouring forest stands dominated by Norway spruce.
Prochnau (1963), 4 years after sowing, found that 14% of viable white spruce seed sown on mineral soil had produced surviving seedlings, at a seed:seedling ratio of 7.1:1.
A disk-trenching experiment in the Sub-boreal Spruce Zone in interior British Columbia investigated the effect on growth of young outplants (lodgepole pine) in 13 microsite planting positions: berm, hinge, and trench in each of north, south, east, and west aspects, as well as in untreated locations between the furrows.
Scarification, for instance, not only covers a wide range of operations that scarify, but also any given way of scarifying can have significantly different results depending on site conditions at the time of treatment.
Bramble, herbs, fairly vigorous spruce seedlings
Night frosts were more common in the clear-felled area.
In Britain and Ireland, for example, there is increased application of Continuous Cover Forestry principles to create permanently irregular structures in many woodlands.
Biolley's pioneering work formed the basis upon which most Swiss forest management practices were later developed, and his ideas have been generally accepted.
However, planting spot selection was seen to be more important overall than trench orientation.
Understorey white spruce is of particular importance in mixedwoods dominated by aspen, as in the B15, B18a, and B19a Sections of Manitoba, and elsewhere.
In most areas, selection logging favours regeneration of fir more than the more light-demanding spruce.
The change in pH depends on the severity of the burn and the amount consumed; the increase can be as much as 2 units, a 100-fold change.
White spruce seed was sown in Alaska on a burned site in summer 1984, and protected by white plastic cones on small spots scarified by hand, or by white funnels placed directly into the residual ash and organic material.
They will be retained until regeneration has become established at which point they may be removed.
Significant difference in height was found between open and sheltered plantations for black spruce but not for white spruce, and root collar diameter in sheltered plantations was significantly larger than in open plantations for black spruce but not for white spruce.
This method can also find a middle ground with the light ambiance by having less light accessible to competitors while still being able to provide enough light for tree regeneration.
In the aspen type of the Great Lakes region, direct sowing of the seed of conifers has usually failed.
Plows were most effective for treating dense brush prior to planting, often in conjunction with a planting machine.
Alternatively, clearcutting can change the dominating species on a stand with the introduction of non-native and invasive species as was shown at the Blodgett Experimental Forest near Georgetown California.
Scarifying teeth, e.g., Young's teeth, were sometimes used to prepare sites for planting, but their most effective use was found to be preparing sites for seeding, particularly in backlog areas carrying light brush and dense herbaceous growth.
Additionally, foresters can select across the range of diameter classes in the stand and maintain a mosaic of age and diameter classes.
While not designed to be applied to boreal mixedwoods, the ''méthode du contrôle'' is described briefly here to illustrate the degree of sophistication applied by some European foresters to the management of their forests.
A common taxonomy divides silviculture into regenerating, tending and harvesting techniques.
In 1878, the French forester A. Gurnaud (1825–1898) published a description of a ''méthode du contrôle'' for determining increment and yield.
(1991) suggested underplanting 30- to 40-year-old aspen stands, on the basis of the success of natural spruce in regenerating under stands of such stands: "By planting, spacing can be controlled enabling easier protection of the spruce during stand entry for harvesting of the aspen overstorey".
Additionally, clearcutting can prolong slash decomposition, expose soil to erosion, impact visual appeal of a landscape and remove essential wildlife habitat.
Second, the equipment must not damage the residual stand.
It can make a difference.
**- Schirmkeilschlag - Shelterwood wedge cutting
However, Gardner (1980) after trials in Yukon, which included broadcast seeding of white spruce seed at 2.24&nbsp;kg/ha that secured 66.5% stocking in the Scarified Spring Broadcast treatment 3 years after seeding, concluded that the technique held "considerable promise".
Thinning greatly influences the ecology and micro-meteorology of the stand, lowering the inter-tree competition for water.
Slash weight (the oven-dry weight of the entire crown and that portion of the stem < 4 inches in diameter) and size distribution are major factors influencing the forest fire hazard on harvested sites.
Most of the broadleaves, however, are able to regenerate by the means of emergence of shoots from stumps (coppice) and broken stems.
However, age does not seem to determine the ability of advance growth of spruce to respond to release, and trees older than 100 years have shown rapid rates of growth after release.
Recognition of the need to become more effective and efficient in site preparation led the Ontario Department of Lands and Forests to adopt the policy of seeking and obtaining for field testing new equipment from Scandinavia and elsewhere that seemed to hold promise for Ontario conditions, primarily in the north.
Until the latter part of the last century, white spruce understorey was mostly viewed as money in the bank on a long-term, low interest deposit, with final yield to be realized after slow natural succession, but the resource became increasingly threatened with the intensification of harvesting of aspen.
A factor of some importance in solar radiation–reproduction relationships is excess heating of the soil surface by radiation.
Hall's (1970) report on the state of site preparation in Ontario noted that blades and rakes were found to be well suited to post-cut scarification in tolerant hardwood stands for natural regeneration of yellow birch.
More particularly, silviculture is the theory and practice of controlling the establishment, composition, constitution, and growth of forests.
The practice of sustainable forestry limits the impacts such that the values of the forest are maintained in perpetuity.
Hence, shelterwood methods are most often chosen for site types characterized by extreme conditions, in order to create a new tree generation within a reasonable time period.
Burning site preparation has enhanced spruce seedling growth, but it must be supposed that burning could be detrimental if the nutrient capital is significantly depleted.
''Scarification'' is defined as "Loosening the top soil of open areas, or breaking up the forest floor, in preparation for regenerating by direct seeding or natural seedfall", but the term is often misapplied to practices that include scalping, screefing, and blading, which pare off low and surface vegetation, together with most off its roots to expose a weed-free surface, generally in preparation for sowing or planting thereon.
Artificial pruning is where people are paid to come and cut the branches.
The need to provide shade for young outplants of Engelmann spruce in the high Rocky Mountains is emphasized by the U.S. Forest Service.
In addition, the general public's distaste for even-aged silviculture, particularly clearcutting, is likely to result in a greater role for uneven-aged management on public lands as well.
Exposed mineral soil covered only 0.3% of the observed transect area.
White spruce seed germinated at 35&nbsp;°F (1.7&nbsp;°C) and 40&nbsp;°F (4.4&nbsp;°C) after continuous stratification for one year or longer and developed radicles 3/ha.
A spacing study of 3 conifers (white spruce, red pine and jack pine) was established at Moodie, Manitoba, on flat, sandy, nutritionally poor soils with a fresh moisture regime.
Effective understorey management planning requires more than improved mixedwood inventory.
**- Mischformen - mixed form regeneration methods.
Site preparation is undertaken to ameliorate one or more constraints that would otherwise be likely to thwart the objectives of management.
(2000) recommended that sheltered plantation site preparation should be used.
Densely growing trees with short and often irregular crowns would probably be overestimated; open-grown trees with long crowns would probably be underestimated.
In general terms, the shelterwood system is a series of partial cuts that removes the trees of an existing stand over several years and eventually culminates in a final cut that creates a new even-aged stand.
A regeneration method which depends on the sprouting of cut trees.
Site preparation is the work that is done before a forest area is regenerated.
The goal of thinning is to control the amount and distribution of available growing space.
From 1890 on, he managed the forests of his Swiss district according to these principles, devoting himself for almost 50 years to the study of increment and a treatment of stands directed towards the highest production, and proving the practicability of the check method.
To some the distinction between forestry and silviculture is that silviculture is applied at the stand level and forestry is broader.
An unfortunate consequence of strip thinning was the build-up of spruce beetle populations.
For example, John D. Matthews says "complete regimes for regenerating, tending, and harvesting forests" are called "silvicultural systems".
The further desiderata are outlined by Sauder (1995).
If the ratio of fir to spruce is large, however, the greater responsiveness to release of fir may subject the spruce to competition severe enough to negate much of the effect of release treatment.
Crown width showed a gradual increase with spacing for all 3 conifers.
Clear knot-free lumber has a higher value.
scarifier, or rolling chopper).
A final cut is made once adequate natural regeneration has been obtained.
Thus, it is not surprising that literature can be used to support the view that the growth of seedlings on scarified sites is much superior to that of growth on similar sites that have not been scarified, while other evidence supports the contrary view that scarification can reduce growth.
In a pure stand of Norway spruce, for instance, Roussel (1948) found the following relationships:
The ability of then current harvesting technology and crews employed to provide adequate protection for white spruce understories was questioned by Brace and Bella.
There is less spruce and more hardwoods in the second-growth forest than in the original forest; Hearnden et al.
In west-central Alberta, he felled, measured, and weighed 60 white spruce, graphed (a) slash weight per merchantable unit volume against diameter at breast height (dbh), and (b) weight of fine slash (<1.27&nbsp;cm) also against dbh, and produced a table of slash weight and size distribution on one acre of a hypothetical stand of white spruce.
For transplant stock, strip plantations had a significantly higher volume (329&nbsp;cm³) than open plantations (204&nbsp;cm³).
'''Vegetation Description'''
New stands need to be established to provide for future supply of commercial white spruce from 150 000 ha of boreal mixedwoods in 4 of Rowe's (1972) regional Forest Sections straddling Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba, roughly from Peace River AB to Brandon MB.
Moss carpet with a few fir seedlings
Seed, of course, is needed for all regeneration modes, both for natural or artificial sowing and for raising planting stock in a nursery.
It is important to avoid the assumption that site preparation of a particular designation will have a particular silvicultural outcome.
Clearcutting can be biologically appropriate with species that typically regenerate from stand replacing fires or other major disturbances, such as Lodgepole Pine (''Pinus contorta'').
Selection systems are appropriate where uneven stand structure is desired, particularly where the need to retain continuous cover forest for aesthetic or environmental reasons outweighs other management considerations.
Henri Biolley (1858–1939) was the first to apply Gurnaud's inspired ideas to practical forestry.
Where the objectives of management specify more uniform spacing, or higher densities, than obtainable from an existing distribution of shade-providing material, redistribution or importing of such material has been undertaken.
Spacings up to 10 × 10 feet (3.05 m × 3.03 m) were subsequently included in the study.
In point of fact, the term is commonly misapplied.
Unlike the seed-tree method, residual trees alter understory environmental conditions (i.e.
While an individual location can be identified where it could be said to be the archetypal form of harvesting technique (they all originated somewhere with a particular forester, and have been described in the scientific literature), and broad generalizations can be made these are merely rules of thumb rather than strict blue prints on how techniques might be applied.
Concerns also include fisheries and wildlife habitat, aesthetics and recreation, a general dissatisfaction with cleacutting in mixedwoods and a strong interest in mixedwood perpetuation, as expressed recently in 41 public meetings on forestry development in northern Alberta...".
Cone shelters (Cerkon™) usually produced greater survival than unsheltered seeding on scarified seedspots in trials of direct seeding techniques in interior Alaska, and funnel shelters (Cerbel™) usually produced greater survival than unsheltered seeding on non-scarified seedspots.
"Brashing" is an alternative name for the same process.
Sauder concluded that: (1) operational measures that protected residual stems may not unduly increase costs, (2) all felling, conifers and hardwoods, needs to be done in one operation to minimize the entry of the feller-buncher into the residual stand, (3) several operational procedures can reduce understorey damage, some of them without incurring extra costs, and (4) successful harvesting of treatment blocks depends primarily on the intelligent location of skid trails and landings.
Some types of site preparation are burning.
The oil can is a container fitted with a long spout through which a predetermined number of seeds are released with each flick of the seeder.
The study of forests and woods is termed silvology.
Site preparation may be designed to achieve, singly or in any combination: improved access, by reducing or rearranging slash, and amelioration of adverse forest floor, soil, vegetation, or other biotic factors.
Burning after windrowing obviously accentuates the subsequent heterogeneity.
Information on the establishment, survival and growth of seedlings influenced by the cover of shelter trees, as well as on the growth of these trees, is needed as a basis for modelling the economic return of practising a shelterwood system.
This silviculture was culturally predicated on wood production in temperate and boreal climates and did not deal with tropical forestry.
Acceptable planting spots are defined as microsites on the north and east sides of down logs, stumps, or slash, and lying in the shadow cast by such material.
With linear site preparation, orientation is sometimes dictated by topography or other considerations, but the orientation can often be chosen.
In this method, the increment of stands is accurately determined periodically with the object of gradually converting the forest, through selective management and continuous experimentation, to a condition of equilibrium at maximum productive capacity.
's (1985) mounds received 5 times the amount of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) summed over all sampled microsites throughout the first growing season; the control treatment consistently received about 14% of daily background PAR, while mounds received over 70%.
The strips, 50 feet (15.24 m) wide, alternating with uncut strips 16 feet (4.88 m) wide, were felled in a ''Pinus resinosa'' stand, aged 90 to 100 years.
In seeding trials in Manitoba between 1960 and 1966 aimed at converting aspen stands to spruce–aspen mixedwoods, 1961 scarification in the Duck Mountain Provincial Forest remained receptive to natural seeding for many years.
Changes in soil chemical properties associated with burning include significantly increased pH, which Macadam (1987) in the Sub-boreal Spruce Zone of central British Columbia found persisting more than a year after the burn.
In a Minnesota study, the N–S strips accumulated more snow but snow melted faster than on E–W strips in the first year after felling.
A survey in 1955–56 to determine survival, development, and the reasons for success or failure of conifer pulpwood plantations (mainly of white spruce) in Ontario and Quebec up to 32 years old found that the bulk of the mortality occurred within the first 4 years of planting, unfavourable site and climate being the main causes of failure.
In some areas, selection logging can be expected to favour spruce over less tolerant hardwood species (Zasada 1972) or lodgepole pine.
"Human-assisted natural regeneration" means establishment of a forest age class from natural seeding or sprouting in an area after harvesting in that area through selection cutting, shelter (or seed-tree) harvest, soil preparation, or restricting the size of a clear-cut stand to secure natural regeneration from the surrounding trees.
**- Saumschlag (Saumfemelschlagbetrieb) - Strip selection cutting (strip-and-group felling system)
Stocking of bare seedspots was extremely low, possibly due to smothering of seedlings by abundant broadleaf and herbaceous litter, particularly that from aspen and red raspberry, and exacerbated by strong competition from graminoids and raspberry.
The devices used in Ontario for manual spot seeding are the "oil can" seeder, seeding sticks, and shakers.
This is especially important for seedlings, such as spruce, whose first leaves do not shade the base of the stem at the soil surface.
This method is also disturbs the canopy layer the least out of all other methods.
The removal of any tree from a stand has repercussions on the remaining trees both above-ground and below.
Tarrant (1954), for instance, found only 4% of a 140-ha slash burn had burned severely, 47% had burned lightly, and 49% was unburned.
In summary, the key to protecting the white spruce understorey without sacrificing logging efficiency is a combination of good planning, good supervision, the use of appropriate equipment, and having conscientious, well-trained operators.Even the best plan will not reduce understorey damage unless its implementation is supervised.
Thus, testing was begun of the Brackekultivator from Sweden and the Vako-Visko rotary furrower from Finland.
Formerly, white spruce in the understories had developed to commercial size through natural succession under the protection of the hardwoods.
Rolling choppers found application in treating heavy brush but could be used only on stone-free soils.
About half the seedlings surveyed grew on rotten wood, and only 3% on mineral soil, and seedlings were 10 times more likely to have established on these substrates than on litter.
Assuming that incident light in the 100-600 µEm‾²s‾1 intensity range is the most important for photosynthesis, the mounds received over 4 times the total daily light energy that reached the control microsites.
Spacings of 1.2 m, 2.7 m, 3.7 m, and 4.9 m were used, and trees were measured 6, 12, 16, 26, and 30 years after planting.
Black spruce open plantation had significantly smaller volume (97&nbsp;cm³) compared with black spruce sheltered (210&nbsp;cm³), as well as white spruce open (175&nbsp;cm³) and sheltered (229&nbsp;cm³) plantations.
Herbaceous plants appear
Previous studies have demonstrated that repeated thinnings over the course of a forest rotation increase carbon stores relative to stands that are clear-cut on short rotations and that the carbon benefits differ according to thinning method (e.g., thinning from above versus below).
A smaller espacement trial, begun in 1951 near Thunder Bay, Ontario, included white spruce at spacings of 1.8 m, 2.7 m, and 3.6 m. At the closest spacing, mortality had begun at 37 years, but not at the wider spacings.
Results to date were suggesting optimum spacings between 1.8 m and 2.4 m for both pines; white spruce was not recommended for planting on such sites.
