Singlish is discouraged by the government.
Many national symbols such as the Coat of arms of Singapore and the Lion head symbol of Singapore make use of the lion, as Singapore is known as the ''Lion City''.
The "national fruit" of Singapore is the durian.
The World Health Organisation ranks Singapore's healthcare system as 6th overall in the world in its World Health Report.
Singapore's best known global brands include Singapore Airlines (SIA) and Changi Airport, both amongst the most-awarded in their industry.
Other regional organisations are important to Singapore, and it is the host of the APEC Secretariat.
The main fear after independence was an invasion by Malaysia.
The People's Action Party has won control of Parliament with large majorities in every election since self-governance was secured in 1959.
Singaporeans who speak English as their native language tend to lean toward Western culture, while those who speak Chinese as their native language tend to lean toward Chinese culture and Confucianism.
Public bodies in Singapore, such as the Singapore Public Service, (which includes the Singapore Civil Service and other agencies), conduct their business in English, and official documents written in a non-English official language such as Malay, Chinese or Tamil typically have to be translated into English to be accepted for submission.
Its foreign trade and capital flows is 407.9% of its GDP, making it the most trade dependent country in the world.
It has been rated one of the best international airports by international travel magazines, including being rated as the world's best airport for the first time in 2006 by Skytrax.
Other monikers by which Singapore is widely known is the ''Garden City'' and the ''Red Dot''.
During that time it still contained flora shared with the Malay Peninsula, but the biodiversity of the fauna was even then relatively low.
Secondary school lasts from four to five years, and is divided between Special, Express, Normal (Academic), and Normal (Technical) streams in each school, depending on a student's ability level.
GDPNominal(Billion)
New Zealand troops were the last to leave, in 1989.
Relative humidity averages around 79% in the morning and 73% in the afternoon.
It lies one degree (137&nbsp;km) north of the equator, south of the southernmost tip of continental Asia and peninsular Malaysia, with Indonesia's Riau Islands to the south.
The government spends 4.9% of the country's GDP on the military, and one out of every four dollars of government spending is spent on defence.
The Economist Intelligence Unit, in its 2013 "Where-to-be-born Index", ranks Singapore as having the best quality of life in Asia and sixth overall in the world.
Elected MPs are voted into the Parliament on a "first-past-the-post" (plurality) basis and represent either single-member or group representation constituencies.
The median age of Singaporean residents is 39.3, and the total fertility rate is estimated to be 0.80 children per woman in 2014, the lowest in the world and well below the 2.1 needed to replace the population.
Singapore consists of 63 islands, including the main island, Pulau Ujong.
The currency of Singapore is the Singapore dollar (SGD or S$), issued by the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS).
In 1819, Thomas Stamford Raffles arrived and signed a treaty with Sultan Hussein Shah of Johor, on behalf of the British East India Company, to develop the southern part of Singapore as a British trading post.
On 23 March 2015 Lee Kuan Yew died, during the 50th year of independence.
The national flower of Singapore is the hybrid orchid, Vanda 'Miss Joaquim', named in memory of a Singapore-born Armenian woman, who crossbred the flower in her garden at Tanjong Pagar in 1893.
Changi Airport is an aviation centre for Southeast Asia and a stopover on the Kangaroo Route between Sydney and London.
Taxis are a popular form of public transport as the fares are relatively cheap compared to many other developed countries.
After independence, the process of crafting a Singaporean identity and culture began.
The People's Action Party has won every election since self-government in 1959.
There are more than 7,000 multinational corporations from the United States, Japan, and Europe in Singapore.
Singapore maintains membership in other regional organisations, such as Asia–Europe Meeting, the Forum for East Asia-Latin American Cooperation, the Asian Network of Major Cities 21, and the East Asia Summit.
There are monasteries and Dharma centres from all three major traditions of Buddhism in Singapore: Theravada, Mahayana, and Vajrayana.
The large number of immigrants has kept Singapore's population from declining.
Although the elections are clean, there is no independent electoral authority and the government has strong influence on the media.
Equinix (332 participants) and also it's smaller brother Singapore Internet Exchange (70 participants) are Internet exchange points where Internet service providers and Content delivery networks exchange Internet traffic between their networks (autonomous systems) in various locations in Singapore.
Singapore's environment has changed drastically due to rapid urbanisation and immense population density.
While the term "mother tongue" in general refers to the first language internationally, in Singapore's education system, it is used to refer to the second language, as English is the first language.
The RSAF also has a few overseas detachments in the United States, in San Diego, California, Marana, Arizona, Grand Prairie, Texas and Luke Air Force Base, among others.
Lee Kuan Yew's emphasis on rapid economic growth, support for business entrepreneurship, and limitations on internal democracy shaped Singapore's policies for the next half-century.
For the past decade, it has been the only Asian country with the top AAA sovereign rating from all major credit rating agencies, including S&P, Moody's and Fitch.
citizens and permanent residents) were foreign born (which means about 10% of Singapore citizens were foreign-born naturalised citizens); if non-residents were counted, nearly 43% of the total population were foreign born.
However, large-scale drills are considered too dangerous to be performed in the area, and since 1975 have been performed in Taiwan.
The RSAF's 130 Squadron is based in RAAF Base Pearce, Western Australia, and its 126 Squadron is based in the Oakey Army Aviation Centre, Queensland.
The high-level dialogue has had influence on confrontational issues, such as territorial disputes in the East and South China seas, together with discussions about global security and terrorism.
The Singaporean military is arguably the most technologically advanced in Southeast Asia.
David Marshall, pro-independence leader of the Labour Front, won Singapore's first general election in 1955.
The country's constitution establishes a representative democracy as the political system.
Its cultural diversity is reflected in its extensive ethnic "hawker" cuisine and major festivals—Chinese, Malay, Indian, Western—which are all national holidays.
In the 2015 elections, PAP scored a landslide victory, winning 83 of 89 seats contested, with 70% of popular votes.
'''Singapore''' (), officially the '''Republic of Singapore''', and often referred to as the ''Lion City'', the ''Garden City'', and the ''Red Dot'', is a global city and sovereign state in Southeast Asia and the world's only island city-state.
This is different from most central banks, which use interest rates to manage policy.
Singapore's governance model eschews populist politics, focusing on the nation's long-term interest, and is known to be clean, effective and pragmatic.
National examinations are standardised across all schools, with a test taken after each stage.
The basic coursework breakdown is the same as in the primary level, although classes are much more specialised.
In 2008, 32% of healthcare was funded by the government.
Public hospitals in Singapore have autonomy in their management decisions, and compete for patients.
In 2007 Singapore's water and sanitation utility, the Public Utilities Board, received the Stockholm Industry Water Award for its holistic approach to water resources management.
Mandarin is the language that is spoken as the native tongue by the greatest number of Singaporeans, half of them.
In general, Singapore has had the lowest infant mortality rate in the world for the past two decades.
ForeignReserves(Billion)
Temperatures usually range from .
Avg.Exchange Rate(1US$ to S$)
By 1860, the population had swelled to more than 80,000 and more than half were Chinese.
Other faiths remained largely stable in their share of the population.
The aim was to soften the harshness of urbanisation and improve the quality of life.
During the May 1959 elections, the People's Action Party won a landslide victory.
In the region, it has helped stabilise East Timor and has provided aid to Aceh in Indonesia following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami.
Singaporean Indians are much more religious.
After the First World War, the British built the large Singapore Naval Base as part of the defensive Singapore strategy.
During Goh's tenure, the country faced the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the 2003 SARS outbreak and terrorist threats posed by Jemaah Islamiyah.
Between 1965 and 1995, growth rates averaged around 6 per cent per annum, transforming the living standards of the population.
It is ranked as Asia's most influential city and 4th in the world by ''Forbes''.
Tamil has official status in Singapore and there have been no attempts to discourage the use of other Indian languages.
Buddhism is the most widely practised religion in Singapore, with 33% of the resident population declaring themselves adherents at the most recent census.
It is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Commonwealth.
It is also the world's most-awarded airline, including "Best international airline", by US-based Travel + Leisure reader surveys, for 20 consecutive years.
As Singapore is a small island with a high population density, the number of private cars on the road is restricted so as to curb pollution and congestion.
Students who have been abroad for a while, or who struggle with their "Mother Tongue" language, are allowed to take a simpler syllabus or drop the subject.
It is interchangeable with the Brunei dollar at par value since 1967, owing to their historically close relations.
Bulim Bus Depot has been leased to Tower Transit to maintain its bus fleet.
In 1990, Goh Chok Tong succeeded Lee as Prime Minister, while the latter continued serving in the Cabinet as Senior Minister until 2004, and then Minister Mentor until May 2011.
Singapore attracts a large amount of foreign investment as a result of its location, skilled workforce, low tax rates, advanced infrastructure and zero-tolerance against corruption.
The government has disputed Amnesty's claims.
Singapore ranks high on its national social policies, leading Asia and 11th globally, on the Human Development Index (UN), notably on key measures of education, healthcare, life expectancy, quality of life, personal safety, and housing.
This was the lowest ranking for Singapore since the inception of this index in 2002.
5,000 Malaysian students cross the Johor–Singapore Causeway daily to attend schools in Singapore.
A Strategic Framework Agreement between the two, signed in 2005, formalises security and defence co-operation.
Private ownership of TV satellite dishes is banned.
The English name of Singapore is an anglicisation of the native Malay name for the country, '''', which was in turn derived from Sanskrit (सिंहपुर, IAST: '''''Siṃhapura'''''; ''siṃha'' is "lion", ''pura'' is "town" or "city"), hence the customary reference to the nation as the ''Lion City'', and its inclusion in many of the nation's symbols (e.g., its coat of arms, Merlion emblem).
Also starting in 2016, GoAhead Singapore will operate Loyang Bus Depot, with its fleet operating bus routes from the North-Eastern and Eastern regions of Singapore, such as Changi Village Bus Terminal, Pasir Ris Bus Interchange and Punggol Bus Interchange.
Singapore is a unitary, multiparty, parliamentary republic, with a Westminster system of unicameral parliamentary government, but is classified as being "partly free" by Freedom House.
However, shortly after the merger, the Singapore state government and the Malaysian central government disagreed on many political and economic issues, and communal strife culminated in the 1964 race riots in Singapore.
Israeli Defense Force (IDF) commanders were tasked with creating the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) from scratch, and Israeli instructors were brought in to train Singaporean soldiers.
Amnesty International has said that some legal provisions of the Singapore system conflict with the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, and that Singapore has "... possibly the highest execution rate in the world relative to its population".
There are a total of seven free-to-air TV channels offered by Mediacorp.
90.3% of resident households (i.e.
It has a symbolic, rather than functional purpose.
The Singaporean economy is known as one of the freest, most innovative, most competitive, most dynamic and most business-friendly.
Singapore and the United States share a long-standing close relationship, in particular in defence, the economy, health, and education.
Singaporean leaders chose to join Malaysia primarily due to concerns over its limited land size, scarcity of water, markets and natural resources.
Malay speaking Singaporeans tend to lean toward the Malay culture, which itself is closely linked to the Islamic culture.
In recent years, the country has been identified as an increasingly popular tax haven for the wealthy due to the low tax rate on personal income and tax exemptions on foreign-based income and capital gains.
Since independence, extensive land reclamation has increased its total size by 23% (130&nbsp;km2), and its greening policy has covered the densely populated island with tropical flora, parks and gardens.
There are six taxi companies, who together put out over 28,000 taxis on the road.
Singaporeans are mostly bilingual in a mother-tongue language and English as their common language.
In 2015, Lonely Planet and The New York Times listed Singapore as their top and 6th best world destination to visit respectively.
The economy is diversified, with its top contributors – financial services, manufacturing, oil-refining.
The legal system of Singapore is based on English common law, but with substantial local differences.
To expand the sector, casinos were legalised in 2005, but only two licenses for "Integrated Resorts" were issued, to control money laundering and addiction.
Singaporeans' disapproval towards drug use has resulted in laws that impose the mandatory death sentence for certain serious drug trafficking offences.
When the British force of 60,000 troops surrendered on 15 February 1942, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill called the defeat "the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history.
Four in ten speak English as their home language, three in ten Tamil, one in ten Malay, and the rest other Indian languages as their home language.
Companies linked to the government control much of the domestic media in Singapore.
A sizeable minority of middle-class, local-born people, known as the Peranakans, also existed.
Life expectancy in Singapore is 80 for males and 85 for females, placing the country 4th in the world for life expectancy.
In 1819, Sir Stamford Raffles founded colonial Singapore as a trading post of the East India Company; after the establishment of the British Raj, the islands were ceded to Britain and became part of its Straits Settlements in 1826.
+ '''Economy Statistics (Recent Years) : Year 2011 To Year 2014'''Sources:
Changi Airport connects over 100 airlines to more than 300 cities.
The diversity of food is touted as a reason to visit the country, and the variety of food representing different ethnicities is seen by the government as a symbol of its multiculturalism.
This is a result of five decades of greening efforts, which began in 1963, when Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew launched Singapore's first tree-planting campaign by planting a mempat tree (''Cratoxylum formosum'').
There were two major foreign invasions before it was destroyed by the Majapahit in 1398.
The annual Singapore Arts Festival is organised by the National Arts Council.
The cost of the Singaporean certificate of entitlement alone would buy a Porsche Boxster in the United States.
Internet in Singapore is provided by state owned Singtel and partially state owned Starhub and M1 Limited plus some other business internet service providers (ISPs) that offer residential service plans of speeds up to 2 Gbit/s as of Spring 2015.
Roughly 44 percent of the Singaporean workforce is made up of non-Singaporeans.
All public gatherings of five or more people require police permits, and protests may legally be held only at the Speakers' Corner.
Deforestation of Singapore was largely completed by the 20th century.
In 1299, according to the ''Malay Annals'', the Kingdom of Singapura was established on the island as a trading port city.
Executive power rests with the Cabinet of Singapore, led by the Prime Minister and, to a much lesser extent, the President.
File:Chinese New Year market.jpg|A scene in a street market in Chinatown, Singapore, during the Chinese New Year holidays.
Since the 1990s, the government has been promoting Singapore as a centre for arts and culture, in particular the performing arts, and to transform the country into a cosmopolitan "gateway between the East and West".
The Singapore government also provides numerous benefits to its citizenry, including: free money to encourage residents to exercise in public gyms, up to $166,000 worth of baby bonus benefits for each baby born to a citizen, heavily subsidised healthcare, money to help the disabled, cheap laptops for poor students, rebates for numerous areas such as public transport, utility bills and more.
Singapore has pushed regional counter-terrorism initiatives, with a strong resolve to deal with terrorists inside its borders.
Live-in foreign domestic workers are quite common in Singapore, with about 224,500 foreign domestic workers there, as of December 2013.
Upgraded in 1998 and renamed Electronic Road Pricing, the system introduced electronic toll collection, electronic detection, and video surveillance technology.
Singapore has the world's highest percentage of millionaires, with one out of every six households having at least one million US dollars in disposable wealth.
One highlight was the construction of Esplanade – Theatres on the Bay, a performing arts centre opened in October 2002.
Freedom House ranks Singapore as "partly free" in its ''Freedom in the World'' report, and ''The Economist'' ranks Singapore as a "flawed democracy", the second best rank of four, in its "Democracy Index".
The religion of Soka Gakkai International, a Japanese Buddhist organisation, is practised by many people in Singapore, but mostly by those of Chinese descent.
Singapore has a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen: ''Af '') with no distinctive seasons, uniform temperature and pressure, high humidity, and abundant rainfall.
As of mid-2015, the estimated population of Singapore was 5,535,000 people, 3,375,000 (60.98%) of whom were citizens, while the remaining 2,160,000 (39.02%) were permanent residents (527,700) or foreign students/foreign workers/dependants (1,632,300).
Singaporeans are mostly bilingual, with English as their common language and usually the mother-tongue as a second language taught in schools, in order to preserve each individual's ethnic identity and values.
In 2011, amidst the global financial crisis, OCBC, DBS and UOB were ranked as the world's 1st, 5th, 6th "strongest banks in the world" respectively by Bloomberg surveys.
During the Second World War, the Imperial Japanese Army invaded British Malaya, culminating in the Battle of Singapore.
Due to these efforts, Singapore was ranked fourth in the 2014 Environmental Performance Index, which measures the effectiveness of state policies for environmental sustainability.
It also has one of the highest income inequalities among developed countries.
17% of the population did not have a religious affiliation.
Singapore English is based on British English, and forms of English spoken in Singapore range from Standard Singapore English to a colloquial form known as "Singlish".
Some Singaporean and Malaysian politicians were also concerned that the communists might form the government on the island, a possibility perceived as an external threat to the Federation of Malaya.
Its standings include: "easiest place to do business" (World Bank) for ten consecutive years, most "technology-ready" nation (WEF), top International-meetings city (UIA), city with "best investment potential" (BERI), 2nd-most competitive country (WEF), 3rd-largest foreign exchange centre, 3rd-largest financial centre, 3rd-largest oil refining and trading centre and one of the top two busiest container ports since the 1990s.
Singapore ranked fifth on the Tax Justice Network's 2013 Financial Secrecy Index of the world's top tax havens, scoring narrowly ahead of the United States.
The plan aims to keep tabs on the unstable populations of fauna and flora, to place new nature parks, and to connect existing parks.
According to the country's most recent census in 2010, nearly 23% of Singaporean residents (i.e.
Public holidays in Singapore cover major Chinese, Western, Malay and Indian festivals.
It gained independence from Britain in 1963, by federating with other former British territories to form Malaysia, but was expelled two years later over ideological differences.
Subsequently, the PAP maintained its dominance in Parliament at the September general elections, receiving 69.9% of the popular vote, its second-highest polling result behind the 2001 tally of 75.3%.
There is a high level of immunisation.
Gallup polls reported 84% of residents in Singapore expressed confidence in the government, and 85% in its judicial systems and courts – one of the highest ratings in the world.
It accounts for approximately 3.5% of Singapore's GDP.
The same census also reports that about 74.1% of residents were of Chinese descent, 13.4% of Malay descent, 9.2% of Indian descent, and 3.3% of other (including Eurasian) descent.
In 2004, Lee Hsien Loong, the eldest son of Lee Kuan Yew, became the country's third Prime Minister.
The national airline is Singapore Airlines.
Culturally, the use of illicit drugs is viewed as highly undesirable by Singaporeans, unlike many European societies.
Singapore has conscription for all able-bodied males at age 18, except those with a criminal record or who can prove that their loss would bring hardship to their families.
Singapore has one of the lowest rates of drug use in the world.
Malaysia and Singapore have clashed over the delivery of fresh water to Singapore, and access by the Singapore Armed Forces to Malaysian airspace.
Two companies run the public bus and train transport system—SBS Transit and SMRT Corporation.
Singapore still maintains strong security ties with Israel and is one of the biggest buyers of Israeli arms and weapons systems.
After early years of turbulence, and despite lacking natural resources and a hinterland, the nation developed rapidly as an Asian Tiger economy, based on external trade and its human capital.
In 2016, under the Bus Contracting Model, Tower Transit will operate several bus routes from the Western region of Singapore, such as Bukit Batok Bus Interchange, Clementi Bus Interchange and Jurong East Bus Interchange.
The Singapore Grand Prix will remain on the F1 calendar through at least 2017, after race organisers signed a contract extension with Formula One Group on the eve of the 2012 event.
During World War II, Singapore was occupied by Japan.
MediaCorp operates most free-to-air television channels and free-to-air radio stations in Singapore.
Almost the whole population has access to improved water and sanitation facilities.
It has diplomatic relations with more than 180 sovereign states.
However, due to scarcity of land, 80.4% of resident households live in subsidised, high-rise, public housing apartments known as "HDB flats" because of the government board (Housing and Development Board) responsible for public housing in the country.
With the exception of the Peranakans (descendants of late 15th and 16th-century Chinese immigrants) who pledged their loyalties to Singapore, most of the labourers' loyalties lay with their respective homelands of Malaysia, China and India.
The Japanese occupied Singapore until the British repossessed it in September 1945, after the Surrender of Japan.
An underlying principle is political and economic stability in the region.
Former Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong proposed the formation of an ASEAN Economic Community, a step beyond the current AFTA, bringing it closer to a common market.
Some projects involve merging smaller islands through land reclamation to form larger, more functional islands, as has been done with Jurong Island.
In addition, the port is the world's busiest for transshipment traffic and the world's biggest ship refuelling centre.
Dining, along with shopping, is said to be the country's national pastime.
The next-most practised religion is Christianity, followed by Islam, Taoism, and Hinduism.
Racial and religious harmony is regarded by Singaporeans as a crucial part of Singapore's success, and played a part in building a Singaporean identity.
The first diplomatic contact with China was made in the 1970s, with full diplomatic relations established in the 1990s.
In 1967, the country co-founded ASEAN, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
This initiative continued into the 1970s and 1980s under the Parks and Recreation Department (PRD), renamed the National Parks Board (abbreviation: NParks) in July 1996.
The Defence Science and Technology Agency is responsible for procuring resources for the military.
Singapore has penalties that include judicial corporal punishment in the form of caning, which may be imposed for such offences as rape, rioting, vandalism, and certain immigration offences.
As the block covers only home internet access, users may still visit the blocked websites from their office computers.
The government provides numerous assistance programmes to the homeless and needy through the Ministry of Social and Family Development, so acute poverty is rare.
Race riots broke out once more in 1969.
Singapore has a highly developed market economy, based historically on extended entrepôt trade.
It is the most comprehensive survey of the pervasiveness and network-readiness of a country, in terms of market, political and regulatory infrastructure for connectivity.
There are eight airports in the country, and Singapore Changi Airport hosts a network of over 100 airlines connecting Singapore to some 300 cities in about 70 countries and territories worldwide.
Former Prime Ministers of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew and Goh Chok Tong, have stated that Singapore does not fit the traditional description of a nation, calling it a society-in-transition, pointing out the fact that Singaporeans do not all speak the same language, share the same religion, or have the same customs.
