Although the powerful Jordanian radar facility at Ajloun detected waves of aircraft approaching Egypt and reported the code word for "war" up the Egyptian command chain, Egyptian command and communications problems prevented the warning from reaching the targeted airfields.
The Egyptians suffered some 2,000 casualties and lost 40 tanks.
Yoffe's attack allowed Tal to complete the capture of the Jiradi defile, Khan Yunis.
However, Dayan sanctioned a number of more limited retaliatory actions.
Prime Minister Eshkol, on the other hand, was more open to the possibility, as was the head of the Northern Command, David Elazar, whose unbridled enthusiasm for and confidence in the operation may have eroded Dayan's reluctance.
Some 70 Israelis were killed, along with Israeli journalist Ben Oyserman and American journalist Paul Schutzer.
At Bir Gafgafa, the Egyptians fiercely resisted advancing Israeli forces, knocking out three tanks and eight half-tracks, and killing 20 soldiers.
Lutfi Abd al-Qadir, the director of Radio Cairo during the late 1960s, who accompanied Nasser to his visits in Moscow, had his conspiracy theory that both the Soviets and the Western powers wanted to topple Nasser or to reduce his influence.
The airstrikes knocked out artillery batteries and storehouses and forced transport columns off the roads.
A planned commando raid against the Syrian Navy never materialized.
M2, / M3 Half-track, Panhard AML
All but ten of Dreizin's soldiers were casualties, and Dreizin himself was wounded three times.
The Israelis entered the city at 8:00&nbsp;am.
With the situation critical, Colonel Mandler ordered simultaneous assaults on Za'ura and Qala.
Three Iraqi Hawker Hunters strafed civilian settlements in the Jezreel Valley, and an Iraqi Tu-16 attacked Afula, and was shot down near the Megiddo airfield.
A pogrom in Tripoli, Libya, left 18 Jews dead and 25 injured; the survivors were herded into detention centers.
Jordan was reluctant to enter the war.
Meanwhile, 600 Egyptian commandos stationed in the West Bank moved to attack Israeli airfields.
At the fortified village of Jalabina, a garrison of Syrian reservists, leveling their anti-aircraft guns, held off the Israeli 65th Paratroop Battalion for four hours before a small detachment managed to penetrate the village and knock out the heavy guns.
James Reston, writing in ''The New York Times'' on May 23, 1967, noted, "In discipline, training, morale, equipment and general competence his Nasser's army and the other Arab forces, without the direct assistance of the Soviet Union, are no match for the Israelis.
After the Old City was captured, Dayan told his troops to dig in to hold it.
The Jordanian 12th Armored Battalion, which outnumbered the Israelis, held off repeated attempts to capture Jenin.
However, most of the defenders were killed, and only three Egyptian tanks, one of them damaged, survived.
At the same time, the mechanized Harel Brigade attacked the fortress at Latrun, which the Jordanians had abandoned due to heavy Israeli tank fire.
The attacks also provided time as Israeli forces cleared paths through Syrian minefields.
Nine brigades (45,000 troops, 270 tanks, 200 artillery pieces) were deployed in the West Bank, including the elite armoured 40th, and two in the Jordan Valley.
On June 7, Israeli forces seized Bethlehem, taking the city after a brief battle that left some 40 Jordanian soldiers dead, with the remainder fleeing.
The vast majority of the populations in both territories declined to take citizenship.
The Israeli aircraft attacked in two waves, the first of which cratered the runways and knocked out the control towers, and the second wave destroyed all 21 of Jordan's Hawker Hunter fighters, along with six transport aircraft and two helicopters.
The Egyptians took heavy casualties, while the Israelis lost 40 dead and 140 wounded.
Of Egypt's 4,000 Jews, 800 were arrested, including the chief rabbis of both Cairo and Alexandria, and their property sequestered by the government.
Second, there was not any provocation on the part of the IDF.
However, the Syrian forces proved unable to put up effective defense largely because the officers were poor leaders and treated their soldiers badly; often officers would retreat from danger, leaving their men confused and ineffective.
The war inspired the Jewish diaspora, which was swept up in overwhelming support for Israel.
Despite the Temple Mount's importance in Jewish tradition, the al-Aqsa Mosque has been under sole administration of a Muslim Waqf, and Jews are barred from praying on the Temple Mount, although they are allowed to visit it.
Israel had seized the Gaza Strip, the Sinai Peninsula, the West Bank of the Jordan River (including East Jerusalem), and the Golan Heights.
Two paratroop battalions attacked Augusta-Victoria Hill, high ground overlooking the Old City from the east.
A column of Israeli tanks managed to penetrate the northern flank of Abu Ageila, and by dusk, all units were in position.
The attack caused minimal material damage, hitting only a senior citizens' home and several chicken coops, but sixteen Israeli soldiers were killed, most of them when the Tupolev crashed.
Across the Arab world, Jewish minority communities were expelled, with refugees going to Israel or Europe.
In any event, it did not make a great deal of difference as the Israeli pilots came in below Egyptian radar cover and well below the lowest point at which its SA-2 surface-to-air missile batteries could bring down an aircraft.
The Israeli advance, which had to cope with extensive minefields, took a large number of casualties.
With the road open, Israeli forces continued advancing towards Arish.
As a result, they began directing soldiers towards the Suez Canal and only taking prisoner high-ranking officers, who were expected to be exchanged for captured Israeli pilots.
The Israelis chose not to risk attacking the Egyptian defenses head-on, and instead surprised them from an unexpected direction.
As Egyptian columns retreated, Israeli aircraft and artillery attacked them.
The Israelis ran into fierce resistance.
They are a matter of controversy within Israel, both among the general population and within different political administrations, supporting them to varying degrees.
Just after dusk, Israeli reinforcements arrived.
The IDF's strategic plan was to remain on the defensive along the Jordanian front, to enable focus in the expected campaign against Egypt.
This order effectively meant the defeat of Egypt.
However, when the Egyptian Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer heard about the fall of Abu-Ageila, he panicked and ordered all units in the Sinai to retreat.
Israel reiterated declarations made in 1957 that any closure of the Straits would be considered an act of war, or justification for war, and Nasser declared the Straits closed to Israeli shipping on May 22–23.
The Israeli Navy started the operation with a probe of Egyptian naval defenses.
Therefore, in the following two days (June 6 and 7), all three Israeli divisions (Sharon and Tal were reinforced by an armoured brigade each) rushed westwards and reached the passes.
M50 self-propelled howitzer and Makmat 160 mm self-propelled mortar, Obusier de 155 mm Modèle 50, AMX 105 mm Self-Propelled Howitzer
However, they made a wrong turn onto the heavily defended Nablus Road.
From the American Colony, the paratroopers moved towards the Old City.
However, the airstrikes did not seriously damage the Syrians' bunkers and trench systems, and the bulk of Syrian forces on the Golan remained in their positions.
In fierce fighting, which saw the pass change hands several times, the Israelis charged through the position.
All but 12 of its nearly 200 operational jets launched a mass attack against Egypt's airfields.
After Palestinian positions in Gaza opened fire on the Negev settlements of Nirim and Kissufim, IDF Chief of Staff Yitzhak Rabin overrode Dayan's instructions and ordered the 11th Mechanized Brigade under Colonel Yehuda Reshef to enter the Strip.
After the Old City fell, the Jerusalem Brigade reinforced the paratroopers, and continued to the south, capturing Judea and Gush Etzion.
Simultaneously, Sharon's tanks from the west were to engage Egyptian forces on Um-Katef ridge and block any reinforcements.
The United States estimated Israel would need 7–10 days to win, with British estimates supporting the U.S. view.
By sunset, the Israelis had taken the strategically vital Ali Muntar ridge, overlooking Gaza City, but were beaten back from the city itself.
Navigational errors placed the Israelis directly under the Syrians' guns.
They dropped grenades into our half-tracks and blocked the streets with trucks.
The Israelis captured the position after four hours of heavy fighting.
Resolution 242 recognized the right of "every state in the area to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or acts of force."
The Harel Brigade proceeded eastward, descending to the Jordan River.
America features prominently in Arab conspiracy theories purporting to explain the June 1967 defeat.
The Jordanian Army, then known as the Arab Legion, was a long-term-service, professional army, relatively well-equipped and well-trained.
Fearing damage to holy sites and the prospect of having to fight in built-up areas, Dayan ordered his troops not to enter the Old City.
Our men threw the grenades back and crushed the trucks with their tanks."
Panzer IV (used by Syria)
Syrian artillery began shelling northern Israel, and twelve Syrian jets attacked Israeli settlements in the Galilee.
Nasser forestalled any movement toward direct negotiations with Israel.
The Jordanians, anticipating an Israeli offensive deep into Jordan, assembled the remnants of their army and Iraqi units in Jordan to protect the western approaches to Amman and the southern slopes of the Golan Heights.
The next morning, Israel launched Operation Focus, a large-scale surprise air strike that was the opening of the Six-Day War.
The Israelis employed a mixed-attack strategy: bombing and strafing runs against planes parked on the ground, and bombing to disable runways with special tarmac-shredding penetration bombs developed jointly with France, leaving surviving aircraft unable to take off.
Engineering Corps sappers blew up the Abdullah and Hussein bridges with captured Jordanian mortar shells, while elements of the Harel Brigade crossed the river and occupied positions along the east bank to cover them, but quickly pulled back due to American pressure.
As they advanced, the force came under fire, and five bulldozers were immediately hit.
Joining up with the 4th Brigade, the Israelis then descended through Shuafat and the site of what is now French Hill, through Jordanian defenses at Mivtar, emerging at Ammunition Hill.
Initially, the advance was met with light resistance, as Egyptian intelligence had concluded that it was a diversion for the main attack.
The Syrians were estimated to have sustained between 1,000 and 2,500 killed in action.
But a broader Syrian offensive quickly failed.
According to Narkis:
SA-2 Guideline, ZSU-57-2 mobile anti-aircraft cannon
A post-war Syrian army report concluded:
An advantage Israel possessed was the excellent intelligence collected by Mossad operative Eli Cohen (who was captured and executed in Syria in 1965) regarding the Syrian battle positions.
Under the orders from General Narkis, the Israelis responded only with small-arms fire, firing in a flat trajectory to avoid hitting civilians, holy sites or the Old City.
Israeli Fouga Magister jets attacked the Jordanian 40th Brigade with rockets as it moved south from the Damiya Bridge.
The Egyptians were caught by surprise, and nearly the entire Egyptian air force was destroyed with few Israeli losses, giving the Israelis air superiority.
Following the war, a series of antisemitic purges began in Communist countries.
With the exceptions of Rafah and Khan Yunis, Israeli forces had initially avoided entering the Gaza Strip.
Mobs attacked Jewish neighborhoods in Egypt, Yemen, Lebanon, Tunisia, and Morocco, burning synagogues and assaulting residents.
These movements were unobserved by the Egyptians, who were preoccupied with Israeli probes against their perimeter.
Part of the attacking force lost its way and emerged opposite Za'ura, a redoubt manned by Syrian reservists.
Other problems included tanks being too wide for bridges, lack of radio communications between tanks and infantry, and units ignoring orders to advance.
On November 22, 1967, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 242, the "land for peace" formula, which called for Israeli withdrawal "from territories occupied" in 1967 and "the termination of all claims or states of belligerency".
Following the war, Israel experienced a wave of national euphoria, and the press praised the military's performance for weeks afterward.
These forces had 950 tanks, 1,100 APCs, and more than 1,000 artillery pieces.
As it reached the outskirts of Arish, Tal's division also consolidated its hold on Rafah and Khan Yunis.
Only the Gidi pass was captured before the Egyptians approached it, but at other places, Egyptian units managed to pass through and cross the canal to safety.
Meanwhile, Za'ura fell in an Israeli assault, and the Israelis also captured the 'Ein Fit fortress.
Against Jordan's forces on the West Bank, Israel deployed about 40,000 troops and 200 tanks (eight brigades).
Others however, including the then United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Chief of Naval Operations at the time, Admiral Thomas Moorer, some survivors of the attack and intelligence officials familiar with transcripts of intercepted signals on the day, have rejected these conclusions as unsatisfactory and maintain that the attack was made in the knowledge that the ship was American.
The Israelis lost 19 planes, including two destroyed in air-to-air combat and 13 downed by anti-aircraft artillery.
The 10th Armored Brigade was stationed north of the West Bank.
Between 367 and 591 Syrians were captured.
Our forces did not go on the offensive either because they did not arrive or were not wholly prepared or because they could not find shelter from the enemy's planes.
Dayan's final report on the war to the Israeli general staff listed several shortcomings in Israel's actions, including misinterpretation of Nasser's intentions, overdependence on the United States, and reluctance to act when Egypt closed the Straits.
In the Golan Heights, an estimated 80,000 Syrians fled.
They possessed sizable numbers of M113 APCs, a new battalion of mechanized infantry, and a paratrooper battalion trained in the new U.S.-built school.
From the suggestions proposed, including the "War of Daring", "War of Salvation", and "War of the Sons of Light", he "chose the least ostentatious, the Six-Day War, evoking the days of creation".
Yoffe's attack allowed Sharon to complete the capture of the Um-Katef, after fierce fighting.
The Israelis continued to press their attack, and despite heavy losses, cleared the Egyptian positions and reached the Khan Yunis railway junction in little over four hours.
The Egyptians had constructed fortified defenses in the Sinai.
They had massed on the border the night before the war, camouflaging themselves and observing radio silence before being ordered to advance.
Two armoured brigades in the meantime, under Avraham Yoffe, slipped across the border through sandy wastes that Egypt had left undefended because they were considered impassable.
On June 25–27, Israel incorporated East Jerusalem together with areas of the West Bank to the north and south into Jerusalem's new municipal boundaries.
During the day, the Israeli units stopped after obtaining manoeuvre room between their positions and a line of volcanic hills to the west.
During the battle, 36 Israeli and 71 Jordanian soldiers were killed.
Further south, the 8th Armored Brigade under Colonel Albert Mandler, initially positioned as a ruse to draw off Egyptian forces from the real invasion routes, attacked the fortified bunkers at Kuntilla, a strategically valuable position whose capture would enable Mandler to block reinforcements from reaching Um-Katef and to join Sharon's upcoming attack on Nakhl.
M50 and M51 Shermans, M48A3 Patton, Centurion, AMX-13.
Syria's army had a total strength of 75,000 and was deployed along the Syrian border.
This is truly how things happened on June 5, although it is difficult to believe.
In Hebron, Jews gained access to the Cave of the Patriarchs (the second most holy site in Judaism) for the first time since the 14th century (previously Jews were allowed to pray only at the entrance).
It has been alleged that Nasser did not want Egypt to learn of the true extent of his defeat and so ordered the killing of Egyptian army stragglers making their way back to the Suez canal zone.
The Egyptian defensive infrastructure was extremely poor, and no airfields were yet equipped with hardened aircraft shelters capable of protecting Egypt's warplanes.
The Jordanians continued to fiercely resist, and the Israelis were unable to advance without artillery and air support.
Two squadrons of fighter-aircraft, Hawker Hunters and MiG 21s, were rebased adjacent to the Jordanian border.
On June 7, heavy fighting ensued.
According to Egyptian diplomat Mahmoud Riad, 10,000 men were killed in one day alone, and many others died from hunger and thirst.
One Israeli jet was shot down by ground fire.
Many Egyptians abandoned their positions after their commander and several of his staff were killed.
The 1967 War laid the foundation for future discord in the region, as the Arab states resented Israel's victory and did not want to give up territory.
In early November 1966, Syria signed a mutual defense agreement with Egypt.
The displacement of civilian populations resulting from the war would have long-term consequences, as 300,000 Palestinians fled the West Bank and about 100,000 Syrians left the Golan to become refugees.
Most notably, the war stirred Zionist passions among Jews in the Soviet Union, who had by that time been forcibly assimilated.
Israeli casualties steadily mounted.
Syria had supported pre-war raids that had helped raise tensions and had routinely shelled Israel from the Heights, so some Israeli leaders wanted to see Syria punished.
Meanwhile, two Israeli reserve brigades under Brigadier-General Avraham Yoffe, each equipped with 100 tanks, penetrated the Sinai south of Tal's division and north of Sharon's, capturing the road junctions of Abu Ageila, Bir Lahfan, and Arish, taking all of them before midnight.
On the eve of the war, Egypt massed approximately 100,000 of its 160,000 troops in the Sinai, including all of its seven divisions (four infantry, two armoured and one mechanized), four independent infantry brigades and four independent armoured brigades.
They were later reinforced by an Egyptian contingent.
In addition, between 80,000 and 110,000 Syrians fled the Golan Heights, of which about 20,000 were from the city of Quneitra.
Israeli forces used in combat consisted of two brigades (the 8th Armored Brigade and the Golani Brigade) in the northern part of the front at Givat HaEm, and another two (infantry and one of Peled's brigades summoned from Jenin) in the center.
The Egyptians suffered heavy casualties and tank losses, while Israeli losses stood at 66 dead, 93 wounded and 28 tanks.
The Israeli settlements in Gaza were evacuated and destroyed in August 2005 as a part of Israel's unilateral disengagement plan of that time.
The first Israelis to reach the perimeter of the southern approach laid bodily down on the barbed wire, allowing their comrades to vault over them.
Throughout the night, the Israelis continued their advance.
The Arab air forces were aided by volunteer pilots from the Pakistan Air Force acting in independent capacity, and by some aircraft from Libya, Algeria, Morocco, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia to make up for the massive losses suffered on the first day of the war.
The Jordanians lost 10 dead and 250 wounded, and had only seven tanks left, including two without gas, and sixteen APCs.
PAF pilots shot down several Israeli planes.
Shortly before 12:30&nbsp;pm, the Israeli Air Force attacked Jordan's two airbases.
At Jabal Libni, retreating Egyptian soldiers were fired upon by their own artillery.
The small Royal Jordanian Air Force consisted of only 24 British-made Hawker Hunter fighters, six transports, and two helicopters.
Dreizin had two infantry companies and eight tanks under his command, several of which broke down or became stuck in the mud at Ramat Rachel, leaving three for the assault.
Record numbers of Jewish immigrants arrived from Western countries after the war, although many of them would later return to their countries of origin.
The Jordanians mounted fierce resistance, knocking out two tanks.
They fled west towards Jabal Libni.
Nasser's image of the United States was such that he might well have believed the worst.
After receiving supplies via an airdrop, the Israelis entered the city and captured the airport at 7:50&nbsp;am.
Soon thereafter, in response to Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) guerilla activity, including a mine attack that left three dead, the Israeli Defence Force (IDF) attacked the village of as-Samu in the Jordanian-occupied West Bank.
The ancient communities of Damascus and Baghdad were placed under house arrest, their leaders imprisoned and fined.
Israeli fighter jets intercepted the Syrian aircraft, shooting down three and driving off the rest.
The Israeli plan was to surprise the Egyptian forces in both timing (the attack exactly coinciding with the IAF strike on Egyptian airfields), location (attacking via northern and central Sinai routes, as opposed to the Egyptian expectations of a repeat of the 1956 war, when the IDF attacked via the central and southern routes) and method (using a combined-force flanking approach, rather than direct tank assaults).
Overall, Israel's territory grew by a factor of three, including about one million Arabs placed under Israel's direct control in the newly captured territories.
The Jordanian defenders, who were heavily dug-in, fiercely resisted the attack.
Israeli jets used napalm bombs during their sorties.
See also Israeli-Palestinian conflict and Golan Heights.
The fighting was fierce, and accounted for nearly half of all Israeli casualties on the southern front.
Again, the air superiority of the IAF proved paramount as it immobilized the Jordanians, leading to their defeat.
Israeli tanks assaulted the northernmost Egyptian defenses and were largely successful, though an entire armoured brigade was stalled by mines, and had only one mine-clearance tank.
Israeli forces had taken significant losses, with Colonel Gonen later telling reporters that "we left many of our dead soldiers in Rafah, and many burnt-out tanks."
To the east, the ground terrain is an open gently sloping plain.
Those that successfully landed on target destroyed Egyptian artillery and ammunition dumps and separated gun crews from their batteries, sowing enough confusion to significantly reduce Egyptian artillery fire.
One of the Jordanian brigades stationed in the West Bank was sent to the Hebron area in order to link with the Egyptians.
Some 450 commandos were killed, and the remainder escaped to Jordan.
On the war's second day, the Israelis were bolstered by the 35th Paratroopers Brigade under Colonel Rafael Eitan, and took Gaza City along with the entire Strip.
Mohamed Hassanein Heikal, a confidant of Nasser, claims that President Lyndon B. Johnson was obsessed with Nasser and that Johnson conspired with Israel to bring him down.
Arab casualties were far greater.
Meanwhile, the Israeli 71st Battalion breached barbed wire and minefields and emerged near Wadi Joz, near the base of Mount Scopus, from where the Old City could be cut off from Jericho and East Jerusalem from Ramallah.
MiG-21, MiG-19, MiG-17, Su-7B, Tu-16, Il-28, Il-18, Il-14, An-12, Hawker Hunter used by Jordan and Iraq
Though inferior in numbers and equipment, the Egyptians were deeply entrenched and camouflaged.
Other Jordanian attempts to reinforce Jerusalem were beaten back, either by armoured ambushes or airstrikes.
Meanwhile, the 60th Brigade became bogged down in the sand, while the paratroopers had trouble navigating through the dunes.
By the evening, the brigade arrived in Ramallah.
The Israeli decision was to be conveyed to the Arab nations by the United States.
At 11:15&nbsp;am, Jordanian howitzers began a 6,000-shell barrage at Israeli Jerusalem.
The Israeli Northern Command provided a division (three brigades) led by Major-General Elad Peled, which was stationed in the Jezreel Valley to the north of the West Bank.
Mount Hermon and the Banias in the north, and the entire sector between Tawfiq and Customs House Road in the south remained in Syrian hands.
An Israeli detachment then captured the Rockefeller Museum after a brief skirmish.
In a meeting early on the night of June 9, Syrian leaders decided to reinforce those positions as quickly as possible, and to maintain a steady barrage on Israeli civilian settlements.
The Centurion was upgraded with the British 105 mm L7 gun prior to the war.
By the evening of June 9, the four Israeli brigades had all broken through to the plateau, where they could be reinforced and replaced.
The defending Egyptian battalion, outnumbered and outgunned, fiercely resisted the attack, hitting a number of Israeli tanks.
In his book ''Righteous Victims'' (1999), Israeli "New Historian" Benny Morris writes:
There are now hundreds of thousands of Israeli settlers in the West Bank.
