The national government has created a project to revive nightlife in the Old Bazaar.
Several works have been carried since Byzantine times to limit the risks, and since the construction of the Kozjak dam on the Treska in 1994, the flood risk is close to zero.
File:Slalomova trat pod prehradou Treska.jpg|The Treska leaving the canyon.
The highest pollution levels usually occur in autumn and winter.
As the financial capital of the Republic of Macedonia, Skopje is the seat of the Macedonian Stock Exchange, of the National Bank and of most of the Macedonian banking, insurance and telecommunication companies, such as Makedonski Telekom, Komercijalna banka Skopje and Stopanska Banka.
Around 1650, the number of inhabitants in Skopje was between 30,000 and 60,000 and the city contained more than 10,000 houses.
80% of Macedonian citizens who hold a PhD take up residence in Skopje.
Some mosques show some originality in their appearance: Sultan Murad and Yahya Pasha mosques have lost their dome and have a pyramidal roof, while Isa Bey mosque has a rectangular base, two domes and two side wings.
16,000 people were buried alive in ruins and 70% of the population lost their home.
File:Saat Kula-Sultan Muratova Dzamija -Skopje (27).JPG|The clock tower.
It is a center for metal-processing, chemical, timber, textile, leather, and printing industries.
The Univerzalna Sala, seating 1,570, was built in 1966 and is used for concerts, fashion shows and congresses.
At that time, the city experienced a slow but steady demographic growth, mainly due to the rural exodus of Slav Macedonians.
In 2009, the regional GDP per capita amounted to USD 6,565, or 155% of the Macedonian GDP per capita.
It is located in Petrovec, some 20&nbsp;km east of the city.
File:Saraj swimming pool.jpg|The Treska lake.
During the 12th and 13th centuries, Bulgarians and Serbs took advantage of Byzantine decline to create large kingdoms stretching from Danube to the Aegean Sea.
The valley is approximately 20&nbsp;km wide and it is limited by several mountain ranges to the North and South.
Radio Antenna 5 and Metropolis are two other major private stations that have their headquarters in Skopje.
After the division of the province by Domitian in 86 AD, Scupi was elevated to colonial status, and became a seat of government within the new province of Moesia Superior.
It was located on Zajčev Rid hill, some  west of the fortress promontory.
The largest museum in Skopje is the Museum of Macedonia which details the history of the country.
The Metropolis Arena, designed for large concerts, has 3,546 seats.
Macedonian architects also took part to the reconstruction: Georgi Konstantinovski designed the City Archives building in 1968 and the Hall of residence Goce Delčev in 1975, while Janko Konstantinov designed the Telecommunication Centre and the main post office (1974–1989).
Before the Austro-Turkish war and the 1698 Great Fire, Skopje was one of the biggest cities in the Balkans, with a population estimated between 30,000 and 60,000 inhabitants.
As a result, 61.8% of Skopjans have never been to Tirana, while only 6.7% have never been to Thessaloniki and 0% to Sofia.
Skopje has one of the biggest Ottoman urban complexes in Europe, with many Ottoman monuments still serving their original purpose.
Although Skopje is geographically close to other major cities, movement of people and goods is not optimised, especially with Albania.
It was then one of the only big cities on the territory of future Yugoslavia, together with Belgrade and Sarajevo.
In the bazaar's restaurants, along with the traditional Macedonian wine and food, dishes of the Ottoman cuisine are also served.
Its revolutionary network in Skopje region was not well-developed and the lack of weapons was a serious problem.
The current name of the city comes from "Scupi", which was the name of a Roman colony located nearby.
Skopje's citizenry is generally more educated than the rest of the country.
Several wells collect its waters but most of the drinking water used in Skopje comes from a karstic spring in Rašče, located west of the city.
Many of the JSP buses are red double-decker buses designed to look like the British-made buses that were in use in the 1950s and 1960s.
However, some tiles are still visible on the adjoining türbe.
Skopje is located on the upper course of the Vardar River, and is located on a major north-south Balkan route between Belgrade and Athens.
It is a relatively new event in the Macedonian cultural scene that occurs every summer in early July.
Many educational facilities, factories and historical buildings were destroyed.
After the declaration of independence for the Republic of Macedonia in 1991, several private universities were brought to existence.
The city eventually became "Skopje" () after the Second World War, when standard Macedonian became the official language of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia.
The City of Skopje had 506,926 inhabitants within its administrative limits in 2002, while the urban unit itself had 378,243 inhabitants.
The Church of the Ascension is particularly small it is half-buried in order not to overlook neighbouring mosques.
According to the 2002 census, the City of Skopje comprised 506,926 inhabitants, whereas the sole urban area only comprised 444,800 inhabitants.
The northern areas are the poorest.
The reconstruction of city centre was partially planned by Japanese Kenzo Tange who designed the new train station.
Each ethnic group generally restrict itself to certain areas of the city.
During much of the early medieval period, the town was contested between the Byzantines and the Bulgarian Empire, whose capital it was between 972 and 992.
The Vardar river, which flows through Skopje, is at approximately 60&nbsp;km from its source near Gostivar.
Three small natural lakes can be found near Smiljkovci, on the northeastern edge of the urban area.
On the eve of the 1st century AD, the settlement was seized by the Romans and became a military camp.
The mayor represents the City of Skopje and he can submit ideas to the Council.
The city developed rapidly after World War II, but this trend was interrupted in 1963 when it was hit by a disastrous earthquake.
Skopje airport has connections to several European cities, including Vienna, Zürich, Brussels, Istanbul, London and Rome.
Ottoman Turks drastically changed the appearance of the city.
It was known in the Roman period under the name ''Scupi''.
Although the Chalcolithic settlement must have been of some significance, it declined during the Bronze Age.
Other large natural spots include the Matka Canyon.
Its expressive frescoes anticipate the Italian primitives.
In the 14th century, Skopje became such an important city that king Dušan made it the capital of the Serbian kingdom.
On 18 August, the insurgents signed the Üsküb agreement which provided for the creation of an autonomous Albanian province and they were amnestied the day later.
The largest private universities in Skopje are currently European University with 7 departments and  FON University with 9 departments respectively.
A mostly foreign ethnic Serb ruling class gained control, imposing a repression unknown under the previous Turkish rulers.
Being the capital and largest city of the Republic of Macedonia, Skopje enjoys a particular status granted by law.
The second most populous municipality, Kumanovo, had 107,632 inhabitants in 2011, and an urban unit of 76,272 inhabitants in 2002.
The coat of arms of the city was adopted in the 1950s.
Waste is disposed of in the open-air municipal landfill site, located 15&nbsp;km north of the city.
The Aladža Mosque was originally covered with blue faience, but it disappeared in the 1689 Great Fire.
The average net monthly wage in Skopje was at €400 in October 2010, which represented 120% of the national figure.
On the railway linking the main station to Belgrade and Thessaloniki are Dračevo and Dolno Lisiče stations, and on the railway to Kičevo are Skopje-North, Gjorče Petrov and Saraj stations.
On average Skopje will see 88 days above 30 °C each year, and 10.2 days above 35.0 °C every year.
Thus the junction between the M-1 and M-4 is located some 20&nbsp;km east, close to the airport.
The main station in Skopje is serviced by the Belgrade-Thessaloniki and Skopje-Prishtina international lines.
In Šuto Orizari, the average was at .
Other smaller venues exist, such as the Albanian Theatre and the Youth Theatre.
It is part of the European Jazz Network and the European Forum of World Wide Festivals.
In 2009, Skopje had 26,056 firms but only 145 of them had a large size.
The annual traffic has constantly risen since 2008, reaching one million passengers in 2014.
Macedonians live south of the Vardar, in areas massively rebuilt after 1963, and Muslims live on the northern side, in the oldest neighbourhoods of the city.
Among young people the most popular destinations are bars, discos, and nightclubs which can be found in the center and the City Park.
At that time, Dubrovnik, which was a busy harbour, had not even 7,000 inhabitants.
The Museum of the Macedonian Struggle is dedicated to the modern national history and the struggle of Macedonians for their independence.
Modernism appeared as early as 1933 with the former Ethnographic Museum (today the City Gallery), designed by Milan Zloković.
The project has generated controversy: critics have described the new landmark buildings as signs of reactionary historicist aesthetics.
At that time, Christians of Skopje were mostly non converted Slavs and Albanians, but also Ragusan and Armenian tradesmen.
The centre is surrounded by a row of long buildings suggesting a wall ("Gradski Zid").
Scupi was originally an Illyrian settlement fonded during the 1st millennium BC but it later became a Dardanian town.
However, before the colony was created, the site had already been settled by Illyrians and "Scupi" is probably of Illyrian origin.
Skopje is an ethnically diverse city, and its urban sociology primarily depends on ethnic and religious belonging.
Also based in Skopje, Večer is pulled 50,000 copies and the state owns one third of its capital, as well as Nova Makedonija, reprinted 20,000 copies.
Skopje is a medium city at European level, but because of their administrative function, they can be compared to small regional metropolis like Sofia and Thessaloniki.
At the end of the 2000s, the city center experienced profound changes.
Although few in number, large firms account for 51% of the local production outside finance.
The first mention of the city was made at that period by Livy, who died in 17 AD.
The lake Matka is the result of the construction of a dam in the Matka Canyon in the 1930s, and the Treska lake was dug for leisure purpose in 1978.
Economic growth was permitted by the construction of the Skopje-Salonica railway in 1873.
Large earthquakes occurred in Skopje in 518, 1505 and 1963.
Although Skopje has been destroyed many times trough its history, it still has many historical landmarks which reflect the successive occupations of the city.
After the completion of the Corridor VIII railway scheduled for 2022, the city will also be linked to Tirana and Sofia.
Other zones are located between Aerodrom and Kisela Voda, along the railway to Greece.
Nevertheless, Austrians left the country within the year and Hajduks, leaders of the uprisings, had to follow them in their retreat north of the Balkans.
It crosses the Matka Canyon before reaching the Vardar on the western extremity of the City of Skopje.
The Contemporary Art Museum of Macedonia was built after the 1963 earthquake thanks to international assistance.
Later, Skopje was briefly seized twice by Slavic insurgents who wanted to restore a Bulgarian state.
Thus, in Čair and Saraj schools and administration use Albanian, and Romani in Šuto Orizari.
The layer is topped by a much smaller layer of clay, sand, silt and gravel, carried by the Vardar river.
The disaster killed 1,070 people, injuring 3,300 others.
It had a deep psychological impact on the population because neighbourhoods were split and people were relocated to new houses and buildings they were not familiar with.
In 1931, in a move to formally decentralize the country, Skopje was named the capital of the Vardar Banovina of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
These zones comprise Alkaloid Skopje (pharmaceuticals), Rade Končar (electrical supplies), Imperial Tobacco, and Ohis (fertilisers).
The subsoil contains a large water table which is alimented by the Vardar river and functions as an underground river.
Cyril and Methodius University, founded in 1949.
It was largely overwhelmed by two towns of the present-day Republic of Macedonia: Bitola (40,000) and Štip (15–20,000).
A former deputy and mayor of Gazi Baba municipality, he is a member of the VMRO-DPMNE.
There is one other major international theater festival that takes place each year at the end of month September, the Young Open Theater Festivial (MOT), which was organized for the first time in May 1976 by the Youth Cultural Center – Skopje.
His successor Koce Trajanovski launched a call for tenders in 2010 and the first line is scheduled for 2019.
The Macedonian Museum of Natural History showcases some 4,000 items while the 12-ha Skopje Zoo is home to 300 animals.
Other large settlements are located north of the city, such as Radišani, with 9,000 inhabitants, whereas smaller villages can be found on Mount Vodno or in Saraj municipality, which is the most rural of the ten municipalities that form the City of Skopje.
A large share of the firms deal with trade of goods (9,758), 3,839 are specialised in business and real estate, and 2,849 are manufacturers.
Skopje's employment area covers a large part of the Republic of Macedonia, including Veles, Kumanovo and Tetovo, and totaling more than one million inhabitants.
Since 2008, it has been managed by the Turkish TAV Airports Holding and it can accommodate up to four million passengers per year.
In 1282 Skopje was captured by Serbian king Milutin.
The city has three large swimming pools, two of which feature Olympic pools.
Water treatment plants are being built, but much polluted water is still discharged untreated into the Vardar.
On the north bank, where the most ancient parts of the city lie, the Old Bazaar was restored and its surroundings were rebuilt with low-rise buildings, so as not to spoil views of the Skopje Fortress.
However, modernist architecture only fully developed in Skopje after the 1963 earthquake.
Engravings on tombstones suggest that only a minority of the population came from Italy, while many veterans were from  Dalmatia, South Gaul and Syria.
The oldest and largest is JSP Skopje, a public company founded in 1948.
Local Partisan detachments started a widespread guerrilla after the proclamation of the "Popular Republic of Macedonia" by the ASNOM on 2 August 1944.
In 1915, during the First World War, Serbian Macedonia was invaded by Bulgaria, which captured Skopje on 22 October 1915 .
Shortly afterwards it became part of the province of Moesia during Augustus's rule.
Thus Scupi became "Skopye" () for Bulgarians, and later "Üsküb" () for the Turks.
Several rivers meet the Vardar within the city boundaries.
Other large halls include the Macedonian Opera and Ballet (800 seats), the National Theatre (724), and the Drama Theatre (333).
Towards the East, the new municipality of Aerodrom was planned in the 1980s to house 80,000 inhabitants on the site of the old airport.
The water temperature is comprised between 4.6&nbsp;°C in January and 18.1&nbsp;°C in July.
The Skopje Aqueduct, located between Scupi and the city centre, is rather mysterious because its date of construction is unknown.
Indeed, it is regularly linked to many Macedonian localities and foreign cities including Istanbul, Sofia, Prague, Hamburg and Stockholm.
The Skopje City Museum is located inside the remains of the old train station, destroyed by the 1963 earthquake.
In some areas, the subsoil is karstic.
An urban project, "Skopje 2014", was adopted by the municipal authorities in order to give the city a more monumental and historical aspect, and thus to transform it into a proper national capital.
In 1689, Austrians seized Skopje which was already weakened by a cholera epidemic.
The population density varies greatly from an area to the other.
During his reign, many Byzantine towns were relocated on hills and other easily defendable places to face invasions.
The Serava, also coming from the North, had flowed through the Old Bazaar until the 1960s, when it was diverted towards the West because its waters were very polluted.
There is a large emphasis on casinos, many of which are associated with hotels, such as that of the Holiday Inn.
Indeed, the north bank is mostly inhabited by Muslim Albanians, Turks and Roma, whereas Christian ethnic Macedonians predominantly reside on the south bank.
The climate of Skopje is usually classified as continental sub-Mediterranean, while according to the Köppen climate classification it has a humid subtropical climate (''Cfa''), with a mean annual temperature of .
However, even if official figures are underestimated, Skopje is the city in the world with the largest Roma population.
It is covered by a first layer of Quaternary sands and silt, which is between 70 and 90 m deep.
The scheme is accused of turning Skopje to a theme park, which is viewed as nationalistic kitsch, and has made Skopje an example to see how national identities are constructed and how this construction is mirrored in the urban space.
Scupi was thus transferred on another site: the promontory on which stands the fortress.
Examples of Ottoman Turkish architecture are located in the Old Bazaar.
It has an Orthodox cathedral and seminary, several madrasahs, a Roman Catholic cathedral and a synagogue.
Unemployment concerns 70% of the active population in the community.
In 1991, it became the capital city of an independent Macedonia.
However, most of the network is still in the hands of JSP which operates 67 lines on 80.
Because of the ethnic diversity of the population, Latin maintained itself as the main language in the city at the expense of Greek, which was spoken in most of the Moesian and Macedonian cities.
The university has 23 departments, 10 research institutes and is attended by an average of 50,000 students.
The festival is a member of the International Festivals and Events Association (IFEA) and it includes musical concerts, operas, ballets, plays, art and photograph exhibitions, movies, and multimedia projects that gather 2,000 participants from around the world each year including the St Petersburg Theatre, the Chamber Orchestra of the Bolshoi Theatre, Irina Arkhipova, Viktor Tretiakov, The Theatre of Shadows, Michel Dalberto, and David Burgess.
The train station was built south of the Vardar and this contributed to the relocation of economic activities on this side of the river, which had never been urbanised before.
These ranges limit the urban expansion of Skopje, which spreads along the Vardar and the Serava, a small river which comes from the North.
It is the only medieval monument in Skopje, but several churches located around the city illustrate the Vardar architectural school which flourished around 1300.
Skopje was first inherited by the Lordship of Prilep and finally taken by Vuk Branković in the wake of the Battle of Maritsa (1371) before becoming part of the Ottoman Empire in 1392.
The territory of Skopje has been inhabited since at least 4000 BC; remains of Neolithic settlements have been found within the old Kale Fortress that overlooks the modern city centre.
Skopje has an international airport, Skopje "Alexander the Great" Airport.
Skopje has 21 secondary schools; 5 of which serve as general high-school gymnasiums and 16 vocational schools.
Between Karpoš and Aerodrom lies the city centre, rebuilt according to plans by Japanese architect Kenzo Tange.
Also, the city boasts big news agencies in the country, both public, as the Macedonian Information Agency, and private, such as the Makfax.
File:Serava.jpg|The Serava north of the city.
Thessaloniki is 233&nbsp;km south and Belgrade is 433&nbsp;km north.
Reconstruction had to be quick in order to relocate families and to relaunch the local economy.
At that time, the region was threatened by the Barbarian invasions, and the city inhabitants had already fled in forests and mountains before the disaster occurred.
Skopje has some remains of Prehistorical architecture which can be seen on the Tumba Madžari Neolithic site.
These pools are particularly relevant to coaching water polo teams.
The period from the end of the 3rd century to the end of the 4th century was particularly flourishing.
Other major newspapers in Skopje, totally private, are Utrinski Vesnik (30,000 copies), Vest (25,000 copies) and Vreme (15,000 copies).
FK Vardar and FK Rabotnički are the two most popular football teams, playing in the first national league.
Founded in 1966, it operate withs three national broadcast channels, twenty-four hours at day.
Its icons and lapidary collections are particularly rich.
The latter is the only municipality in the world where Romani is an official language.
The City of Skopje is part of Skopje Statistical Region, which has no political or administrative power.
It led to the formation of canyons, such as the Matka Canyon, which is surrounded by ten caves.
In the beginning of the 21st century, it is again the subject of massive building campaigns, thanks to the "Skopje 2014" project.
An estimation conduced by French officers around 1836 revealed that at that time Skopje only had around 10,000 inhabitants.
On 3 and 5 August respectively, they attacked a Turkish unit guarding the bridge on the Vardar river and gave a battle in the "St. Jovan" monastery.
Roman expansion east brought Scupi under Roman rule as a colony of legionnaires, mainly veterans of the Legio IIV Claudia in the time of Domitian (81–96 AD).
The large Albanian minority felt it was not represented in the new monuments, and launched side projects, including a new square over the boulevard that separate the city centre from the Old Bazaar.
The average wage in Skopje was then lower than in Sarajevo (€522) Sofia (€436) and in Belgrade (€440).
8,167 people did not belong to any of these groups.
Several institutions, including the university and the Macedonian academy, were also relocated on the north bank in order to reduce borders between the ethnic communities.
Until the Second World War, Skopje experienced strong economic growth, and its population increased.
The ratio of medical specialists was also higher than in the rest of the country.
They were both renovated in the 19th century.
For middle-aged people, places for having fun are also the ''kafeanas'' where traditional Macedonian food is served and traditional Macedonian Music (''Starogradska muzika'') is played, but music from all the Balkans, particularly Serbian folk music is also popular.
A tram network has long been planned in Skopje and the idea was first proposed in the 1980s.
The Skopje Fortress was rebuilt several times before it was destroyed by the 1963 earthquake.
Some of them are becoming outer suburbs, such as Singeliḱ, located on the road to Belgrade, which has more than 23,000 inhabitants, and Dračevo, which has almost 20,000 inhabitants.
After the fire, it experienced a long period of decline and only had 10,000 inhabitants in 1836.
The oldest churches in the city centre, the Ascension and St Dimitri churches, were built in the 18th century, after the 1689 Great Fire.
