As of December 2013, Slovakia maintained 90 missions abroad, including 64 embassies, seven missions to multilateral organisations, nine consulates-general, one consular office, one Slovak Economic and Cultural Office and eight Slovak Institutes.
Typical souvenirs from Slovakia are dolls dressed in folk costumes, ceramic objects, crystal glass, carved wooden figures, črpáks (wooden pitchers), fujaras (a folk instrument on the UNESCO list) and valaškas (a decorated folk hatchet) and above all products made from corn husks and wire, notably human figures.
* Ivan Bella (1964), first Slovak in space, having participated in a 9-day joint Russian-French-Slovak mission on the space station Mir in 1999.
Stars such as Karel Gott, Olympic, Pražský výběr (from the Czech Republic) or Elán, Modus, Tublatanka, Team (from Slovakia) and many others were highly acclaimed and many recorded their LPs in foreign languages.
During his reign, the Great Moravian Empire reached its greatest territorial extent, when not only present-day Moravia and Slovakia but also present-day northern and central Hungary, Lower Austria, Bohemia, Silesia, Lusatia, southern Poland and northern Serbia belonged to the empire, but the exact borders of his domains are still disputed by modern authors.
The Constitution of the Slovak Republic was ratified 1 September 1992, and became effective 1 January 1993).
It is relatively closely related to Hungarian, Czech and Austrian cuisine.
Painters Mikuláš Galanda (1895–1938), Martin Benka (1888–1971), Janko Alexy (1894–1970), Miloš Alexander Bazovský (1899–1968), Gustáv Mallý (1879–1952) and Jan Hála (1890–1959) are considered to be the ones who laid foundations of the Slovak modern art in the first half of the 20th century.
The biggest volume of discharge in Slovak rivers is during spring, when the snow melts  from the mountains.
It provided what were at the time rather extensive rights to its minorities and remained the only democracy in this part of Europe in the interwar period.
Other caves open to the public include Belianska Cave, Demänovská Cave of Liberty, Demänovská Ice Cave or Bystrianska Cave
Slovakia's highest judicial body is the Constitutional Court of Slovakia (''Ústavný súd''), which rules on constitutional issues.
A Slovak patriot Milan Rastislav Štefánik (1880–1919), who helped organize Czechoslovak regiments against Austria-Hungary during the First World War, died in a plane crash.
More than 4.3 million people visited Slovakia in 2015, and the most attractive destinations are the capital of Bratislava and the High Tatras.
After the Munich Agreement and its Vienna Award, Nazi Germany threatened to annex part of Slovakia and allow the remaining regions to be partitioned by Hungary or Poland unless independence was declared.
In recent years, Slovakia has been pursuing a policy of encouraging foreign investment.
The dry continental air brings in the summer heat and winter frosts.
Most of them are protected by Slovak law as cultural heritage, but some of them are on the UNESCO list too, in Bodružal, Hervartov, Ladomirová and Ruská Bystrá.
The prime minister is appointed by the president.
A separate Slovak Republic (1939–1945) existed in World War&nbsp;II as a client state of Nazi Germany.
Showers or thunderstorms may occure because of the summer monsoon called Medardova kvapka (Medard drop – 40 days of rain).
Slovakia accepts the compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction with reservations.
The Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic entered into a Customs Union upon the division of Czechoslovakia in 1993, which facilitates a relatively free flow of goods and services.
Lamb and goat are eaten but are not widely popular.
Biatecs, silver coins with inscriptions in the Latin alphabet, represent the first known use of writing in Slovakia.
Nevertheless, under Tiso's government, the vast majority of Slovakia's Jewish population (between 75,000–105,000 individuals) were murdered.
Education in Slovakia is compulsory from age 6 to 16.
The Avars occupied the lowlands of the Pannonian Plain, and established an empire dominating the Carpathian Basin.
Well-known painters of that time are the ''Master from Okoličné'', author of the altar in St. Elisabeth Cathedral in Košice, and ''Master M.S.''
In 2011 and 2012, Slovakia was the 2nd fastest growing Eurozone member after Estonia.
Slovakia is also known for its polyhistors, of whom include Pavol Jozef Šafárik, Matej Bel, Ján Kollár, and its political revolutionaries and reformists, such Milan Rastislav Štefánik and Alexander Dubček.
The capital and largest city is Bratislava.
The country was invaded by the Warsaw Pact forces (with the exception of Romania) in 1968, ending a period of liberalization under the leadership of Alexander Dubček.
From 2006 the army transformed into a fully professional organization and compulsory military service was abolished.
Slovakia successfully transformed from a centrally planned economy to a market-driven economy.
More than 80,000 Hungarians and 32,000 Germans were forced to leave Slovakia, in a series of population transfers initiated by the Allies at the Potsdam Conference.
and Svatopluk&nbsp;II succeeded him as the Prince of Great Moravia and the Prince of Nitra respectively.
The statue was found in the 1940s in Moravany nad Váhom near Piešťany.
Thereafter Czechoslovakia came under continuous pressure from the revisionist governments of Germany and Hungary.
The Kingdom of Vannius, a kingdom founded by the Germanic Suebian tribes of Quadi and Marcomanni, as well as several small Germanic and Celtic tribes, including the Osi and Cotini, existed in Western and Central Slovakia from 8–6&nbsp;BC to 179&nbsp;AD.
Famous globetrotter and explorer, count Móric Benyovszky had Slovak ancestors.
In 1465, King Matthias Corvinus founded the Hungarian Kingdom's third university, in Pressburg (Bratislava, Pozsony), but it was closed in 1490 after his death.
In 880, Pope John&nbsp;VIII set up an independent ecclesiastical province in Great Moravia with Archbishop Methodius as its head.
The government of the First Slovak Republic, led by Jozef Tiso and Vojtech Tuka, was strongly influenced by Germany and gradually became a puppet regime in many respects.
In 2012, Slovakia produced a total of 28 393 GWh of electricity while at the same time consumed 28 786 GWh.
In addition to economic growth, migration of workers to other EU countries also contributed to this reduction.
With its height of , it is the tallest Gothic altar in the world.
The common people were buried in flat urnfield cemeteries.
The car industry represents 43 percent of Slovakia’s industrial output and a quarter of its exports.
There are 44 embassies and 35 honorary consulates in Bratislava.
The longest river in Slovakia is the Váh (), the shortest is the Čierna voda.
Peter Lipa (born 1943) is a well-known Slovak singer, composer and promoter of modern jazz.
The president is elected by direct, popular vote under the two-round system for a five-year term.
In 2007, 2008 and 2010 (with GDP growth of 10.5%, 6% and 4% retrospectively), Slovakia was the fastest growing economy in the European Union.
Most executive power lies with the head of government, the prime minister (currently Robert Fico), who is usually the leader of the winning party, but he/she needs to form a majority coalition in the parliament.
Students are then obliged to take one year in high school.
July is the warmest month with temperatures up to about 37-40 °C, especially in regions of southern Slovakia – in the urban area of Komárno, Hurbanovo or Štúrovo.
Slovak popular music began as a mix of bossa nova, cool jazz, and rock, with propagandistic lyrics.
There was progress in not only the development of the country's economy, but also culture and educational opportunities.
Slovakia has been a member state of the European Union and NATO since 2004.
The pre–World War&nbsp;II population of the country included an estimated 90,000 Jews (1.6% of the population).
Smaller airports served by passenger airlines include those in Košice and Poprad.
According to the 2011 census, the majority of the inhabitants of Slovakia are Slovaks (80.7%).
Great Moravia left behind a lasting legacy in Central and Eastern Europe.
The first was Anton Bernolák whose concept was based on the western Slovak dialect in 1787.
Summer in Northern Slovakia is usually mild with temperatures around  (less in the mountains).
* Eugen Čerňan (1934), American astronaut of Slovak origin was the last man to visit the Moon
The education system consists of elementary school which is divided into two parts, first grade(age 6–10) second grade(age 10–15) which is finished by taking nationwide testing called Monitor from slovak language and math.
Winter starts on 21st of December with temperatures around -5 or -10 °C.
The country used to be dubbed the "Tatra Tiger" before the recent global economic crisis.
It was amended in September 1998 to allow direct election of the president and again in February 2001 due to EU admission requirements.
The Air and Air Defence Forces comprise one wing of fighters, one wing of utility helicopters, and one SAM brigade.
In Slovakia, there are four seasons, each season (Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter) lasts three months.
Slovakia is usually represented by many groups but mainly by SĽUK (''Slovenský ľudový umelecký kolektív – Slovak folk art collective'').
Authors from this period include Johannes de Thurocz, author of the Chronica Hungarorum and Maurus, both of them Hungarians.
Some of the most distinguished Slovak artists, whose work was closely linked to modern European art streams are Koloman Sokol (1902–2003), who became a professor of graphic techniques at the ''Escuela de las Artes del Libro'' and at the University of Mexico City from 1937 to 1941, Ľudovít Fulla (1902–1980) who received many international prices for his work and Imro Weiner-Kráľ (1901–1978).
Jánošík's life was depicted in a list of literature works and many movies throughout the 20th century.
The remains of Roman buildings have also survived in Devin castle (present-day downtown Bratislava), the suburbs of Dubravka and Stupava, and Bratislava Castle Hill.
Some historians put this year as the date of the breakup of the Great Moravian Empire, due to the Hungarian conquest; other historians take the date a little bit earlier (to 902).
Traditionally, white wine was more popular than red or rosé (except in some regions), and sweet wine more popular than dry, but in recent years tastes seem to be changing.
The painters influenced by Art Nouveau, symbolism and expressionism are Zolo Palugyay (1898–1935), Anton Jasusch (1882–1965), Edmund Gwerk (1895–1956) or Július Jakoby (1903–1985).
It is located  northeast of the city centre.
Bryndzové halušky must be on the menu of every traditional Slovak restaurant.
The port connects Bratislava to international boat traffic, especially the interconnection from the North Sea to the Black Sea via the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal.
of the 16th century, whose statue of Madonna can be seen in the Saint Catherine Church in Banská Štiavnica.
Tatras, with 29 peaks higher than  AMSL, are the highest mountain range in the Carpathian Mountains.
The city's inner network of roadways is made on the radial-circular shape.
The Slovak economy is a developed, high-income economy, with the GDP per capita equaling 76% of the average of the European Union in 2014.
However, Attila's death in 453 brought about the disappearance of the Hun tribe.
Most of the caves have stalagmites rising from the ground and stalactites hanging from above.
After finishing high school students can go to university.
Bryndza is a salty cheese made of a sheep milk, characterized by a strong taste and aroma.
The Slavs arrived in the territory of present-day Slovakia in the 5th and 6th centuries.
Slovakia became a member of NATO on 29 March 2004 and of the European Union on 1 May 2004.
Other ethnic groups   include Roma (2%), Czechs (0.6%), Rusyns (0.6%) and others or unspecified (7.6%).
Autumn in Slovakia starts on 23rd September and is mostly characterized by wet weather and wind, although the first weeks can be very warm and sunny.
Inflation dropped from an average annual rate of 12% in 2000 to just 3.3% in 2002, an election year, but it rose again in 2003–2004 because of rising labour costs and taxes.
The quality of socialist music was very high.
Various ancient trade routes, such as the Amber Road and the Danube waterway, have crossed territory of present-day Bratislava.
The end of Communist rule in Czechoslovakia in 1989, during the peaceful Velvet Revolution, was followed once again by the country's dissolution, this time into two successor states.
Deputy Speakers of the National Council of the Slovak Republic
During Hallstatt times, monumental burial mounds were erected in western Slovakia, with princely equipment consisting of richly decorated vessels, ornaments and decorations.
Germans and their local collaborators completely destroyed 93 villages and massacred thousands of civilians, often hundreds at a time.
The two nuclear power-plants in Slovakia are in Jaslovské Bohunice and Mochovce, each of them containing two operating reactors.
Slovak wine comes predominantly from the southern areas along the Danube and its tributaries; the northern half of the country is too cold and mountainous to grow grapevines.
Temperature extremes are between  although temperatures below  are rare.
Numerous fortified castles built throughout the country are dated to his reign and some of them (e.g.,&nbsp;''Dowina'', sometimes identified with Devín Castle) are also mentioned in connection with Rastislav by Frankish chronicles.
In contrast, oceanic air brings rainfalls and reduces summer temperatures.
From around 500&nbsp;BC, the territory of modern-day Slovakia was settled by Celts, who built powerful oppida on the sites of modern-day Bratislava and Devin.
Slovakia is the world’s biggest per-capita car producer with a total of 1,000,001 cars manufactured in the country in 2015 alone.
The Slavic tribes settled in the territory of present-day Slovakia in the 5th century.
An example of wooden folk architecture in Slovakia can be seen in the well preserved village of Vlkolínec which has been the UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1993.
In the meantime, the semi-nomadic Magyar tribes, possibly having suffered defeat from the similarly nomadic Pechenegs, left their territories east of the Carpathian Mountains, invaded the Carpathian Basin and started to occupy the territory gradually around 896.
Today, Bratislava is the road, railway, waterway and airway hub.
The daily temperatures in winter average in the range of  to .
During the revolution of 1848–49, the Slovaks supported the Austrian Emperor, hoping for independence from the Hungarian part of the Dual Monarchy, but they failed to achieve their aim.
The inhabitants of the area manufactured arms, shields, jewelry, dishes, and statues.
Additionally, tourist lines operate from Bratislava's passenger port, including routes to Devín, Vienna and elsewhere.
Both Martinček and Kállay received the EFIAP (Excellence de la Fédération Internationale de l' Art Photographique) price in 1970.
These findings provide the most ancient evidence of commercial exchanges carried out between the Mediterranean and Central Europe.
The ratio of government debt to GDP in Slovakia reached 58% by the end of 2013.
At the northern regions, remnants of the local population of Lusatian origin, together with Celtic and later Dacian influence, gave rise to the unique Puchov culture, with advanced crafts and iron-working, many hill-forts and fortified settlements of central type with coinage of the "Velkobysterecky" type (no inscriptions, with a horse on one side and a head on the other).
Upon Rastislav's request, two brothers, Byzantine officials and missionaries Saints Cyril and Methodius came in 863.
* John Dopyera (1893–1988), constructed a resonator guitar, an important contribution to the development of acoustic string instrument
Slovakia has been a member of European Union since 2004.
There are around 175 naturally formed tarns in High Tatras.
The official language is Slovak, a member of the Slavic language family.
Slovakia is ranked among the top EU countries regarding the knowledge of foreign languages.
It is a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the OECD.
Most–Híd SMER-SD#SIEŤFreedom and Solidarity
* Daniel Gajdusek (1923–2008), (of Slovak ancestry) won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1976 for work on Kuru
Following National Council elections, the leader of the majority party or the leader of the majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the president.
A special role was given to weaving and the production of textiles.
Romanticism of Jozef B. Klemens (1817–1883) and Peter Michal Bohúň (1822–1879) was represented in the portrait paintings of Slovak national protagonists of that time (Štefan Moyses, Andrej Sládkovič, Karol Kuzmány or Ľudovít Štúr), depicting the revolutionary atmosphere of the 1840s in the background.
It also is part of the Visegrad Four (Slovakia, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Poland), a forum for discussing areas of common concern.
Pressburg became the capital city of Royal Hungary in 1536.
Spring starts with the 21st of March and is characterized by colder weather with average daily temperature of 9 °C in the first weeks and about 14 °C in May and 17 °C in June.
Slovakia is an attractive country for foreign investors mainly because of its low wages, low tax rates and well educated labour force.
The Glagolitic script and its successor Cyrillic were disseminated to other Slavic countries, charting a new path in their sociocultural development.
The name of this settlement was Gerulata.
In 2018, Jaguar Land Rover is set to open the country's fourth automobile assembly plant in Nitra.
There are currently three automobile assembly plants: Volkswagen's in Bratislava (models: Volkswagen Up, Volkswagen Touareg, Audi Q7, Porsche Cayenne), PSA Peugeot Citroën's in Trnava (models: Peugeot 208, Citroën C3 Picasso) and Kia Motors' Žilina Plant (models: Kia Cee'd, Kia Sportage, Kia Venga).
In 1969 Czechoslovakia became a federation of the Czech Socialist Republic and the Slovak Socialist Republic.
He has been playing with the world's famous Japanese jazz pianist Hiromi Uehara.
Martin Valihora (1976), having been awarded a scholarship on the Berklee College of Music in Boston, he established himself as a part of the New York's jazz scene.
The new monarch pursued an independent policy: after stopping a Frankish attack in 855, he also sought to weaken influence of Frankish priests preaching in his realm.
Although Slovakia's GDP comes mainly from the tertiary (services) sector, the industrial sector also plays an important role within its economy.
Archaeologists have found prehistoric human skeletons in the region, as well as numerous objects and vestiges of the Gravettian culture, principally in the river valleys of Nitra, Hron, Ipeľ, Váh and as far as the city of Žilina, and near the foot of the Vihorlat, Inovec, and Tribeč mountains, as well as in the Myjava Mountains.
It is bordered by the Czech Republic and Austria to the west, Poland to the north, Ukraine to the east and Hungary to the south.
Svatopluk also withstood attacks of the semi-nomadic Magyar tribes and the Bulgarian Empire, although sometimes it was he who hired the Magyars when waging war against East Francia.
In 1918, Slovakia and the regions of Bohemia, Moravia, Czech Silesia and Carpathian Ruthenia formed a common state, Czechoslovakia, with the borders confirmed by the Treaty of Saint Germain and Treaty of Trianon.
The Bronze Age in the geographical territory of modern-day Slovakia went through three stages of development, stretching from 2000 to 800&nbsp;BC.
Schools with bacalaureat take 5 years to complete while the ones without usually take less.
Before the financial crisis of 2007–08, Slovakia had experienced high and sustained economic growth.
Eventually this led to the Munich Agreement of September 1938, which allowed Nazi Germany to partially dismember the country by occupying what was called the Sudetenland, a region with a German-speaking majority and bordering Germany and Austria.
As a result of Yalta Conference, Czechoslovakia came under the influence and later under direct occupation of the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact, after a coup in 1948.
There are about 200,000 registered cars in Bratislava, (approximately 2 inhabitants per car).
Beer (mainly of the pilsener style, though dark lagers are also consumed) is also popular.
In 568, a Turko-Mongol tribal confederacy, the Avars, conducted its own invasion into the Middle Danube region.
However, in medieval times the area of the present-day Slovakia was characterized rather by burgeoning towns, construction of numerous stone castles, and the cultivation of the arts.
Most of the rivers stem in the Slovak mountains.
Both countries cooperate with Hungary and Poland in the Visegrád Group.
It serves civil and governmental, scheduled and unscheduled domestic and international flights.
However, they started to quarrel for domination of the whole empire.
Rastislav asked the Byzantine Emperor Michael III to send teachers who would interpret Christianity in the Slavic vernacular.
In 2011, 62.0% of Slovaks identified themselves as Roman Catholics, 8.9% as Protestants, 3.8% as Greek Catholics, 0.9% as Orthodox, 13.4% identified themselves as atheists  and 10.6% did not answer the question about their belief.
Slovak graphic art experienced its peak during the 20th century.
The average temperature in September is around 14 °C, in November to 3 °C.
Most visitors come from the Czech Republic (about 26%), Poland (15%) and Germany (11%).
The official language is Slovak, a member of the Slavic language family.
After the disappearance of the Čakany and Velatice cultures, the Lusatian people expanded building of strong and complex fortifications, with the large permanent buildings and administrative centers.
The military fort had an auxiliary cavalry unit, approximately 300 horses strong, modeled after the Cananefates.
In comparison with other European countries, "game meat" is more accessible in Slovakia due to vast resources of forest and because hunting is relatively popular.
The Slovak koruna was revalued on 28 May 2008 to 30.126 for 1 euro, which was also the exchange rate for the euro.
Traditional Slovak cuisine is based mainly on pork meat, poultry (chicken is the most widely eaten, followed by duck, goose, and turkey), flour, potatoes, cabbage, and milk products.
Slovakia is a high-income advanced economy with a very high Human Development Index, a very high standard of living and performs favourably in measurements of civil liberties, press freedom, democratic governance and peacefulness.
Hungarians are the largest ethnic minority (8.5%).
From 2&nbsp;AD, the expanding Roman Empire established and maintained a series of outposts around and just north of the Danube, the largest of which were known as Carnuntum (whose remains are on the main road halfway between Vienna and Bratislava) and Brigetio (present-day Szöny at the Slovak-Hungarian border).
In 1945, Czechoslovakia was reestablished under communist rule as a Soviet satellite.
The business and public research and development expenditures are well below the EU average.
Hungarian is widely spoken in the southern regions, and Rusyn is used in some parts of the Northeast.
When Mojmír I endeavoured to secede from the supremacy of the king of East Francia in 846, King Louis the German deposed him and assisted Mojmír's nephew Rastislav (846–870) in acquiring the throne.
Weakened by an internal conflict as well as by constant warfare with Eastern Francia, Great Moravia lost most of its peripheral territories.
According to Eurostat, which uses a calculation method different from that of the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic, the unemployment rate in April 2015 is at 12.1%  the sixth highest in the Eurozone.
Out of about 130,000 Carpathian Germans in Slovakia in 1938, by 1947 only some 20,000 remained.
In the 1990 U.S.&nbsp;census, 1.8&nbsp;million people self-identified as having Slovak ancestry.
After World War I and the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Slovaks and Czechs established Czechoslovakia.
About 7% are apparently extinct, 9% endangered, 17% vulnerable, and 7% rare.
The largest dams on the river Váh are Liptovská Mara and Sĺňava.
The administrative system of Great Moravia may have influenced the development of the administration of the Kingdom of Hungary.
Medieval literature, in the period from the 11th to the 15th centuries, was written in Latin, Czech and Slovakized Czech.
They crossed the Danube in 377&nbsp;AD and occupied Pannonia, which they used for 75&nbsp;years as their base for launching looting-raids into Western Europe.
The country maintains a combination of market economy with universal health care and a comprehensive social security system.
The best known Slovak hero, found in many folk mythologies, is Juraj Jánošík (1688–1713) (the Slovak equivalent of Robin Hood).
In the 7th century, they played a significant role in the creation of Samo's Empire and in the 9th century established the Principality of Nitra.
Nuclear energy accounts for 53.8% of total electricity production in Slovakia, followed by 18.1% of thermal power energy, 15.1% by hydro power energy, 2% by solar energy, 9.6% by other sources and the rest 1.4% is imported.
The rebellious prince allied himself with the Franks and overthrew his uncle in 870.
* Štefan Banič (1870–1941), constructed the first actively used parachute
Some only pass through and the others make a natural border with surrounding countries (more than ).
Yet the Great Depression caused a sharp economic downturn, followed by political disruption and insecurity in Europe.
