In the end of the month, the last soldiers of the Yugoslav Army left Slovenia.
It has been severely hurt by the Eurozone crisis, started in the late 2000s.
The idea of a United Slovenia, first advanced during the revolutions of 1848, became the common platform of most Slovenian parties and political movements in Austria-Hungary.
High level of openness makes Slovenia extremely sensitive to economic conditions in its main trading partners and changes in its international price competitiveness.
He also performed in television and radio drama.
The first entirely computer made animations are the 2003 ''Perkmandeljc'' and the 2008 ''Čikorja an' kafe'', both made by Dušan Kastelic.
Slovenia joined the federation as a constituent republic, led by its own pro-Communist leadership.
Attempts to implement reforms that would help economic recovery were met by student protesters, led by a student who later became a member of Janez Janša's SDS, and by the trade unions.
Many more remain to be discovered.
Altogether, Bibič played over 150 theatre and over 30 film roles.
The proposal to raise the retirement age from the current 57 for women and 58 for men was rejected in a referendum in 2011.
Important parts of tourism in Slovenia include congress and gambling tourism.
Literacy was exceptionally high, at 80-90%.
Avant-garde classical music arose in Slovenia in the 1960s, largely due to the work of Uroš Krek, Dane Škerl, Primož Ramovš and Ivo Petrić, who also conducted the Slavko Osterc Ensemble.
Ethnologically most characteristic Slovene dishes were one-pot dishes, such as ''ričet'', Istrian stew (), minestrone (), and ''žganci''buckwheat spoonbread; in the Prekmurje region there is also ''bujta repa'', and ''prekmurska gibanica'' pastry.
After Slovenia joined the EU in 2004, yearly immigrants doubled by 2006 and increased by half again by 2009.
The disillusionment with domestic socio-economic elites at municipal and national levels was expressed at the 2012–2013 Slovenian protests on a wider scale than in the smaller 15 October 2011 protests.
Other sources characterize the number of dialects as nine or as eight.
Political disputes around economic measures were echoed in the public sentiment, as many Slovenians felt they were being economically exploited, having to sustain an expensive and inefficient federal administration.
The new generation of comedians include stand up comedians, such as Tin Vodopivec, who co-founded the Punch Festival, the radio host and impersonator Denis Avdić, and The Elephant and a Fruit group.
After the WW II, one of the most notable film actors was Polde Bibič, who played a number of roles in many films that were well received in Slovenia, including ''Don't Cry, Peter'' (1964), ''On Wings of Paper'' (1968), ''Kekec's Tricks'' (1968), ''Flowers in Autumn'' (1973), ''The Widowhood of Karolina Žašler'' (1976), ''Heritage'' (1986), ''Primož Trubar'' (1985), and ''My Dad, The Socialist Kulak'' (1987).
Carantania, being the most important, was elevated into the Duchy of Carinthia in 976.
According to the 2002 census, Slovenia's main ethnic group are the Slovenes (83%), however their share in the total population is continuously decreasing due to their relatively low fertility rate.
In the second half of the 20th century, the national and universal style were merged by the architects Edvard Ravnikar and first generation of his students: Milan Mihelič, Stanko Kristl, Savin Sever.
In August 2012, the three main ratings agencies have all downgraded Slovenian sovereign debt.
In eastern Slovenia, fiddle and cimbalon bands are called velike goslarije.
The Idrija Mercury mining site is of world importance, as are the prehistoric pile dwellings in the Ljubljana Marshes.
After the fascists took over the power in Italy, they were subjected to a policy of violent Fascist Italianization.
Three historic sites in Slovenia are on the UNESCO World Heritage Site list.
The German speaking minority, amounting to 2.5% of the Slovenian population prior to WWII, was either expelled or killed in the aftermath of the war.
Despite the losses suffered during the Holocaust, Judaism still numbers a few hundred adherents, mostly living in Ljubljana, site of the sole remaining active synagogue in the country.
Gojmir Anton Kos was a notable realist painter and photographer between First World War and WW II.
In September 1989, numerous constitutional amendments were passed to introduce parliamentary democracy to Slovenia.
84% of secondary school graduates go on to tertiary education.
After the financial crisis of 2007-2010 and European sovereign-debt crisis, the price for a boom that veered out of control is now being paid.
There is a big difference in prosperity between the various regions.
Jakob Jež, Darijan Božič, Lojze Lebič and Vinko Globokar have since composed enduring works, especially Globokar's ''L'Armonia'', an opera.
Slovenia's Adriatic coastline stretches approximately  from Italy to Croatia.
There are 13 domestic animals native to Slovenia, of eight species (hen, pig, dog, horse, sheep, goat, honey bee, and cattle).
A similarly high standing in Slovene culture, like the Sanremo Music Festival has had in Italian culture, was attributed to the Slovenska popevka, a specific genre of popular Slovene music.
In south-central Slovenia, annexed by Fascist Italy and renamed to Province of Ljubljana, the Slovenian National Liberation Front was organized in April 1941.
The 1910 US Census showed that there were already "183.431 persons in the USA of Slovenian mother tongue".
The areas are covered mostly by beech, fir-beech and beech-oak forests and have a relatively high production capacity.
The latter concludes with matura, the final exam that allows the graduates to enter a university.
Slovenia is a natural sports venue, with many Slovenians actively practicing sports.
These people mainly belong to the geographically dispersed and marginalized Roma community.
The climate is also influenced by the variety of relief, and the influence of the Alps and the Adriatic Sea.
During the first term of Janez Janša's government, for the first time after independence, the Slovenian banks saw their loan-deposit ratios veering out of control.
These areas attracted first many single men (who often boarded with Slovenian families).
* moderately rural regions: Central Sava, Upper Carniola, Coastal–Karst, Central Slovenia.
The Slovenians mostly wanted to be with Germany and Austria, but merged that December with the Kingdom of Serbia into the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (renamed Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929).
The tourist gravitational area is considerably large, however the tourist market is small.
Slovenian cuisine is a mixture of the Central European cuisine (especially Austrian and Hungarian), the Mediterranean cuisine and the Balkan cuisine.
The nut roll () has become a trademark and symbol of Slovenia especially among Slovene diaspora in America.
Personal cars are much more popular than public road passenger transport, which has significantly declined.
Gottscheerish or ''Granish'', the traditional German dialect of Gottschee County,  faces extinction.
Remnants of primeval forests are still to be found, the largest in the Kočevje area.
An increasing burden for the Slovenian economy has been its rapidly ageing population.
The 19th century also saw a revival of culture in the Slovene language, accompanied by a Romantic nationalist quest for cultural and political autonomy.
In the Iron Age, present-day Slovenia was inhabited by Illyrian and Celtic tribes until the 1st century BC.
Škocjan Caves and its karst landscape are a protected site.
These are mostly immigrants who moved to Slovenia from other former Yugoslav republics from the 1960s to the late 1980s, and their descendants.
These are often quite interwoven.
The main industries are motor vehicles, electric and electronic equipment, machinery, pharmaceuticals, and fuels.
Slovenia subsequently succeeded in meeting the Maastricht criteria and joined the Eurozone (the first transition country to do so) on 1 January 2007.
While the refugees in Austria received decent treatment, the Slovene refugees in Italian camps were treated as state enemies, and several thousand died of malnutrition and diseases between 1915 and 1918.
Extensive breeding programmes have been introduced to repopulate the marble trout into lakes and streams invaded by non-indigenous species of trout.
The capital and largest city is Ljubljana.
According to recent estimates, Slovenia has up to 50 wolves and about 450 brown bears.
The Slovene Lands were part of the Illyrian provinces, the Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary.
According to an OECD report, 83% of adults ages 25–64 have earned the equivalent of a high school degree, well above the OECD average of 74%; among 25- to 34-year-olds, the rate is 93%.
They were hosts of that championships in 2004, when they finish as runners-up.
Today, a significant Lutheran minority lives in the easternmost region of Prekmurje, where they represent around a fifth of the population and are headed by a bishop with the seat in Murska Sobota.
The official language in Slovenia is Slovene, which is a member of the South Slavic language group.
Catholicism was an important feature of both social and political life in pre-Communist Slovenia.
Despite a relatively small number of Protestants (less than 1% in 2002), the Protestant legacy is historically significant given that the Slovene standard language and Slovene literature were established by the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century.
This statistic ranks Slovenia among the most homogeneous countries in the EU in terms of the share of speakers of the predominant mother tongue.
There was over-borrowing from foreign banks and then over-crediting of customers, including local tycoons.
All international transit trains in Slovenia drive through the Ljubljana Railway Hub.
The Slovene People's Party launched a movement for self-determination, demanding the creation of a semi-independent South Slavic state under Habsburg rule.
However, the majority of Slovenian terrain is hilly or mountainous, with around 90% of the surface  or more above sea level.
The railway passenger transport has been recovering after a large drop in the 1990s.
A special position is held by the autochthonous and geographically dispersed Roma ethnic community.
Slovenia is distinguished by an exceptionally wide variety of habitats, due to the contact of geological units and biogeographical regions, and due to human influences.
The area of the United States with the highest concentration of Slovenian immigrants is Cleveland, Ohio.
Near Postojna there is an interesting fortress called the Predjama Castle, half hidden in a cave.
Protected areas of Slovenia include national parks, regional parks, and nature parks, the largest of which is Triglav National Park.
Among the cave vertebrates, the only known one is the olm, living in Karst and White Carniola.
Bibič's unique accordion style, often solo, with no accompaniment, has also made him a solo star.
Some important carnivores include the Eurasian lynx (reintroduced to the Kočevje area in 1973), European wild cats, foxes (especially the red fox), and European jackal.
With exception of Terrafolk that made appearances worldwide, other bands, such as Zaklonišče Prepeva, Šank Rock, Big Foot Mama, Dan D, and Zablujena generacija, are mostly unknown outside the country.
Scientists have been able to identify 60 destructive earthquakes in the past.
Slovenia has one Commissioner in the European Commission, and seven Slovene parliamentarians were elected to the European Parliament at elections on 13 June 2004.
According to the 1991 census there is 99.6% literacy in Slovenia.
Current investments: new 600&nbsp;MW block of Šoštanj thermal power plant is in construction and will be finished by 2014.
In the mid-8th century, Carantania became a vassal duchy under the rule of the Bavarians, who began spreading Christianity.
The first Slovenian hymnal, ''Eni Psalmi'', was published in 1567.
Harmony singing is a deep rooted tradition in Slovenia, and is at least three-part singing (four voices), while in some regions even up to eight-part singing (nine voices).
Many generations of children have been educated by the technical and science illustrations created by Božo Kos and published in Slovenian children's magazines, such as Ciciban.
Suspected opponents of this policy both from within and outside the Communist party were persecuted and thousands were sent to the Goli otok gulag.
An increase in 2013 estimates about Slovenia allegedly being in need of a bailout was attributed by Finland’s Europe Minister Alexander Stubb to "financial sharks" who would like to capitalize on it by creating self-fulfilling prophecies and Die Welt ranked Slovenia among the three least vulnerable European countries topped only by Germany and Estonia.
The number of people immigrating into Slovenia risen steadily from 1995 and has been increasing even rapidly in recent years.
The proposal was picked up by most Slovene parties, and a mass mobilization of Slovene civil society, known as the Declaration Movement, followed.
The Constitutional Court, composed of nine judges elected for nine-year terms, decides on the conformity of laws with the Constitution; all laws and regulations must also conform with the general principles of international law and with ratified international agreements.
Poetry in the Slovene language achieved its highest level with the Romantic poet France Prešeren (1800–1849).
The interwar period brought further industrialization in Slovenia, with rapid economic growth in the 1920s, followed by a relatively successful economic adjustment to the 1929 economic crisis and Great Depression.
Notable Slovenian basketball players include Goran Dragić, Jure Zdovc, Peter Vilfan, Ivo Daneu and Boris Kristančič.
The National Council (''''), consisting of forty members, appointed to represent social, economic, professional and local interest groups, has a limited advisory and control power.
File:Cerkno - Labinje.jpg|Pre-Alpine landscape: the village of Labinje near Cerkno
Its numerous large estates subsequently became the property of the Habsburgs, who retained control of the area right up until the beginning of the 20th century.
With more than 15 million views for the official a cappella "Africa" performance video since its publishing on YouTube in May 2009 until September 2013 that earned them kudos from the song's co-writer, David Paich, Perpetuum Jazzile is the group from Slovenia that is internationally most listened online.
The Karst Plateau in the Slovene Littoral gave its name to karst, a landscape shaped by water dissolving the carbonate bedrock, forming caves.
Thus the country is at the junction of three important geotectonic units: the Alps to the north, the Dinaric Alps to the south and the Pannonian Basin to the east.
Slovenian post-WWII singer-songwriters include Frane Milčinski (1914-1988), Tomaž Pengov whose 1973 album ''Odpotovanja'' is considered to be the first singer-songwriter album in former Yugoslavia, Tomaž Domicelj, Marko Brecelj, Andrej Šifrer, Eva Sršen, Neca Falk, and Jani Kovačič.
Perla in Nova Gorica is the largest casino in the region.
There is no official intermediate unit between the municipalities and the Republic of Slovenia.
The legislative authority is held by the bicameral Parliament of Slovenia, characterised by an asymmetric duality.
In the 2002, around 10% of Slovenes declared themselves as atheists, another 10% professed no specific denomination, and around 16% decided not to answer the question about their religious affiliation.
With the Treaty of Trianon, on the other hand, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was awarded the Slovene-inhabited Prekmurje region, formerly part of Austro-Hungary.
The differences between regions and the genders are pronounced.
In the early 20th century, impressionism was spreading across Slovenia, which soon produced composers Marij Kogoj and Slavko Osterc.
Nowadays, the Slovene visual arts are diverse, based on tradition, reflect the influence of neighboring nations and are intertwinned with modern European movements.
Grassland covers  and fields and gardens ().
There is a plan and obligation that at least 500&nbsp;MW of wind power will be installed by 2020.
Of those, 88 are elected by all the citizens in a system of proportional representation, whereas two are elected by the registered members of the autochthonous Hungarian and Italian minorities.
Year-on-year contraction has been attributed to the fall in domestic consumption, and the slowdown in export growth.
Slovenia was in the beginning of 2007 the first new member to introduce the euro as its currency, replacing the tolar.
Numerous folk dances along with colorful costumes distinguishing between single and married women are found throughout Slovenia.
Air transport in Slovenia is quite low, but has significantly grown since 1991.
Slovene is the official language throughout the country.
The road freight and passenger transport constitutes the largest part of transport in Slovenia at 80%.
The poorest regions are the Mura, the Central Sava and the Littoral–Inner Carniola.
The 62 administrative districts, officially called "Administrative Units" (''upravne enote''), are only territorial sub-units of government administration and are named after their capital.
The 1992-2004 period was marked by the rule of the Liberal Democracy of Slovenia, which was responsible for gradual transition from the Titoistic economy to the capitalist market economy.
Construction of ten hydropower plants on the Sava River with a cumulative capacity of 338&nbsp;MW is planned to be finished by 2030.
The small Jewish community, mostly settled in the Prekmurje region, perished in 1944 in the holocaust of Hungarian Jews.
The team also qualified for the 2014 and 2018 Winter Olympics.
Traditional Slovenian folk music is performed on Styrian harmonica (the oldest type of accordion), fiddle, clarinet, zithers, flute, and by brass bands of alpine type.
Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy republic with a multi-party system.
File:Goriska Brda PA64.jpg|Submediterranean Slovenia: vineyards in the Gorizia Hills
In 1991, 71.6% were self-declared Catholics which means a drop of more than 1% annually.
The Nazis had a plan of ethnic cleansing of these areas, and they resettled or expelled the local Slovene civilian population to the puppet states of Nedić's Serbia (7,500) and NDH (10,000).
Overall, there are eleven urban municipalities in Slovenia.
Among several universities in Slovenia, the best ranked is the University of Ljubljana, ranking among the first 500 or the first 3% of the world's best universities according to the ARWU.
The edible dormouse is often found in the Slovenian beech forests.
After the victory of Emperor Otto I over the Magyars in 955, Slovene territory was divided into a number of border regions of the Holy Roman Empire.
The proposed reforms were postponed in a referendum.
At the northwestern corner of the country lie the Julian Alps with the picturesque Lake Bled and the Soča Valley, as well as the nation's highest peak, Mount Triglav in the middle of Triglav National Park.
Hundreds of thousands of Slovene conscripts were drafted into the Austro-Hungarian Army, and over 30,000 of them died.
Between 1981 and 2000 the Novi Rock festival was notable for bringing rock music across Iron curtain from the West to the Slovenian and then Yugoslav audience.
In 2002 around 0.2% of the Slovenian population spoke Italian and around 0.4% spoke Hungarian as their native language.
Many musicians followed Avsenik's steps, one of the most famous being Lojze Slak.
The national basketball team has qualified for 13 Eurobaskets, including a 4th-place finish in 2009, and three FIBA World Championship appearances.
After its disintegration following Samo's death in 658 or 659, the ancestors of Slovenes located in present-day Carinthia formed the independent duchy of Carantania.
Primary school is divided into three periods, each of three years.
Modern architecture in Slovenia was introduced by Max Fabiani, and in the mid-war period, Jože Plečnik and Ivan Vurnik.
By the time of Protestant Reformation in the 16th century, music was used to proselytize.
Soups were added to the traditional one-pot meals and various kinds of porridge and stew only in relatively recent history.
Other state roads have been rapidly deteriorating due to neglect and the overall increase in traffic.
After the WW II, both the comics and animated advertisements drawn by Miki Muster gained popularity in Slovenia.
Besides these two Christian denominations, a small Jewish community has also been historically present.
The main economic field is services, followed by industry and construction.
The anti-Nazi resistance however expanded, creating its own administrative structures as the basis for Slovene statehood within a new, federal and socialist Yugoslavia.
The counts of Celje, a feudal family from this area who in 1436 acquired the title of state princes, were Habsburgs' powerful competitors for some time.
This makes Slovenia the third most forested country in Europe, after Finland and Sweden.
In the interior of the country are typical Central European forests, predominantly oak and beech.
Slovenia's total national debt at the end of September 2011 amounted to 15,884&nbsp;million euros or 44.4% of GDP.
The third largest denomination, with around 2.2% of the population, is Orthodox Christianity, with most adherents belonging to the Serbian Orthodox Church while a minority belongs to the Macedonian and other Orthodox churches.
Three decades later, the Carantanians were incorporated, together with the Bavarians, into the Carolingian Empire.
Anže Kopitar is the most notable Slovene ice hockey player, and is one of the best players in the world, having helped the Los Angeles Kings to the Stanley Cup Championship in 2012 and 2014.
The most taught foreign languages are English, German, Italian, French and Spanish.
Additionally, according to Yale University's Environmental Performance Index, Slovenia is considered a "strong performer" in environmental protection efforts.
After 1943, Germany took over the Italian occupational area, as well.
'''1''' Slovene Littoral;  '''Carniola:''' '''2a''' Upper   '''2b''' Inner, '''2c''' Lower    '''3''' Carinthia; '''4''' Styria; '''5''' Prekmurje
World War I brought heavy casualties for the Slovenes, particularly the twelve Battles of the Isonzo, which took place in present-day Slovenia's western border area.
Due to limited opportunities, between 1880-1910 there was extensive emigration, and around 300,000 Slovenes (i.e.
Consequently, the Frankish feudal system reached the Slovene territory.
In the mountains, spruce, fir, and pine are more common.
On 27 June in the early morning, the Yugoslav People's Army dispatched its forces to prevent further measures for the establishment of a new country, which led to the Ten-Day War.
This gives it a special position in the European social, economic and cultural integration and restructuring.
The Italian authorities deported some 25,000 people to the concentration camps, which equaled 7.5% of the population of their occupation zone.
The men were important as workers in the mining industry, because of some of the skills they brought from Slovenia.
They have been preserved ex situ and in situ.
In a parallel process, an intensive German colonisation significantly diminished the extent of Slovene-speaking areas.
Most Slovenian Muslims came from Bosnia.
19%) belongs to the Adriatic Sea basin.
Other birds of prey have been recorded, as well as a growing number of ravens, crows and magpies migrating into Ljubljana and Maribor where they thrive.
Hundreds of Istrian Italians and Slovenes that opposed communism were killed in the foibe massacres, and more than 25,000 fled or were expelled from Slovenian Istria in the aftermath of the war.
The Slovenian Armed Forces provide military defence independently or within an alliance, in accordance with international agreements.
New 39.5&nbsp;MW HE Krško hydro power plant was finished in 2013.
The marble trout or marmorata (''Salmo marmoratus'') is an indigenous Slovenian fish.
By the 15th century, the Slovene ethnic territory was reduced to its present size.
Trapping these animals is a long tradition and is a part of the Slovenian national identity.
Precipitation, often coming from Bay of Genoa, varies across the country as well, with over  in some Western regions and dropping down to  in Prekmurje.
Nonetheless, from 2000 until 2010, the rate has decreased by about 30%.
From 1952 on, the Slavko Avsenik's band began to appear in broadcasts, movies, and concerts all over the West Germany, inventing the original "Oberkrainer" country sound that has become the primary vehicle of ethnic musical expression not only in Slovenia, but also in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and in the Benelux, spawning hundreds of Alpine orchestras in the process.
This caused a mass emigration of Slovenes, especially the middle class, from the Slovenian Littoral and Trieste to Yugoslavia and South America.
Judicial powers in Slovenia are executed by judges, who are elected by the National Assembly.
In 1945, Yugoslavia was liberated by the partisan resistance and soon became a socialist federation known as the People's Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Slovenia is situated in Central and Southeastern Europe touching the Alps and bordering the Mediterranean.
