The housing policy aiming to accommodate these workers was not well enforced and the government built settlements in the form of single-occupancy bedspaces.
In 1850 the Catholic Cardinal Wiseman described the area known as Devil's Acre in Westminster, London as follows:
Slums thus create an informal alternate economic ecosystem, that demands low paid flexible workers, something impoverished residents of slums deliver.
Some slums risk man-made hazards such as toxic industries, traffic congestion and collapsing infrastructure.
The income from the land will decline, which decreases the people’s incomes in that area.
Urbanization might also force some people to live in slums when it influences land use by transforming agricultural land into urban areas and increases land value.
Common causes include rapid rural-to-urban migration, poor planning, economic stagnation and depression, poverty, high unemployment, informal economy, colonialism and segregation, politics, natural disasters and social conflicts.
Slum upgrading is largely a government controlled, funded and run process, rather than a competitive market driven process.
Engels described these British neighborhoods as "cattle-sheds for human beings".
Similarly slum upgrading efforts in Philippines, India and Brazil have proven to be excessively expensive than initially estimated, and the condition of the slums 10 years after completion of slum upgrading has been slum like.
In 1887, the British colonial government expelled all tanneries, other noxious industry and poor natives who worked in the peninsular part of the city and colonial housing area, to what was back then the northern fringe of the city – a settlement now called Dharavi.
For example, the Sabarmati Riverfront Project, a recreational development in Ahmedabad, India, forcefully relocated over 19,000 families from shacks along the river to 13 public housing complexes that were an average of 9 km away from the family's original dwelling.
Jacob Riis, Walker Evans, Lewis Hine and others photographed many before World War II.
Some city governments and state officials have simply sought to remove slums.
Often police can not reduce crime because, due to ineffective city planning and governance, slums set inefficient crime prevention system.
After World War II, French people started mass migration from rural to urban areas of France.
Recent study has shown improvements in health awareness in adolescent age group of a rural slum area.
Today, Five Points slum has transformed into the Little Italy and Chinatown neighborhood of New York City.
The Millennium Development Goals proposes that member nations should make a “significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers” by 2020.
Examples of illicit informal economy include illegal substance and weapons trafficking, drug or moonshine/changaa production, prostitution and gambling – all sources of risks to the individual, families and society.
By the 1960s, over 33% of population of Rio lived in slums, 45% of Mexico City and Ankara, 65% of Algiers, 35% of Caracas, 25% of Lima and Santiago, 15% of Singapore.
Another common cause is mothers’ faulty feeding practices, including inadequate breastfeeding and wrongly preparation of food for children.
The transformation of agricultural land also provides surplus labor, as peasants have to seek jobs in urban areas as rural-urban migrant workers.
Some rural-urban migrant workers cannot afford housing in cities and eventually settle down in only affordable slums.
The formation of slums is closely linked to urbanization.
These strategies shield slums from the risk of being noticed and removed when they are small and most vulnerable to local government officials.
These slums tend to become permanent because the residents do not want to leave, as in the case of slums near Port-au-Prince after the 2010 Haiti earthquake, and slums near Dhaka after 2007 Bangladesh Cyclone Sidr.
The anticipated  benefits of slum upgrading, claims Werlin, have proven to be a myth.
The slum residents have been convinced that their current location is a health hazard, prone to natural disaster, or that the alternative location is well connected to employment opportunities.
Overcrowding is another characteristic of slums.
Rather crime is one of the symptoms of slum dwelling; thus slums consist of more victims than criminals.
Similarly, some of the slums of Lagos, Nigeria sprouted because of neglect and policies of the colonial era.
New slums sprout at the new boundaries of the expanding city, usually on publicly owned lands, thereby creating an urban sprawl mix of formal settlements, industry, retail zones and slums.
In some countries like Venezuela, officials have sent in the military to control slum criminal violence involved with drugs and weapons.
The urban poor arrives with hope, and very little of anything else.
While slums differ in size and other characteristics, most lack reliable sanitation services, supply of clean water, reliable electricity, law enforcement and other basic services.
With poverty and informal economy, slums do not generate tax revenues for the government and therefore tend to get minimal or slow attention.
In addition, without registration of the land ownership, the government has difficulty in upgrading basic facilities and improving the living environment.
Fires are another major risk to slums and its inhabitants, with streets too narrow to allow proper and quick access to fire control trucks.
The poor moved into Dharavi, found work as servants in colonial offices and homes and in the foreign owned tanneries and other polluting industries near Dharavi.
It is unclear whether slum upgrading can lead to long term sustainable improvement to slums.
Scholars claim politics also drives rural-urban migration and subsequent settlement patterns.
By the late 1700s, the lake was surrounded by slaughterhouses and tanneries, which emptied their waste directly into this lake.
By the early 1800s Lake Collect of New York City was filled up and dry, and on it was Five Points – United States’ first slum.
In Ethiopia and the Niger, rates of child malnutrition in urban slums are around 40%.
Slum children are less likely to be vaccinated mainly because some slum dwellers refuse vaccinations without understanding its importance or no one at home is able to take the child to health sectors for vaccinations.
These children are likely to be neglected by their mothers or sometimes not carefully looked after by their female relatives.
Women in slums are at greater risk of physical and sexual violence.
Recognizing and notifying slums often triggers a creation of property rights, and requires that the government provide public services and infrastructure to the slum residents.
Mutual monogamy or using condoms are two main ways to prevent HIV/AIDS, but some women might not be able to modify their behaviors due to masculine authority or violence.
Slum relocation that displaces the poor from opportunities to earn a livelihood, generates economic insecurity in the poor.
In some cases, local governments ignore the flux of immigrants during the process of urbanization.
The police sometimes participate in gender-based violence against men as well by picking up some men, beating them and putting them in jail.
Turner argued to demolish the housing, but to improve the environment: if governments can clear existing slums of unsanitary human waste, polluted water and litter, and from muddy unlit lanes, they do not have to worry about the shanty housing.
Since 1950, world population has increased at a far greater rate than the total amount of arable land, even as agriculture contributes a much smaller percentage of the total economy.
During the process of urbanization, some agricultural land is used for additional urban activities.
Five Points was occupied by successive waves of freed slaves, Irish, then Italian, then Chinese, immigrants.
Many local and national governments have, for political interests, subverted efforts to remove, reduce or upgrade slums into better housing options for the poor.
The lack of services such as routine garbage collection allows rubbish to accumulate in huge quantities.
According to Ali and Toran, social networks might also explain rural-urban migration and people's ultimate settlement in slums.
The increase in returns of scale will mean that the production of each good will take place in a single location.
Slums are considered a major public health concern and potential breeding grounds of drug resistant diseases for the entire city, the nation, as well as the global community.
In a slum of Kolkata, India, over 10 people sometimes share a 45 m2 room.
Slums like Five Points triggered discussions of affordable housing and slum removal.
Trash piled, modern waste collection and sanitation system, electricity and other technologies had yet to be invented and adopted.
Maternal employment also influences children's nutritional status.
There are still many examples left of former slum housing in the UK, but many have been removed by government initiative, redesigned and replaced with better public housing.
In some slums, people sort and recycle trash of different kinds (from household garbage to electronics) for a living – selling either the odd usable goods or stripping broken goods for parts or raw materials.
Rio de Janeiro documented its first slum in 1920 census.
In addition to migration for jobs, a portion of people migrate to cities because of their connection with relatives or families.
In some cases the local community or the government allots lands to people, which will later develop into slums and over which the dwellers don’t have property rights.
Rapid urbanization drives economic growth and causes people to seek working and investment opportunities in urban areas.
These children all suffer from third-degree malnutrition, the most severe level, according to WHO standards.
Some governments, moreover, mapped the land where slums occupied as undeveloped land.
This might prevent appropriate allocation of health care resources in slum areas since many countries base their health care plans on data from clinic, hospital, or national mortality registry.
Slums were common in the 18th to early 20th centuries in the United States and Europe.
In 1950, France launched its Habitation à Loyer Modéré initiative to finance and build public housing and remove slums, managed by techniciens – urban technocrats., and financed by Livret A – a tax free savings account for French public.
These are sometimes called ''slum cities''.
The newcomers, having paid for the right, feel they have commercial right to the home in that slum.
This trend has continued in modern times.
Factors such as unemployment that lead to insufficient resources in the household can increase marital stress and therefore exacerbate domestic violence.
Shanty homes are often built hurriedly, on ad hoc basis, with materials unsuitable for housing.
Many dwellings are single room units, with high occupancy rates.
During apartheid era of South Africa, under the pretext of sanitation and plague epidemic prevention, racial and ethnic group segregation was pursued, people of color were moved to the fringes of the city, policies that created Soweto and other slums – officially called townships.
Slums are often placed amongs the places vulnerable to natural disasters such as landslides and floods.
They regarded the Africans as temporary migrants and needed them only for supply of labor.
Often in such circumstance, multiple gangs fight for control over revenue.
Urban informal sector is between 20 and 60% of most developing economies’ GDP; in Kenya, 78 per cent of non-agricultural employment is in the informal sector making up 42 per cent of GDP.
Marcuse suggests ghettoes in the United States, and elsewhere, have been created and maintained by the segregationist policies of the state and regionally dominant group.
Some governments have begun to approach slums as a possible opportunity to urban development by slum upgrading.
In some cities, especially in countries in Southern Asia and sub-Saharan, slums are not just marginalized neighborhoods holding a small population; slums are widespread, and are home to a large part of urban population.
The problem can also lie on the failure in coordination among different departments in charge of economic development, urban planning, and land allocation.
Secure land tenure is important for slum dwellers as an authentic recognition of their residential status in urban areas.
Further, crime rates are not uniformly high in world’s slums; the highest crime rates in slums are seen where illicit economy - such as drug trafficking, brewing, prostitution and gambling - is strong and multiple gangs are fighting for control.
Moreover, health service does not exist in most of the world’s slums.
Ben Arimah cites this social exclusion and poor infrastructure as a cause for numerous slums in African cities.
The world's largest slum city is in Mexico City.
Such problems is not primarily due to community indifference.
However, the ad hoc construction, lack of quality control on building materials used, poor maintenance, and uncoordinated spatial design make them prone to extensive damage during earthquakes as well from decay.
The UN-Habitat reports that 43% of urban population in developing countries and 78% of those in the least developed countries are slum dwellers.
The poor children as well as working adults of a city’s informal economy need a place to live.
Some of them are seeking jobs at the same time and some of those will eventually find jobs in formal economies after gaining some professional skills in informal sectors.
Slum dwellers usually experience a high rate of disease.
Rape is another serious issue related to crime in slums.
A number of slum families do not report cases or seek professional medical care, which results in insufficient data.
Financial deficiency in some governments may explain the lack of  affordable public housing for the poor since any improvement of the tenant in slums and expansion of public housing programs involve a great increase in the government expenditure.
Violence often leads to retaliatory and vigilante violence within the slum.
The percentage of developing world's urban population living in slums has been dropping with economic development, even while total urban population has been increasing.
And about 70% of the mothers did not provide their children three meals everyday.
suggest, improving living conditions such as introduction of better sanitation and access to basic facilities can ameliorate the effects of diseases.
Rural-urban migration is one of the causes attributed to the formation and expansion of slums.
Established, old slums sometimes garner official support and get some of these infrastructure such as paved roads and unreliable electricity or water supply.
Each dwelling may be cohabited by multiple families.
At their start, slums are typically located in least desirable lands near the town or city, that are state owned or philanthropic trust owned or religious entity owned or have no clear land title.
These were generally still inhabited until the 1940s, when the government started slum clearance and built new council houses.
Communal toilets provided under slum upgrading effort were poorly maintained, and abandoned by slum residents of Jakarta.
Besides children’s vulnerability to diseases, many scholars also focus on high HIV/AID prevalence in slums among women.
Slum upgrading does not address poverty, low paying jobs from informal economy, and other characteristics of slums.
Overcrowding leads to faster and wider spread of diseases due to the limited space in slum housing.
Agriculture, meanwhile, has also become higher yielding, less disease prone, less physically harsh and more efficient with tractors and other equipment.
Economic stagnation in a nation with a growing population reduces per capita disposal income in urban and rural areas, increasing urban and rural poverty.
A UN-Habitat report states that in 2006 there were nearly 1 billion people settling in slum settlements in most cities of Latin America, Asia, and Africa, and a smaller number in the cities of Europe and North America.
However, as evidenced by poor urban infrastructure and insufficient housing, the local governments sometimes are unable to manage this transition.
The Economist summarizes this as, "good housing is obviously better than a slum, but a slum is better than none".
Fires are often a serious problem.
The public program was named "Minha casa, minha vida" which means "My house, my life" The project has built 2 million popular houses and it has 2 million more under construction.
More investment will come into these areas, which increases the land value.
These social and political groups have vested interests to encourage migration by ethnic groups that will help maintain the slums, and reject alternate housing options even if the alternate options are better in every aspect than the slums they seek to replace.
In many cities the informal sector accounts for as much as 60 per cent of employment of the urban population.
Gang and drug wars are endemic in some slums, predominantly between male residents of slums.
It also encourages them to upgrade their housing facilities, which will give them protection against natural and unnatural hazards.
However, some rural migrants may not find jobs immediately because of their lack of skills and the increasingly competitive job markets, which leads to their financial shortage.
Some scholars suggest that urbanization creates slums because local governments are unable to manage urbanization, and migrant workers without an affordable place to live in, dwell in slums.
Slums were found in every major urban region of the United States in the early 20th century, before and through the Great Depression.
The US and European governments additionally created a procedure by which the poor could directly apply to the government for housing assistance, thus becoming a partner to identifying and meeting the housing needs of its citizens.
Removal and replacement of slum created a conflict of interest, and politics prevented efforts to remove, relocate or upgrade the slums into housing projects that are better than the slums.
In Haiti (where a majority of the population live in poverty), after the 2010 Earthquake, an outbreak of Cholera spread throughout the country, killing 8321 people.
Slums were common in the United States and Europe before the early 20th century.
In 2008, more than 50% of the world’s population lived in urban areas.
Cohen as well as Merton theorized that the cycle of slum violence does not mean slums are inevitably criminogenic, rather in some cases it is frustration against life in slum, and a consequence of denial of opportunity to slum residents to leave the slum.
Slums have been historically linked to epidemics.
As they could not afford to buy houses, slums were thus formed.
More recently slums have been predominantly found in urban regions of developing and undeveloped parts of the world, but are also found in developed economies.
Recent reports reflecting illicit informal economies include drug trade and distribution in Brazil’s ''favelas'', production of fake goods in the ''colonías'' of Tijuana, smuggling in ''katchi abadis'' and slums of Karachi, or production of synthetic drugs in the ''townships'' of Johannesburg.
Examples include Zone One Tondo Organization of Manila, Philippines and Abahlali baseMjondolo of Durban, South Africa.
Five Points slum used to be a lake named Collect.
Poor water quality, a manifest example, is a cause of many major illnesses including malaria, diarrhea and trachoma.
The proportion of urban population living in slums was highest in Sub-Saharan Africa (61.7%), followed by South Asia (35%), Southeast Asia (31%), East Asia (28.2%), West Asia (24.6%), Oceania (24.1%), Latin America and the Caribbean (23.5%), and North Africa (13.3%).
In the United States, slum dwellers are usually in city neighborhoods and inner suburbs, while in Europe, they are more common in high rise housing on the urban outskirts.
A footnote defined slum to mean "low, unfrequent parts of the town".
In some cases, once the slum has many residents, the early residents form a social group, an informal association or a gang that controls newcomers, charges a fee for the right to live in the slums, and dictates where and how new homes get built within the slum.
It leads to homicide and the emergence of criminal gangs.
Diseases that have been reported in slums include cholera, HIV/AIDS, measles, malaria, dengue, typhoid, drug resistant tuberculosis, and other epidemics.
Studies focus on children’s health in slums address that cholera and diarrhea are especially common among young children.
Similarly, in recent years, numerous slums have sprung around Kabul to accommodate rural Afghans escaping Taliban violence.
Similar dynamics are cited in favelas of Brazil, slums of India, and shanty towns of Kenya.
With rapid shift from rural to urban life, poverty migrates to urban areas.
This approach was inspired in part by the theoretical writings of John Turner in 1972.
Such examples can be found in many African countries.
Poverty may result in inadequate food intake when people cannot afford to buy and store enough food, which leads to malnutrition.
Widespread child malnutrition in slums is closely related to family income, mothers’ food practice, mothers’ educational level, and maternal employment or housewifery.
High population densities, poor living conditions, low vaccination rates, insufficient health-related data and inadequate health service engender a higher rate of disease transmission in slums than that in non-slum areas.
The concentration is the result of a self-reinforcing process of agglomeration.
Affordable public transport and economic infrastructure empowers poor people to move and consider housing options other than their current slums.
Melun Law first passed in 1849 and revised in 1851, followed by establishment of Paris Commission on Unhealthful Dwellings in 1852 began the social process of identifying the worst housing inside slums, but did not remove or replace slums.
Poor families that cannot afford transportation, or those who simply lack any form of affordable public transportation, generally end up in squat settlements within walking distance or close enough to the place of their formal or informal employment.
The first cholera epidemic of 1832 triggered a political debate, and Louis René Villermé study of various arrondissements of Paris demonstrated the differences and connection between slums, poverty and poor health.
Herbert Werlin notes that the initial benefits of slum upgrading efforts have been ephemeral.
Affordable public mass transit in cities such as New York City, London and Paris allowed the poor to reach areas where they could earn a livelihood.
In France as in most industrialised European capitals, slums were widespread in Paris and other urban areas in the 19th century, many of which continued through first half of the 20th century.
The approach seeks to upgrade the slum with basic infrastructure such as sanitation, safe drinking water, safe electricity distribution, paved roads, rain water drainage system, and bus/metro stops.
By 1980, in various cities and towns of Latin America alone, there were about 25,000 slums.
As cities expanded and business parks scattered due to cost ineffectiveness, people moved to live in the suburbs; thus retail, logistics, house maintenance and other businesses followed demand patterns.
As the slum started by violating another's property rights, the residents have no legal claim to the land.
Established old slums, surrounded by the formal city infrastructure, cannot expand horizontally; therefore, they grow vertically by stacking additional rooms, sometimes for a growing family and sometimes as a source of rent from new arrivals in slums.
Slum crime rate correlates with insufficient law enforcement and inadequate public policing.
In some cases, brick and cement is used, but without attention to proper design and structural engineering requirements.
Social exclusion and poor infrastructure forces the poor to adapt to conditions beyond his or her control.
The informal sector, by its very nature, means income insecurity and lack of social mobility.
Charles Dickens used the word slum in a similar way in 1840, writing "I mean to take a great, London, back-slum kind walk tonight".
Various space, dwelling placement bylaws and local building codes may also be extensively violated.
Further, rural migrants, mainly lured by higher incomes, continue to flood into cities.
Some immigrants regard unoccupied land as land without owners and therefore occupy it.
By the 1920s it had become a common slang expression in England, meaning either various taverns and eating houses, "loose talk" or gypsy language, or a room with "low going-ons".
The gap between people’s low income and the high land price forces some people to look for and construct cheap informal settlements, which are known as slums in urban areas.
Numerous other non English terms are often used interchangeably with ''slum'': shanty town, favela, rookery, gecekondu, skid row, barrio, ghetto, bidonville, taudis, bandas de miseria, barrio marginal, morro, loteamento, barraca, musseque, tugurio, solares, mudun safi, karyan, medina achouaia, brarek, ishash, galoos, tanake, baladi, hrushebi, chalis, katras, zopadpattis, bustee, estero, looban, dagatan, umjondolo, watta, udukku, and chereka bete.
One of the identifying characteristics of slums is the lack of or inadequate public infrastructure.
This can sometimes be licit informal economy or illicit informal economy without working contract or any social security.
To live, the poor built shanty towns within easy commute to work.
Another prevalent form of violence in slums is armed violence (gun violence), mostly existing in African and Latin American slums.
Slums exist in many countries and have become a global phenomenon.
In yet others, the demand far exceeds the government bureaucracy’s ability to deliver.
In Mexico City for example, the government attempted to upgrade and urbanize settled slums in the periphery during the 1970s and 1980s by including basic amenities such as concrete roads, parks, illumination and sewage.
Violence and crime were commonplace.
Slum areas are characterized by substandard housing structures.
Overcrowding is also seen near sources of drinking water, cleaning, and sanitation where one toilet may serve dozens of families.
Some scholars suggest that crime is one of the main concerns in slums.
Many slums grow because of growing informal economy which creates demand for workers.
Public and council housing projects cleared slums and provided more sanitary housing options than what existed before the 1950s.
Whenever there is a significant gap in growing demand for housing and insufficient supply of affordable housing, this gap is typically met in part by slums.
