William III lost his mother to the disease when he was only ten years old in 1660, and named his uncle Charles as legal guardian: her death from smallpox would indirectly spark a chain of events that would eventually lead to the permanent ousting of the Stuart line from the British throne.
In 1842, the United Kingdom banned inoculation, later progressing to mandatory vaccination.
Some Indian women, in an attempt to ward off Shitala, placed plates of cooling foods and pots of water on the roofs of their homes.
'''Smallpox''' was an infectious disease caused by either of two virus variants, ''Variola major'' and ''Variola minor''.
Circulating immune complexes, overwhelming viremia, or an uncontrolled immune response may be contributing factors.
In cultures that did not recognize a smallpox deity, there was often nonetheless a belief in smallpox demons, who were accordingly blamed for the disease.
An intensive surveillance and containment and vaccination program was undertaken in these countries in early and mid-1977, under the direction of Australian microbiologist Frank Fenner.
Blindness results in approximately 35 percent to 40 percent of eyes affected with keratitis and corneal ulcer.
In this form of the disease, by the second day of the rash the macules became raised ''papules''.
However, if particles with the characteristic morphology of herpesviruses are seen this will eliminate smallpox and other orthopoxvirus infections.
In 1796, Edward Jenner, a doctor in Berkeley, Gloucestershire, rural England, discovered that immunity to smallpox could be produced by inoculating a person with material from a cowpox lesion.
There is no evidence of chronic or recurrent infection with variola virus.
Improved vaccines and the practice of re-vaccination led to a substantial reduction in cases in Europe and North America, but smallpox remained almost unchecked everywhere else in the world.
File:Female smallpox patient -- late-stage confluent maculopapular scarring.jpg|An Italian female smallpox patient whose skin displayed the characteristics of late-stage confluent maculopapular scarring, 1965.
Overall, however, the progress towards eradication was disappointing, especially in Africa and in the Indian subcontinent.
The introduction of the vaccine to the New World took place in Trinity, Newfoundland in 1800 by Dr. John Clinch, boyhood friend and medical colleague of Jenner.
Lady Mary Wortley Montagu observed smallpox inoculation during her stay in the Ottoman Empire, writing detailed accounts of the practice in her letters, and enthusiastically promoted the procedure in England upon her return in 1718.
Guarnieri bodies are readily identified in skin biopsies stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and appear as pink blobs.
The only surviving son of Henry VIII, Edward VI, died from complications shortly after apparently recovering from the disease, thereby nullifying Henry's efforts to ensure a male successor to the throne (his two immediate successors were both women, who had both had it and survived).
Jack Carmody claimed the cause of the outbreak in question was more likely due to chickenpox, which at the time was sometimes identified as a mild form of smallpox.
The first hemisphere-wide effort to eradicate smallpox was made in 1950 by the Pan American Health Organization.
By the third or fourth day the papules filled with an opalescent fluid to become ''vesicles''.
Civil war, famine, and refugees made the task even more difficult.
No drug is currently approved for the treatment of smallpox.
If a person is vaccinated again later, immunity lasts even longer.
British officers, including the top British commanding generals, ordered, sanctioned, paid for and conducted the use of smallpox against the Native Americans.
The life cycle of poxviruses is complicated by having multiple infectious forms, with differing mechanisms of cell entry.
The inspectors were met with evasion and denials from the Soviet scientists, and were eventually ordered out of the facility.
The earliest physical evidence of it is probably the pustular rash on the mummified body of Pharaoh Ramses V of Egypt.
Smallpox devastated the native Amerindian population and was an important factor in the conquest of the Aztecs and the Incas by the Spaniards.
By contrast, 52 percent of unvaccinated persons died.
Four orthopoxviruses cause infection in humans: variola, vaccinia, cowpox, and monkeypox.
Specific allegations made against Iraq in this respect, however, proved to be mistaken.
I hope it will have the desired effect."
An outbreak of weaponized smallpox occurred during testing at a facility on an island in the Aral Sea in 1971.
While the Antonine Plague that swept through the Roman Empire in AD 165180 may have been caused by smallpox, Saint Nicasius of Rheims became the patron saint of smallpox victims for having supposedly survived a bout in 450, and Saint Gregory of Tours recorded a similar outbreak in France and Italy in 580, the first use of the term ''variola''; other historians speculate that Arab armies first carried smallpox from Africa into Southwestern Europe during the 7th and 8th centuries.
Also, prior to becoming Russian Emperor, Peter III caught the virus and suffered greatly from it.
Routine vaccination of health care workers was discontinued in the U.S. in 1976, and among military recruits in 1990 (although military personnel deploying to the Middle East and Korea still receive the vaccination).
In the United States, from 1843 to 1855 first Massachusetts, and then other states required smallpox vaccination.
minor'' spread all over the USA, into Canada, the South American countries and Great Britain it became the dominant form of smallpox, further reducing mortality rates.
During the 19th century, the cowpox virus used for smallpox vaccination was replaced by vaccinia virus.
In 1721, Cotton Mather and colleagues provoked controversy in Boston by inoculating hundreds.
U.S. Presidents George Washington, Andrew Jackson, and Abraham Lincoln all contracted and recovered from the disease.
Vaccination to prevent smallpox was soon practiced all over the world.
Vaccinia, cowpox, and monkeypox viruses can infect both humans and other animals in nature.
Famous theologian Jonathan Edwards died of smallpox in 1758 following an inoculation.
Early on, donations of vaccine were provided primarily by the Soviet Union and the United States, but by 1973, more than 80 percent of all vaccine was produced in developing countries.
Some scientists have argued that the stocks may be useful in developing new vaccines, antiviral drugs, and diagnostic tests; however, a 2010 review by a team of public health experts appointed by WHO concluded that no essential public health purpose is served by the U.S. and Russia continuing to retain virus stocks.
Pustules can form on the eyelid, conjunctiva, and cornea, leading to complications such as conjunctivitis, keratitis, corneal ulcer, iritis, iridocyclitis, and optic atrophy.
The initial or prodromal symptoms are similar to other viral diseases such as influenza and the common cold: fever of at least , muscle pain, malaise, headache and prostration.
The disease killed an estimated 400,000 Europeans annually during the closing years of the 18th century (including five reigning monarchs), and was responsible for a third of all blindness.
His wife, Catherine the Great, was spared but fear of the virus clearly had its effects on her.
In late hemorrhagic cases, high and sustained viremia, severe platelet loss and poor immune response were often cited as causes of death.
The settled existence of smallpox in Europe was of particular historical importance, since successive waves of exploration and colonization by Europeans tended to spread the disease to other parts of the world.
The last major European outbreak of smallpox was in 1972 in Yugoslavia, after a pilgrim from Kosovo returned from the Middle East, where he had contracted the virus.
Smallpox is highly contagious, but generally spreads more slowly and less widely than some other viral diseases, perhaps because transmission requires close contact and occurs after the onset of the rash.
Alibek's stories about the former Soviet program's smallpox activities have never been independently verified.
A rash develops on the skin 24 to 48 hours after lesions on the mucous membranes appear.
By days 12–15 the first visible lesions—small reddish spots called ''enanthem''—appear on mucous membranes of the mouth, tongue, palate, and throat, and temperature falls to near normal.
Plans of large scale production were never carried through as they considered that the weapon would not be very effective due to the wide-scale availability of a vaccine.
In Russia, Peter II of Russia died of the disease at 15 years of age.
During the second week, the blister begins to dry up and a scab forms.
Authorities declared martial law, enforced quarantine, and undertook widespread re-vaccination of the population, enlisting the help of the WHO.
Instead, bleeding occurs under the skin, making it look charred and black, hence this form of the disease is also known as black pox.
The procedure was much safer than variolation, and did not involve a risk of smallpox transmission.
This process is known as "ring vaccination".
Vaccinia is in the same family as cowpox and variola, but is genetically distinct from both.
In the early 1950s an estimated 50 million cases of smallpox occurred in the world each year.
The distribution of the rash was densest on the face; denser on the extremities than on the trunk; and on the extremities, denser on the distal parts than on the proximal.
Cause of death in hemorrhagic cases involved heart failure, sometimes accompanied by pulmonary edema.
The last naturally occurring case of smallpox (''Variola minor'') was diagnosed on 26 October 1977.
The key to this strategy was the monitoring of cases in a community (known as surveillance) and containment.
The last cases of smallpox in the world occurred in an outbreak of two cases (one of which was fatal) in Birmingham, UK in 1978.
For example, several relatives of Henry VIII survived the disease but were scarred by it.
Cuitláhuac, the 10th tlatoani (ruler) of the Aztec city of Tenochtitlan, died of smallpox in 1520, shortly after its introduction to the Americas, and the Incan emperor Huayna Capac died of it in 1527.
According to a theory put forward in ''Journal of Australian Studies'' (JAS) by an independent researcher, in 1789, British marines used smallpox against indigenous tribes in New South Wales.
The antibodies induced by vaccinia vaccine are cross-protective for other orthopoxviruses, such as monkeypox, cowpox, and variola (smallpox) viruses.
Infection with smallpox is focused in small blood vessels of the skin and in the mouth and throat before disseminating.
Smallpox is not notably infectious in the prodromal period and viral shedding is usually delayed until the appearance of the rash, which is often accompanied by lesions in the mouth and pharynx.
major'' infection included characteristic scars, commonly on the face, which occur in 65–85 percent of survivors.
The envelope was labeled as containing scabs from a vaccination and gave scientists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention an opportunity to study the history of smallpox vaccination in the U.S.
The overall fatality rate for children younger than 1 year of age is 40–50 percent.
In temperate areas, the number of smallpox infections were highest during the winter and spring.
Lincoln contracted the disease during his Presidency, possibly from his son Tad, and was quarantined shortly after giving the Gettysburg address in 1863.
Rarely, smallpox has been spread by virus carried in the air in enclosed settings such as buildings, buses, and trains.
By 1832, the federal government of the United States established a smallpox vaccination program for Native Americans.
Concern has been expressed by some that artificial gene synthesis could be used to recreate the virus from existing digital genomes, for use in biological warfare.
The U.S. Congress passed the Vaccine Act of 1813 to ensure that safe smallpox vaccine would be available to the American public.
On June 24, 1763, William Trent, a local trader and commander of the Fort Pitt militia, wrote, "Out of our regard for them, we gave them two Blankets and an Handkerchief out of the Small Pox Hospital.
Based on past experience, it is estimated that 1 or 2 people in 1 million (0.000198 percent) who receive the vaccine may die as a result, most often the result of postvaccinial encephalitis or severe necrosis in the area of vaccination (called progressive vaccinia).
Hemorrhagic smallpox is a severe form that is accompanied by extensive bleeding into the skin, mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract.
The overall rate of infection is also affected by the short duration of the infectious stage.
In the United States and South Africa a much milder form of smallpox, ''variola minor'', was recognized just before the close of the 19th century.
A medical photographer, Janet Parker, contracted the disease at the University of Birmingham Medical School and died on September 11, 1978, after which Professor Henry Bedson, the scientist responsible for smallpox research at the university, committed suicide.
Catherine then sought to have inoculations throughout her empire stating: "My objective was, through my example, to save from death the multitude of my subjects who, not knowing the value of this technique, and frightened of it, were left in danger."
The first step to mitigating this risk, it has been suggested, should be to destroy the remaining virus stocks so as to enable unequivocal criminalization of any possession of the virus.
People with semi-confluent and confluent types of smallpox may have therapeutic issues similar to patients with extensive skin burns.
Subclinical (asymptomatic) infections with variola virus were noted but were not common.
In the 9th century the Persian physician, Rhazes, provided one of the most definitive descriptions  of smallpox and was the first to differentiate smallpox from measles and chickenpox in his ''Kitab fi al-jadari wa-al-hasbah'' (''The Book of Smallpox and Measles'').
It is now primarily recommended for laboratory workers at risk for occupational exposure.
Smallpox virus preferentially attacks skin cells, causing the characteristic pimples (called macules) associated with the disease.
His great-niece, Mary, Queen of Scots, contracted the disease as a child but had no visible scarring.
In the early, or fulminating form, hemorrhaging appears on the second or third day as sub-conjunctival bleeding turns the whites of the eyes deep red.
Smallpox was introduced into Australia in 1789 and again in 1829.
Microscopically, poxviruses produce characteristic cytoplasmic inclusions, the most important of which are known as Guarnieri bodies, and are the sites of viral replication.
Blindness resulting from corneal ulceration and scarring, and limb deformities due to arthritis and osteomyelitis were less common complications, seen in about 2–5 percent of cases.
Hemorrhagic smallpox also produces a dusky erythema, petechiae, and hemorrhages in the spleen, kidney, serosa, muscle, and, rarely, the epicardium, liver, testes, ovaries and bladder.
Fluid slowly leaked from the pustules, and by the end of the second week the pustules deflated, and started to dry up, forming crusts (or scabs).
In addition, a form called ''variola sine eruptione'' (smallpox without rash) was seen generally in vaccinated persons.
Unlike ordinary-type smallpox, the vesicles contained little fluid, were soft and velvety to the touch, and may have contained hemorrhages.
The palms of the hands and soles of the feet were involved in the majority of cases.
Other complications include encephalitis (1 in 500 patients), which is more common in adults and may cause temporary disability; permanent pitted scars, most notably on the face; and complications involving the eyes (2 percent of all cases).
It has been speculated that Egyptian traders brought smallpox to India during the 1st millennium BC, where it remained as an endemic human disease for at least 2000 years.
The disease was originally known in English as the "'''pox'''" or "'''red plague'''"; the term "smallpox" was first used in Britain in the 15th century to distinguish variola from the "great pox" (syphilis).
Age distribution of smallpox infections depends on acquired immunity.
The skin lesions tended to be fewer and evolve more quickly, are more superficial, and may not show the uniform characteristic of more typical smallpox.
General Prof. Peter Burgasov, former Chief Sanitary Physician of the Soviet Army and a senior researcher within the Soviet program of biological weapons, described the incident:
Washington became infected with smallpox on a visit to Barbados in 1751.
Smallpox vaccination within three days of exposure will prevent or significantly lessen the severity of smallpox symptoms in the vast majority of people.
This form of variola major is more easily confused with chickenpox.
In 1958 Professor Viktor Zhdanov, Deputy Minister of Health for the USSR, called on the World Health Assembly to undertake a global initiative to eradicate smallpox.
In March 2004 smallpox scabs were found inside an envelope in a book on Civil War medicine in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
While some have identified the Plague of Athens—which was said to have originated in "Ethiopia" and Egypt—or the plague that lifted Carthage's 396 BC siege of Syracuse with smallpox, many scholars agree it is very unlikely such a serious disease as variola major would have escaped being described by Hippocrates if it had existed in the Mediterranean region during his lifetime.
If successful, a red and itchy bump develops at the vaccine site in three or four days.
William III's wife, Mary II of England, died from smallpox as well.
The timing of the arrival of smallpox in Europe and south-western Asia is less clear.
The prodrome, or preeruptive stage, usually lasts 2–4 days.
With the breakup of the Soviet Union and unemployment of many of the weapons program's scientists, U.S. government officials have expressed concern that smallpox and the expertise to weaponize it may have become available to other governments or terrorist groups who might wish to use virus as means of biological warfare.
At this point variola major infection can take several very different courses, resulting in four types of smallpox disease based on the Rao classification: ordinary, modified, malignant (or flat), and hemorrhagic.
The last naturally occurring case of indigenous smallpox (''Variola minor'') was diagnosed in Ali Maow Maalin, a hospital cook in Merca, Somalia, on 26 October 1977.
If the victim recovered, the shrines were removed and carried away in a special paper chair or boat for burning.
Image:Smallpox CAM.png|Smallpox virus lesions on the chorioallantoic membrane of a developing chick.
India’s first records of smallpox can be found in a medical book that dates back to A.D. 400.
In one case series, the case-fatality rate in confluent smallpox was 62 percent.
There are also accounts that smallpox was used as a weapon during the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783).
Patients with ''variola minor'' experience only a mild systemic illness, are often ambulant throughout the course of the disease, and are therefore able to more easily spread disease.
This is consistent with archaeological and historical evidence regarding the appearance of smallpox as a human disease which suggests a relatively recent origin.
Louis XV of France succeeded his great-grandfather Louis XIV through a series of deaths of smallpox or measles among those earlier in the succession line.
By about 1817, a very solid state vaccination program existed in the Dutch East Indies.
Although some disliked these measures, coordinated efforts against smallpox went on, and the disease continued to diminish in the wealthy countries.
The British used smallpox as a biological warfare agent at the Siege of Fort Pitt during the French and Indian Wars (1754–1763) against France and its Native American allies.
As recently as 1967, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that 15 million people contracted the disease and that two million died in that year.
Respiratory complications tend to develop on about the eighth day of the illness and can be either viral or bacterial in origin.
There were two clinical forms of smallpox.
A later form of the disease occurs in patients who survive for 8–10 days.
The pustules were sharply raised, typically round, tense, and firm to the touch.
In fatal cases of ordinary smallpox, death usually occurs between the tenth and sixteenth days of the illness.
Studies of smallpox cases in Europe in the 1950s and 1960s demonstrated that the fatality rate among persons vaccinated less than 10 years before exposure was 1.3 percent; it was 7 percent among those vaccinated 11 to 20 years prior, and 11 percent among those vaccinated 20 or more years prior to infection.
During the Middle Ages, smallpox made periodic incursions into Europe but did not become established there until the population increased and population movement became more active during the era of the Crusades.
In 1947 the Soviet Union established a smallpox weapons factory in the city of Zagorsk, 75&nbsp;km to the northeast of Moscow.
Due to resistance from the U.S. and Russia, in 2002 the World Health Assembly agreed to permit the temporary retention of the virus stocks for specific research purposes.
The drug must be administered intravenously, however, and may cause serious kidney toxicity.
Smallpox is not clearly described in either the Old or New Testaments of the Bible or in the literature of the Greeks or Romans.
The Hindu goddess Shitala was both worshipped and feared during her reign.
The disease is also known by the Latin names '''''variola''''' or '''''variola vera''''', derived from ''varius'' ("spotted") or ''varus'' ("pimple").
However, all orthopoxviruses exhibit identical brick-shaped virions by electron microscopy.
In two months, the outbreak was over.
Prior to the JAS article this theory was disputed by some academics.
Shrines were created where many India natives, both healthy and not, went to worship and attempt to protect themselves from this disease.
Definitive laboratory identification of variola virus involves growing the virus on chorioallantoic membrane (part of a chicken embryo) and examining the resulting pock lesions under defined temperature conditions.
Insertion of the synthesized smallpox DNA into existing related pox viruses could theoretically be used to recreate the virus.
By 1800, approximately 2 million inoculations were administered in the Russian Empire.
The cause of death from smallpox is not clear, but the infection is now known to involve multiple organs.
minor'' caused a milder form of disease (also known as '''alastrim''', '''cottonpox''', '''milkpox''', '''whitepox''', and '''Cuban itch''') which killed about 1 percent of its victims.
In China, the smallpox goddess was referred to as T’ou-Shen Niang-Niang.
In Northern Europe a number of countries had eliminated smallpox by 1900, and by 1914, the incidence in most industrialized countries had decreased to comparatively low levels.
Famous historical figures who contracted smallpox include Lakota Chief Sitting Bull, Ramses V of Egypt, the Kangxi Emperor (survived), Shunzhi Emperor and Tongzhi Emperor (refer to the official history) of China, Date Masamune of Japan (who lost an eye to the disease).
He himself died of the disease in 1774.
The earliest procedure used to prevent smallpox was inoculation (known as variolation after the introduction of smallpox vaccine to avoid possible confusion), which likely occurred in India, Africa, and China well before the practice arrived in Europe.
Variola is a large brick-shaped virus measuring approximately 302 to 350 nanometers by 244 to 270&nbsp;nm, with a single linear double stranded DNA genome 186 kilobase pairs (kbp) in size and containing a hairpin loop at each end.
While it was noted that, in the 8-month voyage of the First Fleet and the following 14 months there were no reports of smallpox amongst the colonists and that as smallpox has an incubation period of 10–12 days it is unlikely it was present in the first fleet, it is now known that the likely source was bottles of smallpox virus possessed by First Fleet surgeons and there actually was a report of smallpox amongst the colonists - a seaman, Jefferies.
Infection with either variola major or variola minor confers immunity against the other.
Portraits of the goddess show her holding a broom in her right hand to continue to move the disease and a pot of cool water in the other hand in an attempt to soothe victims.
However, if the mutation rate is assumed to be similar to that of the herpesviruses, the divergence date between variola from Taterapox has been estimated to be 50,000 years ago.
His face was badly scarred by the disease.
Secondary bacterial infection of the skin is a relatively uncommon complication of smallpox.
As early as 1803, the Spanish Crown organized the Balmis expedition to transport the vaccine to the Spanish colonies in the Americas and the Philippines, and establish mass vaccination programs there.
It most likely evolved from a rodent virus between 68,000 and 16,000 years ago.
Variola minor was a less common presentation, and a much less severe disease, with historical death rates of 1 percent or less.
Prominent families throughout the world often had several people infected by and/or perish from the disease.
In this form the prodromal illness still occurred but may be less severe than in the ordinary type.
The diagnosis of an orthopoxvirus infection can also be made rapidly by electron microscopic examination of pustular fluid or scabs.
In a related New Year's Eve custom it was prescribed that the children of the house wear ugly masks while sleeping, so as to conceal any beauty and thereby avoid attracting the goddess, who would be passing through sometime that night.
In British India a program was launched to propagate smallpox vaccination, through Indian vaccinators, under the supervision of European officials.
As the digestive tract is commonly involved, nausea and vomiting and backache often occur.
Australia and New Zealand are two notable exceptions; neither experienced endemic smallpox and never vaccinated widely, relying instead on protection by distance and strict quarantines.
In early hemorrhagic smallpox, death occurs suddenly about six days after the fever develops.
As the campaign neared its goal, Fenner and his team played an important role in verifying eradication.
There are no credible descriptions of smallpox-like disease in the Americas before the westward exploration by Europeans in the 15th century AD.
In the initial growth phase the virus seems to move from cell to cell, but around the 12th day, lysis of many infected cells occurs and the virus is found in the bloodstream in large numbers (this is called ''viremia''), and a second wave of multiplication occurs in the spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes.
Vaccination continued in industrialized countries, until the mid to late 1970s as protection against reintroduction.
He later had photographs retouched to make his pockmarks less apparent.
Transmission occurs through inhalation of airborne variola virus, usually droplets expressed from the oral, nasal, or pharyngeal mucosa of an infected person.
Ordinary smallpox generally produced a discrete rash, in which the pustules stood out on the skin separately.
In the face of the devastation of smallpox, various smallpox gods and goddesses have been worshipped throughout parts of the Old World, for example in China and in India.
Smallpox was introduced into the Caribbean island of Hispaniola in 1509, and into the mainland in 1520, when Spanish settlers from Hispaniola arrived in Mexico bringing smallpox with them.
The current formulation of smallpox vaccine is a live virus preparation of infectious vaccinia virus.
Smallpox was responsible for an estimated 300–500 million deaths during the 20th century.
By the end of 1975, smallpox persisted only in the Horn of Africa.
This form of smallpox occurs in anywhere from 3 to 25 percent of fatal cases depending on the virulence of the smallpox strain.
