Smoking generally has negative health effects, because smoke inhalation inherently poses challenges to various physiologic processes such as respiration.
The Rastafari considered cannabis smoking to be a way to come closer to God, or Jah, an association that was greatly popularized by reggae icons such as Bob Marley and Peter Tosh in the 1960s and 70s.
Along with a smaller number of psychedelic drugs such as DMT, 5-Meo-DMT, and Salvia divinorum.
By the mid-17th century every major civilization had been introduced to tobacco smoking and in many cases had already assimilated it into its culture, despite the attempts of many rulers to stamp the practice out with harsh penalties or fines.
Education and counselling by physicians of children and adolescents has been found to be effective in decreasing the risk of tobacco use.
In the UK, the share of lung cancer among all cancer deaths in men increased from 1.5% in 1920 to 19.7% in 1947.
Tobacco and cannabis were used in Sub-Saharan Africa, much like elsewhere in the world, to confirm social relations, but also created entirely new ones.
The incomplete combustion produced by burning plant material, like tobacco or cannabis, produces carbon monoxide, which impairs the ability of blood to carry oxygen when inhaled into the lungs.
As scientific evidence mounted in the 1980s, tobacco companies claimed contributory negligence as the adverse health effects were previously unknown or lacked substantial credibility.
Female smokers in film were also early on associated with a type of sensuous and seductive sexuality, most notably personified by German film star Marlene Dietrich.
Although several carcinogens were already known at the time (for example, Benzo(a)pyrene|benzoapyrene was isolated from coal tar and demonstrated to be a potent carcinogen in 1933), none were known to be contained in adequate quantities in tobacco smoke.
In 1612, six years after the settlement of Jamestown, John Rolfe was credited as the first settler to successfully raise tobacco as a cash crop.
Per capita yearly cigarette consumption in post-war Germany steadily rose from 460 in 1950 to 1,523 in 1963.
The second most common substance that is smoked is cannabis, made from the flowers or leaves of ''Cannabis sativa'' or ''Cannabis indica''.
The social problems and the large net loss of currency led to several Chinese attempts to stop the imports which eventually culminated in the First and Second Opium Wars.
Most of these substances are controlled, and some are considerably more intoxicating than either tobacco or cannabis.
A U.S. female smoker that also smokes more than a pack a day can expect an average of $25,800 additional healthcare costs over her lifetime.
Many of the books were published in novel packaging that would attract the learned smoking gentleman.
Whether tobacco, cannabis, opium or herbs, some form of receptacle is required along with a source of fire to light the mixture.
Passive smoking, or secondhand smoking, which affects people in the immediate vicinity of smokers, is a major reason for the enforcement of smoking bans.
The most important chemicals causing cancer are those that produce DNA damage since such damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of cancer.
The inhaled substances trigger chemical reactions in nerve endings in the brain due to being similar to naturally occurring substances such as endorphins and dopamine, which are associated with sensations of pleasure.
Illegal smuggling of tobacco became prevalent, and leaders of the Nazi anti-smoking campaign were assassinated.
The most popular type of substance that is smoked is tobacco.
The movement in Nazi Germany did reach across enemy lines during the Second World War, as anti-smoking groups quickly lost popular support.
Later, scrupulous rulers would realise the futility of smoking bans and instead turned tobacco trade and cultivation into lucrative government monopolies.
Oxidative stress causing increased 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine
Reacts with deoxyguanine to form DNA adducts
In Japan during the Edo period, prostitutes and their clients would often approach one another under the guise of offering a smoke; the same was true for 19th-century Europe.
Like tea, coffee and opium, tobacco was just one of many intoxicants that was originally used as a form of medicine.
Four years later, in 1954 the British Doctors Study, a study of some 40 thousand doctors over 20 years, confirmed the link, based on which the government issued advice that smoking and lung cancer rates were related.
Thus, the apparent relaxant effect of smoking only reflects the reversal of the tension and irritability that develop during nicotine depletion.
Other than being a frequent part of short stories and novels, smoking has spawned endless eulogies, praising its qualities and affirming the author's identity as a devoted smoker.
Despite this decrease in the prevalence of consumption, the average number of cigarettes consumed per person per day increased from 22 in 1954 to 30 in 1978.
Many early paintings were of scenes set in taverns or brothels.
The growth remained stable until the American Civil War in 1860s, from which the primary labor force transition from slavery to share cropping.
Indentured servitude became the primary labor force up until Bacon's Rebellion, from which the focus turned to slavery.
Another form of modern popular music that has been closely associated with cannabis smoking is reggae, a style of music that originated in Jamaica in the late 1950s and early 60s.
Smokers often report that cigarettes help relieve feelings of stress.
However, the stress levels of adult smokers are slightly higher than those of nonsmokers.
Substances such as Cannabis, clarified butter (ghee), fish offal, dried snake skins and various pastes molded around incense sticks dates back at least 2000&nbsp;years.
For example, in Connecticut, reported age-adjusted incidence rates of lung cancer among males increased 220% between 1935–39 and 1950-54.
After an individual has smoked for many years, the avoidance of withdrawal symptoms and negative reinforcement become the key motivations.
A few other recreational drugs are smoked by smaller minorities.
The first report of a smoking Englishman is of a sailor in Bristol in 1556, seen "emitting smoke from his nostrils".
The rise of the modern anti-smoking movement in the late 19th century did more than create awareness of the hazards of smoking; it provoked reactions of smokers against what was, and often still is, perceived as an assault on personal freedom and has created an identity among smokers as rebels or outcasts, apart from non-smokers:
In 1964 the United States Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health demonstrated the relationship between smoking and cancer.
This is a law enforced to stop individuals smoking in indoor public places, such as bars, pubs and restaurants.
During the early stages, smoking provides pleasurable sensations (because of its action on the dopamine system) and thus serves as a source of positive reinforcement.
Proponents believe the theme of the exotic and alien "Other" escalated in the 19th century, fueled by the rise in the popularity of ethnology during the Enlightenment.
While the symbolism of the cigarette, pipe and cigar respectively were consolidated in the late 19th century, it was not until the 20th century that artists began to use it fully; a pipe would stand for thoughtfulness and calm; the cigarette symbolized modernity, strength and youth, but also nervous anxiety; the cigar was a sign of authority, wealth and power.
The consumption of Opium abated in China during the Cultural revolution in the 1960s and 1970s.
This became a motivator to settle west into the unknown continent, and likewise an expansion of tobacco production.
Water pipes are also fairly common, and when used for cannabis are called bongs.
The substance is considered illegal in most countries in the world and in those countries that tolerate public consumption, it is usually only pseudo-legal.
The English language term ''smoking'' was coined in the late 18th century; before then the practice was referred to as ''drinking smoke''.
Smoking has been accepted into culture, in various art forms, and has developed many distinct, and often conflicting or mutually exclusive, meanings depending on time, place and the practitioners of smoking.
Many ancient civilizations, such as the Babylonians, Indians and Chinese, burnt incense as a part of religious rituals, as did the Israelites and the later Catholic and Orthodox Christian churches.
This trend has been paralleled by many industrialized nations as rates have either leveled-off or declined.
Smoking could also be used as a means to subvert censorship, as two cigarettes burning unattended in an ashtray were often used to suggest sexual activity.
Recent years shows an increase in the consumption of vaporized heroin, methamphetamine and Phencyclidine (PCP).
This is due to smoking tobacco being among the leading causes of many diseases such as lung cancer, heart attacks, COPD, erectile dysfunction, and birth defects.
This trend abated following the American revolution as slavery became regarded as unprofitable.
Single and double strand breaks in DNA
Far from acting as an aid for mood control, nicotine dependency seems to exacerbate stress.
In the mid-20th century psychologists such as Hans Eysenck developed a personality profile for the typical smoker of that period; extraversion was associated with smoking, and smokers tended to be sociable, impulsive, risk taking, and excitement-seeking individuals.
Tobacco, both product and plant, followed the major trade routes to major ports and markets, and then on into the hinterlands.
The titles were written by men for other men and contained general tidbits and poetic musings about the love for tobacco and all things related to it, and frequently praised the refined bachelor's life.
Dependent smokers need nicotine to remain feeling normal.
Despite this, a considerable percentage of the adult population in many countries have tried it with smaller minorities doing it on a regular basis.
In the early 1980s, organized international drug trafficking grew.
By the end of the 20th century, anti-smoking campaigns in Germany were unable to exceed the effectiveness of the Nazi-era climax in the years 1939–41 and German tobacco health research was described by Robert N. Proctor as "muted".
DNA-protein crosslinks causing chromosome deletions and re-arrangements
In Europe, it introduced a new type of social activity and a form of drug intake which previously had been unknown.
This is confirmed in the daily mood patterns described by smokers, with normal moods during smoking and worsening moods between cigarettes.
Cigarettes are primarily industrially manufactured but also can be hand-rolled from loose tobacco and rolling paper.
The non-linear dose response relationship is explained by smoking's effect on platelet aggregation.
The Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, originally between the four largest US tobacco companies and the Attorneys General of 46 states, restricted certain types of tobacco advertisement and required payments for health compensation; which later amounted to the largest civil settlement in United States history.
These works were all published in an era before the cigarette had become the dominant form of tobacco consumption and pipes, cigars, and chewing tobacco were still commonplace.
Also, smoking can be seen as a sort of camaraderie.
Murad IV, sultan of the Ottoman Empire 1623-40 was among the first to attempt a smoking ban by claiming it was a threat to public morality and health.
Other smoking implements include pipes, cigars, bidis, hookahs, vaporizers, and bongs.
There have been few examples of tobacco in music in early modern times, though there are occasional signs of influence in pieces such as Johann Sebastian Bach's ''Enlightening Thoughts of a Tobacco-Smoker''.
Global loss of DNA methylation (an epigenetic effect) as well as DNA adducts
At first smoking was considered lowly and was associated with peasants.
Reacts with deoxyguanine and forms DNA crosslinks, DNA-protein crosslinks and DNA adducts
Fumigation (''dhupa'') and fire offerings (''homa'') are prescribed in the Ayurveda for medical purposes, and have been practiced for at least 3,000&nbsp;years while smoking, ''dhumrapana'' (literally "drinking smoke"), has been practiced for at least 2,000&nbsp;years.
Richard Doll in 1950 published research in the British Medical Journal showing a close link between smoking and lung cancer.
In Germany, anti-smoking groups, often associated with anti-liquor groups, first published advocacy against the consumption of tobacco in the journal ''Der Tabakgegner'' (The Tobacco Opponent) in 1912 and 1932.
Other than recreational drug use, it can be used to construct identity and a development of self-image by associating it with personal experiences connected with smoking.
Most commonly the substance is the dried leaves of the tobacco plant which have been rolled into a small square of rice paper to create a small, round cylinder called a "cigarette".
Soon after smoking was introduced outside of the Americas it began appearing in painting in Europe and Asia.
Other than actual smoking equipment, many other items are associated with smoking; cigarette cases, cigar boxes, lighters, matchboxes, cigarette holders, cigar holders, ashtrays, silent butlers, pipe cleaners, tobacco cutters, match stands, pipe tampers, cigarette companions and so on.
The corresponding estimates for lifelong nonsmokers are a 1.1% probability of dying from lung cancer before age 85 for a man of European descent, and a 0.8% probability for a woman.
Many governments are trying to deter people from smoking with anti-smoking campaigns in mass media stressing the harmful long-term effects of smoking.
Tobacco smoking is the most popular form, being practiced by over one billion people globally, of whom the majority are in the developing world.
Since cannabis is illegal or only tolerated in most jurisdictions, there is no industrial mass-production of cigarettes, meaning that the most common form of smoking is with hand-rolled cigarettes (often called joints) or with pipes.
Jazz was from early on closely intertwined with the smoking that was practiced in the venues where it was played, such as bars, dance halls, jazz clubs and even brothels.
The seven most important carcinogens in tobacco smoke are shown in the table, along with DNA alterations they cause.
The rise of jazz coincided with the expansion of the modern tobacco industry, and in the United States also contributed to the spread of cannabis.
Smoking in public has for a long time been something reserved for men and when done by women has been associated with promiscuity.
Tobacco advertising is also sometimes regulated to make smoking less appealing.
This has resulted in a staggering variety of smoking tools and paraphernalia from all over the world.
In Africa, smoking is in most areas considered to be modern, and many of the strong adverse opinions that prevail in the West receive much less attention.
Smoking represented pleasure, transience and the briefness of earthly life as it, quite literally, went up in smoke.
The Western church leader Urban VII likewise condemned smoking in a papal bull of 1590.
In the 18th century smoking became far more sparse in painting as the elegant practice of taking snuff became popular.
Although personality and social factors may make people likely to smoke, the actual habit is a function of operant conditioning.
''The Fragrant Weed: Some of the Good Things Which Have been Said or Sung about Tobacco'', published in 1907, contained, among many others, the following lines from the poem ''A Bachelor's Views'' by Tom Hall that were typical of the attitude in many of the books:
Similarly, actors like Humphrey Bogart and Audrey Hepburn have been closely identified with their smoker persona, and some of their most famous portraits and roles have involved them being haloed by a mist of cigarette smoke.
The demand quickly grew as tobacco, referred to as "golden weed", revived the Virginia join stock company from its failed gold expeditions.
Though nicotine is a highly addictive drug, its effects on cognition are not as intense or noticeable as other drugs such as cocaine, amphetamines or any of the opiates (including heroin and morphine).
''Pipe and Pouch'' came in a leather bag resembling a tobacco pouch and ''Cigarettes in Fact and Fancy'' (1901) came bound in leather, packaged in an imitation cardboard cigar box.
Diseases related to tobacco smoking have been shown to kill approximately half of long term smokers when compared to average mortality rates faced by non-smokers.
Some examples of these have become valuable collector items and particularly ornate and antique items can fetch high prices.
For adolescents, it can function as a first step out of childhood or as an act of rebellion against the adult world.
Cannabis smoking was introduced to Sub-Saharan Africa through Ethiopia and the east African coast by either Indian or Arab traders in the 13th century or earlier and spread on the same trade routes as those that carried coffee, which originated in the highlands of Ethiopia.
A 2007 report states that, each year, about 4.9 million people worldwide  die as a result of smoking.
One of the forerunners of this symbolism can be seen in Fritz Lang's Weimar era ''Dr Mabuse, der Spieler'', 1922 (''Dr Mabuse, the Gambler''), where men mesmerized by card playing smoke cigarettes while gambling.
Estimates claim that smokers cost the U.S. economy $97.6 billion a year in lost productivity, and that an additional $96.7 billion is spent on public and private health care combined.
Smoking rates in the United States have dropped by half from 1965 to 2006, falling from 42% to 20.8% in adults.
While opium dens that catered primarily to emigrant Chinese continued to exist in China Towns around the world, the trend among the European artists largely abated after the outbreak of World War I.
The popularity of marijuana among jazz musicians remained high until the 1940s and 50s, when it was partially replaced by the use of heroin.
Impressionists like Vincent van Gogh, who was a pipe smoker himself, would also begin to associate smoking with gloom and ''fin-du-siècle'' fatalism.
Opium smoking later spread with Chinese immigrants and spawned many infamous opium dens in China towns around South and Southeast Asia and Europe.
8% of long-term smokers develop the characteristic set of facial changes known to doctors as smoker's face.
A small number of psychedelic drugs are also smoked, including DMT, 5-Meo-DMT, and Salvia divinorum.
combined the microgram weight of the compound in the smoke of one cigarette with the known genotoxic effect per microgram to identify the most carcinogenic compounds in cigarette smoke.
This can be used to administer useful medical as well as recreational drugs such as aerosols, consisting of tiny droplets of a medication, or as gas produced by burning plant material with a psychoactive substance or pure forms of the substance itself.
Smoking has elements of risk-taking and rebellion, which often appeal to young people.
Health authorities sided with these claims up until 1998, from which they reversed their position.
The decades following World War II, during the apex of smoking when the practice had still not come under fire by the growing anti-smoking movement, a cigarette casually tucked between the lips represented the young rebel, epitomized in actors like Marlon Brando and James Dean or mainstays of advertising like the Marlboro Man.
The smoking of tobacco, as well as various hallucinogenic drugs was used to achieve trances and to come into contact with the spirit world.
The image of the smoker can vary considerably, but is very often associated, especially in fiction, with individuality and aloofness.
In order to meet demands from the old world, tobacco was grown in succession, quickly depleting the land.
The presence of high-status models and peers may also encourage smoking.
In his painting "Holy Smokes", artist Brian Whelan pokes fun at the smoking debate and its newly found focus on morality and guilt.
Smoking was also associated with representations of both the sense of smell and that of taste.
Smoking, primarily of tobacco, is an activity that is practiced by some 1.1&nbsp;billion people, and up to 1/3 of the adult population.
In the 19th century smoking was common as a symbol of simple pleasures; the pipe smoking "noble savage", solemn contemplation by Classical Roman ruins, scenes of an artists becoming one with nature while slowly toking a pipe.
As part of the Marshall Plan, the United States shipped free tobacco to Germany; with 24,000 tons in 1948 and 69,000&nbsp;tons in 1949.
This compounded with a change in demand, lead to the industrialization of tobacco production with the cigarette.
Smoking on screen is more common today among characters who are portrayed as anti-social or even criminal.
Smoking can be dated to as early as 5000 BC, and has been recorded in many different cultures across the world.
Smoking, especially after the introduction of tobacco, was an essential component of Muslim society and culture and became integrated with important traditions such as weddings, funerals and was expressed in architecture, clothing, literature and poetry.
Cannabis smoking was common in the Middle East before the arrival of tobacco, and was early on a common social activity that centered around the type of water pipe called a hookah.
After the European exploration and conquest of the Americas, the practice of smoking tobacco quickly spread to the rest of the world.
As a way to amend this problem, the British began exporting large amounts of opium grown in the Indian colonies.
Adolescent smokers report increasing levels of stress as they develop regular patterns of smoking, and smoking cessation leads to reduced stress.
From 1965 to 2006, rates of smoking in the United States have declined from 42% to 20.8%.
Before modern times these substances have been consumed through pipes, with stems of various lengths or chillums.
In the developing world, however, tobacco consumption continues to rise at 3.4% in 2002.
Micrograms per cigarette
Rates of smoking have leveled off or declined in the developed world but continue to rise in developing countries.
The lungs consist of several million tiny bulbs called alveoli that altogether have an area of over 70 m² (about the area of a tennis court).
Many developing countries have not adopted anti-smoking policies, leading some to call for anti-smoking campaigns and further education to explain the negative effects of ETS (Environmental Tobacco Smoke) in developing countries.
In the hard boiled ''film noir'' crime thrillers, cigarette smoke often frames characters and is frequently used to add an aura of mystique or nihilism.
Not all drugs can be smoked, for example the sulphate derivative that is most commonly inhaled through the nose, though purer free base forms of substances can, but often require considerable skill in administering the drug properly.
In some cultures, smoking is also carried out as a part of various rituals, where participants use it to help induce trance-like states that, they believe, can lead them to "spiritual enlightenment".
Further reports confirmed this link in the 1980s and concluded in 1986 that passive smoking was also harmful.
Smoking during pregnancy may cause ADHD to a fetus.
A massive increase in opium smoking in China was more or less directly instigated by the British trade deficit with Qing dynasty China.
Like all addictive substances, the amount of exposure required to become dependent on nicotine can vary from person to person.
However the practice was revived in 1794 with the invention of the cotton gin.
Smoking a cigarette or a cigar would also become associated with the bohemian, someone who shunned the conservative middle class values and displayed his contempt for conservatism.
The idea behind this is to discourage smoking by making it more inconvenient, and to stop harmful smoke being present in enclosed public spaces.
Until the mid-20th century, the majority of the adult population in many Western nations were smokers and the claims of anti-smoking activists were met with much skepticism, if not outright contempt.
Perception surrounding smoking has varied over time and from one place to another: holy and sinful, sophisticated and vulgar, a panacea and deadly health hazard.
In Edo period Japan, some of the earliest tobacco plantations were scorned by the shogunate as being a threat to the military economy by letting valuable farmland go to waste for the use of a recreational drug instead of being used to plant food crops.
It was smoked in calabash water pipes with terra cotta smoking bowls, apparently an Ethiopian invention which was later conveyed to eastern, southern and central Africa.
This paradoxical event suggests that those who quit smoked less, while those who continued to smoke moved to smoke more light cigarettes.
By the late 1920s, the publication of this type of literature largely abated and was only sporadically revived in the later 20th century.
With the modernization of cigarette production compounded with the increased life expectancies during the 1920s, adverse health effects began to become more prevalent.
The latter went under names like "tea", "muggles" and "reefer" in the jazz community and was so influential in the 1920s and 30s that it found its way into songs composed at the time such as Louis Armstrong's ''Muggles'' Larry Adler's ''Smoking Reefers'' and Don Redman's ''Chant of The Weed''.
Lighting a cigarette is often seen as an effective way of avoiding the appearance of idleness or mere loitering.
Other popular smoking tools are various pipes and cigars.
Later, as the Dutch Republic rose to considerable power and wealth, smoking became more common amongst the affluent and portraits of elegant gentlemen tastefully raising a pipe appeared.
When smoking appeared it was often in the exotic portraits influenced by Orientalism.
Despite the many bans, European countries still hold 18 of the top 20 spots, and according to the ERC, a market research company, the heaviest smokers are from Greece, averaging 3,000 cigarettes per person in 2007.
A male smoker in the United States that smokes more than one pack a day can expect an average increase of $19,000 just in medical expenses over the course of his lifetime.
The effects of addiction on society vary considerably between different substances that can be smoked and the indirect social problems that they cause, in great part because of the differences in legislation and the enforcement of narcotics legislation around the world.
However, compounded with overproduction and tighter legal enforcement for the illegal product, drug dealers decided to convert the powder to "crack" - a solid, smoke-able form of cocaine, that could be sold in smaller quantities, to more people.
In 1929, Fritz Lickint of Dresden, Germany, published a paper containing formal statistical evidence of a lung cancer–tobacco link.
Tobacco was introduced around 1600 by French merchants in what today is modern-day Gambia and Senegal.
Especially during the late 19th century and early 20th century, a panoply of books with titles like ''Tobacco: Its History and associations'' (1876), ''Cigarettes in Fact and Fancy'' (1906) and ''Pipe and Pouch: The Smokers Own Book of Poetry'' (1905) were written in the UK and the US.
Most tobacco smokers begin during adolescence or early adulthood.
In the latter half of the 19th century, opium smoking became popular in the artistic community in Europe, especially Paris; artists' neighborhoods such as Montparnasse and Montmartre became virtual "opium capitals".
A less common but increasingly popular alternative to smoking is vaporizers, which use hot air convection to deliver the substance without combustion, which may reduce health risks.
Since World War II, smoking has gradually become less frequent on screen as the obvious health hazards of smoking have become more widely known.
During the Great Depression, Adolf Hitler condemned his earlier smoking habit as a waste of money, and later with stronger assertions.
With the anti-smoking movement gaining greater respect and influence, conscious attempts not to show smoking on screen are now undertaken in order to avoid encouraging smoking or giving it positive associations, particularly for family films.
Smoking is one of the leading causes of preventable death globally.
Less common drugs for smoking include cannabis and opium.
It was not until the start of the 20th century that smoking women would appear in paintings and photos, giving a chic and charming impression.
Today the movement has considerably more weight and evidence of its claims, but a considerable proportion of the population remains steadfast smokers.
Smoking one cigarette a day results in a risk of heart disease that is halfway between that of a smoker and a non-smoker.
Many proponents of post-colonial theory controversially believe this portrayal was a means of projecting an image of European superiority over its colonies and a perception of the male dominance of a feminized Orient.
Even the most primitive form of smoking requires tools of some sort to perform.
In the UK and the USA, an increase in lung cancer rates, formerly "among the rarest forms of disease", was noted by the 1930s, but its cause remained unknown and even the credibility of this increase was sometimes disputed as late as 1950.
Previously it had only been eaten, and then primarily for its medical properties.
