However, aside from restoring salmon runs, dam removal proponents argue that the power is replaceable, that the grain transportation system could be replaced by railroads, and that only one of the four reservoirs supplies irrigation water.
The lake was stable and survived for nearly 30,000&nbsp;years.
Several species of frogs are common in the "lost streams" basin and the northeasternmost part of the Snake River watershed, including the inland tailed frog, northern leopard frog, western toad, Columbia spotted frog, long-toed salamander, spadefoot toad.
Since the early 20th&nbsp;century, when Swan Falls Dam was constructed on the middle Snake River upstream of Hells Canyon, the fifteen dams and reservoirs on the river have posed an increasing problem for migrating salmon.
This was one of the first in a series of catastrophic flooding events in the Northwest known as the Ice Age Floods.
The Snake River watershed is bounded by several other major North American watersheds, which drain both to the Atlantic or the Pacific, or into endorheic basins.
However, Minidoka Dam was not the only dam constructed for the project.
All three dams are primarily for power generation and flood control, and do not have fish passage or navigation locks.
The Snake River watershed includes parts of Yellowstone National Park, Grand Teton National Park, Hells Canyon National Recreation Area, and many other national and state parks.
Agricultural runoff and water held in reservoirs higher upstream on the Snake warm its waters as it flows through the Snake River Plain, so as the Snake meets the Clearwater, its average temperature is much higher.
The Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804–06) was the first American group to cross the Rocky Mountains and sail down the Snake and Columbia rivers to the Pacific Ocean.
There are 14 fish species found in the Upper Snake region that do not occur elsewhere in the Columbia's watershed, but which do occur in Bonneville freshwater ecoregion of western Utah, part of the Great Basin and related to the prehistoric Lake Bonneville.
By the middle 19th&nbsp;century, the Oregon Trail, a pioneer trail of which a major portion followed the Snake River, had been established by aspiring settlers and traders.
The historical barrier to fish migration on the Snake River was Shoshone Falls, a waterfall that occurs as the Snake River passes through the Snake River Plain.
Water diverted from the river for irrigation, after absorbing any surface pollutants, re-enters the ground and feeds the aquifer.
Rugged mountains divided by rolling plains characterize the physiographically diverse watershed of the Snake River.
The confluence with the Henrys Fork takes the river southwards through downtown Idaho Falls, rounding the Fort Hall Indian Reservation and into American Falls Reservoir, receiving the Portneuf River.
For miles on either side of the Snake, flood waters stripped away soils and scoured the underlying basalt bedrock, in the process creating Shoshone Falls, Twin Falls, Crane Falls, and Swan Falls, while cutting and deepening gorges and canyons along the way.
About 6&nbsp;million years ago, the Salmon River Mountains and Blue Mountains at the far end of the plain began to rise, and as the river cut through the rising mountains, the ancestral Hells Canyon was formed.
It is of note that the northeastern divide of the Snake River watershed forms the Idaho-Montana boundary, so the Snake River watershed does not extend into Montana.
The party later traveled north, descended the Lemhi River to the Salmon and attempted to descend it to the Snake, but found it impassable because of its violent rapids.
The first dam constructed for the project was Minidoka Dam in 1904; its power plant began operating in 1909, producing 7&nbsp;MW of electricity.
Especially in the headwaters and the other mountainous areas strewn throughout the watershed, the gray wolf, grizzly bear, wolverine, mountain lion and Canada lynx are common.
However, fish passage is limited to the stretch below Hells Canyon.
There are also high, often localized levels of mollusc endemism, especially in Hells Canyon and the basins of the Clearwater River, Salmon River, and middle Snake River.
At Twin Falls, in the center of the Snake River Plain, the climate is nearly desert, with an annual rainfall of just , although the average snowfall is .
Irrigation dams include American Falls Dam, Minidoka Dam, and C.J.
Irrigation pumps for fields in southeastern Washington would also have to reach further to access the water of the Snake River.
Several of these have been proposed for removal in order to restore some of the river's once-tremendous salmon runs.
Other products barged on the lower Snake River include peas, lentils, forest products, and petroleum.
Close to Twin Falls, the Snake approaches the southernmost point in its entire course, after which it starts to flow generally northwest.
Hells Canyon is one of the most rugged and treacherous portions of the course of the Snake River, which pioneers on the Oregon Trail and steamboat operators in the 19th&nbsp;century had great difficulty negotiating.
In 1810, Andrew Henry, along with a party of fur trappers, discovered the Henrys Fork of the Snake River, which is now named after him.
It has been determined that there are 97 species of mammals in the upper part of the Snake River, upstream from the Henrys Fork confluence.
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) divides the Snake River's watershed into two freshwater ecoregions: the "Columbia Unglaciated" ecoregion and the "Upper Snake" ecoregion.
These boats were the ''Harvest Queen'', ''John Gates'', ''Spokane'', ''Annie Faxon'', ''Mountain Queen'', ''R.R.
The three dams of the project, Brownlee Dam, Oxbow Dam and Hells Canyon Dam, are located in upper Hells Canyon.
There it is also met by the Salt River at the mouth of Star Valley.
Lava flowing from Cedar Butte in present southeast Idaho blocked the Snake River at Eagle Rock, about 42,000&nbsp;years ago, near the present-day site of American Falls Dam.
Explorers misinterpreted it to represent a snake, giving the river its present-day name.
As the Bonneville Floods rushed down the Snake River, the Missoula Floods occurred in the same period, but farther north.
In the upper parts of the watershed, however, the river flows through an area with a distinct alpine climate.
In the eastern Snake River Plain there is some evidence of Clovis, Folsom, and Plano cultures dating back over 10,000 years ago.
One such trading center in the Weiser area existed as early as 4,500 years ago.
The deluge caused American Falls Lake to breach its natural lava dam, which was rapidly eroded with only the  American Falls left in the end.
The Missoula Floods, which took place more than 40 times in the time span from 15,000 to 13,000 years ago, were caused by Glacial Lake Missoula on the Clark Fork repeatedly being impounded by ice dams then breaking through, with the lake's water rushing over much of eastern Washington in massive surges far larger than the Lake Bonneville Flood.
The river supported species including chinook salmon, coho salmon, and sockeye salmon, as well as steelhead, white sturgeon, and Pacific lamprey.
Below Shoshone Falls, the economy centered on salmon, who often came up the river in enormous numbers.
The Wood River sculpin (''Cottus leiopomus'') is endemic to the Wood River.
The lower Columbia River has likewise been dammed for navigation.
Fertilizer, manure and other chemicals and pollutants washed into the river greatly increase the nutrient load, especially of phosphorus, fecal coliforms and nitrogen.
Overall, these combined efforts have had good success.
The aquifer filled to hold nearly  of water, underlying about  in a plume  thick.
The '''Snake River''' is a major river of the greater Pacific Northwest in the United States.
Irrigators in the Snake River Plain would likely need to allow less water into the Snake River during low flow in order to create a current in the four lower reservoirs, and recreation and tourism would likely benefit.
The elevation of the Snake River is  when it joins the Columbia River.
Before the completion of the lower Snake dams, grain from the region was transported by truck or rail to Columbia River ports around the Tri-Cities.
By the middle 19th&nbsp;century, the Oregon Trail had been established, generally following much of the Snake River.
In the 18th&nbsp;century, Shoshone territory extended beyond the Snake River Plain, extending over the Continental Divide into the upper Missouri River watershed and even further north into Canada.
The mollusc richness extends into the lower Columbia River and tributaries such as the Deschutes River.
However, the area was eventually annexed into the United States.
There were hundreds of rapids in Hells Canyon, some of which have been stilled by the three dams of the Hells Canyon Hydroelectric Project: Hells Canyon, Oxbow, and Brownlee.
After the first irrigation dams on the river begun operation in the first decade of the 20th&nbsp;century, much of the arable land in a strip a few miles wide along the Snake River was cultivated or turned to pasture, and agricultural return flows began to pollute the Snake.
The Snake River resumes its journey westwards, then enters the Snake River Canyon of Idaho, where it drops over Shoshone Falls, a waterfall that marks the historical upriver limit of migrating salmon, and passing under the Perrine Bridge.
Immediately below Ice Harbor Dam is Lake Wallula, formed by the construction of the McNary Dam on the Columbia River.
Above the falls, life was significantly different.
The powerful, steep flow of the Snake River has been used since the 1890s to generate hydroelectricity, enhance navigation, and provide irrigation water from fifteen major dams built on the lower river, transforming it into a series of reservoirs.
The rest of the Plateau area is characterized by low hills, dry lakes, and an arid, nearly desert climate.
Aside from aquatic species, much of the Snake River watershed supports larger animals including numerous species of mammals, birds, amphibians, and reptiles.
In 1893 the ''Annie Faxon'' suffered a boiler explosion and sank on the Snake below Lewiston.
More than 11,000 years ago, prehistoric Native Americans lived along the Snake.
The party of three traveled into the headwaters of the Owyhee River, a major southern tributary of the Snake, but disappeared.
These dams are, in downstream order: Lower Granite Lock and Dam, Little Goose Lock and Dam, Lower Monumental Lock and Dam, and Ice Harbor Lock and Dam.
In the summer of 2006, the Snake River reportedly only had 3 sockeye salmon that returned to their spawning grounds.In the summer of 2013, more than 13,000 sockeye salmon returned to the spawning grounds.
At its height, there were at least 27 Nez Perce settlements along the Clearwater River and 11 more on the Snake between the mouth of the Clearwater and Imnaha Rivers.
These floods pooled behind the Cascade Range into enormous lakes and spilled over the northern drainage divide of the Snake River watershed, carving deep canyons through the Palouse Hills.
However, there are almost no wild sockeye salmon left in the river due to a number of factors.
Its first  run through the valley of Jackson Hole, which cuts between the Teton Range and the Continental Divide.
After passing through Palisades Dam, the Snake River flows through the Snake River Plain, a vast physiographic province extending through southern Idaho across the massif of the Rocky Mountains and underlain by the Snake River Aquifer, one of the most productive aquifers in the United States.
Idaho's Snake river once teemed with sockeye salmon.
There are fifteen dams in total along the Snake River, which aside from irrigation, also produce electricity, maintain a navigation channel along part of the river's route, and provide flood control.
On the south, the Snake watershed borders that of the Humboldt River in Nevada, and the watershed of the Great Salt Lake (the Bear, Jordan and Weber rivers) on the south.
But at the border of Idaho and Oregon, near Weiser at the beginning of Hells Canyon, the Snake's flow rises to  after receiving several major tributaries such as the Payette, Owyhee and Malheur.
The Grand Coulee Dam also blocks spawning grounds to the famous "June Hogs" (legendary Chinook salmon that weighed over ).
Above Lower Granite Dam, the river channel from Lewiston to Johnson Bar, just below Hells Canyon, is also maintained for jet-boats as this section is too rugged for ships.
The Palouse River canyon was the largest of the many gorges cut through the Palouse Hills, and could not have become as large as it now is if it were not for the Missoula Floods.
The Snake River begins to define the roughly  Idaho–Oregon state border, which follows the river into Hells Canyon, a steep and spectacular gorge that cuts through the Salmon River Mountains and Blue Mountains of Idaho and Oregon.
Aside from water from the river, water is also pulled from the Snake River Aquifer for irrigation.
As recently as 165&nbsp;million years ago, most of western North America was still part of the Pacific Ocean.
The high hydraulic conductivity of the mostly-basalt rocks in the plain led to the formation of the Snake River Aquifer, one of the most productive aquifers in North America.
The basin ranges from semi-desert to alpine climates, providing habitat for hundreds of species of plants.
Agricultural products from Idaho and eastern Washington are among the main goods transported by barge on the Snake and Columbia rivers.
The Shoshone sculpin (''Cottus greenei'') is endemic to the small portion of the Snake River between Shoshone Falls and the Wood River.
The expedition named the Snake River the ''Lewis River'', ''Lewis's River'', or ''Lewis Fork'', in his honor, and they traveled northwards to the Lochsa River, which they traveled via the Clearwater River into the lower Snake, and into the Columbia.
The Bannock brought with them the skill of buffalo hunting and horses they had acquired from Europeans, changing the Shoshone way of life significantly.
These dams form a cascade of reservoirs with no stretches of free-flowing river in between.
Many factors have influenced the construction of dams along the Snake River.
However, the lodgepole pine has increased in number, taking over historic stands of other conifers.
Its watershed is the 10th largest among North American rivers, and covers almost  in portions of six U.S. states: Wyoming, Idaho, Nevada, Utah, Oregon, and Washington, with the largest portion in Idaho.
However, in the lower and middle portions of the Snake River watershed, several native species have been severely impacted by agriculture practices and the resulting non-native species supported by them.
There are also stretches where the river and its tributaries have incised themselves into tight gorges.
Most of the Snake River watershed lies between the Rocky Mountains on the east and the Columbia Plateau on the northwest.
The massive amounts of sediment deposited by the Lake Bonneville Floods in the Snake River Plain also had a lasting effect on most of the middle Snake River.
This capacity was revised to 20&nbsp;MW in 1993.
Paradoxically, the combination of these factors gives the young salmon further time to grow and to feed in Lower Granite Lake, so when they begin the migration to the Pacific Ocean, they often have a higher chance at survival, compared to those salmon who migrate to the ocean earlier.
Lifestyles along the Snake River varied widely.
Riparian zones, wetlands and marshes once occurred along the length of the Snake River and its tributaries.
The rest of the Snake River watershed borders on several other major Columbia River tributaries - mostly the Spokane River to the north, but also Clark Fork in Montana to the northeast and the John Day River to the west.
Finally, a third cascade of dams, from Hells Canyon to the mouth, facilitates navigation.
Dredging work was also done throughout the length of the navigation channel to facilitate ship passage.
Later explorers and fur trappers further changed and used the resources of the Snake River basin.
Separate volcanic activity formed the northwestern portion of the plain, an area far from the path of the hotspot which now lies beneath Yellowstone National Park.
A smallpox epidemic brought by European explorers and fur trappers was responsible for wiping out much of the Shoshone east of the Rocky Mountains, but the Shoshone continued to occupy the Snake River Plain.
The Snake River's average flow is .
Much of the area along the river, within a few miles of its banks, is irrigated farmland, especially in its middle and lower course.
On the Snake River in southeastern Washington there are several ancient sites.
By the 1870s, the OSN Company, owned by the Northern Pacific Railroad, was operating seven steamboats for transporting wheat and grain from the productive Palouse region along the Snake and Columbia to lower Columbia River ports.
Ten amphibian and twenty species of reptiles inhabit the upper Snake River's wetland and riparian zones.
In the 1960s and 1970s the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built four dams and locks on the lower Snake River to facilitate shipping.
Compared to the lower Snake River and the rest of the Columbia River's watershed, the Upper Snake ecoregion has a high level of endemism, especially among freshwater molluscs such as snails and clams.
The Shoshone or Shoshoni were characterized by nomadic groups that took their culture from the earlier Bitterroot culture and Great Basin tribes that migrated north via the Owyhee River.
Hells Canyon Dam was the last and most downriver of the three, was constructed in 1967 and generates 450&nbsp;MW.
By the time Lewis and Clark crossed the Rockies and sighted the valley of a Snake tributary, the Nez Perce and Shoshone were the most powerful peoples in the region.
Runoff from several feedlots was dumped into the river until laws made the practice illegal.
According to legend, the Nez Perce tribe was first founded in the valley of the Clearwater River, one of the Snake River's lowermost major tributaries.
The lowest recorded daily mean flow was  on February&nbsp;4, 1979.
One of the oldest and most well-known is called the Marmes Rockshelter, which was used from over 11,000 years ago to relatively recent times.
The Marmes Rockshelter was flooded in 1968 by Lake Herbert G. West, the Lower Monumental Dam's reservoir.
The largest tributary of the Columbia River, the Snake River watershed makes up about 41% of the entire Columbia River Basin.
Meriwether Lewis supposedly became the first American to sight the drainage basin of the Snake River after he crossed the mountains a few days ahead of his party on August&nbsp;12, 1805, and sighted the Salmon River valley (a major Snake tributary) from Lemhi Pass, a few miles from the present-day site of Salmon, Idaho.
During this period people drew upon a wide variety of food resources.
At the confluence of the Snake and Clearwater Rivers, young salmon that swim down from spawning gravels in the headwaters of the Clearwater River often delay their migrations because of a significant temperature difference.
The Lake Bonneville Floods and the Missoula Floods helped widen and deepen the Columbia River Gorge, a giant water gap which allows water from the Columbia and Snake rivers to take a direct route through the Cascade Range to the Pacific.
The shipping channel is authorized to be at least  deep and  wide.
Between here and Hells Canyon, the first dam on the Snake, Swan Falls Dam, was built in 1901.
Other non-native species include the bullfrog, brown-headed cowbird, and European starling, attracted by the construction of cities and towns.
Eventually, the Shoshone culture merged with that of the Paiute and Bannock tribes, which came from the Great Basin and the Hells Canyon area, respectively.
A total of fifteen dams have been constructed along the Snake River for a multitude of different purposes, from its headwaters in the Rocky Mountains to its mouth on Lake Wallula, a slackwater reservoir formed behind McNary Dam on the Columbia River.
About 14,500&nbsp;years ago, pluvial Lake Bonneville in the Great Salt Lake area, formed in the last glacial period, spilled catastrophically down the Portneuf River into the Snake in an event known as the Bonneville Flood.
Because of deforestation, up to one quarter of the forests have been taken over by sagebrush, leaving the remaining forests to cover about 15% of the watershed.
Much of the water lost by the Snake River as it transects the plain issues back into the river at its western end, by way of many artesian springs.
The Snake River Plain and the gap between the Sierra Nevada and Cascade Range formed a "moisture channel," running as far inland as the headwaters of the Snake River.
These baby salmon then are transported by ship, bypassing the dams.
Steamboats and railroads moved agricultural products and minerals along the river throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries.
American Falls Dam, upstream of Minidoka, was completed in 1927 and replaced in 1978.
Salmon swimming upstream in this river are faced with predators and dams.
Dredging and redredging work is ongoing and actual depths vary over time.
Brownlee Dam, the most upriver dam, was constructed in 1959, and generates 728&nbsp;MW of power.
Two of these catastrophic flooding events significantly affected the river and its surrounds.
Where river depths were less than , the shipping channel has been dredged in most places.
The introduction of the horse to the Snake River Plain around 1700 helped in establishing the Shoshone and Northern Paiute cultures.
Throughout much of the Snake River Plain and Hells Canyon, excessive sediment is also a recurring problem.
The Snake River watershed includes a diversity of vegetation zones both past and present.
Even later, American fur trappers scouted the area for beaver streams, but Canadian trappers from the British Hudson's Bay Company were by now a major competitor.
Dams on the Snake can be grouped into three major categories.
Still, from the 1860s to the 1940s, steamboats traveled on the Snake River from its mouth at the Columbia River to near the mouth of the Imnaha River in lower Hells Canyon.
As far upstream as Jackson Lake in Wyoming, the Jackson Lake Dam was built in 1907 to raise the lake level for providing additional water storage for dry years.
Some tribes adopted use of horses after contact with Europeans, which reshaped their hunting and cultures for the next few hundred years before outside settlement.
Another similar method to transport fish across the dams is the "Fish Gun" method.
Rising in several forks in the Clearwater Mountains of central Idaho, the Clearwater and Salmon River watersheds are nearly undeveloped with the enormous exception of Dworshak Dam on the North Fork Clearwater River.
Southwest of the city of Rexburg, the Snake receives from the right the Henrys Fork, sometimes called the North Fork of the Snake River.
The highest flow ever recorded on the Snake River was at a different USGS stream gauge near Clarkston, which operated from 1915 to 1972.
The WWF placed the ecoregion boundary about  downriver from Shoshone Falls in order to include the Big Wood River (the main tributary of the Malad River) in the Upper Snake ecoregion, because the Wood River is biologically distinct from the rest of the downriver Snake.
In December 2007, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a permit requiring owners of fish farms along the Snake River to reduce their phosphorus discharge by 40%.
With a channel about  deeper than the Mississippi River system, the Columbia and Snake rivers can float barges twice as heavy.
Another place where pioneers crossed the Snake was further upstream, at a place called "Three Island Crossing", near the mouth of the Boise River.
The name "Lewis Fork", however, did not last.
The watershed of the Grande Ronde in northeastern Oregon is also largely undeveloped.
On August&nbsp;27, 1965, there was temporarily no flow as a result of testing at Ice Harbor Dam.
A majority of the watershed was once covered with shrub-steppe grassland, most common in the Snake River Plain and also the Columbia Plateau in southeastern Washington.
People have been living along the Snake River for at least 11,000 years.
In 1998, over  of grain were barged on the Snake.
The explorer Wilson Price Hunt of the Astor Expedition named the river as ''Mad River''.
Shoshone Falls marks the boundary between the two.
As the dams were constructed above Shoshone Falls, the historical upriver limit of salmon and also a total barrier to boats and ships, no provisions were made for fish passage or navigation.
The Snake takes a large bend northwest through Snake River Canyon, cutting through the Snake River Range and into eastern Idaho, receiving first the Hoback and Greys rivers before entering Palisades Reservoir.
The flood waters of Lake Bonneville, approximately twenty times the flow of the Columbia River or , swept down the Snake River, leaving debris and sediment deposits across southern Idaho.
The Columbia River flows about  further west to the Pacific Ocean, cutting through the Cascade Range by way of the Columbia River Gorge.
The discharge further increases to  at Hells Canyon Dam on the border of Idaho and Oregon.
In Hells Canyon, a cascade of dams produce hydroelectricity from the river's lofty decrease in elevation over a comparatively small distance.
Grand Teton is the highest point in the Snake River watershed, reaching  in elevation.
Several ships were built specifically to transport ore from there to Lewiston: these included ''Imnaha'', ''Mountain Gem'', and ''Norma''.
As the North American Plate moved westwards over a stationary hotspot beneath the crust, a series of tremendous lava flows and volcanic eruptions carved out the Snake River Plain beginning about 12&nbsp;million years ago, west of the Continental Divide.
Directly below the confluence, the river flows into Lower Granite Lake, formed by Lower Granite Dam, the uppermost dam of the Lower Snake River Project.
There are many reasons why Sockeye Salmon in the Snake River are reduced in number.
The first he calls "Broad Spectrum Foraging", dating from 11,500 to 4,200 years before present.
The Upper Snake freshwater ecoregion includes most of southeastern Idaho and extends into small portions of Wyoming, Utah, and Nevada, including major freshwater habitats such as Jackson Lake.
The Snake River also shares a boundary with the Green River to the southeast; the Green River drains parts of Wyoming and Utah and is the largest tributary of the Colorado River.
This method raises controversy to the effectiveness and costs, since this method is extremely expensive, almost costing $15&nbsp;million.
The Columbia River drops  from source to mouth, while the Snake drops over  in elevation over a length more than  shorter.
Grain, mainly wheat, accounts for more than 85% of the cargo barged on the lower Snake River.
However, at Buhl, Idaho, only about  downstream, the river's flow decreases to  because of agricultural diversions and seepage.
Some emigrants chose to ford the Snake and proceed down the west side and recross the river near Fort Boise into Hells Canyon, continue down the drier east side into the gorge, or float the Snake and Columbia to the Willamette River, the destination of the Oregon Trail.
The first was John Ordway in 1806, who also explored the lower Salmon River.
Water in the aquifer eventually travels to the west side of the Snake River Plain and re-enters the river as springs.
It is characterized by large horse-mounted tribes that spent long amounts of time away from their local foraging range hunting bison.
The Oregon Steam Navigation Company launched the Shoshone at Fort Boise in 1866 which provided passenger and freight service on the upper Snake for the Boise and Owyhee mines.
(The dams can hurt juvenile baby sockeye salmon with their powerful tides and currents, which suck the baby salmon down.)
Between 1985 and 2007, only an average of 18 sockeye salmon returned to Idaho each year.
However, in the high Rockies of Wyoming, in the upper Jackson Hole area, the average precipitation is over , and snowfall averages .
