Some primitive snakes are known to have possessed hindlimbs, but their pelvic bones lacked a direct connection to the vertebrae.
Unlike the gaits of limbed animals, which form a continuum, each mode of snake locomotion is discrete and distinct from the others; transitions between modes are abrupt.
The vestigial left lung is often small or sometimes even absent, as snakes' tubular bodies require all of their organs to be long and thin.
They generally catch the snakes with the help of a simple stick.
Most snakes currently labelled "nonvenomous" would still be considered harmless according to this theory, as they either lack a venom delivery method or are incapable of delivering enough to endanger a human.
Scale counts can sometimes be used to tell the sex of a snake when the species is not distinctly sexually dimorphic.
The venom is modified saliva, delivered through fangs.
Each of these environmental objects, in turn, generates a reaction force directed forward and towards the midline of the snake, resulting in forward thrust while the lateral components cancel out.
Their eyes are always open, and for sleeping, the retina can be closed or the face buried among the folds of the body.
A female python will not leave the eggs, except to occasionally bask in the sun or drink water.
Earlier, the ''Irulas'' caught thousands of snakes for the snake-skin industry.
Because the sides of the jaw can move independently of one another, snakes resting their jaws on a surface have sensitive stereo hearing which can detect the position of prey.
Early in snake evolution, the Hox gene expression in the axial skeleton responsible for the development of the thorax became dominant.
While not commonly thought of as food in most cultures, in some cultures, the consumption of snakes is acceptable, or even considered a delicacy, prized for its alleged pharmaceutical effect of warming the heart.
Most species of snakes lay eggs which they abandon shortly after laying.
The bite of a nonvenomous snake is usually harmless; their teeth are not designed for tearing or inflicting a deep puncture wound, but rather grabbing and holding.
Parthenogenesis is a natural form of reproduction in which growth and development of embryos occur without fertilization.
The word ousted ''adder'', as ''adder'' went on to narrow in meaning, though in Old English ''næddre'' was the general word for snake.
However, the Colombian Rainbow boa, ''Epicrates maurus'' can also reproduce by facultative parthenogenesis resulting in production of WW female progeny.
The cobra is seen on the neck of Shiva and Vishnu is depicted often as sleeping on a seven-headed snake or within the coils of a serpent.
While the majority of snakes eat a variety of prey animals, there is some specialization by some species.
The venom so collected is used for producing life-saving antivenom, biomedical research and for other medicinal products.
They keep their tongues constantly in motion, sampling particles from the air, ground, and water, analyzing the chemicals found, and determining the presence of prey or predators in the local environment.
Digestion is an intense activity, especially after consumption of large prey.
These snakes can perform a controlled glide for hundreds of feet depending upon launch altitude and can even turn in midair.
Ritual combat between males for the females they want to mate with includes topping, a behavior exhibited by most viperids in which one male will twist around the vertically elevated fore body of its opponent and forcing it downward.
Alethinophidia is sometimes split into Henophidia and Caenophidia, with the latter consisting of "colubroid" snakes (colubrids, vipers, elapids, hydrophiids, and atractaspids) and acrochordids, while the other alethinophidian families comprise Henophidia.
The shedding of scales is called ''ecdysis'' (or in normal usage, ''molting'' or ''sloughing'').
Documented deaths resulting from snake bites are uncommon.
Pit vipers, pythons, and some boas have infrared-sensitive receptors in deep grooves on the snout, which allow them to "see" the radiated heat of warm-blooded prey.
In the Western world, some snakes (especially docile species such as the ball python and corn snake) are kept as pets.
Venom, like all salivary secretions, is a predigestant that initiates the breakdown of food into soluble compounds, facilitating proper digestion.
In some parts of the world, especially in India, snake charming is a roadside show performed by a charmer.
The English word ''snake'' comes from Old English ''snaca'', itself from Proto-Germanic ''*snak-an-'' (cf.
'''Snakes''' are elongated, legless, carnivorous reptiles of the suborder '''Serpentes''' that can be distinguished from legless lizards by their lack of eyelids and external ears.
Before a molt, the snake stops eating and often hides or moves to a safe place.
These proteins can potentially be a mix of neurotoxins (which attack the nervous system), hemotoxins (which attack the circulatory system), cytotoxins, bungarotoxins and many other toxins that affect the body in different ways.
The cardiovascular system of snakes is also unique for the presence of a renal portal system in which the blood from the snake's tail passes through the kidneys before returning to the heart.
The ''Irulas'' tribe of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu in India have been hunter-gatherers in the hot, dry plains forests, and have practiced the art of snake catching for generations.
Almost all snake venom contains ''hyaluronidase'', an enzyme that ensures rapid diffusion of the venom.
Snakes are a part of Hindu worship.
Pet snakes can be fed relatively infrequently, usually once every 5 to 14 days.
This is caused by the evolution of Hox genes, controlling limb morphogenesis.
The speed of this movement depends upon the density of push-points in the environment, with a medium density of about 8 along the snake's length being ideal.
In this mode, the snake braces the posterior portion of its body against the tunnel wall while the front of the snake extends and straightens.
The colloquial term "poisonous snake" is generally an incorrect label for snakes.
Australia averages only one fatal snake bite per year.
In regions where winters are colder than snakes can tolerate while remaining active, local species will brumate.
Snake venoms are complex mixtures of proteins, and are stored in venom glands at the back of the head.
The lack of limbs does not impede the movement of snakes.
Medusa was one of the three Gorgon sisters who Perseus defeated.
All snakes can laterally undulate forward (with backward-moving waves), but only sea snakes have been observed reversing the motion (moving backwards with forward-moving waves).
The nine-headed Lernaean Hydra that Hercules defeated and the three Gorgon sisters are children of Gaia, the earth.
In all venomous snakes, these glands open through ducts into grooved or hollow teeth in the upper jaw.
The other term, ''serpent'', is from French, ultimately from Indo-European ''*serp-'' (to creep), which also gave Ancient Greek ''hérpō'' (ἕρπω) "I crawl".
That is, they are capable of switching from a sexual mode of reproduction to an asexual mode.
There are many stories in India about greedy people trying to possess this gem and ending up getting killed.
The probe is marked at the point where it stops, removed, and compared to the subcaudal depth by laying it alongside the scales.
Contrary to the popular belief that snakes can dislocate their jaws, snakes have a very flexible lower jaw, the two halves of which are not rigidly attached, and numerous other joints in their skull (see snake skull), allowing them to open their mouths wide enough to swallow their prey whole, even if it is larger in diameter than the snake itself.
While not extant today, the Madtsoiidae, a family of giant, primitive, python-like snakes, was around until 50,000 years ago in Australia, represented by genera such as ''Wonambi''.
There are also several temples in India solely for cobras sometimes called ''Nagraj'' (King of Snakes) and it is believed that snakes are symbols of fertility.
Snake scales are not discrete, but extensions of the epidermis—hence they are not shed separately but as a complete outer layer during each molt, akin to a sock being turned inside out.
piscivorus'' appear to be capable of this form of parthenogenesis.
In the United States for example, all species of venomous snakes are pit vipers, with the exception of the coral snake.
One example of this is the Habu snake sometimes placed in the Okinawan liquor Awamori also known as "Habu Sake".
Most species are nonvenomous and those that have venom use it primarily to kill and subdue prey rather than for self-defense.
Some antivenom is species-specific (monovalent) while some is made for use with multiple species in mind (polyvalent).
''Pareas iwesakii'' and other snail-eating colubrids of subfamily Pareatinae have more teeth on the right side of their mouths than on the left, as the shells of their prey usually spiral clockwise
After killing her, Perseus gave her head to Athena who fixed it to her shield called the Aegis.
Snakes have also been widely revered, such as in ancient Greece, where the serpent was seen as a healer.
The World Health Organisation lists snakebite under the "other neglected conditions" category.
A festival, Nag Panchami, in which participants worship either images of or live Nāgas (cobras) is celebrated every year.
There are numerous debates in the systematics within the group.
This adjustment protects the heart from potential damage when large ingested prey is passed through the esophagus.
In this mode, the belly scales are lifted and pulled forward before being placed down and the body pulled over them.
Most snakes focus by moving the lens back and forth in relation to the retina, while in the other amniote groups, the lens is stretched.
Additionally, sea snakes are widespread throughout the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
Cobras, vipers, and closely related species use venom to immobilize or kill their prey.
One extant analog of these putative ancestors is the earless monitor ''Lanthanotus'' of Borneo (though it also is semiaquatic).
These include fossil species like ''Haasiophis'', ''Pachyrhachis'' and ''Eupodophis'', which are slightly older than ''Najash''.
Fossils readily identifiable as snakes (though often retaining hind limbs) first appear in the fossil record during the Cretaceous period.
Most often employed by colubroid snakes (colubrids, elapids, and vipers) when the snake must move in an environment that lacks irregularities to push against (rendering lateral undulation impossible), such as a slick mud flat, or a sand dune, sidewinding is a modified form of lateral undulation in which all of the body segments oriented in one direction remain in contact with the ground, while the other segments are lifted up, resulting in a peculiar "rolling" motion.
The digestive system is then 'up-regulated' to full capacity within 48&nbsp;hours of prey consumption.
Molting serves a number of functions.
Retention of eggs and live birth are most often associated with colder environments.
Although the possibility of infection and tissue damage is present in the bite of a nonvenomous snake, venomous snakes present far greater hazard to humans.
The old skin breaks near the mouth and the snake wriggles out, aided by rubbing against rough surfaces.
Renewal of the skin by moulting is supposed to allow growth in some animals such as insects; however, this has been disputed in the case of snakes.
Caudal autotomy in snakes is rare and is intervertebral, unlike that in lizards, which is intravertebral&mdash;that is, the break happens along a predefined fracture plane present on a vertebra.
Both captive-born and wild-born ''A.
Venomous snakes are classified in two taxonomic families:
Some snakes, such as the Asian vine snake (genus ''Ahaetulla''), have binocular vision, with both eyes capable of focusing on the same point.
The ribs of the snake do not move in this mode of locomotion and this method is most often used by large pythons, boas, and vipers when stalking prey across open ground as the snake's movements are subtle and harder to detect by their prey in this manner.
Unless startled or injured, most snakes prefer to avoid contact and will not attack humans.
The serpent makes its final appearance symbolizing Satan in the Book of Revelation: "And he laid hold on the dragon the old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years."
In this mode, the posteriorly moving waves push against contact points in the environment, such as rocks, twigs, irregularities in the soil, etc.
The movement of snakes in arboreal habitats has only recently been studied.
The serum is separated and further purified and freeze-dried.
Living snakes are found on every continent except Antarctica, and on most smaller land masses; exceptions include some large islands, such as Ireland, Iceland, Greenland, the Hawaiian archipelago, and the islands of New Zealand, and many small islands of the Atlantic and central Pacific oceans.
Nonvenomous snakes either swallow prey alive or kill by constriction.
The snake's heart is encased in a sac, called the ''pericardium'', located at the bifurcation of the bronchi.
Other infrared-sensitive snakes have multiple, smaller labial pits lining the upper lip, just below the nostrils.
The thymus gland is located in fatty tissue above the heart and is responsible for the generation of immune cells in the blood.
It has many snake-like features, is adapted for burrowing and its stomach indicates that it was preying on other animals.
Front limbs are nonexistent in all known snakes.
Thrust is generated by pushing their body against the water, resulting in the observed slip.
The wave speed is precisely the same as the snake speed, and as a result, every point on the snake's body follows the path of the point ahead of it, allowing snakes to move through very dense vegetation and small openings.
Recent molecular studies support the monophyly of the clades of modern snakes, scolecophidians, typhlopids + anomalepidids, alethinophidians, core alethinophidians, uropeltids (''Cylindrophis'', ''Anomochilus'', uropeltines), macrostomatans, booids, boids, pythonids and caenophidians.
However, the tail is still long enough to be of important use in many species, and is modified in some aquatic and tree-dwelling species.
The inner surface of the old skin liquefies.
In "advanced" (Caenophidian) snakes, the broad belly scales and rows of dorsal scales correspond to the vertebrae, allowing scientists to count the vertebrae without dissection.
Snakes' eyes are covered by their clear scales (the brille) rather than movable eyelids.
The earliest known true snake fossils (members of the crown group Serpentes) come from the marine simoliophiids, the oldest of which is the Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian age) ''Haasiophis terrasanctus'', dated to between 112 and 94 million years old.
It is reconstituted with sterile water and becomes antivenom.
The colubrids, one of the more common snake groups, became particularly diverse due to preying on rodents, an especially successful mammal group.
While on tree branches, snakes use several modes of locomotion depending on species and bark texture.
This mode of locomotion overcomes the slippery nature of sand or mud by pushing off with only static portions on the body, thereby minimizing slipping.
As a result, the vertebrae anterior to the hindlimb buds (when present) all have the same thoracic-like identity (except from the atlas, axis, and 1–3 neck vertebrae).
The axial skeleton of the snakes’ common ancestor, like most other tetrapods, had regional specializations consisting of cervical (neck), thoracic (chest), lumbar (lower back), sacral (pelvic), and caudal (tail) vertebrae.
They require minimal space, as most common species do not exceed five feet (1.5 m) in length.
Some snakes have a venomous bite, which they use to kill their prey before eating it.
In both Maya and Aztec calendars, the fifth day of the week was known as Snake Day.
Snake charming as a profession is dying out in India because of competition from modern forms of entertainment and environment laws proscribing the practice.
The fork in the tongue gives snakes a sort of directional sense of smell and taste simultaneously.
Some species of snake are ovoviviparous and retain the eggs within their bodies until they are almost ready to hatch.
This periodic renewal has led to the snake being a symbol of healing and medicine, as pictured in the Rod of Asclepius.
Asclepius carried a serpent wound around his wand, a symbol seen today on many ambulances.
The vertebrae have projections that allow for strong muscle attachment enabling locomotion without limbs.
The vertebral column consists of anywhere between 200 and 400 (or more) vertebrae.
There is a third family containing the ''opistoglyphous'' (rear-fanged) snakes (as well as the majority of other snake species):
Snake handlers use snakes as an integral part of church worship in order to exhibit their faith in divine protection.
An early fossil snake relative, ''Najash rionegrina'', was a two-legged burrowing animal with a sacrum, and was fully terrestrial.
The snake returns in Exodus when Moses, as a sign of God's power, turns his staff into a snake and when Moses made the Nehushtan, a bronze snake on a pole that when looked at cured the people of bites from the snakes that plagued them in the desert.
''Tetrapodophis'' does not have distinctive snake features in its spine and skull.
Snakes use smell to track their prey.
While this movement appears rapid, snakes have rarely been documented moving faster than two body-lengths per second, often much less.
Neck, lumbar and pelvic vertebrae are very reduced in number (only 2–10 lumbar and pelvic vertebrae are present), while only a short tail remains of the caudal vertebrae.
To produce antivenom, a mixture of the venoms of the different species of rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cottonmouths is injected into the body of a horse in ever-increasing dosages until the horse is immunized.
More than 20 families are currently recognized, comprising about 500 genera and about 3,400 species.
Certain birds, mammals, and other snakes (such as kingsnakes) that prey on venomous snakes have developed resistance and even immunity to certain venoms.
The two infraorders of Serpentes are: Alethinophidia and Scolecophidia.
In such cases, the body of a snake or several snakes is left to steep in a jar or container of liquor.
They share this venom clade with various other saurian species.
The legendary account of the foundation of Thebes mentioned a monster snake guarding the spring from which the new settlement was to draw its water.
In religious terms, the snake and jaguar are arguably the most important animals in ancient Mesoamerica.
Generally, vision is best in arboreal snakes and weakest in burrowing snakes.
In many cases, the cast skin peels backward over the body from head to tail in one piece, like pulling a sock off inside-out.
However, more commonly in Christianity, the serpent has been seen as a representative of evil and sly plotting, which can be seen in the description in Genesis chapter 3 of a snake in the Garden of Eden tempting Eve.
The most common and effective method is through antivenom (or antivenin), a serum made from the venom of the snake.
However, a few species (such as the king cobra) actually construct nests and stay in the vicinity of the hatchlings after incubation.
So much metabolic energy is involved in a snake's digestion that in the Mexican rattlesnake (''Crotalus durissus''), surface body temperature increases by as much as  during the digestive process.
Modern snakes greatly diversified during the Paleocene.
When push-points are absent, but there is not enough space to use sidewinding because of lateral constraints, such as in tunnels, snakes rely on concertina locomotion.
All snakes are strictly carnivorous, eating small animals including lizards, frogs, other snakes, small mammals, birds, eggs, fish, snails or insects.
They range in size from the tiny, 10.4&nbsp;cm-long thread snake to the reticulated python of  in length.
Scales are named mainly according to their positions on the body.
They smell by using their forked tongues to collect airborne particles, then passing them to the vomeronasal organ or ''Jacobson's organ'' in the mouth for examination.
In Judaism, the snake of brass is also a symbol of healing, of one's life being saved from imminent death.
Snake wine (蛇酒) is an alcoholic beverage produced by infusing whole snakes in rice wine or grain alcohol.
The underside is very sensitive to vibration.
The fangs of 'advanced' venomous snakes like viperids and elapids are hollow to inject venom more effectively, while the fangs of rear-fanged snakes such as the boomslang merely have a groove on the posterior edge to channel venom into the wound.
In other words, most of a snake's skeleton is an extremely extended thorax.
The fossil record of snakes is relatively poor because snake skeletons are typically small and fragile making fossilization uncommon.
The ideal temperature for snakes to digest is .
Most pythons coil around their egg-clutches and remain with them until they hatch.
The snake is one of the 12 celestial animals of Chinese Zodiac, in the Chinese calendar.
The term Nāga is used to refer to entities that take the form of large snakes in Hinduism and Buddhism.
Many species of snakes have skulls with several more joints than their lizard ancestors, enabling them to swallow prey much larger than their heads with their highly mobile jaws.
Molting occurs periodically throughout the snake's life.
Snakes are thought to have evolved from either burrowing or aquatic lizards, perhaps during the Jurassic period, with the earliest known fossils dating to between 143 and 167 Ma ago.
With the exception of large constrictors, nonvenomous snakes are not a threat to humans.
To accommodate their narrow bodies, snakes' paired organs (such as kidneys) appear one in front of the other instead of side by side, and most have only one functional lung.
The oldest preserved descriptions of snakes can be found in the Brooklyn Papyrus.
Commonly known in Hindi as "Ichchhadhari" snakes.
For instance, many sources classify Boidae and Pythonidae as one family, while some keep the Elapidae and Hydrophiidae (sea snakes) separate for practical reasons despite their extremely close relation.
Snakes do not ordinarily prey on humans.
Other notable snakes in Hinduism are Ananta, Vasuki, Taxak, Karkotaka and Pingala.
Contrary to the popular notion of snakes being slimy because of possible confusion of snakes with worms, snakeskin has a smooth, dry texture.
Modern-day snake trapping involves a herpetologist using a long stick with a V- shaped end.
Individual snakes may brumate in burrows, under rock piles, or inside fallen trees, or snakes may aggregate in large numbers at hibernacula.
After eating, snakes become dormant while the process of digestion takes place.
contortrix'' and ''A.
Smaller snakes eat smaller prey.
This ultimately led to an animal similar to today's sea snakes.
In pit vipers, the grooves are located between the nostril and the eye in a large "pit" on each side of the head.
In the majority of species, only one lung is functional.
This high cost is due to the repeated stops and starts of portions of the body as well as the necessity of using active muscular effort to brace against the tunnel walls.
The families Leptotyphlopidae and Typhlopidae also possess remnants of the pelvic girdle, appearing as horny projections when visible.
The ouroboros or uroboros is a snake eating its own tail in a clock-wise direction (from the head to the tail) in the shape of a circle, representing the cycle of life, death and rebirth, leading to immortality.
This 'saccular lung' is used for hydrostatic purposes to adjust buoyancy in some aquatic snakes and its function remains unknown in terrestrial species.
Such snakes can take the form of any living creature, but prefer human form.
Ribs are found exclusively on the thoracic vertebrae.
While snakes are limbless reptiles, which evolved from (and are grouped with) lizards, there are many other species of lizards which have lost their limbs independently and superficially look similar to snakes.
The jaw-quadrate-stapes pathway is capable of detecting vibrations on the angstrom scale, despite the absence of an outer ear and the ossicle mechanism of impedance matching used in other vertebrates to receive vibrations from the air.
Typical blind snakes
This mode of movement has the same net cost of transport (calories burned per meter moved) as running in lizards of the same mass.
King cobras and the Australian bandy-bandy consume other snakes.
The shape and number of scales on the head, back, and belly are often characteristic and used for taxonomic purposes.
In such a show, the snake charmer carries a basket that contains a snake that he seemingly charms by playing tunes from his flutelike musical instrument, to which the snake responds.
An alternative hypothesis, based on morphology, suggests the ancestors of snakes were related to mosasaurs—extinct aquatic reptiles from the Cretaceous—which in turn are thought to have derived from varanid lizards.
