Venom emitted from elapids, including sea snakes, kraits, cobras, king cobra, mambas, and many Australian species, contain toxins which attack the nervous system, causing neurotoxicity.
The World Health Organization lists snakebite as a neglected disease.
Half of bites from venomous species poison the person.
Venom emitted from some types of cobras, almost all vipers and some sea snakes causes necrosis of muscle tissue.
Those bitten may also describe a "rubbery", "minty", or "metallic" taste if bitten by certain species of rattlesnake.
The object was regarded as a divinely empowered instrument of God that could bring healing to Jews bitten by venomous snakes while they were wandering in the desert after their exodus from Egypt.
It is beneficial to know the species of snake that are common in local areas, or while travelling or hiking.
The British military recommends pressure immobilization in all cases where the type of snake is unknown.
Since envenomation is completely voluntary, all venomous snakes are capable of biting without injecting venom into a person.
Interestingly, bites caused by the Mojave rattlesnake, kraits, coral snake, and the speckled rattlesnake reportedly cause little or no pain despite being serious injuries.
Of the roughly 3,000 known species of snake found worldwide, only 15% are considered dangerous to humans.
*Get to a hospital immediately.
Do not administer stimulants or pain medications, unless specifically directed to do so by a physician.
Subcutaneous LD50 varies by over 140-fold within elapids and by more than 100-fold in vipers.
Trying to suck out the venom, cutting the wound with a knife, or using a tourniquet is not recommended.
There are several reasons for this: a snakebite may become infected, with the snake's saliva and fangs sometimes harboring pathogenic microbial organisms, including ''Clostridium tetani''.
The induced bite can be just as severe as that of a live snake.
It has been suggested that Boris III of Bulgaria, who was allied to Nazi Germany during World War II, may have been killed with snake venom, although there is no definitive evidence.
Rhabdomyolysis can result in damage to the kidneys as a result of myoglobin accumulation in the renal tubules.
Snakebite first aid recommendations vary, in part because different snakes have different types of venom.
While not as life-threatening as a bite from a venomous species, the bite can be at least temporarily debilitating and could lead to dangerous infections if improperly dealt with.
Venom is composed of hundreds to thousands of different proteins and enzymes, all serving a variety of purposes, such as interfering with a prey's cardiac system or increasing tissue permeability so that venom is absorbed faster.
The first antivenom was developed in 1895 by French physician Albert Calmette for the treatment of Indian cobra bites.
Knowledge of what species are present locally can be crucial, as is knowledge of typical signs and symptoms of envenomation by each type of snake.
It is not an easy task determining whether or not a bite by any species of snake is life-threatening.
Determining the type of snake that caused a bite is often not possible.
Some have little local effect, but life-threatening systemic effects, in which case containing the venom in the region of the bite by pressure immobilization is desirable.
Agricultural and tropical regions report more snakebites than anywhere else.
This speeds determination of which antivenom to administer in the emergency room.
The frequency of bites varies greatly among different parts of the world.
Children and the elderly are the most likely to die.
Earlier, the venom of a particular snake was considered to be one kind only, i.e.
However, most first aid guidelines agree on the following:
* Use of electroshock therapy in animal tests has shown this treatment to be useless and potentially dangerous.
Although some people may develop serious adverse reactions to antivenom, such as anaphylaxis, in emergency situations this is usually treatable and hence the benefit outweighs the potential consequences of not using antivenom.
* Application of a one-percent solution of potassium permanganate or chromic acid to the cut, exposed area.
Identification of the snake is important in planning treatment in certain areas of the world, but is not always possible.
Risk factors for bites include working outside with one's hand such as in farming, forestry, and construction.
In worst-case scenarios, thoroughly constricting tourniquets have been applied to bitten limbs, completely shutting off blood flow to the area.
Ideally the dead snake would be brought in with the person, but in areas where snake bite is more common, local knowledge may be sufficient to recognize the snake.
*Tell the doctor of any systemic symptoms, such as droopiness of a body part, that manifest on the way to hospital.
#Keep the person as still as possible.
In extreme cases, in remote areas, all of these misguided attempts at treatment have resulted in injuries far worse than an otherwise mild to moderate snakebite.
Snakes are likely to approach residential areas when attracted by prey, such as rodents.
In medieval Europe, a form of capital punishment was to throw people into snake pits, leaving people to die from multiple venomous bites.
The object of pressure immobilization is to contain venom within a bitten limb and prevent it from moving through the lymphatic system to the vital organs.
Dry snakebites and those inflicted by a non-venomous species can still cause severe injury.
The use of a flashlight when engaged in camping activities, such as gathering firewood at night, can be helpful.
Worldwide, snakebites occur most frequently in the summer season when snakes are active and humans are outdoors.
In Africa it is mambas, Egyptian cobras, puff adders, and carpet vipers.
Seventy percent of all snakebites are from non-venomous species.
This therapy has two components: pressure to prevent lymphatic drainage, and immobilization of the bitten limb to prevent the pumping action of the skeletal muscles.
Washing the wound with soap and water and holding the limb still is recommended.
Uninformed tourniquet use is dangerous, since reducing or cutting off circulation can lead to gangrene, which can be fatal.
Pharmaceutical companies which produce antivenom target their products against the species native to a particular area.
While identifying the species is desirable in certain regions, risking further bites or delaying proper medical treatment by attempting to capture or kill the snake is not recommended.
Problems are often worse in children than adults.
Paresthesia throughout the body, as well as difficulty in speaking and breathing, may be reported.
This results in immediate pain, ophthalmoparesis, and sometimes blindness.
In the developing world most snakebites occur in those who work outside such as farmers, hunters, and fishermen.
By the time the person finally reached appropriate medical facilities their limbs had to be amputated.
Antivenom is effective at preventing death from bites; however, antivenoms frequently have side effects.
Many organizations, including the American Medical Association and American Red Cross, recommend washing the bite with soap and water.
Until the advent of antivenom, bites from some species of snake were almost universally fatal.
However, in regions where polyvalent antivenoms are available, such as North America, identification of snake is not a high priority item.
Venomous snakes can be found on every continent except Antarctica.
Some dry bites may also be the result of imprecise timing on the snake's part, as venom may be prematurely released before the fangs have penetrated the person.
Venom in many snakes, such as pit vipers, affects virtually every organ system in the human body and can be a combination of many toxins, including cytotoxins, hemotoxins, neurotoxins, and myotoxins, allowing for an enormous variety of symptoms.
It is also important to avoid snakes that appear to be dead, as some species will actually roll over on their backs and stick out their tongue to fool potential threats.
Sometimes poisoning from the bite may occur.
As open grasslands replaced forested areas in parts of the world, some snake families evolved to become smaller and thus more agile.
Furthermore, some snake genera, such as rattlesnakes, significantly increase the amount of venom injected in defensive bites compared to predatory strikes.
Bites may result in the loss of a limb or other chronic problems.
Opisthoglyphous colubrids have venom ranging from life-threatening (in the case of the boomslang) to barely noticeable (as in ''Tantilla'').
A bite by a North American copperhead on the ankle is usually a moderate injury to a healthy adult, but a bite to a child's abdomen or face by the same snake may be fatal.
Most snake envenomings and fatalities occur in South Asia, Southeast Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa, with India reporting the most snakebite deaths of any country.
They often happen when a person steps on the snake or approaches it too closely.
Most snakebites are caused by non-venomous snakes.
Traditional remedies have no proven benefit in treating snakebite.
Prevention of snake bites can involve wearing protective footwear, avoiding areas where snakes live, and not handling snakes.
Other venoms instigate localized tissue damage around the bitten area, and immobilization may increase the severity of the damage in this area, but also reduce the total area affected; whether this trade-off is desirable remains a point of controversy.
#Remove any items or clothing which may constrict the bitten limb if it swells (rings, bracelets, watches, footwear, etc.)
Antivenom has little effect on the area around the bite itself.
Snakebites were also used as a form of suicide, most notably by Egyptian queen Cleopatra VII, who reportedly died from the bite of an asp—likely an Egyptian cobra—after hearing of Mark Antony's death.
A scoring system can be used to try to determine the biting snake based on clinical features, but these scoring systems are extremely specific to particular geographical areas.
Use bandages or cloth to hold the splints, with care taken not to apply pressure or block the blood supply (such as with ligatures).
The resulting antibodies are then harvested from the animal's blood.
#Do not give the person anything to eat or drink.
Acute stress reaction increases blood flow and endangers the person.
Antivenom is made by injecting a small amount of venom into an animal (usually a horse or sheep) to initiate an immune system response.
However, this generally only applies to vipers, as some larger and more aggressive snakes in other parts of the world, such as mambas and cobras, will respond more aggressively.
#Do not incise the bitten site.
Deaths are relatively rare in Australia, Europe and North America.
The latter substance is notably toxic and carcinogenic.
Other common initial symptoms of pit viper and viper bites include lethargy, bleeding, weakness, nausea, and vomiting.
There is minor pain and redness in over 90 percent of cases, although this varies depending on the site.
It cannot undo damage already caused by venom, so antivenom treatment should be sought as soon as possible.
In the United States and Europe snakebites most commonly occur in those who keep them as pets.
Africa, Australia, the Neotropics, and southern Asia in particular are populated by many dangerous species of snake.
Attempting to catch or kill the offending snake also puts one at risk for re-envenomation or creating a second person bitten, and generally is not recommended.
In the USA, those bitten are typically male and between 17 and 27 years of age.
The venom may cause bleeding, kidney failure, a severe allergic reaction, tissue death around the bite, or breathing problems.
Spitting cobras and rinkhalses can spit venom in a person's eyes.
Snake venom is produced in modified parotid glands normally responsible for secreting saliva.
Other research on Toxicofera, a hypothetical clade thought to be ancestral to most living reptiles, suggests an earlier time frame for the evolution of snake venom, possibly to the order of tens of millions of years, during the Late Cretaceous.
* Drinking abundant quantities of alcohol following the cauterization or disinfection of the wound area.
Fear following a bite is common with symptoms of a racing heart and feeling faint.
The ancient Egyptians recorded prescribed treatments for snakebites as early as the Thirteenth Dynasty in the Brooklyn Papyrus, which includes at least seven venomous species common to the region today, such as the horned vipers.
The type of snake that most often delivers serious bites depends on the region of the world.
A snake's detached head can immediately act by reflex and potentially bite.
The majority of snake species do not have venom and kill their prey by squeezing them.
Snakebite as a surreptitious form of murder has been featured in stories such as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's ''The Adventure of the Speckled Band'', but actual occurrences are virtually unheard of, with only a few documented cases.
In the United States, more than 40 percent of people bitten by snake intentionally put themselves in harm's way by attempting to capture wild snakes or by carelessly handling their dangerous pets—40 percent of that number had a blood alcohol level of 0.1 percent or more.
It is advised not to reach blindly into hollow logs, flip over large rocks, and enter old cabins or other potential snake hiding-places.
Antivenom is injected into the person intravenously, and works by binding to and neutralizing venom enzymes.
* Immersion in warm water or sour milk, followed by the application of snake-stones (also known as ''la Pierre Noire''), which are believed to draw off the poison in much the way a sponge soaks up water.
Even without venom, some snakes, particularly large constrictors such as those belonging to the Boidae and Pythonidae families, can deliver damaging bites; large specimens often cause severe lacerations, or the snake itself pulls away, causing the flesh to be torn by the needle-sharp recurved teeth embedded in the person.
Snakes are found on every continent except Antarctica.
#Keep the person calm.
It has been suggested that snakes evolved the mechanisms necessary for venom formation and delivery sometime during the Miocene epoch.
Infection is often reported with viper bites whose fangs are capable of deep puncture wounds.
The person may present with strange disturbances to their vision, including blurriness.
In a study with pigs, suction not only caused no improvement but led to necrosis in the suctioned area.
Vomiting, trouble seeing, tingling of the limbs, and sweating may result.
The three types of venomous snakes that cause the majority of major clinical problems are vipers, kraits, and cobras.
Nervous system problems will cause a huge array of symptoms, and those provided here are not exhaustive.
While most snakes must open their mouths before biting, African and Middle Eastern snakes belonging to the family Atractaspididae are able to fold their fangs to the side of their head without opening their mouth and jab a person.
#Protect the person and others from further bites.
Bites may cause anaphylaxis in certain people.
* Cutting open the bitten area, an action often taken prior to suction, is not recommended since it causes further damage and increases the risk of infection; the subsequent cauterization of the area with fire or silver nitrate (also known as ''infernal stone'') is also potentially threatening.
India developed a national snake bite protocol in 2007 which includes advice to:
#Make sure to keep the bitten limb in a functional position and below the person's heart level so as to minimize blood returning to the heart and other organs of the body.
Snakes were both revered and worshipped and feared by early civilizations.
The well-meaning family member or friend may also release bacteria into the person's wound, leading to infection.
They result in about 2.5 million poisonings and 20,000 to 125,000 deaths.
However, subduing and killing prey became more difficult for the smaller snakes, leading to the evolution of snake venom.
However, the percentage of dry bites varies among species: 80 percent of bites inflicted by sea snakes, which are normally timid, do not result in envenomation, whereas only 25 percent of pit viper bites are dry.
When the type of snake is unknown, antivenom is often given based on the types known to be in the area.
Regular pest control can reduce the threat of snakes considerably.
Internal organs may bleed, including the brain and intestines and will cause ecchymosis (bruising) of the skin.
Most snakebites, whether by a venomous snake or not, will have some type of local effect.
A similar form of punishment was common in Southern Han during China's Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period and in India.
They occur most commonly in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, with rural areas more greatly affected.
Estimates vary from 1.2 to 5.5&nbsp;million snakebites, 421,000 to 2.5&nbsp;million envenomings, and 20,000 to 125,000 deaths.
If not treated immediately they may die from respiratory failure.
There is no convincing evidence that it is an effective first-aid tool as ordinarily applied.
If the snake has not yet fled it is important to step away slowly and cautiously.
The outcome of all snakebites depends on a multitude of factors: the size, physical condition, and temperature of the snake, the age and physical condition of the person, the area and tissue bitten (e.g., foot, torso, vein or muscle), the amount of venom injected, the time it takes for the person to find treatment, and finally the quality of that treatment.
It often results in two puncture wounds from the animal's fangs.
*Immobilise in the same way as a fractured limb.
An additional issue is the cost of these medications.
It is stored in structures called alveoli behind the animal's eyes, and ejected voluntarily through its hollow tubular fangs.
Muscle tissue will begin to die throughout the body, a condition known as rhabdomyolysis.
Being aware of—and ultimately avoiding—areas known to be heavily populated by dangerous snakes is strongly recommended.
Bites by vipers and some cobras may be extremely painful, with the local tissue sometimes becoming tender and severely swollen within five minutes.
In some areas of the world getting the right type of antivenom is difficult and this partly contributes to why they sometimes do not work.
When dealing with direct encounters it is best to remain silent and motionless.
When in the wilderness, treading heavily creates ground vibrations and noise, which will often cause snakes to flee from the area.
It is recommended for snakebites that have occurred in Australia (due to elapids which are neurotoxic).
At least one attempted suicide by snakebite has been documented in medical literature involving a puff adder bite to the hand.
Giving adrenaline (epinephrine) to prevent adverse effect to antivenom before they occur might be reasonable where they occur commonly.
This may result in redness, swelling, and severe pain at the area, which may take up to an hour to appear.
Modern antivenoms are usually polyvalent, making them effective against the venom of numerous snake species.
This area may also bleed and blister and can eventually lead to tissue necrosis.
Tourniquets have been found to be completely ineffective in the treatment of ''Crotalus durissus'' bites, but some positive results have been seen with properly applied tourniquets for cobra venom in the Philippines.
The outcome depends on the type of snake, the area of the body bitten, the amount of venom injected, and the health conditions of the person.
This, coupled with hypotension, can lead to acute renal failure, and, if left untreated, eventually death.
#Call for help to arrange for transport to the nearest hospital emergency room, where antivenom for snakes common to the area will often be available.
Suction started after three minutes removes a clinically insignificant quantity—less than one-thousandth of the venom injected—as shown in a human study.
Historically, snakebites were seen as a means of execution in some cultures.
When rock climbing, it is not safe to grab ledges or crevices without examining them first, as snakes are cold-blooded and often sunbathe atop rock ledges.
Snakes may deliver such a "dry bite" rather than waste their venom on a creature too large for them to eat, a behaviour called venom metering.
During the mid-Tertiary, most snakes were large ambush predators belonging to the superfamily Henophidia, which use constriction to kill their prey.
The amount of venom produced also differs among species, with the Gaboon viper able to potentially deliver from 450–600 milligrams of venom in a single bite, the most of any snake.
In Central and South America it is snakes of the ''Bothrops'' and ''Crotalus'' types, the latter including rattlesnakes.
Dead snakes are also incapable of regulating the venom they inject, so a bite from a dead snake can often contain large amounts of venom.
Australian recommendations for snake bite treatment recommend against cleaning the wound.
In Judaism, the Nehushtan was a pole with a snake made of copper fixed upon it.
In South Asia it was previously believed that Indian cobras, common kraits, Russell's viper and carpet vipers were the most dangerous; other snakes, however, may also cause significant problems in this area of the world.
Traces of venom left on the skin/bandages from the strike can be used in combination with a snake bite identification kit to identify the species of snake.
Treatment partly depends on the type of snake.
Most bites are on the hands or arms.
Since reporting is not mandatory in much of the world, the data on the frequency of snakebites is not precise.
Although there is much known about the protein compositions of venoms from Asian and American snakes, comparatively little is known of Australian snakes.
The number of snakebites that occur each year may be as high as five million.
Despite huge advances in emergency therapy, antivenom is often still the only effective treatment for envenomation.
The strength of venom differs markedly between species and even more so between families, as measured by median lethal dose (LD50) in mice.
Snakes commonly involved in poisonings include the elapids, vipers, and sea snakes.
This is especially important with consumable alcohol, a known vasodilator which will speed up the absorption of venom.
either hemotoxic or neurotoxic, and this erroneous belief may still persist wherever the updated literature is hard to access.
The most diverse and widely distributed snake family, the colubrids, has approximately 700 venomous species, but only five genera—boomslangs, twig snakes, keelback snakes, green snakes, and slender snakes—have caused human fatalities.
It is not recommended for bites from non-neurotoxic snakes such as those found in North America and other regions of the world.
Snakes may also be unusually active during especially warm nights when ambient temperatures exceed .
In the Middle East it is carpet vipers and elapids.
Snakes bite both as a method of hunting and as a means of protection.
Because snakes vary from one country to another, first aid methods also vary.
Symptoms may become more life-threatening over time, developing into hypotension, tachypnea, severe tachycardia, severe internal bleeding, altered sensorium, kidney failure, and respiratory failure.
A '''snakebite''' is an injury caused by the bite of a snake.
*Reassure the person.
Supporting the person's breathing is sometimes also required.
