Known as "leading" the target, the amount of "lead" depends on the speed and angle of the target's movement as well as the distance to the target.
Thus, attempts to draw fire are often made, sometimes by offering a helmet slightly out of concealment, a tactic successfully employed in the Winter War by the Finns known as "Kylmä-Kalle" (Cold Charlie).
Graduates of the U.S. Army sniper school are expected to achieve 90 percent first-round hits at 600 meters, using the M24 Sniper Weapon System (SWS).
14.5×114mm (Russian)
They almost never left their carefully camouflaged hiding spots.
The sniper in turn must utilize the weapon to accurately place shots under varying conditions.
Through the combination of a leather wad and tight grooves on the inside of the barrel (rifling), this weapon was far more accurate, though slower to load.
The resulting distance will be 353 meters.
This prompted the British once again to increase training of specialized sniper units.
Some rifles, such as the Denel NTW-20 and Vidhwansak, are designed for a purely anti-materiel (AM) role, e.g.
A police sharpshooter is part of a police operation and usually takes part in relatively short missions.
When employed by a highly skilled marksman, this tactic can be used as a substitute for a noise suppressor.
During the 26th of July Movement in the Cuban Revolution, the revolutionaries led by Fidel Castro always killed the foremost man in a group of President Batista's soldiers.
In the jungles of Asia and the Pacific Islands, snipers posed a serious threat to the U.S, British, and Commonwealth troops.
Barrel rifling was invented at the end of the fifteenth century, but was only employed in large cannons.
Military snipers may be further trained as forward air controllers (FACs) to direct air strikes or forward observers (FOs) to direct artillery or mortar fire.
Only when the two loopholes were lined up—a one-to-twenty chance—could an enemy shoot between them.
After several years of war and heavy losses on the Eastern Front, the German army was forced to rely more heavily on enrolling teenage soldiers.
Mil dots are used like a slide rule to measure the height of a target, and if the height is known, the range can be as well.
Due to lack of training in more complex group tactics, and thanks to rifle training provided by the Hitlerjugend, those soldiers would often be used as autonomous left-behind snipers.
Thus, gravity must be divided into its component vectors.
.50 BMG (12.7×99mm NATO)
During the Boer War the latest breech-loading rifled guns with magazines and smokeless powder were used by both sides.
Police units that are unequipped for tactical operations may rely on a specialized SWAT team, which may have a dedicated sniper.
At trials in 1857 which tested the accuracy and range of both weapons, Whitworth's design outperformed the Enfield at a rate of about three to one.
In particular, bipods help when firing from a prone position, and enable the firing position to be sustained for an extended period of time.
Military snipers from the US, UK, and other countries that adopt their military doctrine are typically deployed in two-man sniper teams consisting of a shooter and spotter.
In the ''Edinburgh Advertiser'', 23 June 1801, can be found the following quote in a piece about the North British Militia; "This Regiment has several Field Pieces, and two companies of Sharp Shooters, which are very necessary in the modern Stile of War".
Many snipers use ghillie suits to hide and stay hidden.
There was almost no instruction in blending into the environment.
Police forces typically deploy such sharpshooters in hostage scenarios.
Because of the nature of fighting in city rubble, snipers were very hard to spot and seriously dented the morale of the German attackers.
Maximum effective range
A common practice is for a shooter and a spotter to take turns in order to avoid eye fatigue.
Often in situations with multiple targets, snipers use relocation.
Much of this pioneering work was the brainchild of Colonel D. Davidson, using optical sights produced by Chance Brothers of Birmingham.
The QTU Lapua external ballistics software, using continuous doppler drag coefficient (Cd) data provided by Lapua, predicts that such shots traveling  would likely have struck their targets after nearly 6.0 seconds of flight time, having lost 93% of their kinetic energy, retaining  of their original  velocity, and having dropped  or 2.8° from the original bore line.
Law enforcement snipers, commonly called police snipers, and military snipers differ in many ways, including their areas of operation and tactics.
One very old counter-sniper tactic is to tie rags onto bushes or similar items in suspected sniper hides.
For example, during the pursuit to Dunkirk, British snipers were able to significantly delay the German infantry's advance.
During Germany's 1940 campaigns, it appeared that lone, well-hidden French and British snipers could halt the German advance for a significant amount of time.
Even before firearms were available, soldiers such as archers were specially trained as elite marksmen.
shooting turbine disks of parked aircraft, missile guidance packages, expensive optics, and the bearings, tubes or wave guides of radar sets.
While this tactic would generally end in the demise of the sniper, giving rise to the nickname "Suicide Boys" that was given to those soldiers, this irrational behavior would prove quite disruptive to the Allied forces' progression.
Only the fraction of gravity equal to the cosine of the angle of fire with respect to the horizon affects the rate of fall of the bullet, with the remaineder adding or subtracting negligible velocity to the bullet along its trajectory.
This allowed a marksman to observe and target objects more accurately at a greater distance than ever before.
However, because the British Army offered sniper training exclusively to officers and non-commissioned officers, the resulting small number of trained snipers in the combat units considerably reduced their overall effectiveness.
Sniping has been used in asymmetric warfare situations, for example in the Northern Ireland Troubles, where in 1972, the bloodiest year of the conflict, the majority of the soldiers killed were shot by concealed IRA riflemen.
The use of sniping (in the sense of shooting at relatively long range from a concealed position) to murder came to public attention in a number of sensational U.S. criminal cases, including the Austin sniper incident of 1966 (Charles Whitman), the John F. Kennedy assassination (Lee Harvey Oswald), and the Beltway sniper attacks of late 2002 (Lee Boyd Malvo).
They used a shop mannequin or other doll dressed as a tempting target, such as an officer.
The main reason the US did not extend sniper training beyond long-range shooting was the limited deployment of US soldiers until the Normandy Invasion.
A careful sniping strategy can use a few individuals and resources to thwart the movement or other progress of a much better equipped or larger force.
The shooter(s) fires the shot while the spotter(s) assists in observation of targets, atmospheric conditions and handles ancillary tasks as immediate security of their location, communication with other parties; including directing artillery fire and close air support.
Once located, the defenders can attempt to approach the sniper from cover and overwhelm him.
The front loophole was fixed, but the rear was housed in a metal shutter sliding in grooves.
The Whitworth rifle was capable of hitting the target at a range of 2,000 yards, whereas the Enfield could only manage it at 1,400 yards.
Snipers are trained for the detection, identification, and location of a target in sufficient detail to permit the effective employment of lethal and non-lethal means.
Typical ranges for common battle field cartridges are as follows:
Soon the British army began to train their own snipers in specialized sniper schools.
The telescopic sight, or scope, was originally fixed and could not be adjusted, which therefore limited its range.
The most accurate position is prone, with a sandbag supporting the stock, and the stock's cheek-piece against the cheek.
A '''sniper team''' (or '''sniper cell''') consists of a combination of one or more ''shooters'' with force protection elements and support personnel: such as a ''spotter'' or a ''flanker''.
7.62×51mm (.308 Winchester)
In the Iraq war, picking up weapons and munitions could be considered evidence of insurgency.
These are tuned to both a specific class of rifle and specific ammunition.
From 2011, the Russian armed forces has run newly developed sniper courses in military district training centres.
These include calculating the trajectory of a bullet by triangulation.
A total of 428,335 individuals received Red Army sniper training, including Soviet and non-Soviet partisans, with 9,534 receiving the sniping 'higher qualification'.
These Riflemen were the elite of the British Army, and served at the forefront of any engagement, most often in skirmish formation, scouting out and delaying the enemy.
Several different mountings produced by various manufacturers were used for mounting aiming optics to the rifles.
German ''Scharfschützen'' were prepared before the war, equipped with Karabiner 98 and later Gewehr 43 rifles, but there were often not enough of these weapons available, and as such some were armed with captured scoped Mosin–Nagant 1891/30, SVT or Czech Mauser rifles.
The only nation that had specially trained sniper units during the 1930s was the Soviet Union.
Japanese snipers were specially trained to use the environment to conceal themselves.
Snipers will frequently use this tactic to their advantage, creating an atmosphere of chaos and confusion.
These shots depend on tissue damage, organ trauma, and blood loss to make the kill.
The personnel or materiel, but most often they target the most important enemy personnel such as officers or specialists (e.g.
The risk of captured snipers being summarily executed is explicitly referred to in Chapter 6 of US Army doctrine document FM 3-060.11 entitled "SNIPER AND COUNTERSNIPER TACTICS, TECHNIQUES, AND PROCEDURES":
The Wehrmacht re-established its sniper training in 1942, drastically increasing the number of snipers per unit with the creation of an additional 31 sniper training companies by 1944.
Anticipating the behavior of the target is necessary to accurately place the shot.
At first the French and British believed such hits to be coincidental hits, until the German scoped rifles were discovered.
In most recent combat operations occurring in large densely populated towns, such as Fallujah, Iraq, two teams would be deployed together to increase their security and effectiveness in an urban environment.
Some police sniper operations begin with military assistance.
This means that if the sniper incorrectly estimated the distance as 700 meters when the target was in fact 800 meters away, the bullet will be 200 millimeters lower than expected by the time it reaches the target.
A sniper team would be armed with their long range weapon, and a shorter ranged weapon to engage and protect the team should enemies come in close contact.
Using their spotting scope and/or rangefinder, they will also read the wind by using physical indicators and the mirage caused by the heat on the ground.
In one high-profile incident, Mike Plumb, a SWAT sniper in Columbus, Ohio, prevented a suicide by shooting a revolver out of the individual's hand, leaving him unharmed.
Sometimes as part of a SWAT team, police snipers are deployed alongside negotiators and an assault team trained for close quarters combat.
Most sniper teams operate independently, with little combat asset support from their parent units; their job is to deliver discriminatory, highly-accurate rifle fire against enemy targets that cannot be engaged successfully by the regular rifleman because of range, size, location, fleeting nature, or visibility.
Apart from marksmanship, British snipers were trained to blend in with the environment, often by using special camouflage clothing for concealment.
The doll was then presented as if it were a real man sloppily covering himself.
Police snipers, who generally engage at much shorter distances, may attempt more precise shot at particular parts of body or particular devices: in one event in 2007 in Marseille, a GIPN sniper took a shot from  at the pistol of a police officer threatening to commit suicide, destroying the weapon and preventing the police officer from killing himself.
For instance, in 1777 at the battle of Saratoga the Colonists hid in the trees and used early model rifles to shoot British officers.
The method of sniper deployment, according to the Ministry of Defence, is likely to be one three-platoon company at the brigade level, with one of the platoons acting independently and the other two supporting the battalions as needed.
The average number of rounds expended by U.S. military snipers to kill one enemy soldier is 1.3 rounds.
Sniper activity has been reported during the Arab Spring civil unrest in Libya in 2011, both from anti-governmental and pro-governmental supporters, and in Syria at least from pro-government forces.
While the German army did have snipers in 1972, the use of army snipers in the scenario was impossible due to the German constitution's explicit prohibition of the use of the military in domestic matters.
Friendly snipers can be used to hunt the enemy sniper.
During the interbellum, most nations dropped their specialized sniper units, notably the Germans.
This device is clamped to the tubular body of the telescopic sight, and gives an indicative readout in numerical form as the rifle is aimed up or down at the target.
Early forms of sniping, or marksmanship were used during the American Revolutionary War.
Both the Union and Confederate armies employed sharpshooters.
Besides direct observation, defending forces can use other techniques.
Another term, "sharp shooter" was in use in British newspapers as early as 1801.
They were skilled woodsmen and practitioners of discretion: "He who shoots and runs away, lives to shoot another day."
As sniper rifles are often extremely powerful and consequently loud, it is common for snipers to use a technique known as sound masking.
Through November 2005, when the Pentagon had last reported a sniper fatality, the Army had attributed 28 of 2,100 U.S. deaths to enemy snipers.
During World War I, the German army received a reputation for the deadliness and efficiency of its snipers, partly because of the high-quality lenses that German industry could manufacture.
Realizing this, none of Batista's men would walk first, as it was suicidal.
The shooter must remember to return the scope to zeroed position.
For example, a sniper who observes a target 500 meters away at a 45-degree angle downhill would multiply the range by the cosine of 45 degrees, which is 0.707.
Mistakes in estimation compound over distance and can decrease lethality or cause a shot to miss completely.
A sniper identifies officers by their appearance and behavior such as symbols of rank, talking to radio operators, sitting as a passenger in a car, having military servants, binoculars/map cases or talking and moving position more frequently.
On another occasion, the same team scored a "Quigley" (i.e., killing two Taliban with a single bullet) at a range of 196 metres.
In this role, their rules of engagement let them engage only high-value targets of opportunity.
Sniper rifles are classified as crew-served, as the term is used in the United States military.
A rifle and scope should retain its zero as long as possible under all conditions to reduce the need to re-zero during missions.
A sandbag can serve as a useful platform for shooting a sniper rifle, although any soft surface such as a rucksack will steady a rifle and contribute to consistency.
As a result, if a sniper is in imminent danger of capture, he may discard any items which might indicate his status as a sniper.
According to the United States Army, the average soldier will hit a man-sized target 10 percent of the time at 300 meters using the M16A2 rifle.
The negative reputation of snipers can be traced back to the American Revolution, when American "Marksmen" would intentionally target British officers, an act considered uncivilized by the British Army at the time (this reputation would be cemented during the Battle of Saratoga, when Benedict Arnold allegedly ordered his marksmen to target British General Simon Fraser, an act that would win the battle and French support).
The average human head is  in width, average human shoulders are  apart and the average distance from a person's pelvis to the top of their head is .
Starting with a first class of only six, in time he was able to lecture to large numbers of soldiers from different Allied nations, proudly proclaiming in a letter that his school was turning out snipers at three times the rate of any such other school in the world.
Shot placement varies considerably with the type of sniper being discussed.
It is widely accepted that sniping, while effective in specific instances, is much more effective as a broadly deployed psychological attack or as a force-multiplier.
Some ballistics and neurological researchers have argued that severing the spinal cord at an area near the second cervical vertebra is actually achieved, usually having the same effect of preventing voluntary motor activity, but the debate on the matter remains largely academic at present.
The American and British forces were surprised by how near the German snipers could approach in safety and attack them, as well as by their ability to hit targets at up to 1,000m.
For moving targets, the point-of-aim is ahead of the target in the direction of movement.
Laser rangefinders may be used, and range estimation is often the job of both parties in a team.
Police snipers typically operate at much shorter ranges than military snipers, generally under  and sometimes even less than .
Ghillie suits vary according to the terrain into which the sniper wishes to blend.
The unit was formed by Lord Lovat and reported to an American, Major Frederick Russell Burnham, the British Army Chief of Scouts under Lord Roberts.
The weapon should be able to consistently place shots within tight tolerances.
The height of the target (in yards) ×1000, divided by the height of the target (in mils), gives the range in yards.
This differs from a military sniper, who operates as part of a larger army, engaged in warfare.
The U.S. Army's lack of familiarity with sniping tactics proved disastrous in Normandy and the campaign in Western Europe where they encountered well trained German snipers.
The art of sniping requires learning and repetitively practicing these skills until mastered.
In one unusual incident, an unnamed 55-year-old ex-Mujahideen fighter with a motorbike and an old British-made Enfield rifle killed two British soldiers with a single shot, hitting the first in the head and the second in the neck.
This technique is frequently used in clandestine operations, infiltration tactics, and guerrilla warfare.
During the Crimean War, the first optical sights were designed to fit onto rifles.
Baiting is the utilization of dropped objects for potential targets to find and pick up.
Before the development of rifling, firearms were smoothbore and inaccurate over long distance.
To find the correct zero, the sniper multiplies the actual distance to the range by this fraction and aims as if the target were that distance away.
In 2006, training materials obtained by U.S. intelligence showed that snipers fighting in Iraq were urged to single out and attack engineers, medics, and chaplains on the theory that those casualties would demoralize entire enemy units.
The risk of damage to a chain of command can be reduced by removing or concealing features that would otherwise indicate an officer's rank.
News reports will often (inaccurately) use the term sniper to describe anyone shooting with a rifle at another person.
An alternative approach to this psychological process is to kill the second man in the row, leading to the psychological effect of nobody wanting to follow the "leader".
Many police and military sniper rifles come equipped with an adjustable bipod.
A trained dog can easily determine direction from the sound of the bullet, and will lie down with its head pointed at the origin of the gunshot.
The use of canine units was very successful, especially during the Vietnam War.
German snipers were at the time the only snipers in the world issued with purpose-manufactured sniping ammunition, known as the 'effect-firing' sS round.
Some used the PTRD anti-tank rifle with an adapted scope as an early example of an anti-materiel rifle.
The Italians trained few snipers and supplied them with a scoped Carcano Model 1891.
This is the process of adjusting the scope so that the bullet's points-of-impact is at the point-of-aim (centre of scope or scope's cross-hairs) for a specific distance.
If the same bullet was shot with 168 grain (10.9 g), a 17.1 MOA adjustment would be necessary.
Japanese snipers were known for their patience and ability to remain hidden for long periods.
This effectively decreased the army's willingness to search for rebel bases in the mountains.
The need for specialized training for police sharpshooters was made apparent in 1972 during the Munich massacre when the German police could not deploy specialized personnel or equipment during the standoff at the airport in the closing phase of the crisis, and consequently all of the Israeli hostages were killed.
During the campaigns in North Africa and Italy, most fighting occurred in arid and mountainous regions where the potential for concealment was limited, in contrast to Western and Central Europe.
Though these may not kill the sniper, they will reveal his/her location.
They were also the first known military unit to wear a ghillie suit.
In one session of duty, lasting just two hours, they shot and killed eight Taliban.
Burnham distinguished himself in wars in South Africa, Rhodesia, and in Arizona fighting the Apaches, and his definitive work, ''Scouting on Two Continents,'' provides a dramatic and enlightening picture of what a sniper was at the time and how he operated.
The key to sniping is accuracy, which applies to both the weapon and the shooter.
The range to the target is measured or estimated as precisely as conditions permit and correct range estimation becomes absolutely critical at long ranges, because a bullet travels with a curved trajectory and the sniper must compensate for this by aiming higher at longer distances.
Military snipers, who generally do not engage targets at less than , usually attempt body shots, aiming at the chest.
For example, over a four-month period in early 2011, two Taliban snipers shot dead two British soldiers and wounded six others at an outpost in Qadrat, Helmand province.
Once the angle where the bullet came from was determined, a large caliber gun, such as a Lahti L-39 "Norsupyssy" ("Elephant rifle") anti-tank rifle was fired at the sniper to kill him.
The sniper is particularly suited to combat environments where one side is at a disadvantage.
If the exact distance is not known the sniper may compensate incorrectly and the bullet path may be too high or low.
Over time, rifling, along with other gunnery advances, has increased the performance of modern firearms.
All other values, such as windage, time-to-target, impact velocity, and energy will be calculated based on the actual range of 500 meters.
Harrison mentions in reports that the environmental conditions were perfect for long range shooting, "... no wind, mild weather, clear visibility."
The papier-mâché figures were painted to resemble soldiers to draw sniper fire.
12.7×108mm (Russian)
In the open terrain of South Africa the marksmen were a crucial component to the outcome of the battle.
Usually, Soviet snipers were unable to resist the temptation of an apparently easy kill.
This meant that whenever a sniper was in the area, the location of the sniper could be determined after the sniper had fired a few shots.
The Allies used their own snipers in the Pacific, notably the U.S. Marines, who used M1903 Springfield rifles.
Both spotter and flanker carries additional ammunition and associated equipment.
Within the Table of Organization and Equipment for both the United States Army and the U.S. Marine Corps, the operator of the weapon has an assistant trained to fulfill multiple roles, in addition to being sniper qualified in the operation of the weapon.
It is not unusual for the spotter to be equipped with a notepad and a laptop computer specifically for performing these calculations.
Although sharpshooters existed on all sides, the Germans specially equipped some of their soldiers with scoped rifles that could pick off enemy soldiers showing their heads out of their trench.
Among the training materials, there included an insurgent sniper training manual that was posted on the Internet.
Some were equipped with rubber surgical tubing so the dummy could "smoke" a cigarette and thus appear realistic.
Another innovation was the use of a dummy head to find the location of an enemy sniper.
After firing a few shots from a certain position, snipers move unseen to another location before the enemy can determine where he or she is and mount a counter-attack.
Sniper training varied from place to place, resulting in wide variation in the qualities of snipers.
In other, rarer situations, relocation is used to eliminate the factor of wind.
7 mm Remington Magnum
The 'effect-firing' sS round featured an extra carefully measured propellant charge and seated a heavy 12.8&nbsp;gram (198 gr) full-metal-jacketed boat-tail projectile of match-grade build quality, lacking usual features such as a seating ring to improve the already high ballistic coefficient of .584 (G1) further.
The USMC standard is that 1 mil (that is, 1 milliradian) equals 3.438 MOA (minute of arc, or, equivalently, minute of angle), while the US Army standard is 3.6 MOA, chosen so as to give a diameter of 1 yard at a distance of 1000 yards (or equivalently, a diameter of 1 meter at a range of 1 kilometer.)
In the field, a bipod can be used instead.
Knowledge of sniper field-craft will assist in this task.
Soviet snipers were trained in their skills as marksmen, in using the terrain to hide themselves from the enemy and the ability to work alongside regular forces.
This happened during World War I, and World War II, for example the second Biscari Massacre when 36 suspected snipers were lined up and shot on 14 July 1943.
Burnham fittingly described these scouts as "half wolf and half jackrabbit.".
The slant of visible convections near the ground can be used to estimate crosswinds, and correct the point of aim.
To determine the range to a target without a laser rangefinder, the sniper may use the mil dot reticle on a scope to accurately find the range.
Most notably, Timothy Murphy shot and killed General Simon Fraser of Balnain on 7 October 1777 at a distance of about 400 yards.
In the Pacific War, the Empire of Japan trained snipers.
