As a result, it is extremely difficult to encounter two identical snowflakes.
In warmer clouds an aerosol particle or "ice nucleus" must be present in (or in contact with) the droplet to act as a nucleus.
When powdery, snow drifts with the wind from the location where it originally fell, forming deposits with a depth of several meters in isolated locations.
The identity of this substance is not known with certainty, but speculation has ranged from elemental tellurium to lead sulfide (galena).
The stronger the temperature decrease with height, the deeper the clouds get, and the greater the precipitation rate becomes.
''Snow shower'' is a term for an intermittent snowfall, while ''flurry'' is used for very light, brief snowfalls.
The combined effects can lead to a "snow day" on which gatherings such as school or work are officially canceled.
Increases in density above this initial compression occur primarily by melting and refreezing, caused by temperatures above freezing or by direct solar radiation.
When snow falls in significant quantities, travel by foot, car, airplane and other means becomes severely restricted, but other methods of mobility become possible, such as the use of snowmobiles, snowshoes and skis.
Once the snow is on the ground, it will settle under its own weight (largely due to differential evaporation) until its density is approximately 30% of water.
Lake-effect snowfall can be heavy locally.
In some areas, such as some states in the United States, schools are given a yearly quota of snow days (or "calamity days").
When the temperature falls below , snow will squeak when walked upon due to the crushing of the ice crystals within the snow.
The Magellan probe imaged a highly reflective substance at the tops of Venus's highest mountain peaks which bore a strong resemblance to terrestrial snow.
The world's snowiest city with a population over one million is Sapporo, Japan, with an average yearly snowfall of .
The crystals were not flakes in the usual sense but rather hollow hexagonal prisms.
When a snow measurement is made, various networks exist across the United States and elsewhere where rainfall measurements can be submitted through the Internet, such as CoCoRAHS or GLOBE.
This greatly amplifies light emitted from city lights, causing the 'bright night' effect.
At temperatures below , the crystal development becomes column-like, although many more complex growth patterns also form such as side-planes, bullet-rosettes and also planar types depending on the conditions and ice nuclei.
This means that  of snow melts down to  of water.
Because of this temperature difference, warmth and moisture are transported upward, condensing into vertically oriented clouds (see satellite picture) that produce snow showers.
Snow can be used to alter the format of outdoor games such as capture the flag, or for snowball fights.
Since 1928 Michigan Technological University in Houghton, Michigan has held an annual winter carnival in mid-February, during which a large snow sculpture contest takes place between various clubs, fraternities, and organizations in the community and the university.
A snowman is created by making a man shaped figure out of snow&nbsp;– often using a large, shaped snowball for the body and a smaller snowball for the head which is often decorated with simple household items&nbsp;– traditionally including a carrot for a nose, and coal for eyes, nose and mouth; occasionally including old clothes such as a top hat or scarf.
File:Falling snowflakes in England.JPG|Falling snowflakes in England
Once on the ground, snow can be categorized as powdery when light and fluffy, fresh when recent but heavier, granular when it begins the cycle of melting and refreezing, and eventually ice once it comes down, after multiple melting and refreezing cycles, into a dense mass called snow pack.
The snowpack absorbs solar shortwave radiation that is partially blocked by cloud cover and reflected by snow surface.
During snowmelt, acidic precipitation which previously fell into the snow pack is released, which harms marine life.
A snowflake consists of roughly 1019 water molecules, which are added to its core at different rates and in different patterns, depending on the changing temperature and humidity within the atmosphere that the snowflake falls through on its way to the ground.
For a daily total snowfall, four six-hour snowfall measurements are summed.
Some agricultural areas depend on an accumulation of snow during winter that will melt gradually in spring, providing water for crop growth.
This substance arguably formed from a similar process to snow, albeit at a far higher temperature.
Accumulated snow is removed to make travel easier and safer, and to decrease the long-term impact of a heavy snowfall.
Ice nuclei are very rare compared to that cloud condensation nuclei on which liquid droplets form.
Types that fall in the form of a ball due to melting and refreezing, rather than a flake, are hail, ice pellets or snow grains.
Steady snows of significant intensity are often referred to as "snowstorms".
Experiments show that this "homogeneous" nucleation of cloud droplets only occurs at temperatures lower than .
Many rivers originating in mountainous or high-latitude regions receive a significant portion of their flow from snowmelt.
A generally insignificant heat exchange takes place by conduction between the snowpack and the ground.
For example, if the snow covering a given area has a water equivalent of , then it will melt into a pool of water  deep covering the same area.
The most common snow particles are visibly irregular.
If a network is not available in the area where one lives, the nearest local weather office will likely be interested in the measurement.
These aggregates are snowflakes, and are usually the type of ice particle that falls to the ground.
The droplet then grows by diffusion of water molecules in the air (vapor) onto the ice crystal surface where they are collected.
Areas with significant snow each year can store the winter snow within an ice house, which can be used to cool structures during the following summer.
It was measured at Tamarack, California at altitude of  in March 1911.
The water equivalent of snowfall is measured to monitor how much liquid is available to flood rivers from meltwater that will occur during the following spring.
In contrast, if much of the melt is from glaciated or nearly glaciated areas, the melt continues through the warm season, with peak flows occurring in mid to late summer.
The cyclone's comma head pattern is a comma-shaped area of clouds and precipitation found around mature extratropical cyclones.
The temperature decrease with height and cloud depth are directly affected by both the water temperature and the large-scale environment.
The process of precipitating snow is called '''snowfall'''.
Snowfall can have a small negative effect on yearly yield from solar photovoltaic systems.
The shape of the snowflake is determined broadly by the temperature and humidity at which it is formed.
Closer to the Equator, the snow load becomes less important and may or may not be the governing factor.
Because water droplets are so much more numerous than the ice crystals due to their sheer abundance, the crystals are able to grow to hundreds of micrometers or millimeters in size at the expense of the water droplets by a process known as the Wegner-Bergeron-Findeison process.
It is more likely that two snowflakes could become virtually identical if their environments were similar enough.
Snowfall is defined by the U.S. National Weather Service as a being the maximum depth of snow on a snowboard (typically a piece of plywood painted white) observed during a six-hour period.
Basic utilities such as electricity, telephone lines, and gas supply can also fail.
The small temperature change from before to after a snowfall is a result of the heat transfer between the snowpack and the air.
The ''snow water equivalent'' is the product of snow depth and the snow bulk density.
When heavy snow occurs early in the fall (or, on rarer occasions, late in the spring), significant damage can occur to trees still in leaf.
Fresh snow reflects 90% or more of ultraviolet radiation, which causes snow blindness, also reducing absorption of sunlight by the ground.
The world record for snow depth is .
Although the ice is clear, scattering of light by the crystal facets and hollows/imperfections mean that the crystals often appear white in color due to diffuse reflection of the whole spectrum of light by the small ice particles.
Artificial nuclei include particles of silver iodide and dry ice, and these are used to stimulate precipitation in cloud seeding.
This allows the snow to be used through the summer for refrigeration and air conditioning, which requires far less electricity than traditional cooling methods.
When the visibility is over , snow is considered light.
Fresh snow absorbs sound, lowering ambient noise over a landscape because the trapped air between snowflakes attenuates vibration.
It has an open and therefore soft, white, and fluffy structure, unless subjected to external pressure.
Newly fallen snow acts as a sound-absorbing material, which minimizes sound over its surface.
While there is little or no water on Venus, there is a phenomenon which is quite similar to snow.
Moisture exchange between the snowpack and the overlying air mass is accompanied by latent heat transfer that is influenced by vapor pressure gradient and air wind.
In both types of gauges once the snowfall/ice is finished accumulating, or as its height in the gauge approaches , the snow is melted and the water amount recorded.
Types that fall in the form of a ball due to melting and refreezing cycles, rather than a flake, are known as graupel, with ice pellets and snow pellets as types of graupel associated with wintry precipitation.
In mountainous areas, heavy snowfall accumulates when air is forced to ascend the mountains and squeeze out precipitation along their windward slopes, which in cold conditions, falls in the form of snow.
These droplets are able to remain liquid at temperatures lower than , because to freeze, a few molecules in the droplet need to get together by chance to form an arrangement similar to that in an ice lattice.
However, when there is also cloud cover, light is then reflected back to the ground.
In Canada and the United Kingdom, the criteria are similar.
If snowfall stays on the ground for a series of years uninterrupted, the snowpack develops into a mass of ice called glacier.
Ibuki in Shiga Prefecture, Japan at altitude of  on February 14, 1927.
Clays, desert dust and biological particles may be effective, although to what extent is unclear.
Thundersnow is possible within a cyclone's comma head and within lake effect precipitation bands.
Large amounts of snow which accumulate on top of man-made structures can lead to structural failure.
Weighing gauges with antifreeze should do fine with snow, but again, the funnel needs to be removed before the event begins.
File:FluffySnowfallByFence.webm|Fluffy Snowfall in Kelowna.
This often makes the river's flow highly seasonal resulting in periodic flooding during the spring months and at least in dry mountainous regions like the mountain West of the US or most of Iran and Afghanistan, very low flow for the rest of the year.
Snowfall can be very difficult to measure due to melting, compacting, blowing and drifting.
The world's biggest snowcastle, the SnowCastle of Kemi, is built in Kemi, Finland every winter.
It is a quantity of type columnar mass density, having units of area density (kg/m2), though it is usually reported normalized by the volumetric density of liquid water (units kg/m3), thus being expressed in units of length (e.g., millimeter or inches).
These acoustic qualities quickly minimize and reverse, once a layer of freezing rain falls on top of snow cover.
Snowball softball tournaments are held in snowy areas, usually using a bright orange softball for visibility, and burlap sacks filled with snow for the bases.
The existence of a snowpack keeps temperatures lower than they would be otherwise, as the whiteness of the snow reflects most sunlight, and any absorbed heat goes into melting the snow rather than increasing its temperature.
In other states, all snow days must be made up.
Moderate snow describes snowfall with visibility restrictions between 0.5 and 1&nbsp;km.
In mountainous areas, heavy snow is possible where upslope flow is maximized within windward sides of the terrain at elevation, if the atmosphere is cold enough.
Although a person's footsteps remain a visible lifeline within a snow-covered landscape, snow cover is considered a general danger to hiking since the snow obscures landmarks and makes the landscape itself appear uniform.
When heavy, wet snow with a snow-water equivalent (SWE) ratio of between 6:1 and 12:1 (in extreme cases, as heavy as 4:1) and a weight in excess of 10 pounds per square foot (~40&nbsp;kg/m2) piles onto trees or electricity lines&nbsp;– particularly if the trees have full leaves or are not adapted to snow&nbsp;– significant damage may occur on a scale usually associated with hurricanes.
In numerous cases, yellow, black, red (or pink), blue, brown and orange snow has been reported.
At the end of the six-hour period, all snow is cleared from the measuring surface.
Flat areas of snow can be used to make snow angels, a popular pastime for children.
Many winter sports, such as skiing, snowboarding, snowmobiling, and snowshoeing depend upon snow.
As snow degrades, its surface can develop characteristic ablation textures such as suncups or penitentes.
In colder climates, snow lies on the ground all winter.
The band of precipitation that is associated with their warm front is often extensive, forced by weak upward vertical motion of air over the frontal boundary, which condenses as it cools off and produces precipitation within an elongated band, which is wide and stratiform, meaning falling out of nimbostratus clouds.
A variation on snow has been observed on Venus, though composed of metallic compounds and occurring at a substantially higher temperature.
While heavy snowfall often occurs during blizzard conditions, falling snow is not a requirement, as blowing snow can create a ground blizzard.
Populations living in snow-prone areas have developed various ways to travel across the snow, such as skis, snowshoes, and sleds pulled by horses, dogs, or other animals and later, snowmobiles.
In some areas with abundant snowfall, such as Yamagata Prefecture, Japan, people harvest snow and store it surrounded by insulation in ice houses.
The liquid equivalent of snowfall may be evaluated using a snow gauge or with a standard rain gauge having a diameter of 100&nbsp;mm (4&nbsp;in; plastic) or 200&nbsp;mm (8&nbsp;in; metal).
These snow bands typically have a width of .
Matching snow crystals were discovered in Wisconsin in 1988.
In such places, water equivalent is of great interest to water managers wishing to predict spring runoff and the water supply of cities downstream.
When moist air tries to dislodge an arctic air mass, overrunning snow can result within the poleward side of the elongated precipitation band.
Snow fences are constructed in order to help control snow drifting in the vicinity of roads, to improve highway safety.
Snow's large reflection of light makes night skies much brighter, since reflected light is directed back up into the sky.
This is due to the trapped air between the individual crystalline flakes, trapping sound waves and dampening vibrations.
From under water, snowfall has a unique sound when compared to other forms of precipitation, and the sound varies little with differences in the snowflakes' size and shape.
Once a droplet has frozen, it grows in the supersaturated environment—one where air is saturated with respect to ice when the temperature is below the freezing point.
Walking across snowfall produces a squeaking sound at low temperatures.
The designs of all structures and buildings use the ground snow load determined by professional engineers and designers.
If it melts into water and refreezes upon sensitive crops, such as oranges, the resulting ice will protect the fruit from exposure to lower temperatures.
Data on ground snow in the U.S.A. are provided by the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE7-latest edition) for most jurisdictions.
Heavy snowfall describes conditions when visibility is less than 0.5&nbsp;km.
Within the ''cold sector'', poleward and west of the cyclone center, small scale or mesoscale bands of heavy snow can occur within a cyclone's comma head pattern.
If a crystal has started forming in a column growth regime, at around , and then falls into the warmer plate-like regime, then plate or dendritic crystals sprout at the end of the column, producing so called "capped columns".
File:Slow Blowing across Lake Okanagan near Maude Roxby Wetlands.webm|Slow Blowing across Lake Okanagan near the Maude Roxby Wetlands.
Each year there is a central theme, and prizes are awarded based on creativity.
The term snow flurry is used to describe the lightest form of a snow shower.
Substantial snowfall can disrupt public infrastructure and services, slowing human activity even in regions that are accustomed to such weather.
File:Duluth blizzard, December 2007.jpg|Snowdrifts in Duluth, Minnesota, March 2007
By late spring, snow densities typically reach a maximum of 50% of water.
Snow cover can protect crops from extreme cold.
Southwest of extratropical cyclones, curved cyclonic flow bringing cold air across the relatively warm water bodies can lead to narrow lake-effect snow bands.
Since snow is composed of small ice particles, it is a granular material.
This load is typically the governing design factor on roofs and structural elements exposed to the effects of snow in the northern United States.
After attaching to hillsides, blown snow can evolve into a snow slab, which is an avalanche hazard on steep slopes.
A similar brightening effect occurs when no snow is falling and there is a full moon and a large amount of snow.
Initial attempts to find identical snowflakes by photographing thousands their images under a microscope from 1885 onward by Wilson Alwyn Bentley found the wide variety of snowflakes we know about today.
In the United States, a blizzard occurs when two conditions are met for a period of three hours or more: A sustained wind or frequent gusts to , and sufficient snow in the air to reduce visibility to less than .
Cloud temperatures and physical processes in the cloud affect the shape of individual snow crystals.
New snow commonly has a density of around 8% of water.
Extratropical cyclones can bring cold and dangerous conditions with heavy rain and snow with winds exceeding , (sometimes referred to as windstorms in Europe).
When powdery, snow moves with the wind from the location where it originally landed, forming deposits called snowdrifts that may have a depth of several meters.
Snowflakes come in a variety of sizes and shapes.
One of the recognizable recreational uses of snow is in building snowmen.
Another type of gauge used to measure the liquid equivalent of snowfall is the weighing precipitation gauge.
When snow is of variable intensity and short duration, it is described as a "snow shower".
Rain gauges are adjusted to winter by removing the funnel and inner cylinder and allowing the snow/freezing rain to collect inside the outer cylinder.
Antifreeze liquid may be added to melt the snow or ice that falls into the gauge.
After attaching itself to hillsides, blown snow can evolve into a snow slab—an avalanche hazard on steep slopes.
The energy balance of the snowpack itself is dictated by several heat exchange processes.
The corresponding depletion of water vapor causes the ice crystals to grow at the droplets' expense.
Snowfall can be beneficial to agriculture by serving as a thermal insulator, conserving the heat of the Earth and protecting crops from subfreezing weather.
In the Northern Hemisphere, poleward is towards the North Pole, or north.
A frozen equivalent of dew known as hoar frost forms on a snow pack when winds are light and there is ample low-level moisture over the snow pack.
The wedge and tipping bucket gauges will have problems with snow measurement.
Because of the ruggedness of terrain, forecasting the location of heavy snowfall remains a significant challenge.
These large crystals are an efficient source of precipitation, since they fall through the atmosphere due to their mass, and may collide and stick together in clusters, or aggregates.
Snow blindness (also known as ultraviolet keratitis, photokeratitis or niphablepsia) is a painful eye condition, caused by exposure of unprotected eyes to the ultraviolet (UV) rays in bright sunlight reflected from snow or ice.
The North American record for snow depth is .
This condition is a problem in polar regions and at high altitudes, as with every  of elevation (above sea level), the intensity of UV rays increases by 4%.
Between  and , the crystals will form needles or hollow columns or prisms (long thin pencil-like shapes).
While snow in its pure form is white in colour, different colours can be caused by several factors including algae and air pollution.
These bands in the comma head are associated with areas of frontogenesis, or zones of strengthening temperature contrast.
Once it is blown around by the wind and exposed to sunshine, snow hardens and its sound-softening quality diminishes.
File:Fresh snow.JPG|Fresh snow on a thin twig in Poland.
In addition, snow can make roads much harder to travel and vehicles attempting to use them can easily become stuck.
Within the Southern Hemisphere, poleward is towards the South Pole, or south.
Highly branched or dendritic crystals tend to have more space between the arms of ice that form the snowflake and this snow will therefore have a lower density, often referred to as "dry" snow.
Measurements are made manually at marked locations known as ''snow courses'', and remotely using special scales called ''snow pillows''.
Types of snow can be designated by the shape of the flakes, the rate of accumulation, and the way the snow collects on the ground.
Within motion pictures, the sound of walking through snow is simulated using cornstarch, salt, or cat litter.
Air and ground transport may be greatly inhibited or shut down entirely.
Once on the ground, snow can be categorized as ''powdery'' when fluffy, ''granular'' when it begins the cycle of melting and refreezing, and eventually ''ice'' once it packs down into a dense drift after multiple melting and refreezing cycles.
Where relatively warm water bodies are present, for example because of water evaporation from lakes, lake-effect snowfall becomes a concern downwind of the warm lakes within the cold cyclonic flow around the backside of extratropical cyclones.
A long-wave heat exchange takes place between the snowpack and its surrounding environment that includes overlying air mass, tree cover and clouds.
If covered by a layer of freezing rain, the hardened frozen surface acts to echo sounds, similar to concrete.
The term ''snow storm'' can describe a heavy snowfall, while a ''blizzard'' involves snow and wind, obscuring visibility.
For example, schools may extend the remaining school days later into the afternoon, shorten spring break, or delay the start of summer vacation.
Once the quota is exceeded, the snow days must be made up.
Spring snow melt is a major source of water supply to areas in temperate zones near mountains that catch and hold winter snow, especially those with a prolonged dry summer.
At some automatic weather stations an ultrasonic snow depth sensor may be used to augment the precipitation gauge.
From  to  the shape reverts to plate-like, often with branched or dendritic features.
Then the droplet freezes around this "nucleus".
It was measured on the slope of Mt.
Preceding an avalanche is a phenomenon known as an avalanche wind caused by the approaching avalanche itself, which adds to its destructive potential.
Snow can be used to make snow cones, also known as snowballs, which are usually eaten in the summer months.
In some of these cases, yellow snow may cause health hazards.
Too volatile to condense on the surface, it rose in gas form to cooler higher elevations, where it then fell as precipitation.
Conditions that create columnar or plate-like crystals will have much less air space within the crystal and will therefore be denser and feel "wetter".
Snowfall's intensity is determined by visibility.
Snow can fall poleward of these systems' associated warm fronts and within their comma head precipitation patterns (called such due to the comma-like shape of the cloud and precipitation pattern around the poleward and west sides of extratropical cyclones).
An avalanche can occur upon a sudden thermal or mechanical impact upon snow that has accumulated on a mountain, which causes the snow to rush downhill en masse.
In areas that normally have very little or no snow, a snow day may occur when there is only light accumulation or even the threat of snowfall, since those areas are unprepared to handle any amount of snow.
Those bands bring strong localized snowfall, which can be understood as follows: Large water bodies such as lakes efficiently store heat that results in significant temperature differences (larger than 13&nbsp;°C 23&nbsp;°F) between the water surface and the air above.
A blizzard is a weather condition involving snow and has varying definitions in different parts of the world.
Rain on snow can add significant amounts of thermal energy to the snowpack.
When the snow does not all melt in the summer it evolves into firn, where individual granules become more spherical in nature, evolving into a glacier as the ice flows downhill.
Snow cover as thin as  thick changes the acoustic properties of a landscape.
Attempts to compensate for snow/ice by warming the tipping bucket meet with limited success, since snow may sublimate if the gauge is kept much above the freezing temperature.
