He built on the work of Alonso de Sandoval, S.J., in this mission.
By the time of Ignatius' death in 1556, the Jesuits were already operating a network of 74 colleges on three continents.
In 1768, the only Omagua mission that was left was San Joaquin de Omaguas, since it had been moved to a new location on the Napo river away from the Bandeirantes.
On 22 April 2006, Feast of Our Lady, Mother of the Society of Jesus, Pope Benedict XVI greeted thousands of Jesuits on pilgrimage to Rome, and took the opportunity to thank God "for having granted to your Company the gift of men of extraordinary sanctity and of exceptional apostolic zeal such as St Ignatius of Loyola, St Francis Xavier and Bl Peter Faber".
formulary controversy and ''Lettres Provinciales'', by Blaise Pascal).
Popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI have appointed ten Jesuit Cardinals to notable jobs.
In 1639, the Audiencia of Quito organized an expedition  to renew its exploration of the Amazon river and the Quito Jesuit (Jesuita Quiteño)  Father Cristóbal de Acuña was a part of this expedition.
When Samuel de Champlain established the foundations of the French colony at Québec, he was aware of native tribes who possessed their own languages, customs, and traditions.
In the immense territory of Mainas, also referred to as Maynas, the Jesuits of Quito made contact with a number of indigenous tribes which spoke 40 different languages, and founded a total of 173 Jesuit missions with a total population of 150,000 inhabitants.
Two Jesuit missionaries, Johann Grueber and Albert Dorville, reached Lhasa in Tibet in 1661, and the Italian Jesuit Ippolito Desideri established a new Jesuit mission in Lhasa and Central Tibet (1716–21) and gained an exceptional mastery of Tibetan language and culture, writing a long and very detailed account of the country and its religion as well as treatises in Tibetan that attempted to refute key Buddhist ideas and establish the truth of Roman Catholic Christianity.
Although most haciendas had a free work force of permanent or seasonal laborers, the Jesuit haciendas in Mexico had a significant number of black slaves.
In 1641, Father Cristobal de Acuña published in Madrid a memoire of his expedition to the Amazon river.
Monastic orders were permitted in 1897, but the ban on Jesuits was only lifted in 1956.
They were ordained at Venice by the bishop of Arbe (24 June).
Vatican Radio was run by the Jesuit Filippo Soccorsi, and spoke out against Nazi oppression—particularly with regard to Poland, and to Vichy-French anti-Semitism.
Pierre-Jean De Smet was a Belgian Roman Catholic priest and Jesuit, active in missionary work among the Native Americans of the Midwestern United States and Western United States in the mid-19th century.
In 1602, Father Rafael Ferrer began to explore the Aguarico, Napo, and Marañon rivers (Sucumbios region, in what is today Ecuador and Peru), and between 1604 and 1605 set up missions among the Cofane natives.
Ignatius of Loyola founded the society after being wounded in battle and experiencing a religious conversion.
A typical conception of the mission of a Jesuit school will often contain such concepts as proposing Christ as the model of human life, the pursuit of excellence in teaching and learning and lifelong spiritual and intellectual growth.
Usually, this theological free thinking is academically oriented, being prevalent at the university level.
He sent his companions as missionaries in Europe to create schools, colleges, and seminaries.
In 1624 the French Recollects realized the magnitude of their task and sought other missionaries.
In 1632 Quebec was returned to the French under the Treaty of Saint Germain-en-Laye and by 1632 the Jesuits were back in Huron territory, called Huronia.
Ignatius's plan of the order's organization was approved by Pope Paul III in 1540 by a bull containing the "Formula of the Institute".
An author of 22 books and over 700 theological articles, Cardinal Dulles died on 12 December 2008 at Fordham University, where he taught for twenty years as the Laurence J. McGinley Professor of Religion and Society.
The Exercises became both the basis for the training of Jesuits and one of the essential ministries of the order: giving the exercises to others in what became known as "retreats".
A major figure in the first wave of Jesuits was José de Acosta (1540–1600), whose book ''Historia natural y moral de las Indias'' (1590) introduced Europeans to Spain's American empire via fluid prose and keen observation and explanation, based on fifteen years in Peru and a bit of time in New Spain (Mexico).
Due to outside conflict the Jesuits were forced to leave all of New France and their efforts as Quebec was captured by the Kirke brothers under the English flag.
As elsewhere in the Spanish empire, the Jesuits were expelled in Mexico in 1767.
This victory set the stage for the golden age of the Jesuits in Paraguay.
The Spanish authorities chose not to defend the settlements, and the Jesuits and their thousands of neophytes thus had little means to protect themselves.
The Jesuit Order was banned from France, although this ban was quickly lifted.
In a 1545 letter to John III of Portugal, he requested an Inquisition to be installed in Goa (see Goa Inquisition).
In 1594 they founded the first Roman-style academic institution in the East, St. Paul Jesuit College in Macau.
Jesuits work in education (founding schools, colleges, universities and seminaries), intellectual research, and cultural pursuits.
Their re-introduction to Mexico was "to assist in the education of the poorer classes and much of their property was restored to them."
The General Congregation is a meeting of all of the assistants, provincials and additional representatives who are elected by the professed Jesuits of each province.
In the mid-seventeenth century, bishop of Puebla, Don Juan de Palafox took on the Jesuits over this matter and was so soundly defeated that he was recalled to Spain, where he became the bishop of the minor diocese of Osma.
It was said that the two men had died as martyrs of the Catholic Church and that their bones would be holy relics.
Many of the schools are named after St. Francis Xavier and other prominent Jesuits.
The action of the Jesuits saved many natives from being enslaved by Europeans, but also disturbed their ancestral way of life and inadvertently helped spread infectious diseases against which the aborigines had no natural defenses.
In April 2005, Thomas J. Reese, S.J., editor of the American Jesuit weekly magazine ''America'', resigned at the request of the Society.
The General is also required to have an "admonitor", a confidential advisor whose specific job is to warn the General honestly and confidentially when he is acting imprudently or is straying toward disobedience to the Pope or heresy.
The initiative has provided the Society with a platform for examining issues brought about by the worldwide Catholic sex abuse cases, including the priesthood, celibacy, sexuality, women's roles, and the role of the laity.
Motezuma's ''Corona mexicana, o Historia de los nueve Motezumas'' was completed in 1696.
From this standpoint, the function of this debate is less to challenge the magisterium than to illustrate the church's ability to compromise in a pluralist society based on shared values that do not always align with religious teachings.
The extent to which the Jesuits accommodated Chinese beliefs and rituals resulted in the Chinese Rites controversy.
Father Brébeuf learned the native language and created the first Huron language dictionary.
''La Civiltà Cattolica'', a periodical produced in Rome by the Jesuits, has often been used as a semi-official platform for popes and Vatican officials to float ideas for discussion or hint at future statements or positions.
The current Superior General of the Jesuits is Adolfo Nicolás.
Jesuits have been accused of using casuistry to obtain justifications for unjustifiable actions.
As his health declined, the Nazis feared the creation of a martyr and sent him to the Abbey of Ettal, but Mayer died in 1945.
Following his resignation, Reese spent a year-long sabbatical at Santa Clara University before being named a fellow at the Woodstock Theological Center in Washington, D.C.
In 2013, Jorge Bergolio, S.J, became Pope Francis.
Because of their success, the Paraguayan Jesuits gained many enemies, and the ''reducciones'' fell prey to changing times.
Those same elite families hoped that a son with a vocation to the priesthood would be accepted as a Jesuit.
The historic curia of St. Ignatius is now part of the ''Collegio del Gesù'' attached to the Church of the Gesù, the Jesuit Mother Church.
Pictured here is the Sanctuary of Loyola in Azpeitia, Spain, the main Jesuit shrine in the birthplace of Saint Ignatius of Loyola.
For this, he told them to "adhere totally to the Word of God and to the Magisterium's task of preserving the integral truth and unity of Catholic doctrine".
Another non-military German Resistance group, dubbed the "Frau Solf Tea Party" by Gestapo, included the Jesuit Fr Friedrich Erxleben.
The Jesuits have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science.
The assassinations galvanized the Society's peace and justice movements, including annual protests at the Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation at Fort Benning, Georgia, United States, where several of the assassins had been trained under US government sponsorship.
The term ''societas'' in Latin is derived from ''socius'', a partner or comrade.
The Society is characterized by its ministries in the fields of missionary work, human rights, social justice and, most notably, higher education.
Although this revolt failed, it was one of the earliest and most serious risings against Spanish authority in the New World and caused the crown to question its continued support for the Jesuits.
Meanwhile, the number of Jesuit institutions has grown considerably, due in large part to a late 20th-century focus on the establishment of Jesuit secondary schools in inner-city areas and an increase in lay association with the order.
The first grammar of the Tupi language was compiled by José de Anchieta and printed in Coimbra in 1595.
The new Jesuit ''reducciones'' were threatened by the slave-raiding ''mamelucos'', who survived by capturing Indians and selling them as slaves to planters in Brazil.
They would blame the outbreak of disease on the Jesuits, claiming that they were casting spells from their books.
The Iroquois killed missionaries, burned villages and scattered many of the Huron natives.
Another expert quoted by Woods said the scientific revolution brought by the Jesuits coincided with a time when science was at a very low level in China.
The '''Society of Jesus''' (, ''S.J.
Today, Jesuit colleges and universities are located in over one hundred nations around the world.
Between 1637 and 1652, there were 14 missions established along the Marañón River and its southern tributaries—the Huallaga and the Ucayali rivers.
They called themselves the Company of Jesus, and also ''Amigos en El Señor'' or "Friends in the Lord", because they felt "they were placed together by Christ".
These natives that inhabited modern day Ontario, Québec, and the areas around Lake Simcoe and Georgian Bay were the Montagnais, the Algonquins and the Huron.
The Jesuits today form the largest single religious order of priests and brothers in the Catholic Church, (although they are surpassed by the Franciscan ''family'' of first orders Order of Friars Minor (OFM), OFM Capuchins, and Conventuals).
Contemporary critics of the Society of Jesus include Avro Manhattan, Alberto Rivera, and Malachi Martin, author of ''The Jesuits: The Society of Jesus and the Betrayal of the Roman Catholic Church'' (1987).
Several other Jesuits are known to have rescued or given refuge to Jews during that period.
For instance, before his death in 1708, Jacques Gravier, vicar general of the Illinois Mission in the Mississippi River valley, compiled a Kaskaskia Illinois–French dictionary, considered the most extensive among works of the missionaries.
The Jesuits were allowed to return to Mexico in 1840 when General Antonio López de Santa Anna was once more president of Mexico.
Before he became Pope, he was appointed bishop when he was in "virtual estrangement from the Jesuits" due to views about his orthodoxy and his opposition to theology of liberation.
He wrote an important history of Mexico during his exile in Italy.
José de Anchieta and Manuel da Nóbrega, founders of the city of São Paulo, Brazil, were also Jesuit priests.
Its famous opening statement echoed Ignatius' military background:
The Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries introduced Western science and astronomy, then undergoing its own revolution, to China.
For that reason in Peru, the Jesuits focused on education of elite men rather than the indigenous populations.
Within a few decades of the expulsion, most of what the Jesuits had accomplished was lost.
A plaque commemorating the 152 Jesuit priests who gave of their lives during the Holocaust was installed at Rockhurst University, a Jesuit university, in Kansas City, Missouri, United States, in April 2007.
Another Jesuit, Oswald Tesimond, managed to escape arrest for his involvement in the Gunpowder Plot.
references to Ignatius' history as a soldier and the society's commitment to accepting orders anywhere and to endure any conditions.
It is partly because the Jesuits, such as Antonio Ruiz de Montoya, protected the natives (whom certain Spanish and Portuguese colonizers wanted to enslave) that the Society of Jesus was suppressed.
These missions were called the  Mainas Missions after the Mainas natives that were found on the banks of the Marañon river, around the Pongo de Manseriche region, close to the Spanish settlement of Borja.
The Superior General of Jesuits at the outbreak of war was Wlodzimierz Ledochowski, a Pole.
These missions were continually attacked by the Brazilian Bandeirantes beginning in the year 1705.
The steep declines in Europe and North America and consistent decline in Latin America have not been offset by the significant increase in South Asia and a small rise in Africa."
A vicar general and secretary of the society run day-to-day administration.
The Jesuit vow against "ambitioning prelacies" was a deliberate effort to prevent greed for money or power from invading Jesuit circles.
After the collapse of the Huron tribe, the Jesuits were to undertake the task of converting the Iroquois natives themselves.
Jesuits and monastic orders are not permitted.
Adolfo Nicolás Pachón who was elected on 19 January 2008.
The Jesuits arrived in the Viceroyalty of Peru by 1571; it was a key area of Spanish empire, with not only dense indigenous populations, but also huge deposits of silver at Potosí.
The Portuguese Jesuit, António de Andrade founded a mission in Western Tibet in 1624.
The ''reducciones'', which became quite wealthy, exported goods and supplied Indian armies.
Included in this would be research, training, advocacy, and action for human development, as well as direct services.
The Jesuits in New Spain distinguished themselves in several ways.
The Jesuits became involved in the Huron mission in 1626 and lived among the Huron peoples.
In the Jesuit order, the formal title of the Superior General is ''Praepositus Generalis'', Latin for "provost-general", more commonly called Father General or General, who is elected by the General Congregation for life or until he resigns; he is confirmed by the Pope and has absolute authority in running the society.
It meets irregularly and rarely, normally to elect a new superior general and/or to take up some major policy issues for the order.
With the French colonization of New France during the 17th century, Jesuits played an active role in North America.
He died in China after a decade of evangelism in Southern India.
Jesuit priests such as Manuel da Nóbrega and José de Anchieta founded several towns in Brazil in the 16th century, including São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, and were very influential in the pacification, religious conversion and education of Indian nations.
At the time when the Jesuits were expelled from Spanish America in 1767, the Jesuits of Quito registered 36 missions run by 25  Jesuits of Quito in the Audiencia of Quito—six Jesuits of Quito in the Napo Missions and Aguarico Missions, and 19 Jesuits of Quito in the Pastaza Missions and Iquitos Missions of Maynas with a total population of 20,000 inhabitants.
On October 2, 2016, General Congregation 36 will convene in Rome, convoked by Superior General Adolfo Nicolás, who has announced his intention to resign at age 80.
Jews were first allowed into the Realm in 1851 after the famous Norwegian poet Henrik Wergeland had campaigned for it.
Once elected, there was an immediate reconciliation, and Pope Francis has been bringing the Jesuit simplicity, love for the poor, and service of the flock into the papacy.
The Society participated in the Counter-Reformation and, later, in the implementation of the Second Vatican Council.
In the United States, 22 of the Society's 28 universities were founded or taken over by the Jesuits during this time.
The Suppression of the Jesuits in Portugal, France, the Two Sicilies, Parma and the Spanish Empire by 1767 was troubling to the Society's defender, Pope Clement XIII.
A modern Jesuit was Gerard Manley Hopkins, the poet.
In the Constitution of Norway from 1814, a relic from the earlier anti-Catholic laws of Denmark-Norway, Paragraph 2 originally read, "The Evangelical-Lutheran religion remains the public religion of the State.
Jesuits made up the largest contingent of clergy imprisoned in the Priest Barracks of Dachau Concentration Camp.
He was born in Belmonte, near Calatayud (Aragon).
An earlier Jesuit who wrote about the history of Mexico was Diego uis de Motezuma (1619–99), a descendant of the Aztec monarchs of Tenochtitlan.
For example, the Jesuits have dedicated significant study to earthquakes, and seismology has been described as "the Jesuit science".
The Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland was particularly severe.
Dezza "knew of the faults that existed in the Church and in her men, but with caring dedication, full of love and faith, he helped to alleviate their effects, working for the authentic renewal of the Church."
The Jesuit-inspired War of the Seven Reductions (1750–61), increased sentiment in Madrid for suppressing this "empire within an empire."
Between 1637 and 1715, Samuel Fritz founded 38 missions along the length of the Amazon river, between the Napo and Negro rivers, that were called the Omagua Missions.
Religious orders established in the medieval era were named after particular men: Francis of Assisi (Franciscans), Domingo de Guzmán, later canonized as St Dominic (Dominicans); and Augustine of Hippo (Augustinians).
They presented the project to Paul III.
In 1642, previous Jesuits had attempted to convert the Iroquois but with little success.
They theorized about the circulation of the blood (independently of Harvey), the theoretical possibility of flight, the way the moon affected the tides, and the wave-like nature of light."
It operates colleges and universities in various countries around the world and is particularly active in the Philippines and India.
However, facing starvation, lack of supplies and constant threats of Iroquois attack, the small Sainte-Marie II was abandoned in June 1650 as the remaining Hurons and Jesuits departed for Quebec and Ottawa.
As such, though it was the common priestly dress of Ignatius' day, Jesuit garb appeared distinctive, and became identifiable over time.
They argued that they were exempt, due to special pontifical privileges.
The Jesuits have been described as "the single most important contributor to experimental physics in the seventeenth century".
Jesuits were a target for Gestapo prosecution, and many Jesuit priests were deported to concentration camps.
The order is divided into geographic provinces, each of which is headed by a Provincial Superior, generally called Father Provincial, chosen by the General.
Ignatius and the early Jesuits did recognize, though, that the hierarchical Church was in dire need of reform.
Among many distinguished early Jesuits was St. Francis Xavier, a missionary to Asia who converted more people to Catholicism than anyone before, and St. Robert Bellarmine, a doctor of the Church.
Since the Second Vatican Council and their own General Congregations which followed it, Jesuits have become increasingly involved in works directed primarily toward social and economic development for the poor and marginalized.
Since the Jesuits resisted paying the tithe on their estates, this donation effectively took revenue out of the church hierarchy's pockets by removing it from the tithe rolls.
The Jesuits often gathered the aborigines in communities (the Jesuit Reductions) where the natives worked for the community and were evangelised.
Subsequently, Pope Pius VI would grant formal permission for the continuation of the Society in Russia and Poland.
Pope Pius VII had resolved during his captivity in France to restore the Jesuits universally; after his return to Rome he did so with little delay: on 7 August 1814, by the bull ''Sollicitudo omnium ecclesiarum'', he reversed the suppression of the Order, and therewith, another Pole, Thaddeus Brzozowski, the Superior in Russia, who had been elected in 1805, acquired universal jurisdiction.
The Society is divided into 83 Provinces with six Independent Regions and ten Dependent Regions.
He said "St Ignatius of Loyola was above all a man of God, who gave the first place of his life to God, to his greater glory and his greater service.
The Pope referred to that moment as "an important phase of its history".
They also run elementary schools at which they are less likely to teach.
The period following the Restoration of the Jesuits in 1814 was marked by tremendous growth, as evidenced by the large number of Jesuit colleges and universities established in the 19th century.
Anthony de Mello developed a new approach to Christian spirituality that integrated wisdom from eastern and western sources and brought enlightenment to people of all backgrounds.
First, they founded schools throughout Europe.
Today, most Jesuits in the United States wear the Roman collar and black clothing of ordinary priests, although some still wear the black cassock.
The Society of Jesus introduced, according to Thomas Woods, "a substantial body of scientific knowledge and a vast array of mental tools for understanding the physical universe, including the Euclidean geometry that made planetary motion comprehensible".
Peter Hans Kolvenbach informed members of the Society of Jesus that, with the consent of Pope Benedict XVI, he intended to step down as Superior General in 2008, the year he would turn 80.
The word "company" comes ultimately from Latin, ''cum'' + ''pane'' = "with bread", or a group that shares meals.
The Jesuit schools played an important part in winning back to Catholicism a number of European countries which had for a time been predominantly Protestant, notably Poland and Lithuania.
He was, at his passing, one of ten Jesuit cardinals in the Catholic Church.
Over the 450 years since its founding, the Society has both been called the papal "elite troops" and been forced into suppression.
The Jesuits vanished almost without a trace.
He "aimed to show that Mexican emperors were a legitimate dynasty in the 17th-century in the European sense."
Many of Jesuit haciendas were huge, with Bishop Palafox asserting that just two colleges owned 300,000 head of sheep, whose wool was transformed locally in Puebla to cloth; six sugar plantations worth a million pesos and generating an income of 100,000 pesos.
Perhaps as a result of this appreciation for art, coupled with their spiritual practice of "finding God in all things", many early Jesuits distinguished themselves in the visual and performing arts as well as in music.
This clear identity, according to the Pope, is important so that "many others may share in your ideals and join you effectively and enthusiastically".
In 2013, Jorge Mario Bergoglio became the first Jesuit Pope, taking the name Pope Francis.
The Jesuits risked their own lives and well-being for the sake of this Iroquois mission.
This order was the most influential, intellectual Counter-Reformation by the Catholic Church.
In a move to gain control of the ''reducciones'' wealth, the Spanish king Charles III (1759–88), expelled the Jesuits in 1767.
The 20th century witnessed both growth and decline.
In 1534, Ignatius and six other young men, including Francis Xavier and Peter Faber, gathered and professed vows of poverty, chastity, and later obedience, including a special vow of obedience to the Pope in matters of mission direction and assignment.
On 21 February 2001, Father Avery Dulles, S.J., an internationally known author, lecturer and theologian, was created a Cardinal of the Catholic Church by Pope John Paul II.
The retreat follows a "Purgative-Illuminative-Unitive" pattern in the tradition of the spirituality of John Cassian and the Desert Fathers.
Slave labor and trade were essential for the economy of Brazil and other American colonies, and the Jesuits usually did not object to the enslavement of African peoples, but rather the conditions of slavery.
A month after, the Pope received members of the General Congregation and urged them "to continue on the path of this mission in full fidelity to your original charism" and asked them to reflect so as "to rediscover the fullest meaning of your characteristic 'fourth vow' of obedience to the Successor of Peter".
The Jesuits operated their properties as an integrated unit with the larger Jesuit order, thus revenues from haciendas funded their  colegios.
They devoted themselves to preaching and charitable work in Italy, as the Italian War of 1535-1538 renewed between Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, Venice, the Pope and the Ottoman Empire rendered any journey to Jerusalem impossible.
He was martyred when an apostate native killed him in 1610.
In Sweden the Catholic cultural magazine ''Signum'', edited by the Newman Institute, covers a broad spectrum of issues concerning faith, culture, research, and society.
There are notable Jesuits in the modern era, the most prominent being Pope Francis.
Peter Hans Kolvenbach, on the occasion of the Jubilee Year, wrote that the Jesuits "should truly profit from the jubilee year to examine our way of life and taking the means to live more profoundly the charisms received from our Founders."
The Recollects sent a delegate to France to invite the Society of Jesus to help them with their mission.
With all this destruction the Huron began to claim that the Jesuits were sorcerers sent to their homeland to kill.
Viceroy of Peru  Don Francisco de Toledo urged the Jesuits to evangelize the indigenous peoples of Peru, wanting to put them in charge of parishes, but Acosta adhered to the Jesuit position that they were not subject to the jurisdiction of bishops and to catechize in Indian parishes would bring them into conflict with the bishops.
The society is headed by a Superior General.
Father Rafael Ferrer was the first Jesuit of Quito to explore and found missions in the upper Amazon regions of South America from 1602 to 1610, which at that period belonged to the Audiencia (high court) of Quito, that was a part of the Viceroyalty of Peru until it was transferred to the newly created Viceroyalty of New Granada in 1717.
The Sainte-Marie expanded into a small community and served as a living replica of European society.
On 16 November 1989, six Jesuit priests (Ignacio Ellacuria, Segundo Montes, Ignacio Martin-Baro, Joaquin López y López, Juan Ramon Moreno, and Amado López); their housekeeper, Elba Ramos; and her daughter, Celia Marisela Ramos, were murdered by the Salvadoran military on the campus of the University of Central America in San Salvador, El Salvador, because they had been labeled as subversives by the government.
"By means of religion," d'Alembert wrote, "the Jesuits established a monarchical authority in Paraguay, founded solely on their powers of persuasion and on their lenient methods of government.
The Jesuits had frequent disputes with other colonists who wanted to enslave the natives.
According to Jonathan Wright in his book ''God's Soldiers'', by the eighteenth century the Jesuits had "contributed to the development of pendulum clocks, pantographs, barometers, reflecting telescopes and microscopes, to scientific fields as various as magnetism, optics and electricity.
Further, he used it as a means of rebuilding the spiritual life of the Church.
The Feast of All Jesuit Saints and Blesseds is celebrated on November 5.
The Franciscans, who were founded as an order embracing poverty, did not accumulate real estate, unlike the Augustinians and Dominicans in Mexico.
Some of their greatest struggles were against corruption, venality, and spiritual lassitude within the Catholic Church.
During the missionary periods of North America, the various native peoples referred to Jesuits as "Blackrobes" because of their black cassocks.
Although in the first 30 years of the existence of the Society of Jesus there were many Jesuit conversos (Catholic-convert Jews) including the second Father General Diego Lainez, an anti-converso faction led to the ''Decree de genere'' (1593), which proclaimed that either Jewish or Muslim ancestry, no matter how distant, was an insurmountable impediment for admission to the Society of Jesus.
The Bavarian Jesuit Provincial, Augustin Rosch, ended the war on death row for his role in the July Plot to overthrow Hitler.
Two of his former teachers were exiled and a third was hanged.
