Democratic socialism is difficult to define, and groups of scholars have radically different definitions for the term.
For early socialist Charles Fourier, true freedom could only occur without suppressing passions; the suppression of passions is not only destructive to the individual, but to society as a whole.
Past and present political philosophies and movements commonly described as libertarian socialist include anarchism (especially anarchist communism, anarchist collectivism, anarcho-syndicalism, and mutualism) as well as autonomism, communalism, participism, revolutionary syndicalism, and libertarian Marxist philosophies such as council communism and Luxemburgism,; as well as some versions of "utopian socialism" and individualist anarchism.
Early socialists (Utopian socialists and Ricardian socialists) criticized capitalism for concentrating power and wealth within a small segment of society.
Management and control over the activities of enterprises are based on self-management and self-governance, with equal power-relations in the workplace to maximise occupational autonomy.
On the other hand, Charles Fourier advocated phalansteres which were communities that respected individual desires (including sexual preferences), affinities and creativity and saw that work has to be made enjoyable for people.
Working-class housing was provided in council housing estates, and university education became available via a school grant system.
Some political groups have called themselves socialist while holding views that some consider antithetical to socialism.
A similar critique of Trotsky's role on the events around the Kronstadt rebellion was raised by the American anarchist Emma Goldman.
In Japan, there has been a resurgent interest in the Japanese Communist Party among workers and youth.
Lassalle considered the state to be an entity independent of class allegiances and an instrument of justice that would therefore be essential for achieving socialism.
By the 1980s, with the rise of conservative neoliberal politicians such as Ronald Reagan in the United States, Margaret Thatcher in Britain, Brian Mulroney in Canada and Augusto Pinochet in Chile, the Western welfare state was attacked from within, but state support for the corporate sector was maintained.
For Marx and Engels, conditions determine consciousness and ending the role of the capitalist class leads eventually to a classless society in which the state would wither away.
In Malaysia, the Socialist Party of Malaysia got its first Member of Parliament, Dr. Jeyakumar Devaraj, after the 2008 general election.
In 2010, there were 270 kibbutzim in Israel.
Brian Reynolds Myers in his book ''The Cleanest Race'', and later supported by other academics, dismisses the idea that ''Juche'' is North Korea's leading ideology, regarding its public exaltation as designed to deceive foreigners and that it exists to be praised and not actually read pointing out that North Korea's latest constitution, of 2009, omits all mention of communism.
In 2011, the socialist parties of Social Democrats, Socialist People's Party and the Danish Social Liberal Party formed government, after a slight victory over the liberal parties.
The Chinese Revolution was the second stage in the Chinese Civil War which ended in the establishment of the People's Republic of China led by the Chinese Communist Party.
The Labour Party stated: "The Labour Party is a democratic socialist party.
As the ideas of Marx and Engels took on flesh, particularly in central Europe, socialists sought to unite in an international organisation.
From 1945 to 1962, the Norwegian Labour Party held an absolute majority in the parliament led by Einar Gerhardsen who was Prime Minister with 17 years in office.
It was strongly associated with G. D. H. Cole and influenced by the ideas of William Morris.
British Petroleum was officially nationalised in 1951.
Utopian socialism is  a term used to define the first currents of modern socialist thought as exemplified by the work of Henri de Saint-Simon, Charles Fourier, and Robert Owen, which inspired Karl Marx and other early socialists.
However, there have been common elements identified by scholars.
Castro's government later reformed along communist lines, becoming the Communist Party of Cuba in October 1965.
The Socialist International aided social democratic parties in re-establishing themselves when dictatorship gave way to democracy in Portugal (1974) and Spain (1975).
Modern social democracy emphasises a program of gradual legislative modification of capitalism in order to make it more equitable and humane, while the theoretical end goal of building a socialist society is either completely forgotten or redefined in a pro-capitalist way.
The Labour Governments of 1964-1970 and 1974–1979 intervened further.
Anarchist communism as a coherent, modern economic-political philosophy was first formulated in the Italian section of the First International by Carlo Cafiero, Emilio Covelli, Errico Malatesta, Andrea Costa and other ex-Mazzinian Republicans.
This model has found support in notable classical and neoclassical economists including Alfred Marshall, John Stuart Mill and Jaroslav Vanek.
Profiteering returned in the form of "NEP men" and rich peasants (Kulaks) gained power in the countryside.
Leon Trotsky rejected central planning in favour of decentralised planning.
They were led by Helle Thorning-Schmidt, and had the Red-Green Alliance as a supporting party.
By 1920, the Red Army, under its commander Trotsky, had largely defeated the royalist White Armies.
It supports a mixed economy that opposes the excesses of capitalism such as inequality, poverty, and oppression of various groups, while rejecting both a totally free market or a fully planned economy.
Although there are many varieties of socialism and there is no single definition encapsulating all of them, social ownership is the common element shared by its various forms.
In 1909 the first Kibbutz was established in Palestine by Russian Jewish Immigrants.
The term "Third World" was coined by French demographer Alfred Sauvy in 1952, on the model of the Third Estate, which, according to the Abbé Sieyès, represented everything, but was nothing: "...because at the end this ignored, exploited, scorned Third World like the Third Estate, wants to become something too" (Sauvy).
The Kibbutz Movement will then expand through the 20th century following a doctrine of zionist socialism.
The USSR played a decisive role in the Allied victory in World War&nbsp;II.
Syndicalism emerged in France inspired in part by the ideas of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and later by Fernand Pelloutier and Georges Sorel.
The Spanish Revolution, largely orchestrated by the anarcho-syndicalist trade union CNT during the Spanish Civil War offers an historical example.
''Public ownership'' may refer to the creation of state-owned enterprises, nationalisation, municipalisation or autonomous collective institutions.
Planning agencies, ministries and enterprises all adapted and bargained with each other during the formulation of the plan as opposed to following a plan passed down from a higher authority, leading some economists to suggest that planning did not actually take place within the Soviet economy and that a better description would be an "administered" or "managed" economy.
For Marxists, the development of capitalism in western Europe provided a material basis for the possibility of bringing about socialism because, according to the ''Communist Manifesto'', "What the bourgeoisie produces above all is its own grave diggers", namely the working class, which must become conscious of the historical objectives set it by society.
President Jiang Zemin and Premier Zhu Rongji led the nation in the 1990s.
Principles that can be described as "liberal socialist" have been based upon or developed by the following philosophers: John Stuart Mill, Eduard Bernstein, John Dewey, Carlo Rosselli, Norberto Bobbio, and Chantal Mouffe.
When the Communist Party of Great Britain applied to affiliate to the Labour Party in 1920, it was turned down.
The French Communist Party (PCF) and many smaller parties strongly opposed Eurocommunism and stayed aligned with the Communist Party of the Soviet Union until the end of the USSR.
In 2015, following a defeat at the 2015 UK general election, Jeremy Corbyn, a self-described socialist took over from Ed Miliband as leader of the Labour Party.
The ownership of the means of production can be based on direct ownership by the users of the productive property through worker cooperative; or commonly owned by all of society with management and control delegated to those who operate/use the means of production; or public ownership by a state apparatus.
In her essay "Trotsky Protests Too Much" she says "I admit, the dictatorship under Stalin's rule has become monstrous.
The ''Encyclopedia of Homosexuality'' reports that "As Marxists the founders of the group believed that the injustice and oppression which they suffered stemmed from relationships deeply embedded in the structure of American society".
Anarchist communism is a theory of anarchism which advocates the abolition of the state, private property, and capitalism in favour of common ownership of the means of production.
After the War, the USSR became a recognised superpower, The Soviet era saw some of the most significant technological achievements of the 20th century, including the world's first spacecraft, and the first astronaut.
It took an important role in the autonomist movement in the 1970s, aside earlier organisations such as ''Potere Operaio'', created after May 1968, and ''Lotta Continua''.
In response, USSR occupied Czechoslovakia.
In his model, assuming perfect computation techniques, simultaneous equations relating inputs and outputs to ratios of equivalence would provide appropriate valuations in order to balance supply and demand.
"Revolution" is not necessarily defined by revolutionary socialists as violent insurrection, but as a complete dismantling and rapid transformation of all areas of class society led by the majority of the masses: the working class.
Mutualism is based on a labour theory of value that holds that when labour or its product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying "the amount of labour necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility".
Governing through the elected soviets, and in alliance with the peasant-based Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Bolshevik government began nationalising banks, industry, and disavowed the national debts of the deposed Romanov royal régime.
It also reached a consensus on certain policies that tended towards a progressive, secular, and highly-democratic social democracy.
The Chinese Kuomintang Party, the current ruling party in Taiwan, was referred to as having a socialist ideology since Kuomintang's revolutionary ideology in the 1920s incorporated unique Chinese Socialism as part of its ideology.
The International Workers Association is an international anarcho-syndicalist federation of various labour unions from different countries.
Factories were run through worker committees, agrarian areas became collectivised and run as libertarian communes.
He advocated the creation of a society in which each person was ranked according to his or her capacities and rewarded according to his or her work.
At one point, France claimed to be the world's most state-controlled capitalist country.
Socialist-inspired groups played an important role in these movements, which nevertheless embraced much broader layers of the population and were championed by figures such as Noam Chomsky.
The related, more technical term in Roman and then medieval law was ''societas''.
The Soviet economy was the modern world's first centrally planned economy.
The Marxian economist Richard D. Wolff argues that "re-organising production so that workers become collectively self-directed at their work-sites" not only moves society beyond both capitalism and state socialism of the last century, but would also mark another milestone in human history, similar to earlier transitions out of slavery and feudalism.
Socialists view creativity as an essential aspect of human nature, and define freedom as a state of being where individuals are able to express their creativity unhindered by constraints of both material scarcity and coercive social institutions.
Mikhail Gorbachev wished to move the USSR towards of Nordic-style social democracy, calling it "a socialist beacon for all mankind."
Michael Freeden in his study ''Ideologies and Political Theory'' (1996) states that all socialists share five themes: the first is that socialism posits that society is more than a mere collection of individuals; second, that it considers human welfare a desirable objective; third, that it considers humans by nature to be active and productive; fourth, it holds the belief of human equality; and fifth, that history is progressive and will create positive change on the condition that humans work to achieve such change.
Reformism is the belief that socialists should stand in parliamentary elections within capitalist society and, if elected, utilize the machinery of government to pass political and social reforms for the purposes of ameliorating the instabilities and inequities of capitalism.
They reject using state power to construct a socialist society, favouring strategies such as the general strike.
In many other capitalist countries, struggles against dictatorships, state repression, and colonisation were also marked by protests in 1968, such as the beginning of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, the Tlatelolco massacre in Mexico City, and the escalation of guerrilla warfare against the military dictatorship in Brazil.
Social Democratic parties dominated post-war politics in countries such as France, Italy, Czechoslovakia, Belgium and Norway.
The Progressive Alliance is a political international founded on 22 May 2013 by political parties, the majority of whom are current or former members of the Socialist International.
As a result, central planners would be unable to respond to local economic conditions.
Among these there appeared the Communist Party of France, the Communist Party USA, the Italian Communist Party, the Chinese Communist Party, the Mexican Communist Party, the Brazilian Communist Party, the Chilean Communist Party and the Communist Party of Indonesia.
In April of that year, Vladimir Lenin, leader of the ''Majority'' (or in Russian: "Bolshevik") faction of socialists in Russia and known for his profound and controversial expansions of Marxism, was allowed to cross Germany to return to his country from exile in Switzerland.
Guild socialism is a political movement advocating workers' control of industry through the medium of trade-related guilds "in an implied contractual relationship with the public".
Social democrats supporting the first variant, advocate for a peaceful, evolutionary transition of the economy to socialism through progressive social reform of capitalism.
They have been categorized as religious socialists by some.
Elsewhere in Asia, some elected socialist parties and communist parties remain prominent, particularly in India and Nepal.
The modern definition and usage of "socialism" settled by the 1860s, becoming the predominant term among the group of words "co-operative", "mutualist" and "associationist", which had previously been used as synonyms.
As many African countries gained independence during the 1960s, some of them rejected capitalism in favour of a more afrocentric economic model.
As a result, today, the rallying cry of the French Revolution – "Egalité, Liberté, Fraternité" – which overthrew absolutism and ushered industrialisation into French society, is promoted as essential socialist values.
There are many variations of socialism and as such there is no single definition encapsulating all of socialism.
Thus, China's transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy named as "socialism with Chinese characteristics" which maintained state ownership rights over land, state or cooperative ownership of much of the heavy industrial and manufacturing sectors and state influence in the banking and financial sectors.
In 1973, his government was ousted by the U.S.-backed military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet, which lasted until the late 1980s.
After Chávez's death on 5 March 2013, vice-president from Chavez's party Nicolás Maduro assumed the powers and responsibilities of the President.
Because the Commune was only able to meet on fewer than 60 days in all, only a few decrees were actually implemented.
The first variant has officially its goal by establishing democratic socialism through reformist and gradualist methods.
A self-managed, decentralised economy is based on autonomous self-regulating economic units and a decentralised mechanism of resource allocation and decision-making.
Other important liberal socialist figures include Guido Calogero, Piero Gobetti, Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse, John Maynard Keynes, and R. H. Tawney.
Although central planning was largely supported by Marxist–Leninists, some factions within the Soviet Union before the rise of Stalinism held positions contrary to central planning.
One of these gave rise to a mass movement of shack dwellers, Abahlali baseMjondolo that, despite major police suppression, continues to work for popular people's planning and against the creation of a market economy in land and housing.
West European social critics, including Robert Owen, Charles Fourier, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Louis Blanc, Charles Hall, and Saint-Simon, were the first modern socialists who criticised the excessive poverty and inequality of the Industrial Revolution.
Furthermore, everything that people produce is in some sense a social product, and everyone who contributes to the production of a good is entitled to a share in it.
The Commune was concerned that skilled workers had been forced to pawn their tools during the war; the postponement of commercial debt obligations, and the abolition of interest on the debts; and the right of employees to take over and run an enterprise if it were deserted by its owner; the Commune, nonetheless, recognised the previous owner's right to compensation.
Variations of market socialism include Libertarian proposals such as mutualism, based on classical economics, and neoclassical economic models such as the Lange Model.
In the 1970s, Barry Commoner, suggesting a left-wing response to the ''Limits to Growth'' model that predicted catastrophic resource depletion and spurred environmentalism, postulated that capitalist technologies were chiefly responsible for environmental degradation, as opposed to population pressures.
After Lenin's death in January 1924, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union – then increasingly under the control of Joseph Stalin – rejected the theory that socialism could not be built solely in the Soviet Union, in favour of the concept of ''Socialism in One Country''.
In Eastern Europe there were widespread protests that escalated particularly in the Prague Spring in Czechoslovakia.
A planned economy is a type of economy consisting of a mixture of public ownership of the means of production and the coordination of production and distribution through economic planning.
Economic activity would still be organised through the use of incentive systems and social classes would still exist, but to a lesser and diminishing extent than under capitalism.
Blanquism refers to a conception of revolution generally attributed to Louis Auguste Blanqui which holds that socialist revolution should be carried out by a relatively small group of highly organised and secretive conspirators.
By the 1920s, social democracy and communism became the two dominant political tendencies within the international socialist movement.
Movie theatres in the Soviet Union showed newsreels and clips of Chiang, at Moscow Sun Yat-sen University Portraits of Chiang were hung on the walls, and in the Soviet May Day Parades that year, Chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of Karl Marx, Lenin, Stalin and other socialist leaders.
Thus Lassalle also rejected the Marxist view that the state was destined to "wither away".
or democratic socialists, and some use these terms interchangeably.
After the Russian Revolution under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin and Leon Trotsky, the Soviet Union abolished previous laws against homosexuality.
Instead of conscious planning, the Soviet economy was based on a process whereby the plan was modified by localised agents and the original plans went largely unfulfilled.
Syndicalism is a social movement that operates through industrial trade unions and rejects state socialism and the use of establishment politics to establish or promote socialism.
At some point "like the American Knights of Labor, guild socialism wanted to abolish the wage system".
Mutualists advocate market socialism, collectivist anarchists workers cooperatives and salaries based on the amount of time contributed to production, anarcho-communists advocate a direct transition from capitalism to libertarian communism and a gift economy and anarcho-syndicalists worker's direct action and the general strike.
Some definitions simply refer to all forms of socialism that follow an electoral, reformist or evolutionary path to socialism, rather than a revolutionary one.
Thus, the Non-Aligned Movement constituted itself, around the main figures of Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru of India, President Sukarno of Indonesia, leader Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia, and Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt who successfully opposed the French and British imperial powers during the 1956 Suez crisis.
For Andrew Vincent, "The word ‘socialism’ finds its root in the Latin ''sociare'', which means to combine or to share.
Many socialists were early advocates for LGBT rights.
In Denmark, the Socialist People's Party (SF or Socialist Party for short) more than doubled its parliamentary representation to 23 seats from 11, making it the fourth largest party.
David Pepper also released his important work, ''Ecosocialism: From Deep Ecology to Social Justice'', in 1994, which critiques the current approach of many within Green politics, particularly deep ecologists.
The nationalised public utilities included Charbonnages de France (CDF), Electricité de France (EDF), Gaz de France (GDF), Air France, Banque de France, and Régie Nationale des Usines Renault.
The International Workingmen's Association (IWA), also known as the First International, was founded in London in 1864.
Positivism held that both the natural and social worlds could be understood through scientific knowledge and be analyzed using scientific methods.
In Chile, Salvador Allende, a physician and candidate for the Socialist Party of Chile, was elected president through democratic elections in 1970.
In the second variant Social democracy becomes a policy regime involving a welfare state, collective bargaining schemes, support for publicly financed public services, and a Capitalist-based economy like a mixed economy.
He is known for his roles in helping to found several gay organisations, including the Mattachine Society, the first sustained gay rights group in the United States which in its early days had a strong marxist influence.
Social ecology is closely related to the work and ideas of Murray Bookchin and influenced by anarchist Peter Kropotkin.
Robert Owen's contribution to modern socialism was his understanding that actions and characteristics of individuals were largely determined by the social environment they were raised in and exposed to.
However, some economists such as Joseph Stiglitz, Mancur Olson and others not specifically advancing anti-socialists positions have shown that prevailing economic models upon which such democratic or market socialism models might be based have logical flaws or unworkable presuppositions.
''The Intermediate Sex: A Study of Some Transitional Types of Men and Women'' was a book from 1908 and an early work arguing for gay liberation written by Edward Carpenter who was also an influential personality in the foundation of the Fabian Society and the Labour Party.
Few western European political leaders defended the occupation, among them the Portuguese communist secretary-general Álvaro Cunhal.
While initially formed in opposition to the "Old Left" Democratic party, groups composing the New Left gradually became central players in the Democratic coalition.
Count Henri de Saint-Simon is regarded as the first individual to coin the term ''socialism''.
(See also: Analysis of Soviet-type economic planning).
This ideology influenced the policies of the British Labour Party during Clement Attlee's administration.
The main architects of African Socialism were Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, Léopold Senghor of Senegal, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana and Sékou Touré of Guinea.
The followers of Bakunin were called collectivist anarchists and sought to collectivise ownership of the means of production while retaining payment proportional to the amount and kind of labor of each individual.
The Ricardian socialists viewed profit, interest and rent as deductions from this exchange-value.
The Labour Party ruled that Militant was ineligible for affiliation with the Labour Party, and the party gradually expelled Militant supporters.
Leaders in the movement also called for a more equitable distribution of income and better living conditions for the working classes.
The Chartists gathered significant numbers around the People's Charter of 1838, which demanded the extension of suffrage to all male adults.
Social ownership may refer to forms of public, collective, or cooperative ownership; to citizen ownership of equity; or to any combination of these.
The reduction of necessary labour time to a minimum would grant individuals the opportunity to pursue the development of their true individuality and creativity.
It is considered a particular sort of 'putschism' – that is, the view that political revolution should take the form of a ''putsch'' or ''coup d'état''.
The Social Democratic Party (SPD) in Germany became the largest and most powerful socialist party in Europe, despite working illegally until the anti-socialist laws were dropped in 1890.
In China living standards continued to improve rapidly despite the late-2000s recession, but centralised political control remained tight.
Rosa Luxemburg and Eduard Bernstein have criticised Lenin that his conception of revolution was elitist and essentially 'Blanquist'.
The Paris Commune was a government that briefly ruled Paris from 18 March (more formally, from 28 March) to 28 May 1871.
State socialism is unfeasible in this view because information cannot be aggregated by a central body and effectively used to formulate a plan for an entire economy, because doing so would result in distorted or absent price signals.
Modern democratic socialism is a broad political movement that seeks to promote the ideals of socialism within the context of a democratic system.
However, these reforms have also caused a rise in income inequality and gender disparities.
Syndicalists advocate a socialist economy based on federated unions or syndicates of workers who own and manage the means of production.
The LCR abolished itself in 2009 to initiate a broad anti-capitalist party, the New Anticapitalist Party, whose stated aim is to "build a new socialist, democratic perspective for the twenty-first century".
Harry Hay was an early leader in the American LGBT rights movement as well as a member of the Communist Party USA.
Market socialism refers to an array of different economic theories and systems that utilise the market mechanism to organise production and to allocate factor inputs among socially owned enterprises, with the economic surplus (profits) accruing to society in a social dividend as opposed to private capital owners.
Productive resources would be legally owned by the cooperative and rented to the workers, who would enjoy usufruct rights.
It developed at the end of the 19th century "out of the French trade-union movement—''syndicat'' is the French word for trade union.
This latter branch of socialism produced the communist work of Étienne Cabet in France and Wilhelm Weitling in Germany.
It sued for peace, withdrawing from World War I, and convoked a Constituent Assembly in which the peasant Socialist-Revolutionary Party (SR) won a majority.
Cole advocated the public ownership of industries and their organisation into guilds, each of which would be under the democratic control of its trade union.
All around Europe and in some places of Latin America there exists a social center and squatting movement mainly inspired by autonomist and anarchist ideas.
On 25 January 1918, at the Petrograd Soviet, Lenin declared "Long live the world socialist revolution!"
After Mao's death in 1976 and the arrest of the faction known as the Gang of Four, who were blamed for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution, Deng Xiaoping took power and led the People's Republic of China to significant economic reforms.
In 1923, on seeing the Soviet State's growing coercive power, a dying Lenin said Russia had reverted to "a bourgeois tsarist machine... barely varnished with socialism."
Socialism proceeded to emerge as the most influential secular political-economic worldview of the twentieth century, and while the emergence of the Soviet Union as the world's first nominally socialist state led to socialism's widespread association with the Soviet economic model, many economists and intellectuals have argued that in practice the model functioned as a form of state capitalism, or a non-planned administrative or command economy.
In Latin America in the 1960s, a socialist tendency within the catholic church appeared which was called Liberation theology which motivated even the Colombian priest Camilo Torres to enter the ELN guerrilla.
The fundamental objective of socialism is to attain an advanced level of material production and therefore greater productivity, efficiency and rationality as compared to capitalism and all previous systems, under the view that an expansion of human productive capability is the basis for the extension of freedom and equality in society.
In Denmark, the Red-Green Alliance was formed as a coalition of numerous radical parties.
Liberal socialism does not have the goal of abolishing capitalism with a socialist economy; instead, it supports a mixed economy that includes both public and private property in capital goods.
Out of respect for Mikhail Bakunin, they did not make their differences with collectivist anarchism explicit until after Bakunin's death.
In Italy, the events known as the ''Biennio Rosso'' was characterised by mass strikes, worker manifestations and self-management experiments through land and factories occupations.
During the 1880s and 1890s, Morris promoted his eco-socialist ideas within the Social Democratic Federation and Socialist League.
In state-oriented forms of market socialism, in which state enterprises attempt to maximise profit, the profits can be used to fund government programs and services through a social dividend, eliminating or greatly diminishing the need for various forms of taxation that exist in capitalist systems.
Eco-socialist authors, like John Bellamy Foster and Paul Burkett, point to Marx's discussion of a "metabolic rift" between man and nature, his statement that "private ownership of the globe by single individuals will appear quite absurd as private ownership of one man by another" and his observation that a society must "hand it the planet down to succeeding generations in an improved condition".
In the United States, syndicalism appeared in the guise of the Industrial Workers of the World, or "Wobblies," founded in 1905."
Numerous studies and surveys indicate that people tend to live happier lives in social democratic societies rather than neoliberal ones.
A state-directed economy may refer to a type of mixed economy consisting of public ownership over large industries, as promoted by various Social democratic political parties during the 20th century.
The two movements are widely similar both in terminology and in ideology, although there are a few key differences.
In the Chinese Cultural Revolution, a social-political youth movement mobilised against "bourgeois" elements which were seen to be infiltrating the government and society at large, aiming to restore capitalism.
The socialist-run government of Salvador Allende in Chile experimented with Project Cybersyn, a real-time information bridge between the government, state enterprises and consumers.
Joseph Schumpeter rejected the association of socialism (and social ownership) with state ownership over the means of production, because the state as it exists in its current form is a product of capitalist society and cannot be transplanted to a different institutional framework.
This experience prompted the contemporary socialist radical movement autonomism.
A distinction between "communist" and "socialist" as descriptors of political ideologies arose in 1918 after the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party renamed itself to the All-Russian Communist Party, where "Communist" came to specifically mean socialists who supported the politics and theories of Leninism, Bolshevism and later Marxism-Leninism; although Communist parties continued to describe themselves as socialists dedicated to socialism.
Anti-capitalism, anarchism and the anti-globalisation movement rose to prominence through events such as protests against the World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 1999 in Seattle.
In Oscar Wilde's ''The Soul of Man Under Socialism'', he passionately advocates for an egalitarian society where wealth is shared by all, while warning of the dangers of social systems that crush individuality.
Bolshevik revolutionary Leon Trotsky argued that money could not be arbitrarily abolished following a socialist revolution.
British Shipbuilders was a combination of the major shipbuilding companies including Cammell Laird, Govan Shipbuilders, Swan Hunter, and Yarrow Shipbuilders; the nationalisation of the coal mines in 1947 created a coal board charged with running the coal industry commercially so as to be able to meet the interest payable on the bonds which the former mine owners' shares had been converted into.
Trotsky's Fourth International was established in France in 1938 when Trotskyists argued that the Comintern or Third International had become irretrievably "lost to Stalinism" and thus incapable of leading the international working class to political power.
Green anarchism, or ecoanarchism, is a school of thought within anarchism which puts a particular emphasis on environmental issues.
The major characteristics of socialism (particularly as conceived by Marx and Engels after the Paris Commune of 1871) are that the proletariat will control the means of production through a workers' state erected by the workers in their interests.
By contrast, market socialism retains the use of monetary prices, factor markets, and, in some cases, the profit motive with respect to the operation of socially owned enterprises and the allocation of capital goods between them.
The current Chinese economy consists of 150 corporatised state-owned enterprises that report directly to China's central government.
Like Proudhonists, they asserted the right of each individual to the product of his labor and to be remunerated for their particular contribution to production.
For example, in 2010, Kibbutz Sasa, containing some 200 members, generated $850 million in annual revenue from its military-plastics industry.
In the Greek legislative election of January 2015, the Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA), led by Alexis Tsipras, won a legislative election for the first time while the Communist Party of Greece won 15 seats in parliament.
