To this day, the Socratic Method is still used in classroom and law school discourse to expose underlying issues in both subject and the speaker.
The numbness slowly crept up his body until it reached his heart.
These indirect methods may fail to satisfy some readers.
Although his ''Apology'' is a monologue delivered by Socrates, it is usually grouped with the Dialogues.
Socrates argued that moral excellence was more a matter of divine bequest than parental nurture.
The Socratic method is a ''negative'' method of hypothesis elimination, in that better hypotheses are found by steadily identifying and eliminating those that lead to contradictions.
An alternative interpretation of the dialectic is that it is a method for direct perception of the Form of the Good.
In Aristophanes' play ''The Clouds'', Socrates is made into a clown of sorts, particularly inclined toward ''sophistry'', who teaches his students how to bamboozle their way out of debt.
In Plato's ''Theaetetus'' (150a), Socrates compares his treatment of the young people who come to him for philosophical advice to the way midwives treat their patients, and the way matrimonial matchmakers act.
Some modern scholarship holds that, with so much of his own thought obscured and possibly altered by Plato, it is impossible to gain a clear picture of Socrates amid all the contradictory evidence.
#If he fled Athens his teaching would fare no better in another country, as he would continue questioning all he met and undoubtedly incur their displeasure.
This assertion seems to be associated with the word ''erôtan'', which means to ask questions.
'''Socrates''' (;  , ''Sōkrátēs''; 470/469 – 399 BC) was a classical Greek (Athenian) philosopher credited as one of the founders of Western philosophy.
Irvine argues that it was because of his loyalty to Athenian democracy that Socrates was willing to accept the verdict of his fellow citizens.
Socrates first worked as a stonemason, and there was a tradition in antiquity, not credited by modern scholarship, that Socrates crafted the statues of the Three Graces, which stood near the Acropolis until the 2nd century AD.
Søren Kierkegaard believed this play was a more accurate representation of Socrates than those of his students.
However, when the prytany responded by refusing to vote on the issue, the people reacted with threats of death directed at the prytany itself.
This issue is known as the Socratic problem, or ''the Socratic question''.
Plato's Socrates also made important and lasting contributions to the field of epistemology, and his ideologies and approach have proven a strong foundation for much Western philosophy that has followed.
Perhaps surprisingly, Socrates claims to have been deeply influenced by two women besides his mother: he says that Diotima (cf.
His mother was a midwife named Phaenarete.
It is debatable whether Socrates believed humans (as opposed to gods like Apollo) could actually become wise.
Today, such a voice would be classified under the ''Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders'' as a command hallucination.
Plato's ''Symposium''), a witch and priestess from Mantinea, taught him all he knows about ''eros'', or love; and that Aspasia, the mistress of Pericles, taught him the art of rhetoric.
However, there is no evidence that he ever had a homosexual or pederastic relationship.
He mentions several influences: Prodicus the rhetor and Anaxagoras the philosopher.
The character of Socrates as exhibited in ''Apology'', ''Crito'', ''Phaedo'' and ''Symposium'' concurs with other sources to an extent to which it seems possible to rely on the Platonic Socrates, as demonstrated in the dialogues, as a representation of the actual Socrates as he lived in history.
It would seem, therefore, that he was ugly, and that Socrates had a brilliant intellect.
The only time he actually claimed to be wise was within ''Apology'', in which he says he is wise "in the limited sense of having human wisdom".
At the same time, however, many scholars believe that in some works, Plato, being a literary artist, pushed his avowedly brightened-up version of "Socrates" far beyond anything the historical Socrates was likely to have done or said.
The one thing Socrates claimed to have knowledge of was "the art of love" (''ta erôtikê'').
To do otherwise would have caused him to break his "social contract" with the state, and so harm the state, an unprincipled act.
The testimony of Xenophon and Aristotle, alongside some of Aristophanes' work (especially ''The Clouds''), is useful in fleshing out a perception of Socrates beyond Plato's work.
Aristotle himself was as much of a philosopher as he was a scientist with extensive work in the fields of biology and physics.
He believed he was a philosopher engaged in the pursuit of Truth, and did not claim to know it fully.
As British philosopher Martin Cohen has put it, "Plato, the idealist, offers an idol, a master figure, for philosophy.
Rather than upholding a status quo and accepting the development of what he perceived as immorality within his region, Socrates questioned the collective notion of "might makes right" that he felt was common in Greece during this period.
(In the ''Symposium'', Socrates credits his speech on the philosophic path to his teacher, the priestess Diotima, who is not even sure if Socrates is capable of reaching the highest mysteries.)
A corollary of this is that sources that do mention Socrates do not necessarily claim to be historically accurate, and are often partisan.
He was prominently lampooned in Aristophanes' comedy ''The Clouds'', produced when Socrates was in his mid-forties; he said at his trial (according to Plato) that the laughter of the theater was a harder task to answer than the arguments of his accusers.
To illustrate the use of the Socratic method, a series of questions are posed to help a person or group to determine their underlying beliefs and the extent of their knowledge.
Over the past century, numerous plays about Socrates have also focused on Socrates' life and influence.
Claiming loyalty to his city, Socrates clashed with the current course of Athenian politics and society.
to go to Salamis, and from there, to return to them with Leon the Salaminian.
Socrates married Xanthippe, who is especially remembered for having an undesirable temperament.
These writings are the ''Sokratikoi logoi'', or Socratic dialogues, which consist of reports of conversations apparently involving Socrates.
The development and practice of this method is one of Socrates' most enduring contributions, and is a key factor in earning his mantle as the father of political philosophy, ethics or moral philosophy, and as a figurehead of all the central themes in Western philosophy.
Socrates' apparent respect for democracy is one of the themes emphasized in the 2008 play ''Socrates on Trial'' by Andrew David Irvine.
Socrates' opposition to democracy is often denied, and the question is one of the biggest philosophical debates when trying to determine exactly what Socrates believed.
After he lay down, the man who administered the poison pinched his foot; Socrates could no longer feel his legs.
This distinction is echoed in Xenophon's ''Symposium'' (3.20), when Socrates jokes about his certainty of being able to make a fortune, if he chose to practice the art of pandering.
Direct criticism of Socrates the man almost disappears after this time, but there is a noticeable preference for Plato or Aristotle over the elements of Socratic philosophy distinct from those of his students, even into the Middle Ages.
The idea that there are certain virtues formed a common thread in Socrates' teachings.
His actions lived up to this standard: in the end, Socrates accepted his death sentence when most thought he would simply leave Athens, as he felt he could not run away from or go against the will of his community; as mentioned above, his reputation for valor on the battlefield was without reproach.
He tells them they are concerned with their families, careers, and political responsibilities when they ought to be worried about the "welfare of their souls".
Socrates' paradoxical wisdom made the prominent Athenians he publicly questioned look foolish, turning them against him and leading to accusations of wrongdoing.
In a similar vein, French philosopher Pierre Hadot suggests that the dialogues are a type of spiritual exercise.
In the monologue of the ''Apology'', Socrates states he was active for Athens in the battles of Amphipolis, Delium, and Potidaea.
Critias' cousin Plato would go on to found the Academy in 385 BC, which gained so much renown that "Academy" became the standard word for educational institutions in later European languages such as English, French, and Italian.
That both Cynicism and Stoicism, which carried heavy influence from Socratic thought, were unlike or even contrary to Platonism further illustrates this.
Questioning them, however, Socrates concluded: while each man thought he knew a great deal and was wise, in fact they knew very little and were not wise at all.
Socrates turned down Crito's pleas to attempt an escape from prison.
Therefore, Socrates is claiming to know about the art of love, insofar as he knows how to ask questions.
"Apology" is a transliteration, not a translation, of the Greek ''apologia'', meaning "defense"; in this sense it is not apologetic according to our contemporary use of the term.
Within the ''Metaphysics'', he states Socrates was occupied with the search for moral virtues, being the ' ''first to search for universal definitions for them'' '.
He did, however, fulfill his duty to serve as ''Prytanis'' when a trial of a group of Generals who presided over a disastrous naval campaign were judged; even then, he maintained an uncompromising attitude, being one of those who refused to proceed in a manner not supported by the laws, despite intense pressure.
Plato, Xenophon, and Aristotle are the main sources for the historical Socrates; however, Xenophon and Plato were students of Socrates, and they may idealize him; however, they wrote the only continuous descriptions of Socrates that have come down to us in their complete form.
Al-Kindi, a well-known Arabic philosopher, introduced and tried to reconcile Socrates and Hellenistic philosophy to an Islamic audience, referring to him by the name 'Suqrat'.
There are no straightforward histories, contemporary with Socrates, that dealt with his own time and place.
There have been several suggestions offered as reasons why he chose to stay:
In Plato's Dialogues, learning appears as a process of remembering.
He has been recognized with accolades ranging from frequent mentions in pop culture (such as the movie ''Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure'' and a Greek rock band called Socrates Drank the Conium) to numerous busts in academic institutions in recognition of his contribution to education.
It is, however, possible that the Socrates of Plato's ''Republic'' is colored by Plato's own views.
Socrates frequently says his ideas are not his own, but his teachers'.
His friend Crito of Alopece criticized him for abandoning them when he refused to try to escape before his execution.
The idea of asceticism being hand in hand with an ethical life or one with piety, ignored by Plato and Aristotle and somewhat dealt with by the Cynics, formed the core of another philosophy in 281 BC—Stoicism when Zeno of Citium would discover Socrates' works and then learn from Crates, a Cynic philosopher.
The conventional interpretation of this is that Socrates' wisdom was limited to an awareness of his own ignorance.
More specifically, in the ''Apology'', Socrates cites his poverty as proof that he is not a teacher.
The Sophistic movement that he railed at in life survived him, but by the 3rd century BC, was rapidly overtaken by the many philosophical schools of thought that Socrates influenced.
Asclepius was the Greek god for curing illness, and it is likely Socrates' last words meant that death is the cure—and freedom, of the soul from the body.
As for discovering the real-life Socrates, the difficulty is that ancient sources are mostly philosophical or dramatic texts, apart from Xenophon.
After drinking the poison, he was instructed to walk around until his legs felt numb.
In the culmination of the philosophic path as discussed in Plato's ''Symposium'', one comes to the Sea of Beauty or to the sight of "the beautiful itself" (211C); only then can one become wise.
Plato refers to Socrates as the "gadfly" of the state (as the gadfly stings the horse into action, so Socrates stung various Athenians), insofar as he irritated some people with considerations of justice and the pursuit of goodness.
Most notable among them was Simon the Shoemaker.
It was this ''sign'' that prevented Socrates from entering into politics.
Evaluation of and reaction to Socrates has been undertaken by both historians and philosophers from the time of his death to the present day with a multitude of conclusions and perspectives.
Others argue that he did have his own theories and beliefs.
In the ''Symposium'', Alcibiades describes Socrates' valour in the battles of Potidaea and Delium, recounting how Socrates saved his life in the former battle (219e-221b).
What is more, the first word of nearly all Plato's works is a significant term for that respective dialogue, and is used with its many connotations in mind.
However, he carefully distinguishes himself from a panderer (προᾰγωγός ''proagogos'') or procurer.
It is argued that Socrates believed "ideals belong in a world only the wise man can understand", making the philosopher the only type of person suitable to govern others.
The Tyrants ruled for about a year before the Athenian democracy was reinstated, at which point it declared an amnesty for all recent events.
Alternately, the ''sign'' is often taken to be what we would call "intuition"; however, Socrates' characterization of the phenomenon as ''daimōnic'' may suggest that its origin is divine, mysterious, and independent of his own thoughts.
Furthermore, according to Plato's ''Apology of Socrates'', an "early" dialogue, Socrates refused to pursue conventional politics; he often stated he could not look into other's matters or tell people how to live their lives when he did not yet understand how to live his own.
Two fragments are extant of the writings by Timon of Phlius pertaining to Socrates, although Timon is known to have written to ridicule and lampoon philosophy.
Xenophon reports that because youths were not allowed to enter the Agora, they used to gather in workshops surrounding it.
His works are, indeed, dialogues; Plato's choice of this, the medium of Sophocles, Euripides, and the fictions of theatre, may reflect the ever-interpretable nature of his writings, as he has been called a "dramatist of reason".
Nothing written by Socrates remains extant.
Amid all the disagreement resulting from differences within sources, two factors emerge from all sources pertaining to Socrates.
In the play, Socrates is ridiculed for his dirtiness, which is associated with the Laconizing fad; also in plays by Callias, Eupolis, and Telecleides.
According to Olympiodorus the Younger in his ''Life of Plato'', Plato himself "received instruction from the writers of tragedy" before taking up the study of philosophy.
However, it is still commonly taught and held with little exception that Socrates is the progenitor of subsequent Western philosophy, to the point that philosophers before him are referred to as pre-Socratic.
It was not only Athenian democracy: Socrates found short of ideal any government that did not conform to his presentation of a perfect regime led by philosophers, and Athenian government was far from that.
While "Socrates dealt with moral matters and took no notice at all of nature in general", in his Dialogues, Plato would emphasize mathematics with metaphysical overtones mirroring that of Pythagoras&nbsp;– the former who would dominate Western thought well into the Renaissance.
One of Socrates' purported offenses to the city was his position as a social and moral critic.
Aristotle refers frequently, but in passing, to Socrates in his writings.
Socrates considered virtuousness to require or consist of ''phronēsis'', "thought, sense, judgement, practical wisdom, and prudence."
He suggests that Socrates was a voluntary scapegoat; his death was the purifying remedy for Athens' misfortunes.
Regardless, this view of Socrates cannot be dismissed out of hand, as we cannot be sure of the differences between the views of Plato and Socrates; in addition, there seem to be some corollaries in the works of Xenophon.
He was to be brought back to be subsequently executed.
In the ''Phaedrus'', we are told Socrates considered this to be a form of "divine madness", the sort of insanity that is a gift from the gods and gives us poetry, mysticism, love, and even philosophy itself.
One of the most recent has been ''Socrates on Trial'', a play based on Aristophanes' ''Clouds'' and Plato's ''Apology'', ''Crito,'' and ''Phaedo,'' all adapted for modern performance.
The ''Socratic Dialogues'' are a series of dialogues written by Plato and Xenophon in the form of discussions between Socrates and other persons of his time, or as discussions between Socrates' followers over his concepts.
Perhaps the most interesting facet of this is Socrates' reliance on what the Greeks called his "daimōnic sign", an averting (ἀποτρεπτικός ''apotreptikos'') inner voice Socrates heard only when he was about to make a mistake.
The lengthy presentation of ideas given in most of the dialogues may be the ideas of Socrates himself, but which have been subsequently deformed or changed by Plato, and some scholars think Plato so adapted the Socratic style as to make the literary character and the philosopher himself impossible to distinguish.
He liked to observe that successful fathers (such as the prominent military general Pericles) did not produce sons of their own quality.
Additionally, in ''Why Socrates Died: Dispelling the Myths'', Robin Waterfield adds another interpretation of Socrates' last words.
Socrates frequented these shops in order to converse with the merchants.
For his part as a philosophical interlocutor, he leads his respondent to a clearer conception of wisdom, although he claims he is not himself a teacher (''Apology'').
She bore for him three sons, Lamprocles, Sophroniscus and Menexenus.
Long, "There should be no doubt that, despite his claim to know only that he knew nothing, Socrates had strong beliefs about the divine", and, citing Xenophon's ''Memorabilia'', 1.4, 4.3,:
Plato's protege, another important figure of the Classical era, Aristotle went on to tutor Alexander the Great and also to found his own school in 335 BC—the Lyceum—whose name also now means an educational institution.
In the ''Meno'', he refers to the Eleusinian Mysteries, telling Meno he would understand Socrates' answers better if only he could stay for the initiations next week.
The soul, before its incarnation in the body, was in the realm of Ideas (very similar to the Platonic "Forms").
Further confusions result from the nature of these sources, insofar as the Platonic Dialogues are arguably the work of an artist-philosopher, whose meaning does not volunteer itself to the passive reader nor again the lifelong scholar.
Generally, the early works of Plato are considered to be close to the spirit of Socrates, whereas the later works—including ''Phaedo'' and ''Republic''—are considered to be possibly products of Plato's elaborations.
The ambiguity and lack of reliability serves as the modern basis of criticism—that it is nearly impossible to know the real Socrates.
Socrates is mentioned in the dialogue Kuzari by Jewish philosopher and rabbi Yehuda Halevi in which a Jew instructs the Khazar king about Judaism.
However, Socrates returned home and did not go to Salamis as he was expected to.
Also, Xenophon, being an historian, is a more reliable witness to the historical Socrates.
To understand Socrates and his thought, one must turn primarily to the works of Plato, whose dialogues are thought the most informative source about Socrates' life and philosophy, and also Xenophon.
In the Athenian jury system, an "apology" is composed of three parts: a speech, followed by a counter-assessment, then some final words.
Please, don't forget to pay the debt."
The ''Apology'' professes to be a record of the actual speech Socrates delivered in his own defense at the trial.
He says that he himself is a true matchmaker (προμνηστικός ''promnestikós'') in that he matches the young man to the best philosopher for his particular mind.
At a time when Athens sought to stabilize and recover from its humiliating defeat, the Athenian public may have been entertaining doubts about democracy as an efficient form of government.
However, Xenophon mentions Socrates' "arrogance" and that he was "an expert in the art of pimping" or "self-presentation".
Also, according to A.
On the one hand, he drew a clear line between human ignorance and ideal knowledge; on the other, Plato's ''Symposium'' (Diotima's Speech) and ''Republic'' (Allegory of the Cave) describe a method for ascending to wisdom.
He praises Sparta, archrival to Athens, directly and indirectly in various dialogues.
The influence of this approach is most strongly felt today in the use of the scientific method, in which hypothesis is the first stage.
Especially for Plato's writings referring to Socrates, it is not always clear which ideas brought forward by Socrates (or his friends) actually belonged to Socrates and which of these may have been new additions or elaborations by Plato—this is known as the Socratic Problem.
According to Xenophon, he was a teleologist who held that god arranges everything for the best.
Socrates also questioned the Sophistic doctrine that arete (virtue) can be taught.
Socrates believed the Oracle's response was not correct, because he believed he possessed no wisdom whatsoever.
Socrates' acceptance of his death sentence after his conviction can also be seen to support this view.
In the Dialogues of Plato, though Socrates sometimes seems to support a mystical side, discussing reincarnation and the mystery religions, this is generally attributed to Plato.
He is an enigmatic figure known chiefly through the accounts of classical writers, especially the writings of his students Plato and Xenophon and the plays of his contemporary Aristophanes.
As Irvine puts it, "During a time of war and great social and intellectual upheaval, Socrates felt compelled to express his views openly, regardless of the consequences.
Finally, the ''Phaedrus'' and the ''Symposium'' each allude to Socrates' coy delivery of philosophic truths in conversation; the Socrates of the ''Phaedrus'' goes so far as to demand such dissembling and mystery in all writing.
#Having knowingly agreed to live under the city's laws, he implicitly subjected himself to the possibility of being accused of crimes by its citizens and judged guilty by its jury.
Plato's ''Phaedo'' is an example of this latter category.
The reason he gave was that "in no case would he act except in accordance with the law".
Socrates' death is described at the end of Plato's ''Phaedo''.
If anything in general can be said about the philosophical beliefs of Socrates, it is that he was morally, intellectually, and politically at odds with many of his fellow Athenians.
Hadot writes that "in Plato's view, every dialectical exercise, precisely because it is an exercise of pure thought, subject to the demands of the Logos, turns the soul away from the sensible world, and allows it to convert itself towards the Good."
During the last years of Socrates' life, Athens was in continual flux due to political upheaval.
The problem of understanding Socrates as a philosopher is shown in the following: In Xenophon's ''Symposium'', Socrates is reported as saying he devotes himself only to what he regards as the most important art or occupation, that of discussing philosophy.
The problem with discerning Socrates' philosophical views stems from the perception of contradictions in statements made by the ''Socrates'' in the different dialogues of Plato.
Plato's dialogues are among the most comprehensive accounts of Socrates to survive from antiquity, though it is unclear the degree to which Socrates himself is "hidden behind his 'best disciple', Plato".
A Saint, a prophet of 'the Sun-God', a teacher condemned for his teachings as a heretic."
It was first described by Plato in the ''Socratic Dialogues''.
Socrates' exceptional service at Delium is also mentioned in the ''Laches'' by the General after whom the dialogue is named (181b).
These virtues represented the most important qualities for a person to have, foremost of which were the philosophical or intellectual virtues.
This idea was inherited by one of Socrates' older students, Antisthenes, who became the originator of another philosophy in the years after Socrates' death: Cynicism.
The beliefs of Socrates, as distinct from those of Plato, are difficult to discern.
Xenophon and Plato agree that Socrates had an opportunity to escape, as his followers were able to bribe the prison guards.
Socrates stressed that "the unexamined life is not worth living and ethical virtue is the only thing that matters."
Therefore, he believed that wrongdoing and behaviour that was not virtuous resulted from ignorance, and that those who did wrong knew no better.
The outcome of the trial was ultimately judged to be a miscarriage of justice, or ''illegal'', but, actually, Socrates' decision had no support from written statutory law, instead being reliant on favouring a continuation of less strict and less formal nomos law.
The full reasoning behind his refusal to flee is the main subject of the ''Crito''.
Socrates lived during the time of the transition from the height of the Athenian hegemony to its decline with the defeat by Sparta and its allies in the Peloponnesian War.
Some controversy also exists about Socrates' attitude towards homosexuality and as to whether or not he believed in the Olympian gods, was monotheistic, or held some other religious viewpoint.
He always invited others to try to concentrate more on friendships and a sense of true community, for Socrates felt this was the best way for people to grow together as a populace.
The statement "I know that I know nothing" is often attributed to Socrates, based on a statement in Plato's ''Apology''.
Most of the dialogues present Socrates applying this method to some extent, but nowhere as completely as in the ''Euthyphro''.
There is a degree of controversy inherent in the identifying of what these might have been, owing to the difficulty of separating Socrates from Plato and the difficulty of interpreting even the dramatic writings concerning Socrates.
The matter is complicated because the historical Socrates seems to have been notorious for asking questions but not answering, claiming to lack wisdom concerning the subjects about which he questioned others.
Almost all of Plato's works center on Socrates.
There were a number of paintings about his life including ''Socrates Tears Alcibiades from the Embrace of Sensual Pleasure'' by Jean-Baptiste Regnault and ''The Death of Socrates'' by Jacques-Louis David in the later 18th century.
Socrates was attracted to teenage boys, as is evident in this encounter with Charmides in a palaestra.
In this view, the token of appreciation for Asclepius would represent a cure for Athens' ailments.
Democracy was at last overthrown by a junta known as the Thirty Tyrants, led by Plato's relative, Critias, who had once been a student and friend of Socrates.
The generals were seen by some to have failed to uphold the most basic of duties, and the people decided upon capital punishment.
However, Plato's later works appear to be more his own philosophy put into the mouth of his mentor.
In the ''Apology,'' Socrates compares his military service to his courtroom troubles, and says anyone on the jury who thinks he ought to retreat from philosophy must also think soldiers should retreat when it seems likely that they will be killed in battle.
His father was Sophroniscus, a sculptor, or stonemason.
Through his portrayal in Plato's dialogues, Socrates has become renowned for his contribution to the field of ethics, and it is this Platonic Socrates who lends his name to the concepts of Socratic irony and the Socratic method, or ''elenchus''.
Consequently, distinguishing the philosophical beliefs of Socrates from those of Plato and Xenophon has not proven easy, so it must be remembered that what is attributed to Socrates might actually be more the specific concerns of these two thinkers instead.
Voltaire even went so far as to write a satirical play about the Trial of Socrates.
Immediately, the students of Socrates set to work both on exercising their perceptions of his teachings in politics and also on developing many new philosophical schools of thought.
Socrates realized the Oracle was correct; while so-called wise men thought themselves wise and yet were not, he himself knew he was not wise at all, which, paradoxically, made him the wiser one since he was the only person aware of his own ignorance.
Socrates believed the best way for people to live was to focus on the pursuit of virtue rather than the pursuit, for instance, of material wealth.
Socrates appears to have been a critic of democracy, and some scholars interpret his trial as an expression of political infighting.
#He believed such a flight would indicate a fear of death, which he believed no true philosopher has.
However, in ''The Clouds'', Aristophanes portrays Socrates as accepting payment for teaching and running a sophist school with Chaerephon.
He proceeded to test the riddle by approaching men considered wise by the people of Athens—statesmen, poets, and artisans—in order to refute the Oracle's pronouncement.
The strongest argument of those who claim Socrates did not actually believe in the idea of philosopher kings is that the view is expressed no earlier than Plato's ''Republic'', which is widely considered one of Plato's "Middle" dialogues and not representative of the historical Socrates' views.
When he is on trial for heresy and corrupting the minds of the youth of Athens, he uses his method of ''elenchos'' to demonstrate to the jurors that their moral values are wrong-headed.
