Fog is not unusual, especially in the beginning of the season.
Some of the biggest telecommunications companies, TV and radio stations, newspapers, magazines, and web portals are based in Sofia, including the Bulgarian National Television, bTV and Nova TV.
Over 99.6% of males and females aged over 9 are recorded as literate.
More than 20,000 students study in its 16 faculties.
The municipality was known for minor and cosmetic repairs and many streets are in a poor condition.
The people with juridical status divorced or widowed are either part of the factual singles or those having another type of partnership, each of the two constitutes by around 10% of the population aged over 20.
Only over 1% of the juridically married do not de facto live within marriage.
In summer, the city generally remains slightly cooler than other parts of Bulgaria, due to its higher altitude.
Shopi speak one of the transitional South Slavic dialects, along with Torlakian, sharing features with both eastern (Bulgarian and Macedonian) and western (Serbo-Croatian) branches, although they are given non-Slavic origin through the ancient Thracian Serdi, the founders of the city.
Summers are warm and sunny.
Sofia's geographic location, in the foothills of the weekend retreat Vitosha mountain, further adds to the city's specific atmosphere.
Smaller collections of items related mostly to the history of Sofia are in the National Archaeological Museum, a former mosque located between the edifices of the National Bank and the Presidency.
Sofia has been an area of human habitation since at least 7000 BC.
The record snow depth is  (December 25, 2001).
These include Tsarigradsko shose, Cherni Vrah, Bulgaria, Slivnitsa and Todor Aleksandrov boulevards, as well as the city's ring road, where long chains of cars are formed at peak hours and traffic jams occur regularly.
Historically, after World War II and the era of industrialisation under socialism, the city and its surrounding areas expanded rapidly and became the most heavily industrialised region of the country.
After the failed crusade of Władysław III of Poland in 1443 towards Sofia, the city's Christian elite was annihilated and the city became the capital of the Ottoman province (beylerbeylik) of Rumelia for more than four centuries.
Muzeiko is a new museum opened in 2015.
File:BusinessParkSofia view2.jpg|Business Park Sofia
For a short period the Thracian rule was possibly interrupted by the Achaemenid Empire.
Sofia has the most polluted air of any capital in the EU.
According to the 2011 census, people aged 20–24 years are the most numerous group, numbering 133,170 individuals and accounting for 11% of the total 1,202,761 people.
The  Capital Fort Business Center will be the first skyscraper in Bulgaria, with 36 floors.
), metallurgy ($1.84 bln.
The real GDP (PPP) per capita growth was 2.5% to $33,105 (28,456 euro) and the employment went up by 3.4% to 962,400 in 2013–2014.
Several smaller parks, among which the Zaimov Park, City Garden and the Doctors' Garden, are located in central Sofia.
In 2012, it hosted the FIVB World League finals.
It occupies an area of  and can hold 10,000 people.
There are two ice skating complexes&nbsp;— the Winter Sports Palace with a capacity of 4,600 and the Slavia Winter Stadium with a capacity of 2,000, both containing two rinks each.
Later, many foreign-educated Bulgarian architects also contributed.
During that time the town had a population of around 7,000.
The city has an extensive green belt.
Artificial and dam lakes were built in the twentieth century.
Many of the most severe crimes are contract killings connected to the organized crime, but these had dropped in recent years after several arrests of gang members.
Serdica Peak on Livingston Island in the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica is named after Serdica.
In 1925 a terrorist act of ultra-leftists failed their attempted assassination of the king but resulted in the destruction of a church and many victims.
The influx of workers from other parts of the country became so intense that a restriction policy was imposed, and residing in the capital was only possible after obtaining Sofianite citizenship.
This statistic should not necessarily be taken at face value due to conflicting data&nbsp;– such as for the predominantly Roma neighbourhood of Fakulteta, which alone may have a population of 45,000.
The city was occupied by Hungarian forces for a short time in 1443.
With their vital, humanistic realism they are a Renaissance phenomenon at its culmination phase in the context of the common-European art.
The oldest such institution is the Ivan Vazov National Theatre, which performs mainly classical plays and is situated in the very centre of the city.
In 1879 there was a dispute about what the name of the new Bulgarian capital should be, when the citizens created a committee of famous people, insisting for the Slavic name.
, the system has  of track.
According to a survey, almost a third of Sofia's residents say that they never feel safe in the Bulgarian capital, while 20% always feel safe.
For  Constantine the Great it was 'Sardica mea Roma est' (Serdica is my Rome).
Low fares in comparison with other European countries, make taxis affordable and popular among a big part of the city population.
Tennis is increasingly popular in the city.
The city has the 4th-highest number of automobiles per capita in the European Union at 546.4 vehicles per 1,000 people.
Around 1393 it became the seat of newly established Sanjak of Sofia.
File:Mladost3.jpg|Housing in Mladost, Stalinist architecture
Some of Bulgaria's most famous operatic singers, such as Nicolai Ghiaurov and Ghena Dimitrova, have made their first appearances on the stage of the National Opera and Ballet.
There were fountains, ''hamams'' (bathhouses), prominent churches such as Saint Sofia were converted into mosques and in total there were 11 big and over 100 small mosques by the 17th century, of which only the Banya Bashi remains as a mosque today.
Two emblematic galleries in Sofia - the National Art Gallery and the National Gallery for Foreign Art united their collections in a new structure.
Sofia has  of railway lines.
File:Sofia Hotel Rodina near Russki pametnik 2012 PD 2.jpg|Hotel Rodina, an example of Brutalist architecture
Other institutions of national significance, such as the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences (BAS) and the SS.
For the same year, the strongest sectors of the city's economy in terms of annual production were manufacturing ($5.5 bln.
The valley has an average altitude of .
The city is known for its 49 mineral and thermal springs.
The venue was inaugurated on July 30, 2011, and the first event it hosted was a friendly volleyball match between Bulgaria and Serbia.
Three of the ten Pan-European Transport Corridors cross the city: IV, VIII and X.
File:StSophiaChurch-Sofia-10.jpg|Interior of the ancient Saint Sofia Church
During World War II in Bulgaria, Bulgaria declared war on the US and UK on 13 December 1941 and in late 1943 and early 1944 US and UK aircraft bombed Sofia.
Vitosha Boulevard, also called ''Vitoshka'', is a pedestrian zone with numerous cafes, restaurants, fashion boutiques, and luxury goods stores.
In 2008, the average per capita annual income was 4,572 leva ($3,479).
Being Bulgaria's primate city, Sofia is a hometown of many of the major local universities, cultural institutions and commercial companies.
There are around 13,000 taxi cabs operating in the city.
There are also various other sports complexes in the city which belong to institutions other than football clubs, such as those of the National Sports Academy, the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, or those of different universities.
Afterwаrds, it grew into an important fortress and administrative centre when Khan Omurtag made it a center of Sredets province (Sredetski komitat, Средецки комитат).
The master plan for the Sofia Metro includes three lines with a total of 63 stations.
Sofia concentrates the majority of Bulgaria's leading performing arts troupes.
The extension of the underground system is hoped to alleviate the city's immense traffic problems.
One of them is Samuil, who became an Emperor of Bulgaria in 997.
Nearly all of these were constructed as competition venues and therefore have seating facilities for several hundred people.
The National Palace of Culture regularly hold classical concerts.
The city and its surrounding Yugozapaden NUTS II planning region had a per capita PPS GDP of €20,600 in 2014, higher than any other region in the country.
The city is the hot spot of internal migration, the capital population is increasing and is around 17% of the national, thus a small number of people with local roots remain today, they dominate the surrounding rural suburbs and are called Shopi.
The National Historical Museum in Boyana district has a vast collection of more than 650,000 historical items dating from Prehistory to the modern era, although only 10,000 of them are permanently displayed due to the lack of space.
In 2008, apartment prices increased dramatically, with a growth rate of 30%.
The architecture of Sofia's centre is thus a combination of Neo-Baroque, Neo-Rococo, Neo-Renaissance and Neoclassicism, with the Vienna Secession also later playing an important part, but it is mostly typically Central European.
Serdica was a significant midway city on the Roman road Via Militaris, connecting Singidunum and Byzantium.
A number of ancient Roman, Byzantine and medieval Bulgarian buildings are preserved in the centre of the city.
Roman emperors Aurelian (215–275) and Galerius (260–311) were from Serdica.
and food and beverages ($778 mln.).
Education institutions include 13 specialized for children with disabilities, 8 art schools, 22 professional colleges.
A number of research and cultural departments operate within SU, including its own publishing house, botanical gardens, a space research centre, a quantum electronics department, and a Confucius Institute Rakovski Defence and Staff College, the National Academy of Arts, and Sofia Medical University are other major higher education establishments in the city.
However, the end of the old administration and centrally planned system also paved the way for chaotic and unrestrained construction, which continues today.
The hottest recorded summer was in 2012 with a daily average July temperature of .
Skiing passes typically allow unlimited access to the ski slopes, cable cars and other transport facilities.
After the Celtic invasion in 3rd century BC Tilataei were conquered by the Celtic tribe of Serdi.
The ratio of women per 1,000 men was 1,102.
Sofia has been an area of continuous human habitation since at least the 8th millennium BC, but others have inhabited the area 30,000 years ago.
The city's GDP PPS per capita at current market prices stood at €26,600 in 2012, which was 100% of the then EU average, according to Eurostat data – well above the same year's national average of 46%.
The natural growth rate during 2009 was 0.2 per mille, the first positive growth rate in nearly 20 years.
The town was the center of Sofia Eyalet (1826–1864).
The earliest works where this latest name is registered are the duplicate of the Gospel of Serdica, in a dialog between two salesmen from Dubrovnik around 1359, in the 14th-century Vitosha Charter of Bulgarian tsar Ivan Shishman and in a Ragusan merchant's notes of 1376.
However, the city is also subjected to heat waves with high temperatures reaching or exceeding  in the hottest days, particularly in July and August.
However, after the political changes in 1989, this kind of citizenship was removed.
Sofia University was founded in 1888.
Serdica's citizens of Thracian descent were referred to as Illyrians probably because it was at some time the capital of Eastern Illyria (Second Illyria).
Of the population aged 15–64 – 265,248 people within the municipality (28.5%) are not economically active, the unemployed being another group of 55,553 people (6%), a large share of whom have completed higher education.
This was a tradition of collection of wise literature, shared between Mediterranean cultures, which was called ''sophia'' (σοφία)  in Greek.
After a number of unsuccessful sieges, the city fell to the Byzantine Empire in 1018, but once again was incorporated into the restored Bulgarian Empire at the time of Tsar Ivan Asen I.
According to modern records 39,551 dwellings were constructed until 1949, 119,943 between 1950 and 1969, 287,191 between 1970 and 1989, 57,916 in the 90s and 102,623 between 2000 and 2011.
Some of them provide a language certificate upon graduation, while the 9th French Language School has exchange programs with a number of ''lycées'' in France and Switzerland, such as the Parisian Collège-lycée Jacques-Decour.
In January 2015 Sofia was ranked 30th out of 300 global cities in terms of combined growth in employment and real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in 2013–2014.
Cyril and Methodius National Library houses the largest national collection of books and documents (1,714,211 books and some 6 million other documents) and is Bulgaria's oldest cultural institute.
File:Tsar Liberator blvd building - Sofia.jpg|Baroque architecture in Sofia
Nearly two thousand works created by artists from Bulgaria and abroad are on display in twenty eight exhibition halls.
Sofia holds Bulgaria's largest  museum collections, which attract tourists and students for practical studies.
The city's name is pronounced by Bulgarians with a stress on the 'o', in contrast with the tendency of foreigners to place the stress on 'i'.
However, the motto of the city is "grows, but does not age".
these vans numbered 368 and serviced 48 lines around the city and suburbs.
Sofia is one of the most visited tourist destinations in Bulgaria alongside coastal and mountain resorts.
According to the director of Sofia District Police Directorate the largest share of the crimes are thefts, making up 62.4% of all crimes in the capital city.
Consequently, traffic and air pollution problems have become more severe and receive regular criticism in local media.
Until 1949, 13,114 buildings were constructed and between 10,000–20,000 in each following decade.
The city subsequently expanded for a century and a half, it became a significant political and economical centre, more so&nbsp;— it became one of the first Roman cities where Christianity was recognized as an official religion (under Galerius).
Winters are cold and snowy.
After the abolition of Communism in 1989, Sofia witnessed the construction of whole business districts and neighbourhoods, as well as modern skryscraper-like glass-fronted office buildings, but also top-class residential neighbourhoods.
Sofia is the economic heart of Bulgaria and home to most major Bulgarian and international companies operating in the country, as well as the Bulgarian National Bank and the Bulgarian Stock Exchange.
Bulgaria Air, PPD, the national airline of Bulgaria, has its head office on the grounds of Sofia Airport.
One year later, in 1880, it was the fifth-largest city in the country after Plovdiv, Varna, Ruse and Shumen.
Sofia is Europe's most affordable capital to visit .
The infant mortality rate was 5.6 per 1,000, down from 18.9 in 1980.
Stalinist Gothic public buildings emerged in the centre, notably the spacious government complex around The Largo, Vasil Levski Stadium, the Cyril and Methodius National Library and others.
Increasing are frauds, drug-related crimes, petty theft and vandalism.
After World War II and the establishment of a Communist government in Bulgaria in 1944, the architectural style was substantially altered.
The city became somehow popular to the Ottomans by the name ''Sofya'' (صوفيا).
Sofia is one of the top 10 best places for start-up business in the world, especially in IT technologies.
The city has a history of nearly 7000 years and it is the second oldest city in Europe according to the city's official website and other sources, though the meaning of the claim is unclear as in the world there were hardly any cities at the time.
Six new stations were opened in 2009, two more in April 2012, and eleven more in August 2012.
The crypt of the Alexander Nevsky cathedral holds a collection of Eastern Orthodox icons from the 9th to the 19th century.
Virtually the entire city (900,000 households and 5,900 companies) is centrally heated, using residual heat from electricity generation (3,000 MW) and gas- and oil-fired heating furnaces; total heat capacity is 4,640 MW.
In the coldest days temperatures can drop below , most notably in January.
In these documents the city is called ''Sofia'', but at the same time the region and the city's inhabitants are still called ''Sredecheski'' (срѣдечьскои, "of Sredets"), which continued until the 20th century.
There are more than fifteen swimming complexes in the city, most of them outdoor.
Other museums are the National Historical Museum with a collection of more than 600,000 items; the National Polytechnical Museum with more than 1,000 technological items on display; the National Archaeological Museum and the Museum of Natural History.
The snowiest recorded winter was 1995/1996 with a total snowfall of .
Private automobile ownership has grown rapidly in the 1990s; more than 1,000,000 cars were registered in Sofia after 2002.
The Ottomans hanged in Sofia the most honored Bulgarian revolutionary of all time Levski in 1873.
As a consequence of the bombings around 2000 people were killed and thousands of buildings were destroyed or damaged including the Capital Library and thousands of books.
According to the 2011 census, throughout the whole municipality some 892,511 people (69.1%) are recorded as Eastern Orthodox Christians, 10,256 (0.8%) as Protestant, 6,767 (0.5%) as Muslim, 5,572 (0.4%) as Roman Catholic, 4,010 (0.3%) belonged to other faith and 372,475 (28.8%) declared themselves irreligious or did not mention any faith.
The lowest recorded temperature is  (January 24, 1942).
The highest recorded temperature is  (July 5, 2000 and July 24, 2007).
The city is home to a number of large sports venues, including the 43,000-seat Vasil Levski National Stadium which hosts international football matches, as well as the Georgi Asparuhov Stadium and  Lokomotiv Stadium, the main venues for outdoor musical concerts.
It was the first edict legalizing Christianity, preceding the Edict of Milan by two years.
These include the 4th century Rotunda of St. George, the walls of the Serdica fortress and the partially preserved Amphitheatre of Serdica.
The air is polluted mostly by particulate matters and nitrogen oxides.
Unlike most European capitals, Sofia does not have any large rivers or bridges, but is surrounded by comparatively high mountains on all sides.
Corruption in Bulgaria also affects Sofia'a authorities.
With a murder rate of 1.8/per 100.000 people (as of 2009) Sofia is a quite safe country capital.
Other sources suppose that the Serdi's Celtic origin is convincingly evidenced through linguistic and archeological clues but that their presence is not evidenced before the 1st century BC, whereas others assume their mixed Thracian-Celtic origin or relation to the Sards.
The city receives an average precipitation of  a year, reaching its peak in late spring and early summer when thunderstorms are common.
The city has a population of 1.26 million, while over 1.5 million people live in its functional urban area.
35 professional high schools, 25 profiled high schools and 4 sport schools.
During the Romans ''civitas Serdenisium'' was mentioned the "brightest city of the Serdi" in official inscriptions.
File:National Gallery for Foreign Art Eola.jpg|The National gallery - SQUARE 500
The Boyana Church, a UNESCO World Heritage site, contains realistic frescoes, depicting more than 240 human images and a total 89 scenes, were painted.
It is ultimately derived from the Egyptian Kemetic word ''sbÅ'' (𓋴𓃀𓄿𓇼𓇳), meaning "star, door, teaching and wisdom" and attested first in the 20th century BC in the tomb of Intef I.
These include four of the five highest-ranking national universities – Sofia University (SU), University of Architecture, Civil Engineering and Geodesy, the Technical University of Sofia, University of National and World Economy and the University of Mining and Geology.
Sofia's development as a significant settlement owes much to its central position in the Balkans.
Sofia was declared the national capital in 1879.
The "elite" secondary language schools provide education in a selected foreign language.
Following a special competition, the art collection was named National Gallery Square 500  (source).
The Georgi Dimitrov Mausoleum, where Dimitrov's body had been preserved in a similar way to the Lenin mausoleum, was detonated in 1999.
Two natural sciences museums — the Natural History Museum and the Earth and Man — display minerals, animal species (alive and taxidermic) and rare materials.
Within the municipality, three quarters, or 965,328 people are recorded as having access to television at home and 836,435 (64.8%) as having internet.
In the context, certainly the neolithic village in Slatina, dating to the 5th–6th millennium BC, is described.
Among the architects invited to work in Bulgaria were Friedrich Grünanger, Adolf Václav Kolář, and Viktor Rumpelmayer, who designed the most important public buildings needed by the newly reestablished Bulgarian government, as well as numerous houses for the country's elite.
Sofia's architecture combines a wide range of architectural styles, some of which are aesthetically incompatible.
The transformations of Bulgaria into the People's Republic of Bulgaria in 1946 and into the Republic of Bulgaria in 1990 marked significant changes in the city's appearance.
After the Liberation War, knyaz Alexander Battenberg invited architects from Austria–Hungary to shape the new capital's architectural appearance.
Economic output in 2011 amounted to 15.9 billion leva, or $11.04 billion.
In recent years the marshrutka, a private passenger van, began serving fixed routes and proved an efficient and popular means of transport by being faster than public transport but cheaper than taxis.
In 2015, Forbes listed Sofia as one of the top 10 places in the world to launch a startup business, because of the low corporate tax (10%), the extremely fast internet connection speed available – one of the fastest in the world, and the presence of several investment funds, including Eleven Startup Accelerator, LAUNCHub and Neveq.
Whole new residential areas were built in the outskirts of the city, like Druzhba, Mladost and Lyulin.
Bulgaria's largest art museums are located in the central areas of the city.
It took 20 years to 1945 when the communist Fatherland Front took power and executed several thousand people.
It seems that the first written mention of ''Serdica'' was made during his reign and the last mention was in the 19th century in a Bulgarian text (Сардакіи, ''Sardaki'').
He considered making Serdica the capital of the Byzantine Empire instead of Constantinople.
Serdica expanded, as turrets, protective walls, public baths, administrative and cult buildings, a civic basilica, an amphitheatre, a circus, the City Council (Boulé), a large forum, a big circus (theatre), etc.
The city was destroyed in the 447 invasion of the Huns and the city laid in ruins for a century It was rebuilt by Byzantine Emperor Justinian I.
There are different boulevards and streets in the city with a higher amount of traffic than others.
In the second half of 10th century the city was ruled by Komit Nikola and his sons, popular as "Komitopuli".
Springs and autumns in Sofia are relatively short with variable and dynamic weather, intensive storms, sudden cold or heat waves.
In the Second Balkan War Bulgaria was warring alone against five neighboring countries and the Romanian Army entered Vrazhdebna in 1913, then a village  from Sofia, now a suburb, which prompted Bulgaria to capitulate.
Remains from another neolithic settlement around the National Art Gallery are traced to the 3rd–4th millennium BC, which has been the traditional center of the city ever since and is not changed today.
the consumer-reported perceived crime risk on the Numbeo database was "high" for theft and vandalism and "low" for violent crimes; safety while walking during daylight was rated "very high", and "moderate" during the night.
The 1818 Sofia earthquake was a 6.0–7.2 Medvedev–Sponheuer–Karnik Scale earthquake, the 1858 earthquake was an 6,6 same scale earthquake though reaching up to 10 in parts such as Boyana, this was followed by a 7–8 MSK Sofia earthquake in 1917 and finally by the 2012 Pernik earthquake which was a 5.6 Mw (or 5.8 ML) magnitude earthquake.
Sofia applied to host the Winter Olympic Games in 1992 and in 1994, coming 2nd and 3rd respectively.
According to some sources, it got first an official mention in the 7th/8th century BC when the Serdi (Sardi) as a Thracian tribe established a settlement.
Vitosha Mountain is a popular hiking destination due to its proximity and ease of access via car and public transport.
The project, also known as the Bulgarian Louvre, gathered under one roof a host of Bulgarian, European, American, Asian and African works of art.
Sofia Airport handled 3,815,158 passengers in 2014.
With its developing infrastructure and strategic location, Sofia is a major hub for international railway and automobile transport.
In the 500s BC, the area became part of a Thracian state union, called the Odrysian kingdom, when another Thracian tribe appeared in the town, the Odrysses.
This was the highest rank amongst cities in Southeast Europe.
During the reign of Justinian it flourished, being surrounded with great fortress walls whose remnants can still be seen today.
In the 3rd century, it became the capital of Dacia Aureliana, and when Emperor Diocletian divided the province of Dacia Aureliana into Dacia Ripensis (at the banks of the Danube) and Dacia Mediterranea, Serdica became the capital of the latter.
