In other varieties of slow pitch (sometimes known as "modified"), the only restriction is that the windmill cannot be used; thus the pitching arm cannot be raised above the shoulder and both the wind-up and the release must be underhand, still allowing for moderate speed and control in pitching.
Pitchers can be righthanded or lefthanded.
Then, depending where the runner is between home and first, the second baseman makes the decision to throw the ball to first or to hold the ball.
These extra inches give the outfielders the extra reach to catch a fly ball far away from them.
A female catcher may optionally wear a body protector in slow pitch.
In girls' fastpitch, 12u up to 18u level can throw between 30&nbsp;mph and 65&nbsp;mph, or more.
There is also something called the inside curve where ball start off the plate on the inside and curves into the strikezone.
There is sometimes a catcher.
Co-recreational leagues, where men and women play on the same team, often adopt rules intended to reduce gender inequality, under the assumption that men will be generally more powerful.
The pitcher aids the batter by attempting to give the easiest pitch to hit.
For comparison, under the current rules of Major League Baseball, a baseball has a mass between , and is  in circumference ( in diameter).
(1.2 kilograms) in mass.
The United States of America also has a competitive girls softball team that competes in international tournaments.
One possible rule requires male batters to "switch hit".
The defense may decide to allow a run if it can achieve one or multiple outs.
No glove larger than 14" (36&nbsp;cm) can be used in ASA (American Softball Association) sanctioned play.
The pitcher does not act as a fielder, and a rule is often made that if a batted ball touches the pitcher, the batter is out.
The center fielder covers the area behind second base if the ball is going to be thrown in that direction.
The World Baseball Softball Confederation (WBSC) regulates rules of play in more than 110 countries, including the United States and Canada; before the WBSC was formed in 2013, the International Softball Federation filled this role.
Despite the name, the ball used in softball is not very soft.
There are half swing slaps, fake slaps, and full swing slaps.
There are different types, including a sacrifice bunt, or slap bunt.
The defense can tag the runner, by touching the runner with the ball while the runner is not on a base.
In fastpitch, the pitcher must have both feet in contact with the pitching rubber at all times.
A well-broken-in ball is called a mush ball and is favoured for informal "pick-up" games and when playing in limited space, such as a city street (because the ball does not go as far).
That is because the player must vacate first base to allow the next batter to reach it, and consequently can only go to second base, where a force out may be recorded.
If it is a championship game, it is replayed from the beginning.
Right field has a particular job of covering the area behind first base if the ball is to be thrown in that area.
Only the wall behind the batter is considered foul territory.
Right field is meant to cover this area is the ball gets past the first baseman.
Sizes may vary but they may be no more than 34&nbsp;inches (86&nbsp;cm) long, 6.0&nbsp;inches (6&nbsp;cm) in diameter, or 38 oz.
The formation of the Joint Rules Committee on Softball in 1934 standardized the rules and naming throughout the United States.
Australia has excellent softball teams which are a reflection of its coaching, education and training system.
In this case, the second baseman covers the steal.
Located in foul territory outside both baselines are two 'Coach's Boxes'.
Slow-pitch softball is played with ten fielders.
They will have more momentum towards first base when fielding the ball than a shortstop.
In fastpitch softball, the pitch is fast, there are nine players on the field at one time, and bunting and stealing are permitted.
The batter is considered to strike out if the batter fails to hit the ball into fair territory after the given number of pitches.
Home runs are usually scored by hitting the ball over the outfield fence, but may be scored on a hit which does not go over the fence.
All over the USA, there are thousands of teams that compete year-round at tournaments.
The infield in softball is smaller than on an adult or high school baseball diamond but identical to that used by Little League Baseball; each base is 60&nbsp;ft (18&nbsp;m) from the next, as opposed to baseball's 90&nbsp;ft (27&nbsp;m).
Some umpires wear a variant of the uniform: some umpires in ASA wear heather gray slacks and may also wear a navy blue shirt; umpires from the USSSA wear red shirts with grey slacks; National Softball Association (NSA) umpires wear an official NSA white-colored umpire shirt with black pants or black shorts; NSA fastpitch umpires wear the white NSA umpires shirt and heather gray slacks.
A score of 7–0 for the team not at fault is recorded (generally one run is awarded for each inning that would have been played).
No part of the glove is allowed to be the same color as that of the ball, including that of its seams.
The IOC funded a landmark bio-mechanical study on pitching during the games.
However, the field can consist of other solid and dry surfaces such as artificial turf or asphalt.
The 1996 Olympics also marked a key era in the introduction of technology in softball.
As soon as the pitcher makes a throw, the fielders are ready to field balls that are hit in the middle of the diamond.
Thus, if the team batting first is ahead by enough runs for the rule to come into effect, the team batting second is given their half of the inning to try to narrow the margin.
The bat is held with both hands, over the shoulder, and away from the pitcher (90 degree angle).
When she safely reaches first (see below) she becomes a "base-runner" or "runner".
Only decisions where a rule might have been misinterpreted are considered to be protestable.
The minimum length of the baselines varies classification of play (see below for official measurements).
In the left field position, the player has full view of the field, the players, the base-runners, and the batter.
The number of umpires on a given game can range from a minimum of one to a maximum of seven.
The other walls are considered fair.
The fielders do not wear gloves or mitts.
A fence running between the baselines defines the limits of the field; distance from home plate to the fence varies by field.
Often double plays are due to quick thinking/reaction by the short stop.
Out calls are made by raising the right hand in a clenched fist, with a verbal call of "out".
By the 1940s, fastpitch began to dominate the game.
The Farragut Club soon set rules for the game, which spread quickly to outsiders.
An infielder's glove is typically the smallest glove on the field.
It is recommended in lower age groups.
The shortstop only doesn't cover second base when a right handed batter is up.
Some leagues play with a reduced number of innings or with a time limit, rather than the traditional seven innings.
Third baseman are responsible for covering third base at all times unless the ball is hit to them.
Rober's version of the game used a ball  in circumference, rather than the  ball used by the Farragut club, and eventually the Minneapolis ball prevailed, although the dimensions of the Minneapolis diamond were passed over in favor of the dimensions of the Chicago one.
The bat used by the batter can be made of wood, aluminum, or composite materials such as carbon fiber.
At some tournaments there might be a rules interpreter or Tournament Chief Umpire (TCU) (also known as the Umpire In Chief, or UIC) available to pass judgment on such protests, but it is usually up to the league or association involved to decide if the protest would be upheld.
The New Zealand women's team have also won a number of World Championship titles in the past.
Although there are a variety of bats used, there are several that are banned due to performance enhancement.
Pitchers also throw knuckle balls which are generally slower and move erratically.
The infield is usually "skinned" (dirt), while the outfield has grass in regulation competitions.
China is fast becoming the team to watch in softball.
Strikes are called by the plate umpire, who uses the same motion as the out call with a verbal call of "strike".
They cannot "bait" the pitcher to throw or they will be called out.
To the batter, the dropball appears to be coming in level but then as the ball reaches the plate, the pitch drops, trying to force the batter to hit the top of the ball.
As in baseball, fastpitch softball has a rubber used to control the pitchers delivery.
This will prevent base-runners from advancing to unwanted bases.
When a ball is batted into play, runners generally must attempt to advance if there are no open bases behind them; for example, a runner on first base must run to second base if the batter puts the ball in play.
The rubber can be 40 or 43 feet away from home plate, depending on age level and the league one is playing in.
A run is not scored if the last out is a force out or occurs during the same play that the runner crosses home plate.
The center fielder needs to be the quickest because of the large area of field they must cover.
Several bats are banned because of the harm it may place upon other teams and/or giving them an unfair advantage.
If the batter reaches four balls, the batter is awarded the first base in what is known as a "walk".
Lastly, painting bats is done because competitors purchase "illegal" bats that are dangerous and hazardous to the opposing team.
Offensive strategy is mostly just to hit the ball skillfully to let the batter reach base and advance other runners around the bases to score runs.
If the catcher doesn't catch the ball, the batter has the chance to run to first base and the catcher can throw the batter out at first base.
"Sliders" may also be worn for similar protection.
The left fielder is part of a group of two other fielders that make up the outfield.
The defense's pitcher stands atop the rubber and throws "(pitches") the ball towards home plate using an underhanded motion.
The batter usually steps forward with the front foot, the body weight shifts forward, as the batter simultaneously swings the bat.
The advantage of it being larger is that way the batter doesn't see the grip on the ball that the pitcher is about to throw to them.
It took place at the Farragut Boat Club at a gathering to hear the outcome of the Yale University and Harvard University football game.
In each inning, each team bats until three batters have been put out (see below).
Other sanctioning bodies of softball are AAU, NSA, PONY, ASA, ISC, USSSA, Triple Crown and ISA.
In 2004, high-visibility yellow "optic" covering, long-used for restricted flight balls in co-ed recreational leagues, became standard for competitive play.
For example, in some slow pitch softball leagues a batter starts at bat with a count of one ball one strike.
Behind home plate is a 'backstop'.
If the pitcher throws three strikes against a batter, then the batter is out and the next batter in the order comes up to bat.
Any ball that the third baseman can get, they should.
Softball and baseball are competing with karate, roller sports, squash, sports climbing, wakeboard and wushu for inclusion in 2020.
A pitch that passes through that zone is a "strike".
For example, with a thinner wall, players are able to swing the bat faster, which allows the ball to go faster, harder, and further.
The ball is a sphere of light material, covered with leather or synthetic material.
The line will be 180 feet from home plate.
An outfielder's glove is smaller than the catcher's but still large.
In fastpitch, runners may try to steal bases by running to the next base on the pitch and reaching it before being tagged with the ball.
A pitch that the batter swings at is also a strike, as is any hit ball that lands in foul territory.
High school athletes are sometimes permitted to wear metal cleats, such as in Ohio.
The pitcher is the individual who throws the ball from the middle of the diamond.
The current Junior Women's World Champion is the United States.
It must be between 25 and 30 feet (7.62 and 9.14 meters) behind home plate depending on the type of division that is playing.
Frequently the purpose of the riseball is to have the batter attempt to chase a ball which ends up out of the strikezone and is either missed entirely or hit as an easy pop-fly.
These are somewhat padded shinguards that extend usually from the ankle to the knee of the wearer and wrap all the way around the leg(s).
In fastpitch softball, there are various types of pitches.
After a successful hit the batter becomes a baserunner (or runner) and must run to first base.
In the infield there is the pitcher, catcher, first baseman, second baseman, shortstop, and third baseman.
While these modified rules are common, there are questions as to their place in modern adult sports.
Some leagues require teams to use limited flight softballs.
For instance, one strike is an out, and two balls is a walk.
Retreating past a made base, negates the advance to that base.
Helmets are optional in slowpitch.
One of the biggest is the Amateur Softball Association, also known as ASA.
When pitchers throw curveballs they snap their wrist and follow their arm across their body, making the ball curve to the outside of the plate.
Some groups allow for a more defensive game by making home plate a force out for first base.
The catcher must then attempt to throw the ball to first base ahead of the runner.
The pitcher also acts as the second baseman.
Just like the catcher, first basemen may wear mitts.
"The proposal calls for men's baseball and women's softball to be played at a single venue over seven to 10 days.
Many softball players prefer to bat second because they feel they have more control in the last inning, since they have the last at-bat.
It is known as the National Governing Body of Softball, was established in 1933 and has over 240,000 teams.
Some leagues even use different balls for male and female batters.
Near the center of the diamond is the pitching plate.
A 12-inch circumference ball is generally used in slow pitch, although in rare cases some leagues (especially recreational leagues) do use a 14-inch circumference ball.
A field is officially required to have a warning track between 15 and 12 feet (5 and 4 meters) from the outfield fence.
The third baseman is the position on the left side of the diamond when you are looking at the field.
Balls are only called verbally, with no hand gesture.
The Amateur Softball Association (ASA) of America (founded 1933) governs the game in the United States and sponsors annual sectional and World Series championships.
The name softball had spread across the United States by 1930.
This is designed to reduce the "Pickle" which can put a great strain on the ankles and knees of older baserunners.
If a batted ball hits a player or a base, it is considered to have hit the ground.
The double base is required in ISF championships.
At the plate the catcher is responsible for catching pitches, keeping mispitched balls in front of the plate, calling pitches that are normally done through hand signals, and they are considered the leaders of the field.
Helmets and cages that are damaged or altered are forbidden.
Most short stops are very quick, agile and think fast.
At higher levels of play, pitchers aim for the inner and outer corners of the plate when throwing fastballs and moving pitches.
These shorts help to protect the upper thigh when sliding into a base.
Currently, the USSSA program is run out of Orlando, FL.
In some associations and leagues, bunting is not allowed and results in an out.
Once the ball is hit into fair territory the runner must try to advance to first base or beyond.
Most male players use long, baseball-style pants.
The USSSA, founded in 1968 as the United States Slo-Pitch Softball Association, but renamed in 1997 to the United States Specialty Sports Association, is the only association that still has a men's major slow-pitch program alive.
Catchers must know how many outs there are, the number of strikes and balls on the batter so they can relay that to their team-mates.
The major role of the first baseman is to receive throws from other defensive players in order to get a force play at first base.
In some leagues the number of pitches to walk or strikeout can be reduced.
Similarly, both the dropball and the riseball are pitches that change heights.
These leagues are almost exclusively slow-pitch.
The umpire behind home plate is the sole arbiter of balls and strikes.
They are also closer to first base when they cut off a slower ground ball towards shortstop.
They must also know how many runners are on base and where the ball should be thrown next in the following play.
If the batter steps out of the box while swinging, the batter is out.
Some balls have a raised seam, and others do not.
The ball must be released simultaneously with the lead leg step.
Male pitching can reach speeds around 85 miles per hour (137 kilometers per hour).
All players are required to wear shoes.
The right fielder's position is on the right side of the field, behind the first baseman, when looking at the field from behind home plate.
Each box is behind a line 15 feet (5 meters) long located 12 feet (3 meters) from each baseline.
Many female players use "sliding shorts", otherwise known as compression shorts in other sports.
A game may be lost due to a "forfeit".
The International Softball Federation holds world championships in several categories.
The 117th meeting of the International Olympic Committee, held in Singapore in July 2005, voted to drop softball and baseball as Olympic sports for the 2012 Summer Olympic Games.
A pitcher's glove is all about the comfort to them, but it must be large enough to cover the ball.
Softball rules vary somewhat from those of baseball.
More advanced levels require the left fielder to be able to field the ball during "slap hit" situations by playing shallow.
There are also several World Cups held at 4-year intervals in different categories.
In fastpitch, a skinned circle 16 feet (4.88 meters) in diameter known as the pitching circle is around the pitching plate.
However, in advanced play pitcher and catcher play a psychological game trying to get the batter to guess where the next pitch is going and if it will be a strike.
In New Orleans, sixteen-inch softball is called "Cabbage Ball" and is a popular team sport in area elementary and high schools.
For example, rules may stipulate that there must be an equal number of men and women on the team, or that batting order alternate male and female batters.
Speed is not always the most important factor in fastpitch softball.
Officially, which team bats first is decided by a coin toss, although a league may decide otherwise at its discretion.
A batter can also advance to first if hit by the pitch.
These bats are determined to be illegal by the Amateur Softball Association of America.
The number of balls is always given first, as 2 and 1, 2 and 2, and so on.
Shaving bats require machine use in order to remove the inner walls of the bat to improve elasticity.
Pitching is generally a little slower because of the indoor turf, or pitched through a pitching machine.
However, bunting a foul ball does result in a strikeout.
Many recreational leagues prohibit the use of metal cleats or spikes to reduce the possible severity of injuries when a runner slides feet-first into a fielder.
The offense may try to sacrifice, with the batter deliberately making an out in order to advance runners.
There is an option to wear a face mask on the field.
Traditionally in the game of softball, the right fielder will have the strongest arm out of the two other outfielders.
The outfield is the remaining space between the baselines and between the outfield fence and the infield.
Softball is played in all states and territories in Australia and at all levels of academic education.
It was at various times called indoor baseball, mush ball, playground, softball, kitten ball, because it was also played by women, ladies' baseball.
The placement of the fielders is different.
No signal is given for balls that are obviously foul and for closer calls that are not borderline; a mere acknowledgement signal is given.
Pitchers can throw balls that curve inwards (screwball) and outwards (curveball) on right-handed batters.
