Total solar eclipses are rare events.
The Moon's orbit around the Earth is inclined at an angle of just over 5 degrees to the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun (the ecliptic).
* A '''partial eclipse''' occurs when the Sun and Moon are not exactly in line with the Earth and the Moon only partially obscures the Sun.
Herodotus also reports a solar eclipse at Sparta during the Second Persian invasion of Greece.
Although they occur somewhere on Earth every 18 months on average, it is estimated that they recur at any given place only once every 360 to 410 years, on average.
This can be done by projecting an image of the disk onto a white piece of paper or card using a pair of binoculars (with one of the lenses covered), a telescope, or another piece of cardboard with a small hole in it (about 1&nbsp;mm diameter), often called a pinhole camera.
Seen from the Moon, the Earth during a total solar eclipse is mostly brilliantly illuminated, with only a small dark patch showing the Moon's shadow.
The retina has no sensitivity to pain, and the effects of retinal damage may not appear for hours, so there is no warning that injury is occurring.
The time between one perigee and the next is slightly longer than the sidereal month and known as the anomalistic month.
This period (18 years 11.3 days) is a saros.
At the end of totality, the same effects will occur in reverse order, and on the opposite side of the Moon.
Therefore, the last total solar eclipse on Earth will occur about six hundred million years from now.
By comparing the apparent distance between stars in the constellation Taurus, with and without the Sun between them, Arthur Eddington stated that the theoretical predictions about gravitational lenses were confirmed.
Securely mounting #14 welder's glass in front of the lens and viewfinder protects the equipment and makes viewing possible.
Total solar eclipses are seen on Earth because of a fortuitous combination of circumstances.
Over a billion years in the future, the Moon will be too far away to fully occlude the Sun, and no total eclipses will occur.
However, during one sidereal month, Earth has revolved part way around the Sun, making the average time between one new moon and the next longer than the sidereal month: it is approximately 29.5 days.
A saros lasts 6,585.3 days (a little over 18 years), which means that, after this period, a practically identical eclipse will occur.
By the mid-19th century, scientific understanding of the Sun was improving through observations of the Sun's corona during solar eclipses.
Historical eclipses are a very valuable resource for historians, in that they allow a few historical events to be dated precisely, from which other dates and ancient calendars may be deduced.
A saros series always starts with a partial eclipse near one of Earth's polar regions, then shifts over the globe through a series of annular or total eclipses, and ends with a partial eclipse at the opposite polar region.
This phenomenon can usually be seen from a large part of the Earth outside of the track of an annular or total eclipse.
The longest total solar eclipse during the 11,000 year period from 3000 BC to at least 8000 AD will occur on July 16, 2186, when totality will last 7&nbsp;min 29&nbsp;s. For comparison, the longest total eclipse of the 20th century at 7&nbsp;min 8&nbsp;s occurred on June 20, 1955 and there are no total solar eclipses over 7&nbsp;min in duration in the 21st century.
Only properly designed and certified solar filters should be used for direct viewing of the Sun's disk.
Because the Earth's orbit around the Sun is also elliptical, the Earth's distance from the Sun similarly varies throughout the year.
The "radiating influence" theory (i.e., the Moon's light was reflection from the Sun) was existent in Chinese thought from about the sixth century BC (in the ''Zhi Ran'' of Zhi Ni Zi), though it was opposed by the 1st century AD philosopher Wang Chong, who made clear in his writing that this theory was nothing new.
The observation of a total solar eclipse of May 29, 1919 helped to confirm Einstein's theory of general relativity.
By the 8th millennium, the longest theoretically possible total eclipse will be less than 7&nbsp;min 2&nbsp;s. The last time an eclipse longer than 7 minutes occurred was June 30, 1973 (7 min 3 sec).
The Moon's orbit around the Earth is an ellipse, as is the Earth's orbit around the Sun.
Sunglasses do not make viewing the Sun safe.
Slightly more solar eclipses are annular than total because, on average, the Moon lies too far from Earth to cover the Sun completely.
This affects the apparent size of the Sun in the same way, but not as much as does the Moon's varying distance from Earth.
Partial eclipses are virtually unnoticeable in terms of the sun's brightness, as it takes well over 90% coverage to notice any darkening at all.
Typically, the umbra is 100–160&nbsp;km wide, while the penumbral diameter is in excess of 6400&nbsp;km.
The solar eclipse of March 20, 2015, was the first occurrence of an eclipse estimated to potentially have a significant impact on the power system, with the electricity sector taking measures to mitigate any impact.
Outside of the central track, a partial eclipse is seen over a much larger area of the Earth.
It is very hard to predict this in advance.
The 4th century BC astronomer Shi Shen described the prediction of eclipses by using the relative positions of the Moon and Sun.
At certain points on the surface of Earth it appears as a total eclipse, whereas at other points it appears as annular.
This damage can result in impairment of vision, up to and including blindness.
Though Eddington's observations were near the experimental limits of accuracy at the time, work in the later half of the 20th century confirmed his results.
A total solar eclipse provides a rare opportunity to observe the corona (the outer layer of the Sun's atmosphere).
As seen from the Earth, a '''solar eclipse''' is a type of eclipse that occurs when the Moon passes between the Sun and Earth, and the Moon fully or partially blocks ("occults") the Sun.
Each cycle begins with the Moon's shadow crossing the earth near the north or south pole, and subsequent events progress toward the other pole until the Moon's shadow misses the earth and the series ends.
One likely candidate took place on May 28, 585 BC, probably near the Halys river in Asia Minor.
This phenomenon is now called the Allais effect.
Spectroscope observations were made of the solar eclipse of August 18, 1868, which helped to determine the chemical composition of the Sun.
Moreover, the Sun is increasing in diameter by about 5% per billion years.
Because 223 synodic months is not identical to 239 anomalistic months or 242 draconic months, saros cycles do not endlessly repeat.
The crew of Gemini 12 observed a total solar eclipse from space in 1966.
During that period, the apparent angular diameter of the Moon will decrease in size, meaning that it will no longer be able to completely cover the Sun's disk as seen from the Earth.
There is a long history of observations of gravity-related phenomena during solar eclipses, especially around totality.
As with a transit of a planet, it will not get dark.
A total solar eclipse can be frightening to people who are unaware of its astronomical explanation, as the Sun seems to disappear during the day and the sky darkens in a matter of minutes.
The observation with the Sun between the stars was only possible during totality, since the stars are then visible.
Even at 99% it would be no darker than civil twilight.
If three-quarters or more of the sun is obscured, then an effect can be observed by which the daylight appears to be dim, as if the sky were overcast, yet objects still cast sharp shadows.
During this period, the Sun is too dim to be seen through filters.
Observations of eclipses from spacecraft or artificial satellites orbiting above the Earth's atmosphere are not subject to weather conditions.
This will be true even when the Moon is at perigee, and the Earth at aphelion.
The first recorded observation of the corona was made in Constantinople in 968 AD.
Normally this is not visible because the photosphere is much brighter than the corona.
* A '''hybrid eclipse''' (also called '''annular/total eclipse''') shifts between a total and annular eclipse.
More common, but still infrequent, is a conjunction of a planet (especially, but not only, Mercury or Venus) at the time of a total solar eclipse, in which event the planet will be visible very near the eclipsed Sun, when without the eclipse it would have been lost in the Sun's glare.
The Moon orbits the Earth in approximately 27.3 days, relative to a fixed frame of reference.
However, the nodes of the Moon's orbit are gradually moving in a retrograde motion, due to the action of the Sun's gravity on the Moon's motion, and they make a complete circuit every 18.6 years.
In the partial eclipse path, one will not be able to see the corona or nearly complete darkening of the sky, however, depending on how much of the Sun's disk is obscured, some darkening may be noticeable.
The satellite passes over the face of the Sun in about a second, typically.
Totality currently can never last more than 7&nbsp;min 32&nbsp;s. This value changes over the millennia and is currently decreasing.
The date of the eclipse (August 1, 477 BC) does not match exactly the conventional dates for the invasion accepted by historians.
Observers aboard a Concorde supersonic aircraft were able to stretch totality for this eclipse to about 74 minutes by flying along the path of the Moon's umbra.
Due to tidal acceleration, the orbit of the Moon around the Earth becomes about 2.2&nbsp;cm more distant each year.
In addition, the Moon's actual orbit is elliptical, often taking it far enough away from Earth that its apparent size is not large enough to block the Sun totally.
The Earth continues to receive at least 92 percent of the amount of sunlight it receives without an eclipse&nbsp;–&nbsp;more if the penumbra of the Moon's shadow partly misses the Earth.
In principle, the simultaneous occurrence of a Solar eclipse and a transit of a planet is possible.
It is safe to observe the total phase of a solar eclipse directly only when the Sun's photosphere is completely covered by the Moon, and not before or after totality.
The total eclipse lasts for only a maximum of a few minutes at any location, because the Moon's umbra moves eastward at over 1700&nbsp;km/h.
This research has not yielded conclusive results, and Good Friday is recorded as being at Passover, which is held at the time of a full moon.
An eclipse recorded by Herodotus before Xerxes departed for his expedition against Greece, which is traditionally dated to 480 BC, was matched by John Russell Hind to an annular eclipse of the Sun at Sardis on February 17, 478 BC.
The next total eclipse exceeding seven minutes in duration will not occur until June 25, 2150.
This can happen only at new moon, when the Sun and the Moon are in conjunction as seen from Earth in an alignment referred to as syzygy.
The Sun's faint corona will be visible, and the chromosphere, solar prominences, and possibly even a solar flare may be seen.
Again a diamond ring may be observed.
The temperature may decrease by 3&nbsp;°C, and wind power potentially decrease as winds are reduced by 0.7&nbsp;m/s.
But these events are extremely rare because of their short durations.
Hybrid eclipses are comparatively rare.
The Moon's orbit intersects with the ecliptic at the two nodes that are 180 degrees apart.
The partial phase of the 1999 total eclipse was visible from Mir.
The magnitude of an eclipse is the ratio of the apparent size of the Moon to the apparent size of the Sun during an eclipse.
Of course, partial eclipses (and partial stages of other eclipses) can be observed if one is viewing the sun through a darkening filter (which should anyhow be used for safety).
This was an annular eclipse.
In the Western hemisphere, there are few reliable records of eclipses before 800 AD, until the advent of Arab and monastic observations in the early medieval period.
Finally, the Moon's perigee is moving forwards or precessing in its orbit, and makes a complete circuit in 8.85 years.
In order for the disk of the Sun/Moon to be easily visible, a fairly high magnification long focus lens is needed (at least 200&nbsp;mm for a 35&nbsp;mm camera), and for the disk to fill most of the frame, a longer lens is needed (over 500&nbsp;mm).
It is only when the Moon is closer to the Earth than average (near its perigee) that a total eclipse occurs.
Viewing the Sun's disk through any kind of optical aid (binoculars, a telescope, or even an optical camera viewfinder) is extremely hazardous and can cause irreversible eye damage within a fraction of a second.
Perhaps the earliest still-unproven claim is that of archaeologist Bruce Masse, who putatively links an eclipse that occurred on May 10, 2807 BC with a possible meteor impact in the Indian Ocean on the basis of several ancient flood myths that mention a total solar eclipse.
The corona was identified as part of the Sun's atmosphere in 1842, and the first photograph (or daguerreotype) of a total eclipse was taken of the solar eclipse of July 28, 1851.
Sometimes the new moon occurs close enough to a node during two consecutive months to eclipse the Sun on both occasions in two partial eclipses.
The period is a little less than half a calendar year because the lunar nodes slowly regress.
There have been other claims to date earlier eclipses.
When Earth approaches its farthest distance from the Sun in July, a total eclipse is somewhat more likely, whereas conditions favour an annular eclipse when Earth approaches its closest distance to the Sun in January.
Care must be taken, however, to ensure that no one looks through the projector (telescope, pinhole, etc.)
Therefore, the new moon occurs close to the nodes at two periods of the year approximately six months (173.3 days) apart, known as eclipse seasons, and there will always be at least one solar eclipse during these periods.
In a total eclipse, the disk of the Sun is fully obscured by the Moon.
Ancient Greeks, such as Parmenides and Aristotle, also supported the theory of the Moon shining because of reflected light.
It is technically safe to view only the total phase of a total solar eclipse with the unaided eye and without protection; however, this is a dangerous practice, as most people are not trained to recognize the phases of an eclipse, which can span over two hours while the total phase can only last up to 7.5 minutes for any one location.
The orbital planes cross each other at a line of nodes resulting in at least two, and up to five, solar eclipses occurring each year; no more than two of which can be total eclipses.
The next non-central total solar eclipse will be on April 9, 2043.
At the altitude of the International Space Station, for example, an object would need to be about  across to blot the Sun out entirely.
A recent published observation during the 1997 solar eclipse by Wang ''et al.''
If the Moon were in a perfectly circular orbit, a little closer to the Earth, and in the same orbital plane, there would be total solar eclipses every month.
Two examples are when the crew of Apollo 12 observed the Earth eclipse the Sun in 1969 and when the Cassini probe observed Saturn eclipsing the Sun in 2006.
Nine years later, English astronomer Edmund Halley observed the solar eclipse of May 3, 1715.
People referred to as ''eclipse chasers'' or ''umbraphiles'' will travel to remote locations to observe or witness predicted central solar eclipses.
* Second contact—starting with Baily's Beads (caused by light shining through valleys on the Moon's surface) and the diamond ring effect.
The brilliantly-lit Earth reflects a lot of light to the Moon.
A solar eclipse of June 15, 763 BC mentioned in an Assyrian text is important for the Chronology of the Ancient Orient.
If the date and time of any solar eclipse are known, it is possible to predict other eclipses using eclipse cycles.
Photographing an eclipse is possible with fairly common camera equipment.
It is possible, though extremely rare, that part of the umbra intersects with the Earth (thus creating an annular or total eclipse), but not its central line.
During a total solar eclipse, the Moon's shadow covers only a small fraction of the Earth.
Saros cycles are numbered; currently, cycles 117 to 156 are active.
Eclipses only occur in the eclipse season, when the Sun is close to either the ascending or descending node of the Moon.
At aphelion(farthest)
They only occur just prior to and after totality, when a narrow solar crescent acts as an anisotropic light source.
This is, however, not completely correct: the definition of a central eclipse is an eclipse during which the central line of the umbra touches the Earth's surface.
The Sun's distance from Earth is about 400 times the Moon's distance, and the Sun's diameter is about 400 times the Moon's diameter.
Viewing the Sun during partial and annular eclipses (and during total eclipses outside the brief period of totality) requires special eye protection, or indirect viewing methods, if eye damage is to be avoided.
Conversely, an eclipse that occurs when the Moon is near its farthest distance from Earth (''i.e.,'' near its apogee) can only be an annular eclipse because the Moon will appear to be slightly smaller than the Sun; the magnitude of an annular eclipse is less than 1.
Looking at the Sun during an eclipse is as dangerous as looking at it outside an eclipse, except during the brief period of totality, when the Sun's disk is completely covered (totality occurs only during a total eclipse and only very briefly; it does not occur during a partial or annular eclipse).
This period is called the nodical or draconic month.
A hybrid eclipse occurs when the magnitude of an eclipse changes during the event from less to greater than one, so the eclipse appears to be total at some locations on Earth and annular at other locations.
* First contact—when the Moon's limb (edge) is exactly tangential to the Sun's limb.
Viewing the Sun's disk on a video display screen (provided by a video camera or digital camera) is safe, although the camera itself may be damaged by direct exposure to the Sun.
Professional workmanship is essential because of the dire consequences any gaps or detaching mountings will have.
The apparent sizes of the Sun and Moon therefore vary.
* Fourth contact—when the trailing edge of the Moon ceases to overlap with the solar disk and the eclipse ends.
Eclipses have been interpreted as omens, or portents.
At apogee(farthest)
For the date of the next eclipse see the section ''Recent and forthcoming solar eclipses''.
On average, the Moon appears to be slightly smaller than the Sun as seen from the Earth, so the majority (about 60%) of central eclipses are annular.
The exact eclipse involved remains uncertain, although the issue has been studied by hundreds of ancient and modern authorities.
Later in 2002, Yang and Wang published detailed data analysis, which suggested that the phenomenon still remains unexplained.
The width of the track of a central eclipse varies according to the relative apparent diameters of the Sun and Moon.
If the corona of the eclipsed Sun were not present, the Moon, illuminated by earthlight, would be easily visible from Earth.
Nevertheless, in some ancient and modern cultures, solar eclipses have been attributed to supernatural causes or regarded as bad omens.
At one time, some scientists hypothesized that there may be a planet (often given the name Vulcan) even closer to the Sun than Mercury; the only way to confirm its existence would have been to observe it in transit or during a total solar eclipse.
These transits are difficult to watch, because the zone of visibility is very small.
This would be essentially the same as the earthshine which can frequently be seen when the Moon's phase is a narrow crescent.
The Sun's disk can be viewed using appropriate filtration to block the harmful part of the Sun's radiation.
* Totality—the Moon obscures the entire disk of the Sun and only the solar corona is visible.
suggested a possible gravitational shielding effect, which generated debate.
In the most favourable circumstances, when a total eclipse occurs very close to perigee, the track can be up to  wide and the duration of totality may be over 7 minutes.
''Central eclipse'' is often used as a generic term for a total, annular, or hybrid eclipse.
* Third contact—when the first bright light becomes visible and the Moon's shadow is moving away from the observer.
Eclipses can occur only when the Sun is within about 15 to 18 degrees of a node, (10 to 12 degrees for central eclipses).
Apparent sizeto scale
The distance of the Earth from the Sun also varies during the year, but this is a smaller effect.
In 1954, and again in 1959, Maurice Allais reported observations of strange and unexplained movement during solar eclipses.
The first known telescopic observation of a total solar eclipse was made in France in 1706.
The ancient Greek historian Herodotus wrote that Thales of Miletus predicted an eclipse that occurred during a battle between the Medes and the Lydians.
It is estimated that, in slightly less than 1.4 billion years, the distance from the Earth to the Moon will have increased by 30,400&nbsp;km.
A saros series lasts 1226 to 1550 years and 69 to 87 eclipses, with about 40 to 60 of them being central.
This is known as the synodic month, and corresponds to what is commonly called the lunar month.
An eclipse is a natural phenomenon.
The phases observed during a total eclipse are called:
According to the point reached in the solar cycle, the corona may appear small and symmetric, or large and fuzzy.
Because 223 synodic months is roughly equal to 239 anomalistic months and 242 draconic months, eclipses with similar geometry recur 223 synodic months (about 6,585.3 days) apart.
A separate category of solar eclipses is that of the Sun being occluded by a body other than the Earth's moon, as can be observed at points in space away from the Earth's surface.
Similarly, in 1970, Saxl and Allen observed the sudden change in motion of a torsion pendulum; this phenomenon is called the Saxl effect.
However, the Moon's orbit is inclined (tilted) at more than 5 degrees to the Earth's orbit around the Sun (''see ecliptic''), so its shadow at new moon usually misses Earth.
Each eclipse is separated by one, five or six lunations (synodic months), and the midpoint of each season is separated by 173.3 days, which is the mean time for the Sun to travel from one node to the next.
However, some eclipses can only be seen as a partial eclipse, because the umbra passes above the Earth's polar regions and never intersects the Earth's surface.
Order bydecreasingapparent size
As noted above, the Moon's orbit is also elliptical.
A solar eclipse can occur only when new moon occurs close to one of the points (known as nodes) where the Moon's orbit crosses the ecliptic.
Therefore, the Moon's apparent size varies with its distance from the Earth, and it is this effect that leads to the difference between total and annular eclipses.
Attempts have been made to establish the exact date of Good Friday by assuming that the darkness described at Jesus's crucifixion was a solar eclipse.
At perihelion(nearest)
The optical viewfinders provided with some video and digital cameras are not safe.
The projected image of the Sun can then be safely viewed; this technique can be used to observe sunspots, as well as eclipses.
The last non-central solar eclipse was on April 29, 2014.
As with viewing the Sun directly, looking at it through the viewfinder of a camera can produce damage to the retina, so care is recommended.
Since the eclipse limit creates a window of opportunity of up to 36 degrees (24 degrees for central eclipses), it is possible for partial eclipses (or rarely a partial and a central eclipse) to occur in consecutive months.
Because these ratios are approximately the same, the Sun and the Moon as seen from Earth appear to be approximately the same size: about 0.5 degree of arc in angular measure.
In the time it takes for the Moon to return to a node (draconic month), the apparent position of the Sun has moved about 29 degrees, relative to the nodes.
Even on Earth, the diversity of eclipses familiar to people today is a temporary (on a geological time scale) phenomenon.
This regression means that the time between each passage of the Moon through the ascending node is slightly shorter than the sidereal month.
The King Zhong Kang supposedly beheaded two astronomers, Hsi and Ho, who failed to predict an eclipse 4,000 years ago.
Almost the entire disk is covered.
Alternatively, a partial eclipse was visible from Persia on October 2, 480 BC.
Hundreds of millions of years in the past, the Moon was closer to the Earth and therefore apparently larger, so every solar eclipse was total and there were no annular eclipses.
Totality then begins with the diamond ring effect, the last bright flash of sunlight.
During the Apollo–Soyuz Test Project conducted in July 1975, the Apollo spacecraft was positioned to create an artificial solar eclipse giving the Soyuz crew an opportunity to photograph the solar corona.
Looking directly at the photosphere of the Sun (the bright disk of the Sun itself), even for just a few seconds, can cause permanent damage to the retina of the eye, because of the intense visible and invisible radiation that the photosphere emits.
The Moon crosses from south to north of the ecliptic at its ascending node, and vice versa at its descending node.
However, total solar eclipses are rare at any particular location because totality exists only along a narrow path on the Earth's surface traced by the Moon's shadow or umbra.
Under normal conditions, the Sun is so bright that it is difficult to stare at it directly.
Chinese records of eclipses begin at around 720 BC.
