These effects lowered 1971 cell costs to some $100 per watt.
This forms a p–n junction a few hundred nanometers below the surface.
In December 2014, a solar cell achieved a new laboratory record with 46 percent efficiency in a French-German collaboration.
Efficiencies have increased from below 5% at their first usage in 2009 to over 20% in 2014, making them a very rapidly advancing technology and a hot topic in the solar cell field.
Some companies use an additional electro-plating step to increase efficiency.
Prices continued to fall in 2012, reaching $0.62/watt by 4Q2012.
These materials must have certain characteristics in order to absorb sunlight.
The fill factor is the ratio of the actual maximum obtainable power to the product of the open circuit voltage and short circuit current.
The efficiency of QDSCs has increased to over 5% shown for both liquid-junction and solid state cells.
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are made of low-cost materials and do not need elaborate manufacturing equipment, so they can be made in a DIY fashion.
By concentrating sunlight up to a thousand times, ''High concentrated photovoltaics (HCPV)'' has the potential to outcompete conventional solar PV in the future.
Solar cells made of c-Si are made from wafers between 160 and 240&nbsp;micrometers thick.
Amorphous silicon has a higher bandgap (1.7&nbsp;eV) than crystalline silicon (c-Si) (1.1&nbsp;eV), which means it absorbs the visible part of the solar spectrum more strongly than the higher power density infrared portion of the spectrum.
Typically a ruthenium metalorganic dye (Ru-centered) is used as a monolayer of light-absorbing material.
A layer several hundred nanometers thick is applied using PECVD.
In 1883 Charles Fritts built the first solid state photovoltaic cell by coating the semiconductor selenium with a thin layer of gold to form the junctions; the device was only around 1% efficient.
Solar cells are the building blocks of photovoltaic modules, otherwise known as solar panels.
Resistive losses are predominantly categorized under fill factor, but also make up minor portions of quantum efficiency, VOC ratio.
In 2007 BP claimed grid parity for Hawaii and other islands that otherwise use diesel fuel to produce electricity.
Technology companies also participated, including General Electric, Motorola, IBM, Tyco and RCA.
Traditional methods of fabrication involve vacuum processes including co-evaporation and sputtering.
They also have high extinction coefficients and have shown the possibility of multiple exciton generation.
The photogenerated electrons from the light absorbing dye are passed on to the n-type  and the holes are absorbed by an electrolyte on the other side of the dye.
Global installed PV capacity reached at least 177 gigawatts in 2014, enough to supply 1 percent of the world's total electricity consumption.
In the extreme, with an infinite number of layers, the corresponding limit is 86% using concentrated sunlight.
The widespread introduction of flat screen televisions in the late 1990s and early 2000s led to the wide availability of large, high-quality glass sheets to cover the panels.
In 2013, researchers announced polymer cells with some 3% efficiency.
In 2014 a system that combined an adaptive surface with a glass substrate that redirect the absorbed to a light absorber on the edges of the sheet.
The other parts of the cell remain reflective increasing the retention of the absorbed light within the cell.
The group had concluded that electrical power would be much more expensive by 2000, and felt that this increase in price would make alternative energy sources more attractive.
Balance of system costs were then higher than those of the panels.
Between 2009 and 2013 cell production has quadrupled.
These cells offer less efficiency than their monosilicon ("mono") counterparts, but they are grown in large vats that reduce cost.
In 1905 Albert Einstein proposed a new quantum theory of light and explained the photoelectric effect in a landmark paper, for which he received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921.
Russell Ohl patented the modern junction semiconductor solar cell in 1946 while working on the series of advances that would lead to the transistor.
Additionally, germanium metal prices have risen substantially to $1000–1200 per kg this year.
In 1959 the United States launched Explorer 6, featuring large wing-shaped solar arrays, which became a common feature in satellites.
In 2014, Malaysia was the world's third largest manufacturer of photovoltaics equipment, behind China and the European Union.
Photovoltaic modules often have a sheet of glass on the sun-facing side, allowing light to pass while protecting the semiconductor wafers.
GaAs is more commonly used in multijunction photovoltaic cells for concentrated photovoltaics (CPV, HCPV) and for solar panels on spacecrafts, as the industry favours efficiency over cost for space-based solar power.
A triple-junction cell, for example, may consist of the semiconductors: GaAs, Ge, and .
The inventors were Daryl Chapin, Calvin Souther Fuller and Gerald Pearson.
Grade B cells were usually between 0.4 and 0.7.
Since silicon solar panels only use one pane of glass, thin film panels are approximately twice as heavy as crystalline silicon panels, although they have a smaller ecological impact (determined from life cycle analysis).
Silicon nitride has gradually replaced titanium dioxide as the preferred material, because of its excellent surface passivation qualities.
As the semiconductor industry moved to ever-larger boules, older equipment became inexpensive.
Two  ions that have absorbed this radiation can interact with each other through an upconversion process.
Solar cells made with this technique can have efficiencies approaching those of wafer-cut cells, but at appreciably lower cost.
Solar cells can be classified into first, second and third generation cells.
Each layers has a different band gap energy to allow it to absorb electromagnetic radiation over a different portion of the spectrum.
Anti-reflection coatings are then typically applied to increase the amount of light coupled into the solar cell.
This is a key parameter in evaluating performance.
The rear contact is formed by screen-printing a metal paste, typically aluminium.
: Monocrystalline silicon (mono-Si) solar cells are more efficient and more expensive than most other types of cells.
A full area metal contact is made on the back surface, and a grid-like metal contact made up of fine "fingers" and larger "bus bars" are screen-printed onto the front surface using a silver paste.
Large commercial arrays could be built, as of 2010, at below $3.40 a watt, fully commissioned.
These cells are entirely based around the concept of a p-n junction.
Quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) are based on the Gratzel cell, or dye-sensitized solar cell architecture, but employ low band gap semiconductor nanoparticles, fabricated with crystallite sizes small enough to form quantum dots (such as CdS, CdSe, , PbS, etc.
The paste is then fired at several hundred degrees Celsius to form metal electrodes in ohmic contact with the silicon.
In a QDSC, a mesoporous layer of titanium dioxide nanoparticles forms the backbone of the cell, much like in a DSSC.
The system also included an array of fixed lenses/mirrors to concentrate light onto the adaptive surface.
By late 2011, a drop in European demand due to budgetary turmoil dropped prices for crystalline solar modules to about $1.09 per watt down sharply from 2010.
The first generation cells—also called conventional, traditional or wafer-based cells—are made of crystalline silicon, the commercially predominant PV technology, that includes materials such as polysilicon and monocrystalline silicon.
When sliced for processing, the inner sections are high-efficiency mono-like cells (but square instead of "clipped"), while the outer edges are sold as conventional poly.
Due to heavy government investment, China has become the dominant force in solar cell manufacturing.
In an effort to decrease production costs, the Prashant Kamat research group demonstrated a solar paint made with  and CdSe that can be applied using a one-step method to any conductive surface with efficiencies over 1%.
Cell sizes grew as equipment became available on the surplus market; ARCO Solar's original panels used cells  in diameter.
Willoughby Smith first described the "Effect of Light on Selenium during the passage of an Electric Current" in a 20 February 1873 issue of Nature.
The Photovoltaic Association reported in 2012 that Australia had reached grid parity (ignoring feed in tariffs).
As example, the energy transfer upconversion process (ETU), consists in successive transfer processes between excited ions in the near infrared.
One upconversion technique is to incorporate lanthanide-doped materials (, ,  or a combination), taking advantage of their luminescence to convert infrared radiation to visible light.
Following the 1973 oil crisis, oil companies used their higher profits to start (or buy) solar firms, and were for decades the largest producers.
The team eliminated the steps of polishing the wafers and coating them with an anti-reflective layer, relying on the rough-sawn wafer surface.
By 1973 they announced a product, and SPC convinced Tideland Signal to use its panels to power navigational buoys, initially for the U.S. Coast Guard.
Bulk silicon is separated into multiple categories according to crystallinity and crystal size in the resulting ingot, ribbon or wafer.
The result is a bulk mono-like material that is polycrystalline around the outsides.
By the 1960s, solar cells were (and still are) the main power source for most Earth orbiting satellites and a number of probes into the solar system, since they offered the best power-to-weight ratio.
Solar cells can be made of only one single layer of light-absorbing material (single-junction) or use multiple physical configurations (multi-junctions) to take advantage of various absorption and charge separation mechanisms.
The cadmium present in the cells would be toxic if released.
The excited ion emits light above the Si bandgap that is absorbed by the solar cell and creates an additional electron–hole pair that can generate current.
In September 2015, the Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems (Fraunhofer ISE) announced the achievement of an efficiency above 20% for epitaxial wafer cells.
Panasonic's was the most efficient.
Many use organic materials, often organometallic compounds as well as inorganic substances.
An amorphous silicon (a-Si) solar cell is made of non-crystalline or microcrystalline silicon.
Current cell efficiencies are, however, very low, and practical devices are essentially non-existent.
A '''solar cell''', or '''photovoltaic cell''' (in very early days also termed "solar battery" – a denotation which nowadays has a totally different meaning, see here), is an electrical device that converts the energy of light directly into electricity by the photovoltaic effect, which is a physical and chemical phenomenon.
* The separation of charge carriers of opposite types.
It is a form of photoelectric cell, defined as a device whose electrical characteristics, such as current, voltage, or resistance, vary when exposed to light.
: Amorphous silicon is the most well-developed thin film technology to-date.
Although GaAs cells are very expensive, they hold the world's record in efficiency for a single-junction solar cell at 28.8%.
Polycrystalline silicon wafers are made by wire-sawing block-cast silicon ingots into 180 to 350 micrometer wafers.
Exxon, ARCO, Shell, Amoco (later purchased by BP) and Mobil all had major solar divisions during the 1970s and 1980s.
Solar-specific feed-in tariffs vary by country and within countries.
In addition, these cells could be beneficial for some applications where mechanical flexibility and disposability are important.
He conducted a market study and concluded that a price per watt of about $20/watt would create significant demand.
Otherwise, shunt diodes can reduce shadowing power loss in arrays with series/parallel connected cells.
The company moved the front contacts to the rear of the panel, eliminating shaded areas.
Solar cells gained prominence with their incorporation onto the 1958 Vanguard I satellite.
These arrays consisted of 9600 Hoffman solar cells.
Proponents of solar hope to achieve grid parity first in areas with abundant sun and high electricity costs such as in California and Japan.
Energy conversion efficiencies achieved to date using conductive polymers are very low compared to inorganic materials.
By the mid-2000s, poly was dominant in the low-cost panel market, but more recently the mono returned to widespread use.
Strings of series cells are usually handled independently and not connected in parallel, though as of 2014, individual power boxes are often supplied for each module, and are connected in parallel.
Manufacturers of wafer-based cells responded to high silicon prices in 2004–2008 with rapid reductions in silicon consumption.
The price of solar panels fell steadily for 40 years, interrupted in 2004 when high subsidies in Germany drastically increased demand there and greatly increased the price of purified silicon (which is used in computer chips as well as solar panels).
Recombination losses make up another portion of quantum efficiency, VOC ratio, and fill factor.
The difficulty, however, is that the conversion efficiency of existing phosphors exhibiting up- or down-conversion is low, and is typically narrow band.
This production method results in mono-like cells at poly-like prices.
The price was determined largely by the semiconductor industry; their move to integrated circuits in the 1960s led to the availability of larger boules at lower relative prices.
Due to the difficulty in measuring these parameters directly, other parameters are substituted: thermodynamic efficiency, quantum efficiency, integrated quantum efficiency, VOC ratio, and fill factor.
Crystalline silicon panels dominate worldwide markets and are mostly manufactured in China and Taiwan.
In the four years after January 2008 prices for solar modules in Germany dropped from €3 to €1 per peak watt.
Although modules can be interconnected to create an array with the desired peak DC voltage and loading current capacity, using independent MPPTs (maximum power point trackers) is preferable.
The operation of a photovoltaic (PV) cell requires 3 basic attributes:
Solar panels using mono-Si cells display a distinctive pattern of small white diamonds.
China increased market share from 8% in 2008 to over 55% in the last quarter of 2010.
In addition they applied thin silicon films to the (high quality silicon) wafer's front and back to eliminate defects at or near the wafer surface.
Connecting cells in parallel yields a higher current; however, problems such as shadow effects can shut down the weaker (less illuminated) parallel string (a number of series connected cells) causing substantial power loss and possible damage because of the reverse bias applied to the shadowed cells by their illuminated partners.
Solar cells could be made using cast-off material from the electronics market.
The electrical circuit is then completed through the use of a liquid or solid redox couple.
ions absorb solar radiation around 1.54&nbsp;µm.
However, they are also less efficient.
They used block copolymers, self-assembling organic materials that arrange themselves into distinct layers.
In 2011, MIT and Michigan State researchers developed solar cells with a power efficiency close to 2% with a transparency to the human eye greater than 65%, achieved by selectively absorbing the ultraviolet and near-infrared parts of the spectrum with small-molecule compounds.
In the early 1990s the technology used for space solar cells diverged from the silicon technology used for terrestrial panels, with the spacecraft application shifting to gallium arsenide-based III-V semiconductor materials, which then evolved into the modern III-V multijunction photovoltaic cell used on spacecraft.
These lightweight, flexible cells can be produced in bulk at a low cost and could be used to create power generating windows.
By adding cells to the outside of the body, the mission time could be extended with no major changes to the spacecraft or its power systems.
In addition, fluoroindate glasses have low phonon energy and have been proposed as suitable matrix doped with  ions.
Between December 2006 and December 2007, the cost of 4N gallium metal rose from about $350 per kg to $680 per kg.
Thin-film technologies reduce the amount of active material in a cell.
Widespread grid parity, the point at which photovoltaic electricity is equal to or cheaper than grid power without subsidies, likely requires advances on all three fronts.
Either of these techniques could be used to produce higher efficiency solar cells by allowing solar photons to be more efficiently used.
In December 2012 the price of Chinese solar panels had dropped to $0.60/Wp (crystalline modules).
In contrast, a solar thermal collector supplies heat by absorbing sunlight, for the purpose of either direct heating or indirect electrical power generation from heat.
: Copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) is a direct band gap material.
Adaptive cells change their absorption/reflection characteristics depending to respond to environmental conditions.
: Cadmium telluride is the only thin film material so far to rival crystalline silicon in cost/watt.
Panels in the 1990s and early 2000s generally used 125&nbsp;mm wafers; since 2008 almost all new panels use 156&nbsp;mm cells.
The third generation of solar cells includes a number of thin-film technologies often described as emerging photovoltaics—most of them have not yet been commercially applied and are still in the research or development phase.
Research into solar power for terrestrial applications became prominent with the U.S. National Science Foundation's Advanced Solar Energy Research and Development Division within the "Research Applied to National Needs" program, which ran from 1969 to 1977, and funded research on developing solar power for ground electrical power systems.
Useful ions are most commonly found in the trivalent state.
In bulk it should be significantly less expensive than older solid-state cell designs.
This  layer can then be made photoactive by coating with semiconductor quantum dots using chemical bath deposition, electrophoretic deposition or successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction.
Most designs sandwich active material between two panes of glass.
+ Typical PV system prices in 2013 in selected countries (USD)
Photon upconversion is the process of using two low-energy (''e.g.,'' infrared) photons to produce one higher energy photon; '''downconversion''' is the process of using one high energy photon (''e.g.,'', ultraviolet) to produce two lower energy photons.
However, the increased efficiency was small.
Also called cast-mono, this design uses polycrystalline casting chambers with small "seeds" of mono material.
Single p–n junction crystalline silicon devices are now approaching the theoretical limiting power efficiency of 33.7%, noted as the Shockley–Queisser limit in 1961.
Tandem solar cells based on monolithic, series connected, gallium indium phosphide (GaInP), gallium arsenide (GaAs), and germanium (Ge) p–n junctions, are increasing sales, despite cost pressures.
However, this success was possible because in the space application, power system costs could be high, because space users had few other power options, and were willing to pay for the best possible cells.
Perovskite solar cells are solar cells that include a perovskite-structured material as the active layer.
Further improvements reduced production cost to under $1 per watt, with wholesale costs well under $2.
The circuit is completed by a redox couple in the electrolyte, which can be liquid or solid.
However, release is impossible during normal operation of the cells and is unlikely during ﬁres in residential roofs.
ions have been the most used.
When a photon is converted into an electron hole pair, typically in the donor material, the charges tend to remain bound in the form of an exciton, separating when the exciton diffuses to the donor-acceptor interface, unlike most other solar cell types.
Vadim Lashkaryov discovered ''p''-''n''-junctions in CuO and silver sulphide protocells in 1941.
Usually this contact covers the entire rear, though some designs employ a grid pattern.
The recession of 2008 and the onset of Chinese manufacturing caused prices to resume their decline.
In 2009, typical commercial solar cells had a fill factor > 0.70.
Such surfaces were first applied to single-crystal silicon, followed by multicrystalline silicon somewhat later.
However cadmium is highly toxic and tellurium (anion: "telluride") supplies are limited.
Nanostructured interfaces, sometimes in the form of bulk heterojunctions, can improve performance.
Multi-junction cells consist of multiple thin films, each essentially a solar cell grown on top of another, typically using metalorganic vapour phase epitaxy.
They consist of small crystals giving the material its typical metal flake effect.
For triple-junction thin-film solar cells, the world record is 13.6%, set in June 2015.
This was also the reason that costs remained high, because space users were willing to pay for the best possible cells, leaving no reason to invest in lower-cost, less-efficient solutions.
Such tariffs encourage the development of solar power projects.
Multiple solar cells in an integrated group, all oriented in one plane, constitute a solar photovoltaic panel or solar photovoltaic module.
* The absorption of light, generating either electron-hole pairs or excitons.
The first commercial shipment of DSSC solar modules occurred in July 2009 from G24i Innovations.
However, Konarka Power Plastic reached efficiency of 8.3% and organic tandem cells in 2012 reached 11.1%.
Cells with a high fill factor have a low equivalent series resistance and a high equivalent shunt resistance, so less of the current produced by the cell is dissipated in internal losses.
After the metal contacts are made, the solar cells are interconnected by flat wires or metal ribbons, and assembled into modules or "solar panels".
As the day continues, the concentrated light moves along the surface of the cell.
On 15 October 2012, triple junction metamorphic cells reached a record high of 44%.
Solar panels have a sheet of tempered glass on the front, and a polymer encapsulation on the back.
Some cells are designed to handle sunlight that reaches the Earth's surface, while others are optimized for use in space.
The first practical photovoltaic cell was publicly demonstrated on 25 April 1954 at Bell Laboratories.
The research focused on P3HT-b-PFTBT that separates into bands some 16 nanometers wide.
In late 1969 Elliot Berman joined Exxon's task force which was looking for projects 30 years in the future and in April 1973 he founded Solar Power Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Exxon at that time.
The program was eventually taken over by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), which was later merged into the U.S. Department of Energy.
GaAs based multi-junction devices are the most efficient solar cells to date.
The wafers are usually lightly p-type-doped.
Epitaxial wafers can be grown on a monocrystalline silicon "seed" wafer by atmospheric-pressure CVD in a  high-throughput inline process, and then detached as self-supporting wafers of some standard thickness (e.g., 250&nbsp;µm) that can be manipulated by hand, and directly substituted for wafer cells cut from monocrystalline silicon ingots.
Triple-junction GaAs solar cells were used as the power source of the Dutch four-time World Solar Challenge winners Nuna in 2003, 2005 and 2007 and by the Dutch solar cars Solutra (2005), Twente One (2007) and 21Revolution (2009).
This is an evolution of the so-called "wet" process for applying electrodes, first described in a US patent filed in 1981 by Bayer AG.
By far, the most prevalent bulk material for solar cells is crystalline silicon (c-Si), also known as "solar grade silicon".
Polysilicon cells are the most common type used in photovoltaics and are less expensive, but also less efficient, than those made from monocrystalline silicon.
In 2014, researchers at California NanoSystems Institute discovered using kesterite and perovskite improved electric power conversion efficiency for solar cells.
Chinese companies produced solar cells/modules with a capacity of ~23 GW in 2013 (60% of global production).
They are used as a photodetector (for example infrared detectors), detecting light or other electromagnetic radiation near the visible range, or measuring light intensity.
Solar cell production in the U.S. has suffered due to the global financial crisis, but recovered partly due to the falling price of quality silicon.
Solar cells are described as being photovoltaic irrespective of whether the source is sunlight or an artificial light.
Multi-junction cells were originally developed for special applications such as satellites and space exploration, but are now used increasingly in terrestrial concentrator photovoltaics (CPV), an emerging technology that uses lenses and curved mirrors to concentrate sunlight onto small but highly efficient multi-junction solar cells.
During that same time production capacity surged with an annual growth of more than 50%.
Solar cells were first used in a prominent application when they were proposed and flown on the Vanguard satellite in 1958, as an alternative power source to the primary battery power source.
: This form was developed in the 2000s and introduced commercially around 2009.
As their price fell, the price of the resulting cells did as well.
