The 1973 oil embargo and 1979 energy crisis caused a reorganization of energy policies around the world and brought renewed attention to developing solar technologies.
The most recent approaches to solar design use computer modeling tying together solar lighting, heating and ventilation systems in an integrated solar design package.
The first solar cell was constructed by Charles Fritts in the 1880s.
These cookers reach temperatures of  and above but require direct light to function properly and must be repositioned to track the Sun.
Central and Eastern Europe
In all of these systems a working fluid is heated by the concentrated sunlight, and is then used for power generation or energy storage.
Solar projects exceeding 1 GW are being developed, but most of the deployed photovoltaics are in small rooftop arrays of less than 5&nbsp;kW, which are connected to the grid using net metering and/or a feed-in tariff.
China is the world leader in their deployment with 70&nbsp;GWth installed as of 2006 and a long-term goal of 210&nbsp;GWth by 2020.
Solar energy may be used in a water stabilization pond to treat waste water without chemicals or electricity.
Following the work of Russell Ohl in the 1940s, researchers Gerald Pearson, Calvin Fuller and Daryl Chapin created the crystalline silicon solar cell in 1954.
The spectrum of solar light at the Earth's surface is mostly spread across the visible and near-infrared ranges with a small part in the near-ultraviolet.
In some states of the United States legislation protects the "right to dry" clothes.
In addition, land availability has a large effect on the available solar energy because solar panels can only be set up on land that is otherwise unused and suitable for solar panels.
On 29 April 1979, the ''Solar Riser'' made the first flight in a solar-powered, fully controlled, man-carrying flying machine, reaching an altitude of .
Cloud cover can affect the potential of solar panels because clouds block incoming light from the sun and reduce the light available for solar cells.
Another approach uses the heat from solar concentrators to drive the steam reformation of natural gas thereby increasing the overall hydrogen yield compared to conventional reforming methods.
Reflector cookers use various concentrating geometries (dish, trough, Fresnel mirrors) to focus light on a cooking container.
Other large CSP plants include the 150 MW Solnova Solar Power Station and the 100 MW Andasol solar power station, both in Spain.
The first recorded instance of this was by 16th-century Arab alchemists.
A further environmental advantage is that algae grow in such ponds and consume carbon dioxide in photosynthesis, although algae may produce toxic chemicals that make the water unusable.
Greenhouses remain an important part of horticulture today, and plastic transparent materials have also been used to similar effect in polytunnels and row covers.
This was quickly followed by the ''Solar Challenger'' which crossed the English Channel in July 1981.
In the last two decades, photovoltaics (PV), also known as solar PV, has evolved from a pure niche market of small scale applications towards becoming a mainstream electricity source.
In 1996, Kenichi Horie made the first solar-powered crossing of the Pacific Ocean, and the ''Sun21'' catamaran made the first solar-powered crossing of the Atlantic Ocean in the winter of 2006–2007.
Phase change materials such as paraffin wax and Glauber's salt are another thermal storage medium.
The size and placement of thermal mass depend on several factors such as climate, daylighting and shading conditions.
Thermal storage systems generally use readily available materials with high specific heat capacities such as water, earth and stone.
Common thermal mass materials include stone, cement and water.
As of 2007, the total installed capacity of solar hot water systems was approximately 154 thermal gigawatt (GWth).
In low geographical latitudes (below 40&nbsp;degrees) from 60 to 70% of the domestic hot water use with temperatures up to 60&nbsp;°C can be provided by solar heating systems.
In 1931 a German engineer, Dr Bruno Lange, developed a photo cell using silver selenide in place of copper oxide.
In climates with significant heating loads, deciduous trees should not be planted on the Equator-facing side of a building because they will interfere with winter solar availability.
Double-slope stills are the most economical for decentralized domestic purposes, while active multiple effect units are more suitable for large-scale applications.
Early fruit walls were built perpendicular to the ground and facing south, but over time, sloping walls were developed to make better use of sunlight.
Greenhouses convert solar light to heat, enabling year-round production and the growth (in enclosed environments) of specialty crops and other plants not naturally suited to the local climate.
He, along with his technical advisor A.S.E.
Unglazed transpired collectors (UTC) are perforated sun-facing walls used for preheating ventilation air.
Thermal mass is any material that can be used to store heat—heat from the Sun in the case of solar energy.
Beginning with the surge in coal use which accompanied the Industrial Revolution, energy consumption has steadily transitioned from wood and biomass to fossil fuels.
A solar cell is a device that converts light directly into electricity using the photoelectric effect.
* Total global annual solar energy potential amounts to 1,575 EJ (minimum) to 49,837 EJ (maximum)
This is handled by 'rolling back' the meter whenever the home produces more electricity than it consumes.
Primary energy use2
CSP systems use lenses or mirrors and tracking systems to focus a large area of sunlight into a small beam.
Centrally planned Asia
Solar distillation can be used to make saline or brackish water potable.
Another vision involves all human structures covering the earth's surface (i.e., roads, vehicles and buildings) doing photosynthesis more efficiently than plants.
In 1990 Eric Scott Raymond in 21 hops flew from California to North Carolina using solar power.
In 2000, the United Nations Development Programme, UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and World Energy Council published an estimate of the potential solar energy that could be used by humans each year that took into account factors such as insolation, cloud cover, and the land that is usable by humans.
These processes offset energy that would otherwise come from a fossil fuel source and can also convert solar energy into storable and transportable fuels.
Development of a solar-powered car has been an engineering goal since the 1980s.
It is an important source of renewable energy and its technologies are broadly characterized as either passive solar or active solar depending on how they capture and distribute solar energy or convert it into solar power.
* Data reflects assumptions of annual clear sky irradiance, annual average sky clearance, and available land area.
Solar power is anticipated to become the world's largest source of electricity by 2050, with solar photovoltaics and concentrated solar power contributing 16 and 11 percent to the global overall consumption, respectively.
Although solar energy refers primarily to the use of solar radiation for practical ends, all renewable energies, other than Geothermal power and Tidal power, derive their energy either directly or indirectly from the Sun.
Deployment strategies focused on incentive programs such as the Federal Photovoltaic Utilization Program in the U.S. and the Sunshine Program in Japan.
Solar technologies are characterized as either passive or active depending on the way they capture, convert and distribute sunlight and enable solar energy to be harnessed at different levels around the world, mostly depending on distance from the equator.
They can be grouped into three broad categories: box cookers, panel cookers and reflector cookers.
Primitive greenhouses were first used during Roman times to produce cucumbers year-round for the Roman emperor Tiberius.
It will increase countries’ energy security through reliance on an indigenous, inexhaustible and mostly import-independent resource, enhance sustainability, reduce pollution, lower the costs of mitigating climate change, and keep fossil fuel prices lower than otherwise.
The short payback period of transpired collectors (3 to 12&nbsp;years) makes them a more cost-effective alternative than glazed collection systems.
Hence the additional costs of the incentives for early deployment should be considered learning investments; they must be wisely spent and need to be widely shared".
It is recommended by the World Health Organization as a viable method for household water treatment and safe storage.
These advantages are global.
Individual still designs include single-slope, double-slope (or greenhouse type), vertical, conical, inverted absorber, multi-wick, and multiple effect.
This is several times larger than the total world energy consumption, which was 559.8&nbsp;EJ in 2012.
These advantages are global.
Solar thermal technologies can be used for water heating, space heating, space cooling and process heat generation.
The energy is recovered when demand is high by releasing the water, with the pump becoming a hydroelectric power generator.
"The strength of solar is the incredible variety and flexibility of applications, from small scale to big scale".
UTCs can raise the incoming air temperature up to  and deliver outlet temperatures of .
Aside from electrolysis driven by photovoltaic or photochemical cells, several thermochemical processes have also been explored.
Active solar equipment such as pumps, fans and switchable windows can complement passive design and improve system performance.
Roofs have been found to be a suitable place for solar cells, as many people have discovered that they can collect energy directly from their homes this way.
Off-grid PV systems have traditionally used rechargeable batteries to store excess electricity.
Geography affects solar energy potential because areas that are closer to the equator have a greater amount of solar radiation.
More recently the technology has been embraced by vintners, who use the energy generated by solar panels to power grape presses.
The International Energy Agency has said that solar energy can make considerable contributions to solving some of the most urgent problems the world now faces:
Salts are an effective storage medium because they are low-cost, have a high specific heat capacity and can deliver heat at temperatures compatible with conventional power systems.
''Quantitative relation'' of global solar potential vs. the world's primary energy consumption:
When planted on the southern side of a building in the northern hemisphere or the northern side in the southern hemisphere, their leaves provide shade during the summer, while the bare limbs allow light to pass during the winter.
As sunlight shines on the balloon, the air inside is heated and expands causing an upward buoyancy force, much like an artificially heated hot air balloon.
By photosynthesis, green plants convert solar energy into chemically stored energy, which produces food, wood and the biomass from which fossil fuels are derived.
When these features are tailored to the local climate and environment they can produce well-lit spaces that stay in a comfortable temperature range.
A wide range of concentrating technologies exists; the most developed are the parabolic trough, the concentrating linear fresnel reflector, the Stirling dish and the solar power tower.
A solar balloon is a black balloon that is filled with ordinary air.
Shuman then constructed a full-scale steam engine powered by low-pressure water, enabling him to patent the entire solar engine system by 1912.
This grid-connected cogeneration system provided 400&nbsp;kW of electricity plus thermal energy in the form of 401&nbsp;kW steam and 468&nbsp;kW chilled water, and had a one-hour peak load thermal storage.
Since 1985 the eventually 354 MW SEGS CSP installation, in the Mojave Desert of California, is the largest solar power plant in the world.
In 1908 Shuman formed the Sun Power Company with the intent of building larger solar power plants.
During the short growing seasons of the Little Ice Age, French and English farmers employed fruit walls to maximize the collection of solar energy.
These materials are inexpensive, readily available, and can deliver domestically useful temperatures (approximately ).
Approximately 30% is reflected back to space while the rest is absorbed by clouds, oceans and land masses.
Solar hot water systems use sunlight to heat water.
The Solzinc process under development at the Weizmann Institute of Science uses a 1&nbsp;MW solar furnace to decompose zinc oxide (ZnO) at temperatures above .
Some solar balloons are large enough for human flight, but usage is generally limited to the toy market as the surface-area to payload-weight ratio is relatively high.
Photosynthesis captures approximately 3,000&nbsp;EJ per year in biomass.
In 1974, the unmanned AstroFlight Sunrise airplane made the first solar flight.
Active solar technologies increase the supply of energy and are considered supply side technologies, while passive solar technologies reduce the need for alternate resources and are generally considered demand side technologies.
The common features of passive solar architecture are orientation relative to the Sun, compact proportion (a low surface area to volume ratio), selective shading (overhangs) and thermal mass.
Active solar techniques include the use of photovoltaic systems, concentrated solar power and solar water heating to harness the energy.
A variety of fuels can be produced by artificial photosynthesis.
It can be used effectively with partially overcast skies and will typically reach temperatures of .
Socrates' Megaron House is a classic example of passive solar design.
The latent heat of water condensation amplifies convection, producing atmospheric phenomena such as wind, cyclones and anti-cyclones.
Pumped-storage hydroelectricity stores energy in the form of water pumped when energy is available from a lower elevation reservoir to a higher elevation one.
Modern uses include concentrating brine solutions used in leach mining and removing dissolved solids from waste streams.
These walls acted as thermal masses and accelerated ripening by keeping plants warm.
There were plans to circumnavigate the globe in 2010.
The first commercial system was the Solar Total Energy Project (STEP) in Shenandoah, Georgia, USA where a field of 114 parabolic dishes provided 50% of the process heating, air conditioning and electrical requirements for a clothing factory.
In 2011, a report by the International Energy Agency found that solar energy technologies such as photovoltaics, solar hot water and concentrated solar power could provide a third of the world’s energy by 2060 if politicians commit to limiting climate change.
The design allows the aircraft to remain airborne for several days.
Solar induced chemical reactions can be divided into thermochemical or photochemical.
The "Dover House" (in Dover, Massachusetts) was the first to use a Glauber's salt heating system, in 1948.
When the air reaches a high altitude, where the temperature is low, water vapor condenses into clouds, which rain onto the Earth's surface, completing the water cycle.
When properly incorporated, thermal mass maintains space temperatures in a comfortable range and reduces the need for auxiliary heating and cooling equipment.
Using these methods, a hypothetical "cool communities" program in Los Angeles has projected that urban temperatures could be reduced by approximately 3&nbsp;°C at an estimated cost of US$1&nbsp;billion, giving estimated total annual benefits of US$530&nbsp;million from reduced air-conditioning costs and healthcare savings.
+Annual solar energy potential by region (Exajoules)
The estimate found that solar energy has a global potential of 1,575–49,837&nbsp;EJ per year ''(see table below)''.
The most common types of solar water heaters are evacuated tube collectors (44%) and glazed flat plate collectors (34%) generally used for domestic hot water; and unglazed plastic collectors (21%) used mainly to heat swimming pools.
Performance can be improved by using glazing and thermal mass materials in a way that mimics greenhouses.
Thermal mass systems can store solar energy in the form of heat at domestically useful temperatures for daily or interseasonal durations.
The International Organization for Standardization has established several standards relating to solar energy equipment.
The 250 MW Agua Caliente Solar Project, in the United States, and the 221 MW Charanka Solar Park in India, are the world’s largest photovoltaic plants.
Some have envisaged working solar fuel plants in coastal metropolitan areas by 2050 the splitting of sea water providing hydrogen to be run through adjacent fuel-cell electric power plants and the pure water by-product going directly into the municipal water system.
As with photovoltaics, solar water heating attracted renewed attention as a result of the oil crises in the 1970s but interest subsided in the 1980s due to falling petroleum prices.
Applications of solar energy in agriculture aside from growing crops include pumping water, drying crops, brooding chicks and drying chicken manure.
One such route uses concentrators to split water into oxygen and hydrogen at high temperatures ().
Commercial solar water heaters began appearing in the United States in the 1890s.
In 1916 Shuman was quoted in the media advocating solar energy's utilization, saying:
His plant used parabolic troughs to power a  engine that pumped more than  of water per minute from the Nile River to adjacent cotton fields.
Historically they have been used in arid climates or warm temperate regions to keep buildings cool by absorbing solar energy during the day and radiating stored heat to the cooler atmosphere at night.
The plant, which had solar collection area of , could produce up to  per day and operate for 40&nbsp;years.
Agriculture and horticulture seek to optimize the capture of solar energy in order to optimize the productivity of plants.
Time variation effects the potential of solar energy because during the nighttime there is little solar radiation on the surface of the Earth for solar panels to absorb.
Former Soviet Union
The potential solar energy that could be used by humans differs from the amount of solar energy present near the surface of the planet because factors such as geography, time variation, cloud cover, and the land available to humans limit the amount of solar energy that we can acquire.
Although generally underestimated, solar water heating and cooling is by far the most widely deployed solar technology with an estimated capacity of 154&nbsp;GW as of 2007.
These stills can operate in passive, active, or hybrid modes.
Solar energy can also be stored at high temperatures using molten salts.
Since bare, leafless trees shade 1/3 to 1/2 of incident solar radiation, there is a balance between the benefits of summer shading and the corresponding loss of winter heating.
In 1980, the ''Gossamer Penguin'' made the first piloted flights powered solely by photovoltaics.
The amount of solar energy reaching the surface of the planet is so vast that in one year it is about twice as much as will ever be obtained from all of the Earth's non-renewable resources of coal, oil, natural gas, and mined uranium combined,
By 1995, passenger boats incorporating PV panels began appearing and are now used extensively.
Latin America and Caribbean
However, they can be used in cold temperate areas to maintain warmth as well.
It is a single-seat plane powered by solar cells and capable of taking off under its own power.
Most of the world's population live in areas with insolation levels of 150-300 watts/m², or 3.5-7.0 kWh/m² per day.
The North American Solar Challenge and the planned South African Solar Challenge are comparable competitions that reflect an international interest in the engineering and development of solar powered vehicles.
Net metering programs give household systems a credit for any electricity they deliver to the grid.
This limits the amount of energy that solar panels can absorb in one day.
Hydrogen production technologies have been a significant area of solar chemical research since the 1970s.
As of 2003, over 80 systems with a combined collector area of  had been installed worldwide, including an  collector in Costa Rica used for drying coffee beans and a  collector in Coimbatore, India, used for drying marigolds.
Urban heat islands (UHI) are metropolitan areas with higher temperatures than that of the surrounding environment.
The use of evaporation ponds to obtain salt from seawater is one of the oldest applications of solar energy.
Other approaches involve the use of two meters, to measure electricity consumed vs. electricity produced.
Although the prototype selenium cells converted less than 1% of incident light into electricity, both Ernst Werner von Siemens and James Clerk Maxwell recognized the importance of this discovery.
The Solar Two project used this method of energy storage, allowing it to store  in its 68 m³ storage tank with an annual storage efficiency of about 99%.
Solar power is the conversion of sunlight into electricity, either directly using photovoltaics (PV), or indirectly using concentrated solar power (CSP).
In 2002, this was more energy in one hour than the world used in one year.
Evaporation ponds are shallow pools that concentrate dissolved solids through evaporation.
1 Energy given in Exajoule (EJ) = 1018 J = 278 TWh&nbsp;2 Consumption as of year 2010
Although the outbreak of World War I and the discovery of cheap oil in the 1930s discouraged the advancement of solar energy, Shuman’s vision and basic design were resurrected in the 1970s with a new wave of interest in solar thermal energy.
As the chimney warms, the air inside is heated causing an updraft that pulls air through the building.
* Ratio of potential vs. projected consumption by 2050 (590–1,050 EJ): 1.5–2.7 (minimum) to 47–84 (maximum)
Development in the solar water heating sector progressed steadily throughout the 1990s and annual growth rates have averaged 20% since 1999.
They can, however, be used on the east and west sides to provide a degree of summer shading without appreciably affecting winter solar gain.
Over two million people in developing countries use this method for their daily drinking water.
A basic box cooker consists of an insulated container with a transparent lid.
Warm air containing evaporated water from the oceans rises, causing atmospheric circulation or convection.
In 1975, the first practical solar boat was constructed in England.
This initial reaction produces pure zinc, which can subsequently be reacted with water to produce hydrogen.
Panel cookers use a reflective panel to direct sunlight onto an insulated container and reach temperatures comparable to box cookers.
Commercial CSP plants were first developed in the 1980s.
Other efforts included the formation of research facilities in the U.S. (SERI, now NREL), Japan (NEDO), and Germany (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE).
The simplest solar cooker is the box cooker first built by Horace de Saussure in 1767.
Various techniques are used to track the Sun and focus light.
The first modern greenhouses were built in Europe in the 16th century to keep exotic plants brought back from explorations abroad.
A large-scale solar distillation project was first constructed in 1872 in the Chilean mining town of Las Salinas.
The concentrated heat is then used as a heat source for a conventional power plant.
Solar concentrating technologies such as parabolic dish, trough and Scheffler reflectors can provide process heat for commercial and industrial applications.
PV converts light into electric current using the photoelectric effect.
Solar chemical processes use solar energy to drive chemical reactions.
Sunlight absorbed by the oceans and land masses keeps the surface at an average temperature of 14&nbsp;°C.
* Ratio of potential vs. projected consumption by 2100 (880–1,900 EJ): 0.8–1.8 (minimum) to 26–57 (maximum)
The United Nations Development Programme in its 2000 World Energy Assessment found that the annual potential of solar energy was 1,575–49,837 exajoules (EJ).
The Earth receives 174,000&nbsp;terawatts (TW) of incoming solar radiation (insolation) at the upper atmosphere.
Developments then turned back to unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) with the ''Pathfinder'' (1997) and subsequent designs, culminating in the ''Helios'' which set the altitude record for a non-rocket-propelled aircraft at  in 2001.
Most standard meters accurately measure in both directions, making a second meter unnecessary.
Thermochemical cycles characterized by the decomposition and regeneration of reactants present another avenue for hydrogen production.
In 1987, when it was founded, the winner's average speed was  and by 2007 the winner's average speed had improved to .
Other areas that are suitable for solar cells are lands that are not being used for businesses where solar plants can be established.
While sunlight is generally considered a plentiful resource, the exceptions highlight the importance of solar energy to agriculture.
Active solar techniques use photovoltaics, concentrated solar power, solar thermal collectors, pumps, and fans to convert sunlight into useful outputs.
The total solar energy absorbed by Earth's atmosphere, oceans and land masses is approximately 3,850,000&nbsp;exajoules (EJ) per year.
These systems saw increasing use until the 1920s but were gradually replaced by cheaper and more reliable heating fuels.
The higher temperatures result from increased absorption of solar energy by urban materials such as asphalt and concrete, which have lower albedos and higher heat capacities than those in the natural environment.
All figures given in Exajoules.
If the net electricity use is below zero, the utility then rolls over the kilowatt hour credit to the next month.
The ''Zephyr'', developed by BAE Systems, is the latest in a line of record-breaking solar aircraft, making a 54-hour flight in 2007, and month-long flights were envisioned by 2010.
