In 1818, New York reformer and Friend, Thomas Eddy, lobbied for inmate labor and solitary confinement in place of other forms of punishment such as hanging.
More than 48 percent of adolescents at this institution have diagnosed mental health problems.
Legislation was introduced in  Bill and 2015.
The effects of solitary confinement on mental health are undeniable.
Treating mentally ill patients by sentencing them into solitary confinement has captured the attention of human rights experts who conclude that “solitary confinement may amount to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment” that violates rights specifically targeting cruel, inhuman treatment.
Juveniles who are charged as adults and placed in adult prisons are usually put in protective custody, and often the conditions of protective custody are similar to those of solitary confinement.
Yet, as the use of solitary confinement progressed, public discourse around solitary confinement transitioned from a legitimate form of punishment to torture.
The Supreme Court considered the constitutionality of long-term solitary confinement only once in the ‘‘Wilkinson v. Austin'’ case.
They needed to remain inactive for six years or debrief.
Therefore, unless a prisoner can demonstrate physical injury as a result of solitary confinement, he or she is unable to recover damages for any “mental or emotional injury” the confinement causes.
The study also concluded that crowding, "increased levels of social density had negative effects on the mental health of inmates."
Prison records from the Denmark institute in 1870 to 1920 indicate that staff noticed inmates were exhibiting signs of mental illnesses while in isolation, revealing that the persistent problem has been around for decades.
In the UK, “twenty-nine children have died in penal custody in 1990.
There are more than 100 prohibited acts, all of which may result in solitary confinement, including unauthorized physical contact such as kissing, using abusive or obscene language, feigning illness, circulating a petition, insolence towards a staff member, engaging in or encouraging a group demonstration or protest, and participating in or encouraging a labor strike (also known as a prison strike), among others.
This resolution however is only a request since the Council does not have the authority to make the Department of Correction adhere.
Evidence has shown that Quakers and Calvinists supported solitary confinement as an alternative form of punishment.
In fact, David Fathi, Director of the ACLU’s National Prison Project, found that “every federal court that has considered claims by severely mentally ill prisoners held in solitary confinement has found this treatment unconstitutional”.
Those inmates in the THU are separated from the General Population inmates by staggering their yard times, visiting times, education and law library times.
Despite the long history of litigation over the practice, the Supreme Court has yet to definitively state whether or not solitary confinement is unconstitutional.
Due to this the city is topping the charts of municipalities with a high rate of solitary confinement.
In March 2014, authorities at the Northwest Detention Center in Washington relegated multiple detainees to solitary confinement units after their participation in protests for the improvement of conditions within the facility and in solidarity with activist organizing against deportation escalations outside of the facility.
These alternative methods suggest a more restorative justice approach to handling high-security offenders.
Solitary confinement lasting for a short period of time, however, is allowed under international law when used as a last resort, though Nowak, Mendez, and many other UN representatives believe that the practice should be abolished altogether.
A second alternative is to deal with long-term inmates by promoting familial and social relationships through the encouragement of visitations which may help boost morale.
Studies have shown that the longer one stays in the prison, the more at risk he or she is to self-harm.
Pelican Bay SHU was one of the first visible “super-maximum security” facilities and thus it attracted lots of media attention.
Recently arrived inmates are more likely to violate prison rules than their inmate counterparts and thus are more likely to be put in solitary confinement.
Organizing against the use of solitary confinement isn't limited to the work of prisoners subject to or at risk for this treatment.
SHU inmates are allotted for an hour and a half of exercise every day where they are taken to a 26 by 20 foot area surrounded by 20 foot high cement walls.
Some of these reasons include separating violent prisoners from the general population, separating vulnerable inmates (such as juveniles) from others, and punishing those prisoners who attempt to cause riots or try to escape.
These scholars argue that the violent nature of supermax prisons such as Pelican Bay State Prison are perpetrated by prison culture itself.
Court cases made on these bases do not necessarily address any “underlying problems” of solitary confinement, but they do call for increased monitoring, hearing, and reviews.
This coalition has aided the prisoners in their strike by providing a legal support force for their negotiations with the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) and by creating and running a media based platform to raise support and awareness for the strikers and their demands among the general public.
This is not including New York City’s jails, which are run under a separate system, where those in solitary confinement reach close to 1,000 or more.
Colorado has announced reforms to limit the use of solitary confinement in prisons following a study that showed significant levels of confinement and isolation in prisons.
Some hope the SHU encourages prisoners to reflect on their actions.
Those options include the Mini-14 as the lethal option, 40mm launcher which utilizes an exact impact rounds or wood block round for less lethal applications of force and a mk46 oleoreisn capsicum spray, pepper spray.
Extreme forms of solitary confinement and isolation can affect the larger society as a whole.
SHU was intended to segregate over a thousand prisoners from the rest of the prison system through isolation.
The isolation of solitary confinement can cause anguish, provoke serious mental and physical health problems, and work against rehabilitation for juveniles.
In 1983, George Deukmejian was elected as the California governor and during his time, he formed what was then the state’s newest prison – a massive, windowless “security housing unit” (SHU).
When placed in the SHU, prisoners are either in "administrative detention status", a non-punitive status which removes prisoners from the general population when necessary to ensure the safety, security, and orderly operation of correctional facilities, or protect the public, or "disciplinary segregation status", a punitive status imposed only by a Discipline Hearing Officer (DHO) as a sanction for committing prohibited acts.
Woodbourne Correctional Facility houses the inmate in with the most time spent in New York state's solitary confinement units.
John F. Cockrell, a recent graduate from the University of Alabama School of Law, suggests that those who challenge solitary confinement do so in context of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA).
'''Solitary confinement''' is a form of imprisonment in which an inmate is isolated from any human contact, often with the exception of members of prison staff.
The study tested two time periods, short-term and long-term, that evaluated the "mental state changes in response to changes in the environment or prison setting."
In a study focusing on women and adolescent men, those who had health insurance, received mental health services, or had a job were less likely to return to jail.
Because many prisoners in solitary confinement suffered severe mental and physical illnesses, Eisenman describes that by the end of the nineteenth century “prisoner isolation and sensory deprivation were widely understood to be forms of torture”.
However, it is also used as an additional measure of protection for vulnerable inmates.
These facilities, supermax prisons, were originally designed to contain and control the worst criminals and those who did not adhere to the rules of prisons, AKA "the worst of the worst".
The average length of time young people spent in solitary confinement at Rikers Island was 43 days.
He now resides in ADX Florence federal penitentiary in Colorado.
A new bill was introduced by Councilman Danny Dromm would require the Department of Correction to post a monthly report on its website about punitive segregation.
Inmates that are released from solitary confinement go through a “transitional unit” but failure in the program results in their return to solitary confinement.
If the inmates fight, the fight will not end until officers use force to stop the fight.
Its practice, therefore, was not believed to violate international law.
Moreover, Frances Crook argues that these punitive policies not only violate their basic rights, but also leave the children mentally unstable and left with illnesses that are often ignored.
The subjects were tested immediately before and after being put into isolation and the results showed that although there was a slight difference in subjective feelings, there were no mental or psychomotor changes.
It is often noted that if a criminal is restrained from interacting with the individuals they wish to have contact with they exhibit similar effects.
Illnesses range from anxiety, clinical depression, and self-mutilation to suicidal thoughts and SHU syndrome.
Physicians have concluded that for those inmates who enter the prison already diagnosed with a mental illness, the punishment of solitary confinement is extremely dangerous in that the inmates are more susceptible to exacerbating the symptoms.
King, Steiner, and Breach question the effectiveness of these institutions and claim the violent reputation of American prisons stems from this departure from the treatment model.
The Supreme Court requires ‘extreme deprivations’ in order to have merits for a ‘conditions-of-confinement claim’ and courts have also held that inmates are only protected against “certain kinds of extreme deprivations” by the Eighth Amendment.
The court ruled that the current conditions were not “per se violative of the Eighth Amendment” with respect to all inmates.
"Prisoner mental health is becoming increasingly important," and has caught the attention of the World Health Organization, which aims to reduce the "effects of imprisonment on mental health."
Inmates who are placed in solitary confinement “must be accorded meaningful periodic review to ensure that segregation solitary confinement is not a ‘pretext for indefinite confinement’”.
Based on these provisions, many members of the UN began to believe that solitary confinement’s detrimental psychological effects could, indeed, constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, if not, torture.
Despite such limitations, the federal courts have refused to find that solitary confinement is per se unconstitutional.
Research surrounding possible psychological and physiological effects of solitary confinement date back to the 1860s.
Instead, many "mentally ill prisoners decompensate in isolation, requiring crisis care or psychiatric hospitalization."
This alternative would help inmates cope with extreme long term sentences in prisons such as those harbored in Pelican Bay.
Officially, the purpose of placing prisoners in secure housing units (SHUs) is to increase control over dangerous inmates.
According to the Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry online, solitary confinement can cause an array of mental disorders, as well as provoke an already existing mental disorder in a prisoner, causing more trauma and symptoms.
“Experience demonstrates that prisons can operate safely and securely without putting inmates with mental illness in typical conditions of segregation.”  Despite this and medical professionals’ obligations, segregation policies have not changed because mental health clinics believe that “isolation is necessary for security reasons.”
In it the court found that the use of solitary confinement produced reduced mental and physical capabilities.
To prove a prison official’s “deliberate indifference,” the prisoner must “show evidence that the official was ‘actually’ aware of a prisoner’s serious need and chose to ignore it”.
Many states such as Colorado, Mississippi, and Maine have implemented plans to reduce use of supermax prisons and solitary confinement and have begun to show signs of reform.
There are high rates of use of solitary confinement in New York when compared to other U.S. states.
Inmates used to have only two options to leave the SHU.
The New York City Department of Corrections reported that in fiscal year 2012 more than 14.4 percent of all adolescents detained at Rikers Island between the ages of 16 and 18 were held in at least one period of solitary confinement while detained.
Supermax prisons are also scrutinized on legal and ethical bases.
In contrast to the Supreme Court’s inaction, lower courts of the U.S. have imposed constitutional limitations on the use of solitary confinement.
Lobel argues that this “implies that the officials must provide something more than a general statement that the prisoner is very dangerous”.
Luis Rosado, known as 'Blue Boy', is another prisoner with a violent history facing indefinite solitary confinement in New York State's Correctional system.
Overall, most of the inmates fail and return to solitary confinement.
Prisoners like Pavle Stanimirović James Rosado, Tyrone Green, Pedro Fernandez, William Basset, Hector Rivera, Angel Diaz, John Maldonado and Dominick Pollatti all spent time there.
Because young people are still developing, traumatic experiences like solitary confinement may have a profound effect on their chance to rehabilitate and grow.
Additionally, individual attributes and environmental factors combine to increase an inmate's likelihood of being put into solitary confinement.
Nonetheless, penal confinement involving solitude has been described as having a beneficent effect on anthrophobes.
In other states, it is known as the Special Management Unit (SMU).
In recent circuit court cases, courts have ruled that solitary confinement of 305 days or more constitutes an “atypical and significant hardship” that implicates due process.
The CDCR’s failure to meet the demands of the Pelican State Bay Prison hunger strikers in 2011 resulted in the aforementioned 2013 California prisoner hunger strike.
Similar to solitary confinement, segregation on the other hand, could not be proven to have lasting negative effects on inmates although those who were segregated had a worse mental health than those who were not segregated.
Juveniles are held in solitary confinement in jails and prisons across the United States, often for days, weeks, months, or even years in order to punish, protect, house, or treat some of the youth held there.
Proponents of solitary confinement propound that solitary confinement can improve the safety of inmates and prison staff.
Solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure for prisoners in Europe was largely reduced or eliminated during the twentieth century.
The selected inmates, who wear jumpsuits that differentiate them from the general population, will spend around 23 hours a day alone in a cell where they are offered very little and fully monitored as is procedure at Pelican Bay State Prison which is one of the largest supermax prisons in the United States.
Many argue the conditions in which these inmates live do not meet the standards of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
In June 2012, for example, the US Senate Judiciary Committee held its first hearing on solitary confinement.
Within the US legal system, too, courts have held that the solitary confinement of the mentally ill is “cruel and unusual”.
Prisoners in SHUs are isolated for long periods of time.
Although prisons nationwide have decreased use of solitary confinement, the New York City Department of Correction expanded its capacity by 27 percent in 2011 and another 44 percent in 2012, according to the NYC Jails Action Coalition.
One issue prison reform activists have fought against is the use of Security Housing Units (extreme forms of solitary confinement).
When California opened its first "adjustment center", the goal was to return prisoners to the mainline prison population and ultimately to a society through an enrichment program of psychological and social services.
Joseph Ponte, Corrections Commissioner of Maine, cut supermax prison population by half.
No lethal force has been used against fighting inmates in the SHU.
Earlier justifications for solitary confinement in the mid 20th century included protection for a prisoner whose sexual orientation, religion, or race were far too different and seen as vulnerable to attack from fellow inmates.
One landmark case, ''Madrid v. Gomez'', challenged the conditions of the Security Housing Unit (SHU) in the Pelican Bay State Prison.
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and Human Rights Watch created a report that incorporated the testimony of some juvenile inmates.
After prison many ex-convicts with mental illness do not receive adequate treatment for their mental health issues, because health services turn them away.
A third alternative would involve regular reevaluation and accelerated transition of isolated inmates back to prison population to help curb long-term effects of solitary confinement.
California's prison system also uses the abbreviation SHU, but it stands for Security Housing Units.
In September 2014, easing some conditions for inmates in near-solitary confinement in California prisons has died in the state legislature.
Washington has also showed signs of decreased use of solitary confinement, low segregation of overall prison population, and emphasis on alternative methods.
Given that they are developing mentally and physically, some experts have suggested that “they are severely and permanently damaged by such conditions to a greater extent than adults”.
Federal Bureau of Prisons create special supermax facilities to contain the most aggressive inmates in a protective effort.
In 2012, a report was conducted by the Vera Institute of Justice revealed that Maryland's use of restricted housing was twice the national average (8.5% versus an average of 4%).
Nowak and Méndez have been especially critical of long-term or prolonged solitary confinement, which they define as lasting fifteen days or more.
The legality of solitary confinement has been frequently challenged over the past sixty years as conceptions surrounding the practice have changed.
The petition alleges that solitary confinement constitutes torture and should be addressed by the international community.
These studies suggest that a main issue with isolating prisoners who are known to have mental illnesses is that it prevents the inmates from ever possibly recovering.
In November 2014. the United Nations Committee Against Torture noted that full isolation for 22-23 hours a day in super-maximum security prisons is unacceptable.
Overall, the solitary confinement of youth is considered to be counterproductive because the “restrictive environment…and intense regulation of children” aggravates them, instead of addressing the issue of rehabilitation.
From studying conditions at Pelican Bay, researchers argue that long-term social isolation “carries major psychiatric risks.”  Prisoners are susceptible to developing mental illnesses because they are confined to coffin-like conditions and denied access to basic health services.
In 2004, only 40 out of 75,000 inmates held in England and Wales were placed in solitary confinement cells.
Misuse of solitary confinement has been widely controversial.
According to a March 2014 article in ''American Journal of Public Health'', “Inmates in jails and prisons attempt to harm themselves in many ways, resulting in outcomes ranging from trivial to fatal.”  While some inmates are known to have psychiatric disorders prior to entering the prison, others develop mental disorders as a result of being placed in solitary confinement.
Solitary confinement was intended as an alternative to public floggings which were common at the time.
Supermax prisons, large-scale implementations of secure housing units, employ solitary confinement to isolate predatory, disorderly inmates from the rest of the prison community.
Solitary confinement is a form of imprisonment practiced worldwide, but no positive effects of the punishment have been proven (Jaapl).
Some sociologists argue that prisons create a unique social environment that do not allow inmates to create strong social ties outside or inside of prison life.
The prisoners are kept confined to their cells almost twenty-three hours a day and all forms of human contact through refined locking and monitoring systems are minimized.
At the time that the UDHR and ICCPR were adopted, solitary confinement was not yet believed to constitute torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.
The penal system in the United States developed under two separate systems known as the Auburn system and Pennsylvania system.
The practice of solitary confinement grew partly because of stigmatizing language used to refer to certain prisoners like ‘the worst of the worst,’ which became a form of “self-justifying the logic of torture”.
These units are characterized by extreme isolation of prisoners who “are housed in small cells with solid steel doors…for 22 to 23 hours per day.” Inmates are also deprived of social interaction and denied access to educational or therapeutic programs and health care while being held in SHUs.
Nowak and Méndez have both “repeatedly unequivocally stated that prolonged solitary confinement is cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and may amount to torture”.
Under current rules he or she must complete those unserved 80 days in solitary.
Much of the legal discussion concerning solitary confinement has centered on whether or not it constitutes torture or cruel and unusual punishment.
Dr. Eisenman, an Art History professor and activist, who is involved in many “stop max” movements centered in Illinois, studies solitary confinement and explains its eventual decline.
In a recent study, it noted that the California Department of corrections has implemented ways to fix their alleged gang problem, such as using ‘confidential informants,’ segregating gang members, intercepting gang communications, setting up task forces to monitor and track gang members, locking up gang leaders in high security prisons, and ‘locking down’ entire institutions.
However, very few of the 1,000 individuals in this study received support from mental health services.
The use of long-term solitary confinement, along with other grievances, has triggered organized resistance from prisoners and advocacy groups in the United States.
One alternative is to administer medical treatment for disorderly inmates who display signs of mental illness.
There is a Plexiglass covering and a pegging system that helps prevent inadvertent door openings but they occasionally happen.
For example, an inmate, because of good behavior or other reasons, might only have served 100 of his or her 180-day sentence in solitary and then was released.
As violence associated with the crack epidemic became increasingly common, new measures were taken.
Professional organizations, like the National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC), the American College of Correctional Physicians, and American Psychiatric Association (APA), work to improve the mental health services, however, the systems within the prisons "remain woefully inadequate."
Since the 1800s solitary confinement was practiced in the penitentiary systems and its implementation and popularity at various prisons grew throughout the centuries.
The U.S. has also effectively “insulated itself from any official sanction for international violations by not submitting to the jurisdiction” of committees that enforce the ICCPR or CAT.
However, solitary confinement has been linked to several developments of mental disorders, one of which being Ganser syndrome.
Courts have generally agreed that solitary confinement is, indeed, a violation of the Eighth Amendment for inmates with preexisting mental illness or juveniles.
The inmates are provided with a concrete slab as a bed, a toilet, small shelf, and a concrete stool with no windows in an 80 sq.
Although the Declaration is non-binding, the basic human rights outlined within it have served as the foundation of customary international law.
Inmates who have made the decision to debrief, are placed into debriefing pods while the investigation into their claims are validated.
The most “notorious example of the extreme social isolation found in supermaximum custody units” is the SHU at Pelican Bay State Prison.
At the time it was meant to provide a prisoner with solitude “to reflect on his misdeeds” and restore his relationship with God.
The urgency with which representatives have undertaken these efforts is largely due to the UN Special Rapporteurs on Torture, Manfred Nowak and Juan Méndez.
The latter example is a form of protective custody.
"Reactions and Attributes of Prisoners in Solitary Confinement," analyzes multiple studies conducted at different prisons throughout the United States.
Nearly 7,000 inmates throughout the California prison system stood in solidarity with these Pelican State Bay prisoners in 2011 by also refusing their food.
"Effect of Solitary Confinement on Prisoners" argues that the negative effects of solitary have often been overemphasized and that the reason these negative findings are often reported is due to the characteristic difference between those who end up in solitary confinement and those who do not.
In effect, segregation is a secondary sentence imposed by the correctional facility, which is usually unrelated to the conviction for which the person is incarcerated.
Community organizing outside of prisons has also occurred to shed light on the use of solitary confinement in prisons and work towards its abolition or highly refined use.
Many of the inmates look to self-harm as a way to “avoid the rigors of solitary confinement.” Mental health professionals ran a series of tests that ultimately concluded that “self-harm and potentially fatal self-harm associated with solitary confinement was higher independent of mental illness status and age group.”
First, prisoners must show that a “substantial risk of serious harm to inmates” and second, that the prison officials were “deliberately indifferent” to such risk.
They typically will try not to harm themselves while in the psychiatric hospital ward either, but they will plan out while in lockdown until they can see their plan through.
The penal system has been cited as failing to protect juveniles in custody.
Many believe, Frances Crook included, that incarceration and solitary confinement are the harshest forms of possible punishments and “should only be taken as a last resort.”  Additionally, because children are still mentally developing, incarceration should not encourage them to commit more violent crimes.
This changed, however, after the UN definition of torture was outlined in detail in the 1984 Convention Against Torture (CAT); Article 1.1 of the CAT states that torture is "any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person" for any reason such as obtaining information or punishment, and Article 16 of the same convention prohibits "other acts of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
The ACLU and the Human Rights Watch have made recommendations at both a State and Federal level regarding their lack of access to medical services etc.
On 11 July 2011, prisoners at Pelican Bay State Prison began a hunger strike to “protest torturous conditions in the Security Housing Unit (SHU) there”…and to advocate for procedural and policy changes like the termination of the “debriefing process” which forces prisoners “to name themselves or others as gang members as a condition of access to food or release from isolation”.
Litigating against solitary confinement on the basis of the Fourteenth Amendment and due process is another less common strategy inmates have used.
Shira E. Gordon, a University of Michigan Law Student, argues that solitary confinement leads to an increase in recidivism and violence.
Instances of assault and torture against these prisoners in response to trivial things have also been cited.
Many interviews described how their placement in solitary confinement exacerbated the stresses of being in jail or prison.
The current system of solitary confinement was derived originally from the Pennsylvania model which was characterized by "isolation and seclusion."
According to a psychiatrist,  Dr. Annette Hanson's article,  who works with Maryland's Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS), prolonged segregation does not provide deleterious effects on inmates.
The practice is used when a prisoner is considered dangerous to themselves or to others, is suspected of organizing or being engaged in illegal activities outside of the prison, or, as in the case of a prisoner such as a pedophile or witness, is at a high risk of being harmed by another inmate or inmates.
This statewide hunger strike reaching 2/3 of California’s prisons began with the organizing of inmates at Pelican Bay State Prison.
Juveniles in solitary confinement are routinely denied access to treatment, services, and programming required to meet their medical, psychological, developmental, social, and rehabilitative needs.
As a result, the Eighth Amendment has not always been proven to be the most effective approach to argue against the practice of solitary confinement.
The due process clause within the Fourteenth Amendment also regulates solitary confinement in that prisoners must be given reviews before and during their placement in solitary confinement.
Section 1997e(e) of the PLRA states that  This demonstrates that the Eighth Amendment provides “greater protection” against physical injury than against mental pain.
However, the plan was never executed.
One study has shown that “inmates ever assigned to solitary confinement were 3.2 times as likely to commit an act of self-harm per 1000 days at some time during their incarceration as those never assigned to solitary.” The study has concluded that there is a direct correlation between inmates who self-harm and inmates that are punished into solitary confinement.
To substantiate this conclusion, she cites two quantitative research based studies that support this nexus and counters those who argue that solitary confinement deters recidivism.
Daniel Mears and William Bales “compared recidivism rates by matching…prisoners who were incarcerated in solitary confinement with prisoners who had been in the general prison population.” They found that “24.2 percent of the prisoners held in solitary confinement were reconvicted of a violent crime compared to 20.5 percent of prisoners held in general population.” And this behavior may be attributed to the mental illnesses prisoners may develop, as well as the dehumanizing treatment they are subject to.
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, or CPT, defines solitary confinement as "whenever a prisoner is ordered to be held separately from other prisoners,for example, as a result of court decision, as a disciplinary sanction imposed within the prison system, as a preventative administrative measure or for the protection of the prisoner concerned".
A May 2013 report on California's Pelican Bay State Prison in ''Mother Jones'' magazine also cites one inmate there who "recently marked his 40th year in solitary".
Furthermore, it showed that the majority of inmates adapted to solitary confinement within a few days finding ways to pass time such as sleeping, thinking about the future, and exercising.
Solitary confinement has served as a site of inspiration for protest-organizing against its use in and outside of prisons and conversely, as a response tactic for prisons to react to the protest-organizing of its prisoners.
The resocialization of newly released inmates who spent an unreasonable amount of time in solitary confinement and thus suffer from serious mental illnesses is a huge dilemma for society to face.
Free and accessible journals like “Turning the Tide: Journal of Anti-Racist Action, Research, & Education” and web-based projects like Solitary Watch and the Prisoner Hunger Strike Solidarity Coalition website also work to disseminate information about the use of solitary confinement in prisons and support actions to bring about the end of this practice in prisons.
Allowed no physical contact with humans, he is watched on camera on camera at all times, takes showers in his cell (the water turns on for 10 minutes every two days) and is fed through a metal slot.
It ultimately concluded that solitary confinement was "associated with negative effects on mental health."
"Psychological effects can include anxiety, depression, anger, cognitive disturbances, perceptual distortions, obsessive thoughts, paranoia, and psychosis."
Current estimates of the number of inmates held in solitary confinement are difficult to determine, though generally the minimum held at any given time has been determined to be 20,000, with estimates as high as 80,000.
Thus, if solitary confinement is believed to constitute torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, then the country practicing solitary confinement is violating the provisions set by the UDHR.
However, in regard to SHU’s isolation of the mentally ill and the conditions of their solitary confinement, the court found that the prison had violated the Eighth Amendment.
