It is generally assumed, on the authority of ancient commentators that Solon also reformed the Athenian coinage.
The seisachtheia however was merely one set of reforms within a broader agenda of moral reformation.
According to Herodotus and Plutarch, he met with Croesus and gave the Lydian king advice, which however Croesus failed to appreciate until it was too late.
This same account is substantially taken up about three centuries later by the author of the Aristotelian ''Athenaion Politeia'' but with an interesting variation:"...there was conflict between the nobles and the common people for an extended period.
Fourth century orators, such as Aeschines, tended to attribute to Solon all the laws of their own, much later times.
The Solonian constitution divided citizens into four political classes defined according to assessable property a classification that might previously have served the state for military or taxation purposes only.
Whatever its source, later generations lent credence to the narrative.
Instead the farmer would have to offer himself and his family as security, providing some form of slave labour in lieu of repayment.
*release of all Athenians who had been enslaved.
This sort of account emerges from Solon's poems (e.g.
In the event of 'bankruptcy', or failure to honour the contract stipulated by the ''horoi'', farmers and their families could in fact be sold into slavery.
Modern knowledge of Solon is limited by the fact that his works only survive in fragments and appear to feature interpolations by later authors, and by the general paucity of documentary and archaeological evidence covering Athens in the early 6th century BC.
Before Solon's reforms, the Athenian state was administered by nine archons appointed or elected annually by the Areopagus on the basis of noble birth and wealth.
Four centuries later Plutarch ignored Aristotle's skepticism and recorded the following anecdote, supplemented with his own conjectures:
Nevertheless, the tradition persisted.
Solon's reform of these injustices was later known and celebrated among Athenians as the Seisachtheia (shaking off of burdens).
Their goal was control of the central government at Athens and with it dominance over their rivals from other districts of Attika.
Athens, like other Greek city states in the 7th Century BC, was faced with increasing population pressures and by about 525 BC it was able to feed itself only in 'good years'.
In that case, the struggle between rich and poor was the struggle between powerful aristocrats and the weaker affiliates of their rivals or perhaps even with their own rebellious affiliates.
His attempts evidently were misunderstood:
Attic pleaders did not hesitate to attribute to him (Solon) any law which suited their case, and later writers had no criterion by which to distinguish earlier from later works.
When someone asked, "Why should you waste your time on it?"
Many scholars are content to accept the account given by the ancient sources, interpreting it as a cancellation of debts, while others interpret it as the abolition of a type of feudal relationship, and some prefer to explore new possibilities for interpretation.
**manual workers or sharecroppers, they served voluntarily in the role of personal servant, or as auxiliaries armed for instance with the sling or as rowers in the navy.
Eventually one of Solon's relatives, Peisistratos, ended the factionalism by force, thus instituting an unconstitutionally gained tyranny.
Solon's father probably was Execestides.
The visible symbol of this perversion of the natural and social order was a boundary marker called a ''horos'', a wooden or stone pillar indicating that a farmer was in debt or under contractual obligation to someone else, either a noble patron or a creditor.
*Competitiveness of Athenian commerce was promoted through revision of weights and measures, possibly based on successful standards already in use elsewhere, such as Aegina or Euboia or, according to the ancient account but unsupported by modern scholarship, Argos.
*'''Economic and ideological rivalry''' is a common theme in ancient sources.
According to Solon the poet, Solon the reformer was a voice for political moderation in Athens at a time when his fellow citizens were increasingly polarized by social and economic differences:
Supported by Peisistratos, he defeated the Megarians either by means of a cunning trick or more directly through heroic battle around 595 B.C.
a female who had no brothers to inherit her father's property and who was traditionally required to marry her nearest paternal relative in order to produce an heir to her father's estate).
The reasoning was that at any minute, fortune might turn on even the happiest man and make his life miserable.
According to Diogenes Laertius, in 594 B.C.
When Athens and Megara were contesting for the possession of the Salamis Island, Solon was given leadership of the Athenian forces.
The Megarians however refused to give up their claim to the island.
Demosthenes claimed that the city's subsequent golden age included "personal modesty and frugality" among the Athenian aristocracy.
Solon's poetry can be said to appear 'self-righteous' and 'pompous' at times and he once composed an elegy with moral advice for a more gifted elegiac poet, Mimnermus.
Opportunities for trade even within the Athenian borders were limited.
Solon's reforms can thus be seen to have taken place at a crucial period of economic transition, when a subsistence rural economy increasingly required the support of a nascent commercial sector.
He died in Cyprus at the age of 80 and, in accordance with his will, his ashes were scattered around Salamis, the island where he was born.
Ancient sources credit Solon with the creation of a Council of Four Hundred, drawn from the four Athenian tribes to serve as a steering committee for the enlarged Ekklesia.
It has been observed also that the ''seisachtheia'' not only removed slavery and accumulated debt, it also removed the ordinary farmer's only means of obtaining further credit.
As a regulator of Athenian society, Solon, according to some authors, also formalized its sexual mores.
Plutarch professes admiration of Solon's elegy urging Athenians to recapture the island of Salamis from Megarian control.
**eligible to serve as ''strategoi'' (generals or military governors)
According to Diogenes Laërtius, he had a brother named Dropides who was an ancestor (six generations removed) of Plato.
In his poems, Solon portrays Athens as being under threat from the unrestrained greed and arrogance of its citizens.
Other reforms included:
Solon was described by Plutarch as having been temporarily awarded autocratic powers by Athenian citizens on the grounds that he had the "wisdom" to sort out their differences for them in a peaceful and equitable manner.
The Areopagus comprised former archons and it therefore had, in addition to the power of appointment, extraordinary influence as a consultative body.
There therefore seemed to be no means by which an archon could be called to account for breach of oath unless the Areopagus favoured his prosecution.
A family struggling on a small farm however could not use the farm as security for a loan even if it owned the farm.
During his visit to Athens, Pausanias, the 2nd century AD geographer reported that the inscribed laws of Solon were still displayed by the Prytaneion.
Some Athenians had already been sold into slavery abroad and some had fled abroad to escape enslavement – Solon proudly records in verse the return of this diaspora.
In Megara, Theagenes had come to power as an enemy of the local oligarchs.
**valued up to 199 ''medimnoi'' annually or less
After he had finished his reforms, he travelled abroad for ten years, so that the Athenians could not induce him to repeal any of his laws.
His family was distinguished in Attica as they belonged to a noble or Eupatrid clan although only possessing moderate wealth.
Solon gave voice to Athenian 'nationalism', particularly in the city state's struggle with Megara, its neighbour and rival in the Saronic Gulf.
Accounts of Solon's laws by 4th century orators like Aeschines, however, are considered unreliable for a number of reasons;
Generally, Solon's reforms appear to have been constitutional, economic and moral in their scope.
Nor can any complete and authentic collection of his statutes have survived for ancient scholars to consult.
The city was divided into as many parties as there were geographical divisions in its territory.
He also wrote iambic and trochaic verses which, according to one modern scholar, are more lively and direct than his elegies and possibly paved the way for the iambics of Athenian drama.
By early sixth century the Athenians were using silver in the form of a variety of bullion silver pieces for monetary payments.
Besides the alleged legislative aspect of Solon's involvement with pederasty, there were also suggestions of personal involvement.
The historical account of Solon's Athens has evolved over many centuries into a set of contradictory stories or a complex story that might be interpreted in a variety of ways.
There were irregularities in the new governmental procedures, elected officials sometimes refused to stand down from their posts and occasionally important posts were left vacant.
According to Plutarch, Solon was related to the tyrant Peisistratos for their mothers were cousins.
For the constitution they were under was oligarchic in every respect and especially in that the poor, along with their wives and children, were in slavery to the rich...All the land was in the hands of a few.
As archon, Solon discussed his intended reforms with some friends.
Solon's lineage, therefore, could be traced back to Codrus, the last King of Athens.
*annulment of all contracts symbolised by the ''horoi''.
The specific economic reforms credited to Solon are these:
By giving common people the power not only to elect officials but also to call them to account, Solon appears to have established the foundations of a true republic.
Let us go to Salamis to fight for the island
There was an assembly of Athenian citizens (the Ekklesia) but the lowest class (the Thetes) was not admitted and its deliberative procedures were controlled by the nobles.
Drachma and obol as a term of bullion value had already been adopted, although the corresponding standard weights were probably unstable.
This was no disadvantage to a clan with large landholdings since it could always rent out farms in a sharecropping system.
The literary merit of Solon's verse is generally considered unexceptional.
**valued at 300 ''medimnoi'' or more annually.
Some modern scholars believe these powers were in fact granted some years after Solon had been archon, when he would have been a member of the Areopagus and probably a more respected statesman by his (aristocratic) peers.
There is consensus among scholars that Solon lowered the requirements—those that existed in terms of financial and social qualifications—which applied to election to public office.
Equally, a family might voluntarily pledge part of its farm income or labour to a powerful clan in return for its protection.
And they say Solon loved Peisistratos; and that is the reason, I suppose, that when afterwards they differed about the government, their enmity never produced any hot and violent passion, they remembered their old kindnesses, and retained "Still in its embers living the strong fire" of their love and dear affection.
In particular, the orator Aeschines cites laws excluding slaves from wrestling halls and forbidding them to enter pederastic relationships with the sons of citizens.
The nine archons took the oath of office while ceremonially standing on a stone in the agora, declaring their readiness to dedicate a golden statue if they should ever be found to have violated the laws.
The typical farming family, even in classical times, barely produced enough to satisfy its own needs.
He was also the first citizen of Athens to reference the goddess Athena (fr.
A century after Plutarch, Aelian also said that Peisistratos had been Solon's ''eromenos''.
"The new picture which emerged was one of strife between regional groups, united by local loyalties and led by wealthy landowners.
The social and political upheavals that characterised Athens in Solon's time have been variously interpreted by historians from ancient times to the present day.
In most Greek city states, a farmer could conveniently reside in town and travel to and from his fields every day.
The top three classes were eligible for a variety of lesser posts and only the ''thetes'' were excluded from all public office.
Aristotle, writing around 330 BC, attempted to refute that belief, claiming that "those are manifestly talking nonsense who pretend that Solon was the lover of Peisistratos, for their ages do not admit of it," as Solon was about thirty years older than Peisistratos.
*the abolition of extravagant dowries.
Fragments of the axones were still visible in Plutarch's time but today the only records we have of Solon's laws are fragmentary quotes and comments in literary sources such as those written by Plutarch himself.
Perhaps this public spirit was instilled in them by Solon and his reforms.
Solon's elegiac style is said to have been influenced by the example of Tyrtaeus.
As with all his reforms, there is considerable scholarly debate about its real significance.
Until then, the narrow warship doubled as a cargo vessel.
**approximating to the mediaeval class of Yeoman, they had enough wealth to equip themselves for the infantry (Hoplite)
*Cultivation of olives was encouraged; the export of all other produce was prohibited.
Solon's verses have come down to us in fragmentary quotations by ancient authors such as Plutarch and Demosthenes who used them to illustrate their own arguments.
Within 4 years of Solon's departure, the old social rifts re-appeared, but with some new complications.
The travel writer Pausanias listed Solon among the seven sages whose aphorisms adorned Apollo's temple in Delphi.
He is remembered particularly for his efforts to legislate against political, economic, and moral decline in archaic Athens.
Solon's economic reforms succeeded in stimulating foreign trade.
As further evidence accumulates, and as historians continue to debate the issues, Solon's motivations and the intentions behind his reforms will continue to attract speculation.
According to the ''Athenian Constitution'', only the ''pentakosiomedimnoi'' were eligible for election to high office as archons and therefore only they gained admission into the Areopagus.
It has been cynically observed, however, that few of these unfortunates were likely to have been recovered.
Even the earth (Gaia), the mighty mother of the gods, had been enslaved.
According to some ancient authors Solon had taken the future tyrant Peisistratos as his eromenos.
see below Solon the reformer and poet), in which he casts himself in the role of a noble mediator between two intemperate and unruly factions.
Despite its persistence, however, it is not known whether the account is historical or fabricated.
Moreover, the language of his laws was archaic even by the standards of the fifth century and this caused interpretational problems for ancient commentators.
It was only after he had lost his kingdom to the Persian king Cyrus, while awaiting execution, that Croesus acknowledged the wisdom of Solon's advice.
According to Thucydides, on the other hand, most Athenians continued to live in rural settlements right up until the Peloponnesian War.
Originally the axones recorded laws enacted by Draco in the late 7th Century (traditionally 621 BC).
Here translated by the English poet John Dryden, Solon's words define a 'moral high ground' where differences between rich and poor can be reconciled or maybe just ignored.
According to Plutarch however, Solon originally wrote poetry for amusement, discussing pleasure in a popular rather than philosophical way.
Solon's verses are mainly significant for historical rather than aesthetic reasons, as a personal record of his reforms and attitudes.
According to the ''Athenian Constitution'', Solon legislated for all citizens to be admitted into the Ekklesia and for a court (the Heliaia) to be formed from all the citizens.
However, the encouragement of olive production for export could actually have led to increased hardship for many Athenians to the extent that it led to a reduction in the amount of land dedicated to grain.
Solon's economic reforms need to be understood in the context of the primitive, subsistence economy that prevailed both before and after his time.
Some short-term consequences of his reforms are considered at the end of the section.
Depending on how we interpret the historical facts known to us, Solon's constitutional reforms were either a radical anticipation of democratic government, or they merely provided a plutocratic flavour to a stubbornly aristocratic regime, or else the truth lies somewhere between these two extremes.
According to a surviving fragment from a work ("Brothers") by the comic playwright Philemon, Solon established publicly funded brothels at Athens in order to "democratize" the availability of sexual pleasure.
Solon was chosen archon or chief magistrate.
Nothing of Draco's codification has survived except for a law relating to homicide, yet there is consensus among scholars that it did not amount to anything like a constitution.
The real motives behind Solon's economic reforms are therefore as questionable as his real motives for constitutional reform.
The removal of the ''horoi'' clearly provided immediate economic relief for the most oppressed group in Attica, and it also brought an immediate end to the enslavement of Athenians by their countrymen.
He wrote poetry for pleasure, as patriotic propaganda, and in defense of his constitutional reforms.
The ban on the export of grain might be understood as a relief measure for the benefit of the poor.
"Here Solon is presented as a partisan in a democratic cause whereas, judged from the viewpoint of his own poems, he was instead a mediator between rival factions.
*prohibition on a debtor's person being used as security for a loan.
A still more significant variation in the ancient historical account appears in the writing of Plutarch in the late 1st – early 2nd century AD:"Athens was torn by recurrent conflict about the constitution.
According to Herodotus the country was bound by Solon to maintain his reforms for 10 years, whereas according to Plutarch and the author of the ''Athenian Constitution'' (reputedly Aristotle) the contracted period was instead 100 years.
Ancient authors such as Herodotus and Plutarch are the main source of information, yet they wrote about Solon long after his death, at a time when history was by no means an academic discipline.
Two contemporary historians have identified three distinct historical accounts of Solon's Athens, emphasizing quite different rivalries: economic and ideological rivalry, regional rivalry and rivalry between aristocratic clans.
However, many modern scholars have doubted this also.
In Sicyon, Cleisthenes had usurped power on behalf of an Ionian minority.
Croesus had considered himself to be the happiest man alive and Solon had advised him, "Count no man happy until he be dead."
Solon's presumed pederastic desire was thought in antiquity to have found expression also in his poetry, which is today represented only in a few surviving fragments.
Knowing that he was about to cancel all debts, these friends took out loans and promptly bought some land.
A heroic sense of civic duty later united Athenians against the might of the Persians.
Athenian black-figure pottery was exported in increasing quantities and good quality throughout the Aegean between 600 BC and 560 BC, a success story that coincided with a decline in trade in Corinthian pottery.
The authenticity of all the poetic fragments attributed to Solon is however uncertain – in particular, pederastic aphorisms ascribed by some ancient sources to Solon have been ascribed by other sources to Theognis instead.
Farmers subject to these sorts of arrangements were loosely known as ''hektemoroi'' indicating that they either paid or kept a sixth of a farm's annual yield.
*Foreign tradesmen were encouraged to settle in Athens; those who did would be granted citizenship, provided they brought their families with them.
His reforms failed in the short term, yet he is often credited with having laid the foundations for Athenian democracy.
'''Solon''' (; &nbsp;BC) was an Athenian statesman, lawmaker, and poet.
*'''Rivalry between clans''' is a theme recently developed by some scholars, based on an appreciation of the political significance of kinship groupings.
These ''axones'' appear to have operated on the same principle as a Lazy Susan, allowing both convenient storage and ease of access.
Modern scholars doubt the reliability of these sources and our knowledge of Solon's legislation is therefore actually very limited in its details.
And if men did not pay their rents, they themselves and their children were liable to be seized as slaves.
Solon died shortly after Peisistratos usurped by force the autocratic power that Athens had once freely bestowed upon him.
Attika in Solon's time seemed to be moving towards a similarly ugly solution with many citizens in danger of being reduced to the status of helots.
In Plutarch's account, Solon accused Athenians of stupidity and cowardice for allowing this to happen.
Solon's laws were inscribed on large wooden slabs or cylinders attached to a series of axles that stood upright in the Prytaneion.
According to this account, bonds of kinship rather than local loyalties were the decisive influence on events in archaic Athens.
The reforms included:
*'''''Zeugitai'''''
For the party of the people of the hills was most in favour of democracy, that of the people of the plain was most in favour of oligarchy, while the third group, the people of the coast, which preferred a mixed form of constitution somewhat between the other two, formed an obstruction and prevented the other groups from gaining control."
Solon repealed all Draco's laws except those relating to homicide.
It has been argued that these interconnecting units of kinship reinforced a hierarchic structure with aristocratic clans at the top.
According to Plato's dialogues Timaeus and Critias, he visited Neith's temple at Sais and received from the priests there an account of the history of Atlantis.
According to Plutarch, he spent some time and discussed philosophy with two Egyptian priests, Psenophis of Heliopolis and Sonchis of Sais.
"Regional factionalism was inevitable in a relatively large territory such as Athens possessed.
His poetry indicates that he attempted to use his extraordinary legislative powers to establish a peaceful settlement between the country's rival factions:
**approximating to the medieval class of knights, they had enough wealth to equip themselves for the cavalry
He was the first people's champion.
*Fathers were encouraged to find trades for their sons; if they did not, there would be no legal requirement for sons to maintain their fathers in old age.
His first stop was Egypt.
However, recent numismatic studies now lead to the conclusion that Athens probably had no coinage until around 560 BC, well after Solon's reforms.
This distinction, though somewhat artificial, does at least provide a convenient framework within which to consider the laws that have been attributed to Solon.
Solon was eventually drawn into the unaristocratic pursuit of commerce.
It has even been said that some people blamed Solon for their troubles.
It has been suggested that the tradition presenting a peaceful and happy coexistence between Solon and Peisistratos was cultivated during the latter's dominion, in order to legitimize his own rule, as well as that of his sons.
While the veracity of this comic account is open to doubt, at least one modern author considers it significant that in Classical Athens, three hundred or so years after the death of Solon, there existed a discourse that associated his reforms with an increased availability of heterosexual pleasure.
*the disenfranchisement of any citizen who might refuse to take up arms in times of civil strife, a measure that was intended to counteract dangerous levels of political apathy.
The standard unit for this assessment was one ''medimnos'' (approximately 12 gallons) of cereals and yet the kind of classification set out below might be considered too simplistic to be historically accurate.
Next Solon sailed to Cyprus, where he oversaw the construction of a new capital for a local king, in gratitude for which the king named it Soloi.
The effects of regionalism in a large territory could be seen in Laconia, where Sparta had gained control through intimidation and resettlement of some of its neighbours and enslavement of the rest.
The same poem was said by Diogenes Laërtius to have stirred Athenians more than any other verses that Solon wrote:
Were the poor being forced to serve the needs of a changing economy, was the economy being reformed to serve the needs of the poor, or were Solon's policies the manifestation of a struggle taking place between poorer citizens and the aristocrats?
Stobaeus in the Florilegium relates a story about a symposium, where Solon's young nephew was singing a poem of Sappho's; Solon, upon hearing the song, asked the boy to teach him to sing it.
His friends never repaid their debts.
Solon was born in Athens around 638 B.C.
During Solon's time, many Greek city-states had seen the emergence of tyrants, opportunistic noblemen who had taken power on behalf of sectional interests.
**valued at a 200 ''medimnoi'' or more annually.
The Heliaia appears to have been the Ekklesia, or some representative portion of it, sitting as a jury.
Most Athenians were still living in rural settlements right up to the Peloponnesian War.
Up until Solon's time, land was the inalienable property of a family or clan and it could not be sold or mortgaged.
Solon replied , "So that I may learn it then die."
Opportunities for international trade were minimal.
It has been estimated that, even in Roman times, goods rose 40% in value for every 100 miles they were carried over land, but only 1.3% for the same distance were they carried by ship and yet there is no evidence that Athens possessed any merchant ships until around  525 BC.
His efforts were in vain.
Perhaps Solon, by both personal example and legislated reform, established a precedent for this decorum.
