Mohammed Ahmed (athlete) is a Canadian long-distance runner who represented Canada in the 10,000 meter races at the 2012 Summer Olympics and the 2013 World Championships in Athletics.
This prompted an unsuccessful bid by Britain in 1956 to buy back the Somali lands it had turned over.
On 15 October 1969, while paying a visit to the northern town of Las Anod, Somalia's then President Abdirashid Ali Shermarke was shot dead by one of his own bodyguards.
In Canada, the cities of Toronto, Ottawa, Calgary, Edmonton, Montreal, Vancouver, Winnipeg and Hamilton all harbor Somali populations.
"We analysed mtDNA variation in ~250 persons from Libya, Somalia, and Congo/Zambia, as representatives of the three regions of interest.
(2007), the presence of this subhaplogroup in the Horn region may represent the traces of an ancient migration from Egypt/Libya.
So to extend ties of alliance, marriage is often to another ethnic Somali from a different clan.
With very few exceptions, Somalis are entirely Muslims, the majority belonging to the Sunni branch of Islam and the Shafi`i school of Islamic jurisprudence, although a few are also adherents of the Shia Muslim denomination.
(2005) observed the M78 subclade of E1b1b in about 77% of their Somali male samples.
Primarily concentrated in the north and Khartoum, the expatriate community mainly consists of students as well as some businesspeople.
In the United States, Minneapolis, Saint Paul, Columbus, San Diego, Seattle, Washington, D.C., Houston, Atlanta, Los Angeles, Portland, Denver, Nashville, Green Bay, Lewiston, Portland, Maine and Cedar Rapids have the largest Somali populations.
The early persecuted Muslims fled to various places in the region, including the city of Zeila in modern-day northern Somalia, so as to seek protection from the Quraysh.
The Sultanate of Ifat, led by the Walashma dynasty with its capital at Zeila, ruled over parts of what is now eastern Ethiopia, Djibouti, and northern Somalia.
The textile-making communities in Somalia are a continuation of an ancient textile industry, as is the culture of wood carving, pottery and monumental architecture that dominates Somali interiors and landscapes.
The Turks also named Hassan Emir of the Somali nation, and the Germans promised to officially recognize any territories the Dervishes were to acquire.
According to mtDNA studies by Holden (2005) and Richards et al.
''Xalwo'' (halva) is a popular confection eaten during festive occasions, such as Eid celebrations or wedding receptions.
It is made from sugar, corn starch, cardamom powder, nutmeg powder and ghee.
According to Y chromosome studies by Sanchez et al.
Usage of the eye cosmetic in the Horn region is believed to date to the ancient Land of Punt.
It was created in 1954 by the Somali scholar Mohammed Awale Liban, after he had been selected by the labour trade union of the Trust Territory of Somalia to come up with a design.
Abdi Bile won the 1500 m event at the World Championships in 1987, running the fastest final 800 m of any 1,500 meter race in history.
On 20 July 1961 and through a popular referendum, the people of Somalia ratified a new constitution, which was first drafted in 1960.
The putsch was spearheaded by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, who at the time commanded the army.
That is, they only use five pitches per octave in contrast to a heptatonic (seven note) scale, such as the major scale.
Books such as ''From a Crooked Rib'' and ''Links'' are considered important literary achievements, works which have earned Farah, among other accolades, the 1998 Neustadt International Prize for Literature.
A government was formed by Abdullahi Issa Mohamud and Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal other members of the trusteeship and protectorate governments, with Haji Bashir Ismail Yusuf as President of the Somali National Assembly, Aden Abdullah Osman Daar as the President of the Somali Republic and Abdirashid Ali Shermarke as Prime Minister (later to become President from 1967 to 1969).
HLA haplotypes with high significance and characteristics of the Somali population are B7-Cw7, B39-Cw12, B51-Cw16, B57-Cw18.
There are also significant Somali communities in Sweden: 57,906 (2014); the Netherlands: 37,432 (2014); Norway: 38,413 (2015); Denmark: 18,645 (2014); and Finland: 16,721 (2014).
Somalis were among the first populations on the continent to embrace Islam.
Somali architecture is a rich and diverse tradition of engineering and designing.
There was also widespread vote rigging, with the French expelling thousands of Somalis before the referendum reached the polls.
These were advantages that British Somaliland, which was to be incorporated into the new Somali state, did not have.
The Xeer legal system is assumed to have developed exclusively in the Horn of Africa since approximately the 7th century.
The pyramidal structures, temples and ancient houses of dressed stone littered around Somalia are said to date from this period.
The population then likely split into two branches, with one group heading westward toward the Maghreb and the other moving south into the Horn.
The clan groupings of the Somali people are important social units, and clan membership plays a central part in Somali culture and politics.
Referred to as Somaliwood, this upstart, youth-based cinematic movement has energized the Somali film industry and in the process introduced innovative storylines, marketing strategies and production techniques.
The peaceful introduction of Islam in the early medieval era of Somalia's history brought Islamic architectural influences from Arabia and Persia.
Somali people in the Horn of Africa are divided among different countries (Somalia, Djibouti, Ethiopia, and northeastern Kenya) that were artificially and some might say arbitrarily partitioned by the former imperial powers.
After meals, homes are traditionally perfumed using frankincense (''lubaan'') or incense (''cuunsi''), which is prepared inside an incense burner referred to as a ''dabqaad''.
The result of HLA class I and class II antigen frequencies show that the Somali population appear more similar to Arab or Caucasoid than to African populations.
This could imply a more recent ancestry for M1 in Africa, as older lineages are more diverse and widespread by nature, and may be an indication of a back-migration into Africa from the Middle East."
Many of the new architectural designs, such as mosques, were built on the ruins of older structures.
Besides Ahmed's Latin script, other orthographies that have been used for centuries for writing Somali include the long-established Arabic script and Wadaad's writing.
Somali songs are usually the product of collaboration between lyricists (''midho''), songwriters (''lahan'') and singers ('''odka'' or "voice").
In the past, dirac fabric was also frequently purchased from South Asian merchandisers.
'''Somalis''' (, ) are an ethnic group inhabiting the Horn of Africa (Somali Peninsula).
Britain also granted administration of the almost exclusively Somali-inhabited Northern Frontier District (NFD) to Kenyan nationalists despite an informal plebiscite demonstrating the overwhelming desire of the region's population to join the newly formed Somali Republic.
Star African Air is also one of three Somali-owned airlines which are based in Dubai.
Somali art is the artistic culture of the Somali people, both historic and contemporary.
As a result of its successes against the British, the Dervish State received support from the Ottoman and German empires.
More recently, Somali entrepreneurs have established themselves in Kenya, investing over $1.5&nbsp;billion in the Somali enclave of Eastleigh alone.
Other writing systems developed in the twentieth century include the Osmanya, Borama and Kaddare scripts, which were invented by Osman Yusuf Kenadid, Abdurahman Sheikh Nuur and Hussein Sheikh Ahmed Kaddare, respectively.
The exact number of speakers of Somali is unknown.
The Somali language is a member of the Cushitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic (Hamitic-Semitic) family.
The oldest evidence of burial customs in the Horn of Africa comes from cemeteries in Somalia dating back to 4th millennium BC.
The cloth is usually made out of ''alandi'', which is a textile that is common in the Horn region and some parts of North Africa.
All of these traditions, including festivals, martial arts, dress, literature, sport and games such as Shax, have immensely contributed to the enrichment of Somali heritage.
''Pan-Somalism'' is an ideology that advocates the unification of all ethnic Somalis once part of Somali empires such as the Ajuran Empire, the Adal Sultanate, the Gobroon Dynasty and the Dervish State under one flag and one nation.
Despite the variety, there remains one thing that unites the various regional cuisines: all food is served halal.
This sharp cline indicates a history of little admixture between these regions.
The results are consistent with hypothesis, supported by cultural and historical evidence, of common origin of the Somali population."
Internet cafés, hotels, coffee shops, restaurants and import-export businesses are all testimony to the Somalis' entrepreneurial spirit.
Football is the most popular sport amongst Somalis.
Harbi was killed in a plane crash two years later.
Young upstart Nadifa Mohamed was also awarded the 2010 Betty Trask Prize.
Meanwhile, in 1948, under pressure from their World War II allies and to the dismay of the Somalis, the British "returned" the Haud (an important Somali grazing area that was presumably 'protected' by British treaties with the Somalis in 1884 and 1886) and the Ogaden to Ethiopia, based on a treaty they signed in 1897 in which the British ceded Somali territory to the Ethiopian Emperor Menelik in exchange for his help against plundering by Somali clans.
Qur'anic schools (also known as ''dugsi'') remain the basic system of traditional religious instruction in Somalia.
In the martial arts, Faisal Jeylani Aweys and Mohamed Deq Abdulle also took home a silver medal and fourth place, respectively, at the 2013 Open World Taekwondo Challenge Cup in Tongeren.
children, women, the pious, poets and guests).
There is no evidence that it developed elsewhere or was greatly influenced by any foreign legal system.
In other places, such as the northern Dhambalin region, a depiction of a man on a horse is postulated as being one of the earliest known examples of a mounted huntsman.
With the migration of fleeing Muslim families from the Islamic world to Somalia in the early centuries of Islam and the peaceful conversion of the Somali population by Somali Muslim scholars in the following centuries, the ancient city-states eventually transformed into Islamic Mogadishu, Berbera, Zeila, Barawa and Merca, which were part of the Berberi civilization.
Somali dialects are divided into three main groups: Northern, Benaadir and Maay.
Somali society is traditionally ethnically endogamous.
The city of Mogadishu came to be known as the ''City of Islam'', and controlled the East African gold trade for several centuries.
(2004, 2007), the Somalis are paternally closely related to other Afro-Asiatic-speaking groups in Northeast Africa.
The Qur'anic system, which teaches the greatest number of students relative to other educational sub-sectors, is oftentimes the only system accessible to Somalis in nomadic as compared to urban areas.
Due to Somalia's proximity to and close ties with the Arabian Peninsula, many Somali men also wear the jellabiya (''jellabiyad'' or ''qamiis'').
Somalis in Britain are largely concentrated in the cities of London, Sheffield, Bristol, Birmingham, Cardiff, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, and Leicester, with London alone accounting for roughly 78% of Britain's Somali population in 2001.
For more formal settings, such as at weddings or religious celebrations like Eid, women wear the ''dirac''.
The disparity between the two territories in economic development and political experience would cause serious difficulties when it came time to integrate the two parts.
Mo Farah is a double Olympic gold medal winner and world champion, and holds the European track record for 10,000 metres, the British road record for 10,000 metres, the British indoor record in the 3000 metres, the British track record for 5000 metres and the European indoor record for 5000 metres.
Hussein Ahmed Salah, a Somalia-born former long-distance runner from Djibouti, won a bronze medal in the marathon at the 1988 Summer Olympics.
Since 1980, prominent ''Somalist'' scholars from around the world have also gathered annually to hold the International Congress of Somali Studies.
During regular, day-to-day activities, Somali women usually wear the ''guntiino''.
Spanning the ancient, medieval and early modern periods in Greater Somalia, it also includes the fusion of Somalo-Islamic architecture with Western designs in contemporary times.
The Dervish State successfully repulsed the British empire four times and forced it to retreat to the coastal region.
In addition, there is an historical Somali community in the general Sudan area.
According to an autosomal DNA study by Hodgson et al.
At first listen, Somali music might be mistaken for the sounds of nearby regions such as Ethiopia, Sudan or Arabia, but it is ultimately recognizable by its own unique tunes and styles.
Many Somali women by tradition also wear gold necklaces and anklets.
Peanuts are also sometimes added to enhance texture and flavor.
Somali-owned businesses line the streets of Deira, the Dubai city centre, with only Iranians exporting more products from the city at large.
Alongside Barre, the Supreme Revolutionary Council (SRC) that assumed power after President Sharmarke's assassination was led by Lieutenant Colonel Salaad Gabeyre Kediye and Chief of Police Jama Korshel.
Somali sailors and merchants were the main suppliers of frankincense, myrrh and spices, items which were considered valuable luxuries by the Ancient Egyptians, Phoenicians, Mycenaeans and Babylonians.
Known as the ''gorgorad'', the underskirt is made out of silk and serves as a key part of the overall outfit.
Traditional Arabian garb, such as the jilbab and abaya, is also commonly worn.
The first clear written reference of the sobriquet ''Somali'', however, dates back to the 15th century.
In 1967, Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal became Prime Minister, a position to which he was appointed by Shermarke.
Growing out of the Somali people's rich storytelling tradition, the first few feature-length Somali films and cinematic festivals emerged in the early 1960s, immediately after independence.
''Qado'' or lunch is often elaborate.
(2014), the Afro-Asiatic languages were likely spread across Africa and the Near East by an ancestral population(s) carrying a newly identified non-African genetic component, which the researchers dub the "Ethio-Somali".
*Assuring good inter-clan relations by treating women justly, negotiating with "peace emissaries" in good faith, and sparing the lives of socially protected groups (e.g.
On their heads, they often wrap a colorful turban or wear the ''koofiyad'', which is an embroidered fez.
His assassination was quickly followed by a military coup d'état on 21 October 1969 (the day after his funeral), in which the Somali Army seized power without encountering armed opposition — essentially a bloodless takeover.
This occupation lasted till 1941 and was replaced by a British military administration.
Epic and period films as well as international co-productions followed suit, facilitated by the proliferation of video technology and national television networks.
Additionally, Mohamed Jama has won both world and European titles in K1 and Thai Boxing.
Known as the most stable local, non-formal system of education providing basic religious and moral instruction, their strength rests on community support and their use of locally made and widely available teaching materials.
Thus, for example, a recent study observed that in 89 marriages contracted by men of the Dhulbahante clan, 55 (62%) were with women of Dhulbahante sub-clans other than those of their husbands; 30 (33.7%) were with women of surrounding clans of other clan families (Isaaq, 28; Hawiye, 3); and 3 (4.3%) were with women of other clans of the Darod clan family (Majerteen 2, Ogaden 1).
In addition to a nationalization program of industry and land, the new regime's foreign policy placed an emphasis on Somalia's traditional and religious links with the Arab world, eventually joining the Arab League (AL) in 1974.
This had the effect of stimulating a shift in construction from drystone and other related materials to coral stone, sundried bricks, and the widespread use of limestone in Somali architecture.
The costume is a long white garment common in the Arab world.
According to Cruciani et al.
Ashraaf, Benadiri, Madhiban, Muse, Reerow-Xassan, Sheekhaal, Yibir
The Somali language is spoken by ethnic Somalis in Greater Somalia and the Somali diaspora.
The multi-ethnic Ocean Stars, Somalia's national team, first participated at the Olympic Games in 1972 and has sent athletes to compete in most Summer Olympic Games since then.
*Providing financial support to married female relatives and newlyweds.
Somali cuisine varies from region to region and consists of a fusion of diverse culinary influences.
Spices like cumin, cardamom, cloves, cinnamon, and garden sage are used to aromatize these different rice delicacies.
Clans are patrilineal and are often divided into sub-clans, sometimes with many sub-divisions.
Married women tend to sport headscarves referred to as ''shaash''.
The palm is also frequently decorated with a dot of henna and the fingertips are dipped in the dye.
Major Somali clans:
The field draws from old Somali chronicles, records and oral literature, in addition to written accounts and traditions about Somalis from explorers and geographers in the Horn of Africa and the Middle East.
The name "Somali" is, in turn, held to be derived from the words ''soo'' and ''maal'', which together mean "go and milk" — a reference to the ubiquitous pastoralism of the Somali people.
The Somali National Olympic committee has devised a special support program to ensure continued success in future tournaments.
M1 is believed to have originated in Asia, where its parent M clade represents the majority of mtDNA lineages.
With the adoption of the Latin alphabet in 1972 to transcribe the Somali language, numerous contemporary Somali authors have also released novels, some of which have gone on to receive worldwide acclaim.
Samaale, the oldest common ancestor of several Somali clans, is generally regarded as the source of the ethnonym ''Somali''.
Henna parties are usually held before the wedding takes place.
Xeer is defined by a few fundamental tenets that are immutable and which closely approximate the principle of ''jus cogens'' in international law:
The stone implements from the ''Jalelo'' site in northern Somalia are said to be the most important link in evidence of the universality in palaeolithic times between the East and the West.
Haplogroup T, like haplogroup E1b1b, is also typically found among other populations of Northeast Africa, the Maghreb, the Near East and the Mediterranean.
Britain included the proviso that the Somali nomads would retain their autonomy, but Ethiopia immediately claimed sovereignty over them.
That same year, Barre also served as chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the predecessor of the African Union (AU).
The analysis of HLA antigens has also helped clarify the possible background of the Somali people, as the distribution of haplotype frequencies vary among population groups.
The equally diverse Somali beach soccer team also represents the country in international beach soccer competitions.
(2006), a significant proportion of the maternal lineages of Somalis consists of the M1 haplogroup.
A number of writing systems have been used over the years for transcribing the language.
Additionally, Somali women have a long tradition of wearing gold jewelry, particularly bangles.
It is a sarong that is worn around the waist.
During weddings, the bride is frequently adorned in gold.
The SRC subsequently renamed the country the Somali Democratic Republic, dissolved the parliament and the Supreme Court, and suspended the constitution.
The imperial clouds wavering over Somalia alarmed the Dervish leader Mohammed Abdullah Hassan, who gathered Somali soldiers from across the Horn of Africa and began one of the longest anti-colonial wars ever.
Tradition holds this general area as an ancestral homeland of the Somali people.
A study from 1993 found, among other things, that "unlike in primary schools where gender disparity is enormous, around 40 per cent of Qur'anic school pupils are girls; but the teaching staff have minimum or no qualification necessary to ensure intellectual development of children."
While the distribution of Somalis per country in Europe is hard to measure because the Somali community on the continent has grown so quickly in recent years, the Office for National Statistics estimates that 114,000 people born in Somalia were living in the United Kingdom in 2015.
*Donating livestock and other assets to the poor.
The city of Minneapolis hosts hundreds of Somali-owned and operated businesses offering a variety of products, including leather shoes, jewelry and other fashion items, halal meat, and hawala or money transfer services.
On 1 July 1960, the two territories united to form the Somali Republic, albeit within boundaries drawn up by Italy and Britain.
Unmarried or young women, however, do not always cover their heads.
During the Stone age, the Doian culture and the Hargeisan culture flourished here with their respective industries and factories.
The fact that Somali legal terminology is practically devoid of loan words from foreign languages suggests that Xeer is truly indigenous.
Our initial results indicate a sharp cline in M1 frequencies that generally does not extend into sub-Saharan Africa.
Somalia and Djibouti are also both members of the Arab League.
According to Mohamoud et al.
Ancient DNA analysis indicates that this foundational ancestry in the Horn region is akin to that of the Neolithic farmers of the southern Levant.
The gown is worn over a full-length half-slip and a brassiere.
The revolutionary army established large-scale public works programs and successfully implemented an urban and rural literacy campaign, which helped dramatically increase the literacy rate.
The antigens with highest frequencies were HLA -A1, A2, and A30; B7, B51 and B39; Cw7, Cw16, Cw17, Cw15 and Cw18; DR 13, DR17, DR8 and DR1.
Houses were built of dressed stone similar to the ones in Ancient Egypt.
Italy similarly faced the same opposition from Somali Sultans and armies and did not acquire full control of parts of modern Somalia until the Fascist era in late 1927.
*Rahanweyn (Digil & Mirifle)
The birth of Islam on the opposite side of Somalia's Red Sea coast meant that Somali merchants, sailors and expatriates living in the Arabian Peninsula gradually came under the influence of the new religion through their converted Arab Muslim trading partners.
Due to the Somali people's passionate love for and facility with poetry, Somalia has often been referred to by scholars as a "Nation of Poets" and a "Nation of Bards" including, among others, the Canadian novelist Margaret Laurence.
It is worn by Somali women on their hands, arms, feet and neck during wedding ceremonies, Eid, Ramadan, and other festive occasions.
The FIBA Africa Championship 1981 was hosted by Somalia from 15–23 December 1981.
This practice would continue over and over again throughout the following centuries.
Following the creation of the Somali Film Agency (SFA) regulatory body in 1975, the local film scene began to expand rapidly.
Benaadir (also known as Coastal Somali) is spoken on the Benadir coast from Adale to south of Merca, including Mogadishu, as well as in the immediate hinterland.
Ethnic Somalis number around 16-20 million and are principally concentrated in Somalia (around 9 million), Ethiopia (4.6 million), Kenya (2.4 million), and Djibouti (524,000), with many also residing in parts of the Middle East, North America and Europe.
*Family obligations such as the payment of dowry, and sanctions for eloping.
After haplogroup E1b1b, the second most frequently occurring Y-DNA haplogroup among Somalis is the West Asian haplogroup T (M184).
Phenotype frequency, gene frequency and haplotype frequency were used to study the relationship between Somalis and other relevant populations.
It is a long stretch of cloth tied over the shoulder and draped around the waist.
The garment can be worn in different styles.
As a result of this bombardment, former Dervish territories were turned into a protectorate of Britain.
Minor Somali clans:
The majority of those who voted no were Somalis who were strongly in favour of joining a united Somalia, as had been proposed by Mahmoud Harbi, Vice President of the Government Council.
Somalis are ethnically of Hamitic ancestral stock, but have genealogical traditions asserting descent from various Arabian patriarchs.
One source estimates that there are 7.78 million speakers of Somali in Somalia itself and 12.65 million speakers globally.
A referendum was held in neighboring Djibouti (then known as French Somaliland) in 1958, on the eve of Somalia's independence in 1960, to decide whether or not to join the Somali Republic or to remain with France.
British Somaliland remained a protectorate of Britain until 1960.
The ancient Puntites were a nation of people that had close relations with Pharaonic Egypt during the times of Pharaoh Sahure and Queen Hatshepsut.
Somali henna designs are similar to those in the Arabian peninsula, often featuring flower motifs and triangular shapes.
Upon independence in 1960, the flag was adopted as the national flag of the nascent Somali Republic.
After a quarter of a century of holding the British at bay, the Dervishes were finally defeated in 1920, when Britain for the first time in Africa used airplanes to bomb the Dervish capital of Taleex.
Besides their traditional areas of inhabitation in Greater Somalia, a Somali community mainly consisting of entrepreneurs, academics, and students also exists in Egypt.
Civil strife in the early 1990s greatly increased the size of the Somali diaspora, as many of the best educated Somalis left for the Middle East, Europe and North America.
The Xeer legal system also requires a certain amount of specialization of different functions within the legal framework.
They provide Islamic education for children, thereby filling a clear religious and social role in the country.
However, there have been cases in the past of artistic depictions representing living creatures, such as certain ancient rock paintings in northern Somalia, the golden birds on the Mogadishan canopies, and the plant decorations on religious tombs in southern Somalia.
The Ethio-Somali component is most closely related to the Maghrebi non-African genetic component, and is believed to have diverged from all other non-African ancestries at least 23,000 years ago.
Its nearest relatives are the Afar and Saho languages.
He also won silver medals in this event at the 1987 and 1991 World Championships, as well as the 1985 IAAF World Marathon Cup.
In addition, there existed a significant amount of homogeneity within the M1 haplogroup.
Although in the 1950s British colonial officials attempted, through various administrative development efforts, to make up for past neglect, the protectorate stagnated.
