Following the end of the TFG's interim mandate the same month, the Federal Government of Somalia, the first permanent central government in the country since the start of the civil war, was formed and a period of reconstruction began in Mogadishu.
According to the prime minister of Somalia, to improve transparency, Cabinet ministers fully disclosed their assets and signed a code of ethics.
In the late 1960s, UN geologists also discovered major uranium deposits and other rare mineral reserves in Somalia.
About 43% of the population live on less than 1 US dollar a day, with around 24% of those found in urban areas and 54% living in rural areas.
Its radio counterpart Radio Mogadishu also broadcasts from the capital.
It was established as one of the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) of government as defined in the Transitional Federal Charter (TFC) adopted in November 2004 by the Transitional Federal Parliament (TFP).
With the help of a small team of African Union troops, the coalition government also began a counteroffensive in February 2009 to assume full control of the southern half of the country.
In November 2013, following a Memorandum of Understanding signed with Emirates Post in April of the year, the federal Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications officially reconstituted the Somali Postal Service (Somali Post).
Each painting has an inscription below it, which collectively have been estimated to be around 2,500 years old.
It provides the legal foundation for the existence of the Federal Republic and source of legal authority.
Adopted on 1 August 2012 by a National Constitutional Assembly in Mogadishu, Banaadir, the document was formulated by a committee of specialists chaired by attorney and incumbent Speaker of the Federal Parliament, Mohamed Osman Jawari.
The SAF was initially made up of the Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force and the National Security Service.
Midwifery education programs on average last from 12 to 18 months, and operate on a sequential basis.
Landing in 1993, the UN peacekeeping coalition started the two-year United Nations Operation in Somalia II (UNOSOM II) primarily in the south.
Djibouti, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Italy were among the countries that officially extended recognition to Muhammad's administration.
Hormuud Telecom alone grosses about $40 million a year.
By 1988, 265 hectares of a projected 336 hectares had been treated, with 39 range reserve sites and 36 forestry plantation sites established.
In 1332, the Zeila-based King of Adal was slain in a military campaign aimed at halting Abyssinian emperor Amda Seyon I's march toward the city.
The government then relocated to Villa Somalia in the capital from its interim location in Baidoa.
According to the Central Bank of Somalia, the country's GDP per capita  is $226, a slight reduction in real terms from 1990.
With the arrival of Governor Cesare Maria De Vecchi on 15 December 1923, things began to change for that part of Somaliland known as Italian Somaliland.
The highest class enrolment was observed in the northernmost Bari region, and the lowest was observed in the under-populated Ayn region.
Christianity is a minority religion in Somalia, with adherents representing less than 0.1% of the population in 2010 according to the Pew Research Center.
It later participated in the Bandy World Championship 2014 in Irkutsk and Shelekhov in Russia.
The ICU subsequently splintered into more radical groups such as Al-Shabaab, which battled the TFG and its AMISOM allies for control of the region.
Zeila's two-mihrab Masjid al-Qiblatayn dates to the 7th century, and is the oldest mosque in the city.
One has a runway of over 3,047 m; four are between 2,438 m and 3,047 m in length; twenty are 1,524 m to 2,437 m; twenty-four are 914 m to 1,523 m; and six are under 914 m. Major airports in the nation include the Aden Adde International Airport in Mogadishu, the Hargeisa International Airport in Hargeisa, the Kismayo Airport in Kismayo, the Baidoa Airport in Baidoa, and the Bender Qassim International Airport in Bosaso.
Somalia's network of roads is  long.
The greatest range in climate occurs in northern Somalia, where temperatures sometimes surpass  in July on the littoral plains and drop below the freezing point during December in the highlands.
Of these, eight are endemic, one has been introduced by humans, and one is rare or accidental.
In the 16th century, Duarte Barbosa noted that many ships from the Kingdom of Cambaya in modern-day India sailed to Mogadishu with cloth and spices, for which they in return received gold, wax and ivory.
In 2011–2012, a political process providing benchmarks for the establishment of permanent democratic institutions was launched.
A joint communiqué was issued indicating that Somali forces were leading operations.
Houses were built of dressed stone similar to the ones in ancient Egypt.
While the SRSP encouraged private investment on a limited scale, the administration's overall direction was essentially communist.
The main rainy season, referred to as the ''Gu'', lasts from April to June.
According to the Somali Chamber of Commerce and Industry, over six private airline firms also offer commercial flights to both domestic and international locations, including Daallo Airlines, Jubba Airways, African Express Airways, East Africa 540, Central Air and Hajara.
Hassan's Dervish movement had an essentially military character, and the Dervish state was fashioned on the model of a Salihiya brotherhood.
Prior to the outbreak of the civil war in 1991, the roughly 53 state-owned small, medium and large manufacturing firms were foundering, with the ensuing conflict destroying many of the remaining industries.
Among these Islamic scholars is the 14th-century Somali theologian and jurist Uthman bin Ali Zayla'i of Zeila, who wrote the single most authoritative text on the Hanafi school of Islam, consisting of four volumes known as the ''Tabayin al-Haqa’iq li Sharh Kanz al-Daqa’iq''.
By 2013, UNICEF in conjunction with the Somali authorities reported that the prevalence rate among 1- to 14-year-old girls in the autonomous northern Puntland and Somaliland regions had dropped to 25% following a social and religious awareness campaign.
This 16th-century campaign is historically known as the Conquest of Abyssinia (''Futuh al-Habash'').
According to the CIA and the Central Bank of Somalia, despite experiencing civil unrest, Somalia has maintained a healthy informal economy, based mainly on livestock, remittance/money transfer companies and telecommunications.
During the coalition government's brief tenure and one year afterwards, due to the protracted lack of a permanent central authority, the Fund For Peace's Fragile States Index (FSI; formerly known as the Failed States Index) for six consecutive years between 2008 and 2013.
However, Indian merchants continued to trade in the port cities of the Somali peninsula, which was free from Roman interference.
In 1991, the Barre administration was ousted by a coalition of clan-based opposition groups, backed by Ethiopia's then-ruling Derg regime and Libya.
In preparation for the transition, staff within Somalia are receiving training, with over 100 airspace personnel scheduled to be transferred to Mogadishu for management duties.
A government was formed by Abdullahi Issa and Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal with other members of the trusteeship and protectorate governments, with Haji Bashir Ismail Yusuf as President of the Somali National Assembly, Aden Abdullah Osman Daar as President of the Somali Republic, and Abdirashid Ali Shermarke as Prime Minister (later to become President from 1967 to 1969).
According to the Central Bank of Somalia, as the nation embarks on the path of reconstruction, the economy is expected to not only match its pre-civil war levels, but also to accelerate in growth and development due to Somalia's untapped natural resources.
Italy acquired full control of the northeastern, central and southern parts of the area after successfully waging the so-called Campaign of the Sultanates against the ruling Majeerteen Sultanate and Sultanate of Hobyo.
Owing to a lack of confidence in the local currency, the US dollar is widely accepted as a medium of exchange alongside the Somali shilling.
The latter include fish-canning and meat-processing plants in the northern regions, as well as about 25 factories in the Mogadishu area, which manufacture pasta, mineral water, confections, plastic bags, fabric, hides and skins, detergent and soap, aluminium, foam mattresses and pillows, fishing boats, carry out packaging, and stone processing.
These rivers mainly flow southwards, with the Jubba River entering the Indian Ocean at Kismayo.
With a significant improvement in local security, Somali expatriates began returning to the country for investment opportunities.
The postal system is slated to be implemented in each of the country's 18 administrative provinces via a new postal coding and numbering system.
In July 1976, Barre's SRC disbanded itself and established in its place the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP), a one-party government based on scientific socialism and Islamic tenets.
During the Stone Age, the Doian and Hargeisan cultures flourished here.
He also mentioned that the Adal kingdom had its capital in the city, suggesting that the Adal Sultanate with Zeila as its headquarters dates back to at least the 9th or 10th centuries.
A maritime police force was also later formed in the Puntland region, and best management practices, including hiring private armed guards, were adopted by ship owners.
, Kilimanjaro Capital has a stake in the  Amsas-Coriole-Afgoi (ACA) Block, which includes uranium exploration.
The oldest evidence of burial customs in the Horn of Africa comes from cemeteries in Somalia dating back to the 4th millennium BCE.
There is little reliable statistical information on urbanization in Somalia.
The Gerads and the Bari Sultans built impressive palaces and fortresses and had close relations with many different empires in the Near East.
In addition to Somali, Arabic, which is also an Afro-Asiatic tongue, is an official national language in Somalia.
On 20 July 1961 and through a popular referendum, the people of Somalia ratified a new constitution, which was first drafted in 1960.
Basketball is also played in the country.
,  streets are paved and  are unpaved.
He also blamed the international community for its failure to support the government, and said that the speaker of parliament would succeed him in office per the Charter of the Transitional Federal Government.
At first listen, Somali music might be mistaken for the sounds of nearby regions such as Ethiopia, Sudan or the Arabian Peninsula, but it is ultimately recognizable by its own unique tunes and styles.
Wild fauna are found throughout the territory, including the cheetah, lion, giraffe, baboon, civet, serval, elephant, bushpig, gazelle, ibex, kudu, dik-dik, oribi, Somali wild ass, reedbuck and zebra, shrew, rock hyrax, golden mole and antelope.
Strategically located at the mouth of the Bab el Mandeb gateway to the Red Sea and the Suez Canal, the country occupies the tip of a region that, due to its resemblance on the map to a rhinoceros' horn, is commonly referred to as the Horn of Africa.
Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, Mohamed's former Minister of Planning and International Cooperation, was later named permanent Prime Minister.
As a result of Jibrell's lobbying and education efforts, the Puntland government in 2000 prohibited the exportation of charcoal.
As a truce, in March 2009, Somalia's coalition government announced that it would re-implement Shari'a as the nation's official judicial system.
Prominent Somali telecommunications companies include Golis Telecom Group, Hormuud Telecom, Somafone, Nationlink, Netco, Telcom and Somali Telecom Group.
By September 2012, Somali, Kenyan, and Raskamboni forces had managed to capture Al-Shabaab's last major stronghold, the southern port of Kismayo.
Harbi was killed in a plane crash two years later.
In 1999, Horn Relief coordinated a peace march in the northeastern Puntland region of Somalia to put an end to the so-called "charcoal wars".
He soon emerged as "a champion of his country's political and religious freedom, defending it against all Christian invaders".
The Bantus, the largest ethnic minority group in Somalia, are the descendants of slaves who were brought in from southeastern Africa by Arab and Somali traders.
On 17 December 2014, former Premier Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke was reappointed Prime Minister.
From 1971 onwards, a massive tree-planting campaign on a nationwide scale was introduced by the Siad Barre government to halt the advance of thousands of acres of wind-driven sand dunes that threatened to engulf towns, roads and farm land.
According to the Central Bank of Somalia, imports of goods total about $460 million per year, surpassing aggregate imports prior to the start of the civil war in 1991.
The forces of the British Empire operating in Somaliland comprised the three divisions of South African, West African, and East African troops.
The conference ended with a signed agreement calling for the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops in exchange for the cessation of armed confrontation.
The Qu'ranic system, which teaches the greatest number of students relative to other educational sub-sectors, is often the only system accessible to Somalis in nomadic as compared to urban areas.
The internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Somalia is .so.
Financial support for this effort was provided by the autonomous region's government.
They were assisted by Somali forces led by Abdulahi Hassan with Somalis of the Isaaq, Dhulbahante, and Warsangali clans prominently participating.
About 15% of the government's budget is allocated toward scholastic instruction.
IDP settlements were concentrated in south-central Somalia (893,000), followed by the northern Puntland (129,000) and Somaliland (84,000) regions.
Somalia's public healthcare system was largely destroyed during the ensuing civil war.
Due to the legitimacy bestowed on Muhammad by the Djibouti conference, he was subsequently recognized by the international community as the new President of Somalia.
Known as the most stable local, non-formal system of education providing basic religious and moral instruction, their strength rests on community support and their use of locally made and widely available teaching materials.
Additionally, Mohamed Jama has won both world and European titles in K-1 and Thai Boxing.
The official languages of Somalia are Somali and Arabic, both of which belong to the Afroasiatic family.
As had been expected, the allotted ministerial positions were significantly reduced in numbers from 39 to 18.
They continued the tradition of castle-building and seaborne trade established by previous Somali empires.
In this region, relative humidity ranges from about 40% in the mid-afternoon to 85% at night, changing somewhat according to the season.
A  highway connects major cities in the northern part of the country, such as Bosaso, Galkayo and Garowe, with towns in the south.
The collusive agreement among Somali and Arab traders inflated the price of Indian and Chinese cinnamon in North Africa, the Near East, and Europe, and made the cinnamon trade a very profitable revenue generator, especially for the Somali merchants through whose hands large quantities were shipped across sea and land routes.
From July to September is the second dry season, the ''Xagaa'' (pronounced "Hagaa").
Following the massive tsunami of December 2004, there have also emerged allegations that after the outbreak of the Somali Civil War in the late 1980s, Somalia's long, remote shoreline was used as a dump site for the disposal of toxic waste.
During Ramadan, supper is often presented after Tarawih prayers; sometimes up to 11 pm.
By 1978, the Somali troops were ultimately pushed out of the Ogaden.
Fuel shortages caused long lines of cars at petrol stations.
Qu'ranic schools (also known as ''dugsi quran'' or ''mal'aamad quran'') remain the basic system of traditional religious instruction in Somalia.
There are four main seasons around which pastoral and agricultural life revolve, and these are dictated by shifts in the wind patterns.
Kediye officially held the title "Father of the Revolution", and Barre shortly afterwards became the head of the SRC.
The Bosaso Airport Company is slated to develop the airport complex to meet international standards, including a new  runway, main and auxiliary buildings, taxi and apron areas, and security perimeters.
To address these concerns, educational policies are being developed that are aimed at guiding the scholastic process.
Additionally, between the towns of Las Khorey and El Ayo in northern Somalia lies Karinhegane, the site of numerous cave paintings of real and mythical animals.
In 2008, the Puntland government signed a multimillion-dollar deal with Dubai's Lootah Group, a regional industrial group operating in the Middle East and Africa.
By 2009, the CIA estimated that the GDP had grown to $5.731 billion, with a projected real growth rate of 2.6%.
However, conflict continued in the southern and central parts of the country.
Fourteen species are globally threatened.
Parliament was subsequently expanded to 550 seats to accommodate ARS members, which then elected Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, the former ARS chairman, to office.
Following the outbreak of the civil war, many of Somalia's residents left in search of asylum.
Due to Somalia's proximity to the equator, there is not much seasonal variation in its climate.
This prompted an unsuccessful bid by Britain in 1956 to buy back the Somali lands it had turned over.
The Somali Civil Aviation Authority (SOMCAA) is Somalia's national civil aviation authority body.
Northern Somali (or Northern-Central Somali) forms the basis for Standard Somali.
It unites five major Somali companies from the trade, finance, security and telecommunications sectors, following a 2010 joint agreement signed in Istanbul to provide electricity and gas infrastructure in Somalia.
This was despite a plebiscite in which, according to a British colonial commission, almost all of the territory's ethnic Somalis favored joining the newly formed Somali Republic.
Additional members of the Independent Constitutional Commission were also appointed to engage Somali constitutional lawyers, religious scholars and experts in Somali culture over the nation's upcoming new constitution, a key part of the government's Transitional Federal Tasks.
A few autonomous regions, including the Somaliland, Puntland, and Galmudug administrations, emerged in the north.
This will serve to expand the national payments system to include formal cheques, which in turn is expected to reinforce the efficacy of the use of monetary policy in domestic macroeconomic management.
The SRC subsequently renamed the country the Somali Democratic Republic, dissolved the parliament and the Supreme Court, and suspended the constitution.
The number of Italian Somalis began to decline after World War II, with fewer than 10,000 remaining in 1960.
In several of his poems and speeches, Hassan emphasized that the British "have destroyed our religion and made our children their children" and that the Christian Ethiopians in league with the British were bent upon plundering the political and religious freedom of the Somali nation.
Mean daily maximum temperatures range from , except at higher elevations along the eastern seaboard, where the effects of a cold offshore current can be felt.
Of these, the Somali alphabet is the most widely used, and has been the official writing script in Somalia since the Supreme Revolutionary Council formally introduced it in October 1972.
In 2006, Puntland was the second territory in Somalia after Somaliland to introduce free primary schools, with teachers now receiving their salaries from the Puntland administration.
In October 2014, the ministry also relaunched postal delivery from abroad.
In the case of the Bantu, these religious traditions were inherited from their ancestors in Southeast Africa.
At the end of 2008, the group had captured Baidoa but not Mogadishu.
The putsch was spearheaded by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, who at the time commanded the army.
The former Premier Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke resigned the month before following a protracted dispute with President Sharif over a proposed draft constitution.
Exports, which total about $270 million annually, have also surpassed pre-war aggregate export levels.
According to the Central Bank, this inflationary environment is expected to come to an end as soon as the bank assumes full control of monetary policy and replaces the presently circulating currency introduced by the private sector.
Barbosa also highlighted the abundance of meat, wheat, barley, horses, and fruit on the coastal markets, which generated enormous wealth for the merchants.
The squad also takes part in the basketball event at the Pan Arab Games.
Somalia evolved into a major world supplier of uranium, with American, UAE, Italian and Brazilian mineral companies vying for extraction rights.
The government has also since enforced the ban, which has reportedly led to an 80% drop in exports of the product.
In July 1977, the Ogaden War broke out after Barre's government played the national unity card to justify an aggressive incorporation of the predominantly Somali-inhabited Ogaden region of Ethiopia into a Pan-Somali Greater Somalia, along with the rich agricultural lands of south-eastern Ethiopia, infrastructure, and strategically important areas as far north as Djibouti.
Harsh exchange control regulations were introduced to prevent export of foreign currency.
According to a 2005 World Health Organization estimate, about 97.9% of Somalia's women and girls underwent Female genital mutilation, a pre-marital custom mainly endemic to Northeast Africa and parts of the Near East.
According to the Central Bank of Somalia, about 80% of the population are nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists, who keep goats, sheep, camels and cattle.
As with other previously nationalized sectors, informal providers have filled the vacuum and replaced the former government monopoly over healthcare, with access to facilities witnessing a significant increase.
In 1913, during the early part of the colonial era, there were virtually no Christians in the Somali territories, with only about 100–200 followers coming from the schools and orphanages of the few Catholic missions in the British Somaliland protectorate.
Ancient pyramidical structures, mausoleums, ruined cities and stone walls, such as the Wargaade Wall, are evidence of an old civilization that once thrived in the Somali peninsula.
The majority belong to the Sunni branch of Islam and the Shafi'i school of Islamic jurisprudence.
The Somali Olympic Committee has devised a special support program to ensure continued success in future tournaments.
According to the UNHCR, there were around 975,951 registered refugees from the country in neighboring states as of 2016.
There were also no known Catholic missions in Italian Somaliland during the same period.
To solidify its rule, the TFG formed an alliance with the Islamic Courts Union, other members of the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia, and Ahlu Sunna Waljama'a, a moderate Sufi militia.
On 3 August 1940, Italian troops, including Somali colonial units, crossed from Ethiopia to invade British Somaliland, and by 14 August, succeeded in taking Berbera from the British.
Following the outbreak of the civil war in 1991, the task of running schools in Somalia was initially taken up by community education committees established in 94% of the local schools.
Somali is the best documented of the Cushitic languages, with academic studies of it dating from before 1900.
In his speech, which was broadcast on national radio, Yusuf expressed regret at failing to end the country's seventeen-year conflict as his government had been mandated to do.
The national court structure is organized into three tiers: the Constitutional Court, Federal Government level courts and State level courts.
Libertarian economist Peter Leeson attributes this increased economic activity to the Somali customary law (referred to as ''Xeer''), which he suggests provides a stable environment to conduct business in.
Benadir (also known as Coastal Somali) is spoken on the Benadir coast, from Adale to south of Merca including Mogadishu, as well as in the immediate hinterland.
On 8 January 2007, as the Battle of Ras Kamboni raged, TFG President and founder Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, a former colonel in the Somali Army and decorated war hero, entered Mogadishu for the first time since being elected to office.
Many of the opposition groups subsequently began competing for influence in the power vacuum that followed the ouster of Barre's regime.
The bill paves the way for the establishment of a National Communications regulator in the broadcasting and telecommunications sectors.
Of these, almost half live in the northern areas.
Some of the prominent healthcare facilities in the country are East Bardera Mothers and Children's Hospital, Abudwak Maternity and Children's Hospital, Edna Adan Maternity Hospital and West Bardera Maternity Unit.
The government became increasingly authoritarian, and resistance movements, encouraged by Ethiopia, sprang up across the country, eventually leading to the Somali Civil War.
, 37.7% of the nation's population live in towns and cities, with the percentage rapidly increasing.
The modest industrial sector, based on the processing of agricultural products, accounts for 10% of Somalia's GDP.
This left little revenue for Puntland's own security forces and civil service employees, leaving the territory vulnerable to piracy and terrorist attacks.
The source of the cinnamon and other spices is said to have been the best-kept secret of Arab and Somali merchants in their trade with the Roman and Greek world; the Romans and Greeks believed the source to have been the Somali peninsula.
Reptiles endemic to Somalia include the Hughes' Saw-scaled Viper, the Southern Somali Garter Snake, a racer Platyceps messanai, a diadem snake Spalerosophis josephscorteccii, the Somali Sand Boa the Angled Worm Lizard Agamodon anguliceps, a spiny-tailed lizard Uromastyx macfadyeni, Lanza's Agama, a gecko Hemidactylus granchii, the Somali Semaphore Gecko, and a sand lizard Mesalina or Eremias.
The European Green Party followed up these revelations by presenting before the press and the European Parliament in Strasbourg copies of contracts signed by two European companies — the Italian Swiss firm, Achair Partners, and an Italian waste broker, Progresso — and representatives of the then "President" of Somalia, the faction leader Ali Mahdi Mohamed, to accept 10 million tonnes of toxic waste in exchange for $80 million (then about £60 million).
The rock art is in the distinctive Ethiopian-Arabian style, dated to 1,000 to 3,000 BCE.
In the northeast, annual rainfall is less than ; in the central plateaus, it is about .
Unlike the climates of most other countries at this latitude, conditions in Somalia range from arid in the northeastern and central regions to semiarid in the northwest and south.
His assassination was quickly followed by a military coup d'état on 21 October 1969 (the day after his funeral), in which the Somali Army seized power without encountering armed opposition — essentially a bloodless takeover.
Islam was introduced to the area early on from the Arabian peninsula, shortly after the hijra.
The Somaliland and Puntland regional governments maintain their own security and police forces.
The Ministry of Education is officially responsible for education in Somalia, and oversees the nation's primary, secondary, technical and vocational schools, as well as primary and technical teacher training and non-formal education.
Power was instead vied with other faction leaders in the southern half of Somalia and with autonomous subnational entities in the north.
The majority of those who voted 'no' were Somalis who were strongly in favour of joining a united Somalia, as had been proposed by Mahmoud Harbi, Vice President of the Government Council.
In July 2012, three European Union operations were also launched to engage with Somalia: EUTM Somalia, EU Naval Force Somalia Operation Atalanta off the Horn of Africa, and EUCAP Nestor.
Regional medical officials enjoyed some authority, but healthcare was largely centralized.
This educational effort led in 1989 to the so-called "Somalia proposal" and a decision by the Somali government to adhere to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), which established for the first time a worldwide ban on the trade of elephant ivory.
The Puntites traded myrrh, spices, gold, ebony, short-horned cattle, ivory and frankincense with the Egyptians, Phoenicians, Babylonians, Indians, Chinese and Romans through their commercial ports.
Under the auspices of the UN, AU, Arab League and IGAD, a series of additional national reconciliation conferences were subsequently held as part of the peace process.
Over six of these private airline firms offer commercial flights to both domestic and international locations, including Daallo Airlines, Jubba Airways, African Express Airways, East Africa 540, Central Air and Hajara.
In addition to a nationalization program of industry and land, the new regime's foreign policy placed an emphasis on Somalia's traditional and religious links with the Arab world, eventually joining the Arab League (AL) in 1974.
Political scientist Ken Menkhaus argues that evidence suggested that the nation had already attained failed state status by the mid-1980s, while Robert I. Rotberg similarly posits that the state failure had preceded the ouster of the Barre administration.
However, the presence or extent of proven oil reserves in Somalia is uncertain.
By March 2014, the currency had appreciated by almost 60% against the U.S. dollar over the previous 12 months.
Of these modern writers, Nuruddin Farah is probably the most celebrated.
Although Somalia has had no central monetary authority for more than 15 years between the outbreak of the civil war in 1991 and the subsequent re-establishment of the Central Bank of Somalia in 2009, the nation's payment system is fairly advanced primarily due to the widespread existence of private money transfer operators (MTO) that have acted as informal banking networks.
United Nations Security Council Resolution 794 was unanimously passed on 3 December 1992, which approved a coalition of United Nations peacekeepers led by the United States.
As part of the official "Roadmap for the End of Transition", a political process that provided clear benchmarks leading toward the formation of permanent democratic institutions in Somalia, the Transitional Federal Government's interim mandate ended on 20 August 2012.
Giraffes, zebras and incense were exported to the Ming Empire of China, which established Somali merchants as leaders in the commerce between East Asia and the Horn.
There is also one merchant marine.
