Which hold my life in their dead doing might, (b)
In the Indian subcontinent, sonnets have been written in the Assamese, Bengali, Dogri, English, Gujarati, Hindi, Kashmiri, Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Oriya, Sindhi and Urdu languages.
W. H. Auden wrote two sonnet sequences and several other sonnets throughout his career, and widened the range of rhyme-schemes used considerably.
In Slovenia the sonnet became a national verse form.
The Romantics were responsible for a return to (and sometimes a modification of) many of the fixed-form poems used during the 15th and 16th centuries, as well as for the creation of new forms.
I fondly ask; but Patience to prevent (a)
:''remembre vus, Senher, del Rei franzes
Of Helicon, whence she derived is, (d)
In writing sonnets Prešeren was followed by many later poets.
Those lamping eyes will deign sometimes to look,(c)
:''qe vus venc a vezer e laiset Fransa
:''per qe lo Rei Engles e sel d'Espangna
:Mujhe ik baar apnaa jalwaa e rangiin dikhaa bhii jaa.
After the Second World War sonnets remained very popular.
Rilke, who is "widely recognized as one of the most lyrically intense German-language poets," wrote the cycle in a period of three weeks experiencing what he described a "savage creative storm."
Inspired by the news of the death of Wera Ouckama Knoop (1900–1919), a playmate of Rilke's daughter Ruth, he dedicated them as a memorial, or '''' (literally "grave-marker"), to her memory.
The Epilogue to ''Henry V'' is also in the form of a sonnet.
This poem is historically interesting for its information on north Italian perspectives concerning the War of the Sicilian Vespers, the conflict between the Angevins and Aragonese for Sicily.
The term ''sonnet'' is derived from the Italian word ''sonetto'' (from Old Provençal ''sonet'' a little poem, from ''son'' song, from Latin ''sonus'' a sound).
Early twentieth-century American poet Edna St. Vincent Millay also wrote mostly Petrarchan sonnets.
The ''Sonnets to Orpheus'' are a cycle of 55 sonnets written in 1922 by the Bohemian-Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke (1875–1926).
whenas those lily hands''
Petrarch typically used an ''abba, abba'' pattern for the octave, followed by either ''cde, cde'' or ''cdc, cdc'' rhymes in the sestet.
Having previously circulated in manuscripts only, both poets' sonnets were first published in Richard Tottel's ''Songes and Sonnetts,'' better known as Tottel's Miscellany (1557).
:Pas e pardaa kisii ne mere armaanon kii mehfil ko (a)
When English sonnets were introduced by Thomas Wyatt (1503–1542) in the early 16th century, his sonnets and those of his contemporary the Earl of Surrey were chiefly translations from the Italian of Petrarch and the French of Ronsard and others.
VIII, "Morte villana", with two sestets (AABBBA AABBBA) and two quatrains (CDDC CDDC).
After the Second World War the sonnet was the favourite form of Oldřich Vyhlídal.
:''per qe en ren no vus qal''''la'''' duptar;
The sonnet was created by Giacomo da Lentini, head of the Sicilian School under Emperor Frederick II.
He used the Petrarchan rhyme scheme.
The traditional French sonnet form was however significantly modified by Baudelaire, who used 32 different forms of sonnet with non-traditional rhyme patterns to great effect in his ''Les Fleurs du mal''.
Robert Lowell wrote five books of unrhymed "American sonnets", including his Pulitzer Prize-winning volume ''The Dolphin'' (1973).
Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent (a)
Frequently allusive and imagistic, they can also be irreverent and playful.
The sonnet however was little used until the Parnassians brought it back into favor, and the sonnet would subsequently find its most significant practitioner in Charles Baudelaire (1821–1867) .
The form consists of fourteen lines structured as three quatrains and a couplet.
It was first published the following year.
Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide, (b)
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lord of the land and the sea,
Like captives trembling at the victor's sight.
He wrote almost 250 sonnets.
Keats and Shelley also wrote major sonnets; Keats's sonnets used formal and rhetorical patterns inspired partly by Shakespeare, and Shelley innovated radically, creating his own rhyme scheme for the sonnet "Ozymandias".
"Doth God exact day-labor, light denied?"
Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote several major sonnets, often in sprung rhythm, such as "The Windhover", and also several sonnet variants such as the 10-line curtal sonnet "Pied Beauty" and the 24-line caudate sonnet "That Nature is a Heraclitean Fire".
Contemporary word sonnets combine a variation of styles often considered to be mutually exclusive to separate genres, as demonstrated in works such as "An Ode to Mary".
Thousands at his bidding speed (c)
The sole confirmed surviving sonnet in the Occitan language is confidently dated to 1284, and is conserved only in troubadour manuscript ''P'', an Italian chansonnier of 1310, now XLI.42 in the Biblioteca Laurenziana in Florence.
The first known sonnets in English, written by Sir Thomas Wyatt and Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, used the Italian, Petrarchan form, as did sonnets by later English poets, including John Milton, Thomas Gray, William Wordsworth and Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
The advent of the New Formalism movement in the United States has also contributed to contemporary interest in the sonnet.
This example, a sonnet by Zia Fatehabadi taken from his collection ''Meri Tasveer'', is in the usual English (Shakespearean) sonnet rhyme-scheme.
Whom if ye please, I care for other none.
When ye behold that angel's blessed look, (c)
Polish poets usually shape their sonnets according to Italian or French practice.
:Munnawar shamma e mehar o maah se din raat duniyaa thii (c)
The English sonnet is not common.
:''e mainz baros menet de lur paes:
They also serve who only stand and wait."
My true account, lest he returning chide; (b)
There are also two poorly regarded sonnets by the Italian Dante de Maiano.
:Har ik soorat ko maine khoob dekhaa, ghaur se dekhaa (b)
:''ne varran mais, si.ls vorres aiudar.
And read the sorrows of my dying sprite, (b)
In the second half of the 19th century Jaroslav Vrchlický published ''Sonety samotáře'' (''Sonnets of a Solitudinarian'').
It was, however, Sir Philip Sidney's sequence ''Astrophel and Stella'' (1591) that started the English vogue for sonnet sequences.
:''a qi prez es honors tut iorn enansa,
Kollár's magnum opus was planned as an Slavic epic poem as great as Dante's Divine Comedy.
The sonnet was introduced into Polish literature in the 16th century by Jan Kochanowski, Mikołaj Sęp-Szarzyński and Sebastian Grabowiecki.
Later in 1826 Adam Mickiewicz wrote a series known as ''Crimean Sonnets'', which was translated into English by Edna Worthley Underwood.
:are not worth as much, if you wish to help them.
Wordsworth himself wrote hundreds of sonnets, of which amongst the best-known are "Upon Westminster Bridge", "The world is too much with us" and "London, 1802" addressed to Milton; his sonnets were essentially modelled on Milton's.
:to whom honour grows every day closer,
:Mere ahsaas kii ghahraiion mein hai chubhan gham kii (f)
Kollár was Slovak and a supporter of Pan-Slavism, but wrote in Czech, as he disagreed that Slovak should be a separate language.
Later, the ''abba, abba'' pattern became the standard for Italian sonnets.
:but a day will come when they will have some to remember.
Another poet, who wrote many sonnets was Josef Svatopluk Machar.
Other Italian poets of the time, including Dante Alighieri (1265–1321) and Guido Cavalcanti (c. 1250–1300), wrote sonnets, but the most famous early sonneteer was Petrarca (known in English as Petrarch).
Half-rhymed, unrhymed, and even unmetrical sonnets have been very popular since 1950; perhaps the best works in the genre are Seamus Heaney's ''Glanmore Sonnets'' and ''Clearances,'' both of which use half rhymes, and Geoffrey Hill's mid-period sequence "An Apology for the Revival of Christian Architecture in England".
Both the Shakespearean and Petrarchan rhyme schemes were popular throughout this period, as well as many variants.
:that has come to find you and has left France
''** PRONUNCIATION/METER: "Fixed" pronounced as two-syllables, "fix-ed".''
The form is often named after Shakespeare, not because he was the first to write in this form but because he became its most famous practitioner.
John Fuller's 1980 "The Illusionists" and Jon Stallworthy's 1987 "The Nutcracker" used this stanza form, and Vikram Seth's 1986 novel ''The Golden Gate'' is written wholly in Onegin stanzas.
The linked rhymes of his quatrains suggest the linked rhymes of such Italian forms as terza rima.
The Canadian poet Seymour Mayne published a few collections of word sonnets, and is one of the chief innovators of the form.
Ted Berrigan's book, ''The Sonnets'', is an arresting and curious take on the form.
Chapter VII gives sonnet "O voi che per la via", with two sestets (AABAAB AABAAB) and two quatrains (CDDC CDDC), and Ch.
:If this be error and upon me proved, (g)*
Hopkin's poetry was, however, not published until 1918.
Admit impediments, love is not love (b)*
Ondřej Hanus wrote a monograph about Czech Sonnets in the first half of the twentieth century.
While Wyatt introduced the sonnet into English, it was Surrey who developed the rhyme scheme&nbsp;– ''abab cdcd efef gg''&nbsp;– which now characterizes the English sonnet.
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;''Ab dos sos fillz es ab aqel d'Artes;
Another work of his is the sequence ''Sonetje nesreče'' (''Sonnets of Misfortune'').
:I never writ, nor no man ever loved.
In the 20th century Vítězslav Nezval wrote the cycle ''100 sonetů zachránkyni věčného studenta Roberta Davida'' (''One Hundred Sonnets for the Woman who Rescued Perpetual Student Robert David'').
:''jorn de lur vida said n'auran menbransa.
:Hijaabaat e nazar kaa sisilaa tod aur aa bhii jaa (g)
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, (e)
However, sonnets came back strongly with the French Revolution.
It employs the rhyme scheme ''a-b-a-b, a-b-a-b, c-d-c-d-c-d''.
This example, Shakespeare's "Sonnet 116", illustrates the form (with some typical variances one may expect when reading an Elizabethan-age sonnet with modern eyes):
His best known work worldwide is ''Sonetni venec'' (''A Wreath of Sonnets''), which is an example of crown of sonnets.
Slovenian poets write both traditional rhymed sonnets and modern ones, unrhymed, in free verse.
:but they have not dealt a blow with sword or lance
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;''Valenz Senher, rei dels Aragones
He published ''Čtyři knihy sonetů'' (''The Four Books of Sonnets'').
Among them are Milan Jesih and Aleš Debeljak.
:Kuchh is andaaz se dekhaa, kuchh aise taur se dekhaa (b)
The Prologue to ''Romeo and Juliet'' is also a sonnet, as is Romeo and Juliet's first exchange in Act One, Scene Five, lines 104–117, beginning with "If I profane with my unworthiest hand" (104) and ending with "Then move not while my prayer's effect I take" (117).
:in order that you might fear nothing;
''On His Blindness'' by Milton, gives a sense of the Petrarchan rhyme scheme:
Polish sonnets are typically written in either hendecasyllables (5+6 syllables) or Polish alexandrines (7+6 syllables).
The greatest Czech romantic poet, Karel Hynek Mácha also wrote many sonnets.
Sonnets were also  written by Adam Asnyk, Jan Kasprowicz and Leopold Staff.
Azmatullah Khan (1887–1923) is believed to have introduced this format to Urdu literature in the very early part of the 20th century.
An Occitan sonnet, dated to 1321 and assigned to one "William of Almarichi", is found in Jean de Nostredame and cited in Giovanni Mario Crescimbeni's, ''Istoria della volgar poesia''.
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With his two sons and that one of Artois;
In Canada during the last decades of the century, the Confederation Poets and especially Archibald Lampman were known for their sonnets, which were mainly on pastoral themes.
It consists of ''The Prelude'' written in quantitative hexameters, and sonnets.
Leaves, lines, and rhymes seek her to please alone, (e)
Emma Lazarus also published many sonnets.
But bears it out even to the edge of doom: (f)*
:as whom the king of England and that of Spain
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our Lord make yourself a company
This includes the invention of the word sonnet, which are fourteen line poems, with one word per line.
Wilfred Owen's sonnet "Anthem for Doomed Youth" is another sonnet of the early 20th century.
And post o'er land and ocean without rest; (d)
With only a rare exception, the meter is iambic pentameter.
Czech poets use different metres for sonnets, Kollár and Mácha used decasyllables, Vrchlický iambic pentameter, Antonín Sova free verse, and Jiří Orten the Czech alexandrine.
:remember, Lord, the French king
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; (d)***
(The symmetries (''abba'' vs. ''cdc'') of these rhyme schemes have also been rendered in musical structure in the late 20th century composition ''Scrivo in Vento'' inspired by Petrarch's Sonnet 212, ''Beato in Sogno''.)
Its authenticity is dubious.
My soul's long lacked food, my heaven's bliss.
:Magar chaaron taraf thaa ghup andheraa merii hastii mein (d)
It congratulates Robert of Naples on his recent victory.
In Shakespeare's sonnets, however, the volta usually comes in the couplet, and usually summarizes the theme of the poem or introduces a fresh new look at the theme.
And happy lines on which, with starry light, (b)
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Valiant Lord, king of the Aragonese
:Mitaa kar jism, merii rooh ko apnaa liyaa kisne (e)
In English, both the English or Shakespearean sonnet, and the Italian Petrarchan sonnet are traditionally written in iambic pentameter.
Elizabeth Bishop's inverted "Sonnet" was one of her last poems.
She is the author of perhaps the best-known American sonnet, ''The New Colossus''.
Within his bending sickle's compass come, (f)*
In the 17th century, the sonnet was adapted to other purposes, with John Donne and George Herbert writing religious sonnets (see John Donne's Holy Sonnets), and John Milton using the sonnet as a general meditative poem.
The other renowned Urdu poets who wrote sonnets were Akhtar Junagarhi, Akhtar Sheerani, Noon Meem Rashid, Mehr Lal Soni Zia Fatehabadi, Salaam Machhalishahari and Wazir Agha.
''*** RHYME/METER: Feminine-rhyme-ending, eleven-syllable alternative.''
And that one talent which is death to hide, (b)
Love's not time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks (e)
This flexibility was extended even further in the 20th century.
Let me not to the marriage of true minds (a)
It is the star to every wand'ring bark, (c)**
The third quatrain generally introduces an unexpected sharp thematic or imagistic "turn", the volta.
:Dil e majboor ko majrooh e ulfat kar diyaa kisne (e)
Even in sonnets that don't strictly follow the problem/resolution structure, the ninth line still often marks a "turn" by signaling a change in the tone, mood, or stance of the poem.
To serve therewith my Maker, and present (a)
Spaniard Federico García Lorca also wrote sonnets.
whenas those lily hands, (a)
For the sestet there were two different possibilities: ''cde, cde'' and ''cdc, cdc''.
:Bahut dhoondaa kiyaa gulshan mein, veeraane mein, bastii mein (d)
''* PRONUNCIATION/RHYME: Note changes in pronunciation since composition.''
Among the major poets of the early Modernist period, Robert Frost, Edna St. Vincent Millay and E. E. Cummings all used the sonnet regularly.
This example is taken from ''Amoretti'':
Whose worth's unknown although his height be taken.
:and many barons have left their country:
bathed in the sacred brook (c)
Either man's work or his own gifts; who best (d)
:that one who would appear to lose might win.
Other fine examples were written by Michelangelo.
The metre for sonnets in Slovenian poetry is iambic pentameter with feminine rhymes, based both on the Italian endecasillabo and German iambic pentameter.
The next two decades saw sonnet sequences by William Shakespeare, Edmund Spenser, Michael Drayton, Samuel Daniel, Fulke Greville, William Drummond of Hawthornden, and many others.
:Ghubaar e aah se de kar jilaa aainaa e dil ko (a)
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;''Nostre Senhier faccia a vus compagna
Which alters when it alteration finds, (a)
:''tals quida hom qe perda qe gazaingna.
Shall handle you, and hold in love's soft bands, (a)
By the thirteenth century it signified a poem of fourteen lines that follows a strict rhyme scheme and specific structure.
A variant on the English form is the Spenserian sonnet, named after Edmund Spenser (c.1552–1599), in which the rhyme scheme is ''abab, bcbc, cdcd, ee''.
Peter III and the Aragonese cause was popular in northern Italy at the time and Paolo's sonnet is a celebration of his victory over the Angevins and Capetians in the Aragonese Crusade:
Other modern poets, including Don Paterson, Joan Brossa, Paul Muldoon used the form.
The 1990s saw something of a formalist revival, however, and several traditional sonnets have been written in the past decade.
Typically, the ninth line initiates what is called the "turn", or "volta", which signals the move from proposition to resolution.
:Nazar aaii na woh soorat, mujhe jiskii tamanaa thii (c)
Or bends with the remover to remove.
Urdu poets, also influenced by English and other European poets, took to writing sonnets in the Urdu language rather late.
Guittone d'Arezzo rediscovered it and brought it to Tuscany where he adapted it to his language when he founded the Neo-Sicilian School (1235–1294).
First, the octave (two quatrains), forms the "proposition", which describes a "problem", or "question", followed by a sestet (two tercets), which proposes a "resolution".
O no, it is an ever fixèd mark (c)**
By the end of the 19th century, the sonnet had been adapted into a general-purpose form of great flexibility.
Wendy Cope's poem "Stress" is a sonnet.
When I consider how my light is spent (a)
The greatest Slovenian poet, France Prešeren, wrote many sonnets.
Most Sonnets in Dante's ''La Vita Nuova'' are Petrarchan.
Sonnets were written throughout the 19th century, but, apart from Elizabeth Barrett Browning's ''Sonnets from the Portuguese'' and the sonnets of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, there were few very successful traditional sonnets.
That murmur, soon replies, "God doth not need (c)
The number of poems increased in subsequent editions and came up to 645.
These sonnets were all essentially inspired by the Petrarchan tradition, and generally treat of the poet's love for some woman, with the exception of Shakespeare's sequence of 154 sonnets.
The fashion for the sonnet went out with the Restoration, and hardly any sonnets were written between 1670 and Wordsworth's time.
