Liston failed to answer the bell for the seventh round, and Ali was declared the winner by technical knockout.
After two rounds, Wilson had taken enough.
Liston's handlers secretly paid sparring partner Amos Lincoln an extra $100 to take it easy on him.
It was the first time since 1919—when Jack Dempsey defeated Jess Willard—that a World Heavyweight Champion had quit on his stool.
He said it was taught to him by comedian and film actor Stepin Fetchit, who learned it from Jack Johnson.
The second round saw Liston continue to pursue Ali.
The story speculates that Liston threw the Ali match for the good of society.
Against Williams, Liston showed durability, power and skill, nullifying Williams' best work before stopping him in the third round.
But others contend that he wasn't the same Liston.
He was paroled after serving six months of a nine-month sentence and prohibited from boxing during 1957.
Unfortunately for  Martin, his career ended after that fight because of a detached retina he suffered during the bout.
After the second loss to Ali, Liston stayed out of the ring for more than a year.
Subsequently, Liston spent some months in Denver where a Catholic priest who acted as his spiritual adviser attempted to help bring his drinking under control.
Liston won by a seventh-round technical knockout and seemed on the verge of making a comeback to the big time.
Patterson and Liston had a rematch clause in their contract.
On May 7, backers of the rematch ended the court battle by pulling the fight out of Boston.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band''.
Hall of Fame announcer Don Dunphy said, "Here was a guy who was in prison and the guards used to beat him over the head with clubs and couldn't knock him down."
He then left the fighters to go over to McDonough.
"The month before he died, some guy ran into Sonny while he was making a left turn.
Some claim Liston was murdered.
He said he could not hear McDonough, who did not have a microphone.
Also, McDonough did not bang on the canvas or motion a number count with his fingers.
The NAACP had urged Patterson not to fight Liston, fearing that a Liston victory would hurt the civil rights movement.
Numerous fans booed and started yelling, "Fix!"
I want to prove to the world there's dirty work afoot.'
Liston never complained about prison, saying he was guaranteed three meals every day.
Leading up to the fight, Liston was an 8-5 betting favorite, though many picked Patterson to win.
The only ones who had been willing to put up the necessary money for him to turn professional were close to underworld figures, and Liston supplemented his income by working for racketeers as an intimidator-enforcer.
Though not particularly tall for a heavyweight at , he had an exceptionally powerful physique and disproportionate reach at  Liston's fists measured  around, the largest of any heavyweight champion.
In his sixth bout, he faced John Summerlin (18-1-2) on national television and won by an eight-round decision.
Liston claimed the officer used racial slurs.
Liston angrily responded by questioning whether Dempsey's failure to serve in World War I qualified him to moralize.
Patterson finally signed to meet Liston for the world title on September 25, 1962, in Comiskey Park in Chicago, Illinois.
He rounded out the year by stopping Nino Valdez and Willi Besmanoff.
Walcott then rushed back to the fighters, who had resumed boxing, and stopped the fight—awarding Ali a first-round knockout victory.
Hall of Fame matchmaker Teddy Brenner also disputed the shoulder injury, claiming he saw Liston use the same arm to throw a chair in his dressing room after the match.
Midway through the first round, Liston threw a left jab and Ali went over it with a fast right, knocking the former champion down.
It was the first time in his career that Liston had been cut.
Referee Jersey Joe Walcott, a former World Heavyweight Champion himself, had a hard time getting Ali to go to a neutral corner.
Liston played a fist fighter in the 1965 film ''Harlow'', made a cameo appearance in the 1968 film ''Head'', which starred The Monkees, and played the part of The Farmer in the 1970 film ''Moonfire'', which starred Richard Egan and Charles Napier.
Liston biographer Paul Gallender claims that Liston fathered several children, though none with his wife.
That got him killed.
Liston also got a new manager in 1958: Joseph "Pep" Barone, who was a front man for mobsters Frankie Carbo and Frank "Blinky" Palermo.
In the third round, Marshall nailed Liston—reportedly while he was laughing—and broke his jaw.
Liston said he quit because of a shoulder injury.
Philadelphia wanted nothing to do with him."
Controversy followed with claims he had been drinking heavily the night before the fight.
"Nat Fleischer editor of ''The Ring'' was sitting beside McDonough and he was waving his hands, too, saying it was over."
His headstone bears two words: '''''A Man'''''.
"When I signed to fight him (in December 1970) he'd been dead for a week", Chuvalo stated years later.
The challenger, his arms held high in surrender, was demanding that the fight be stopped and Dundee, fearing the fight might indeed be halted, gave his charge a one-word order: "Run!"
Strict interpretation of the knockdown/count rule states it is the referee's count and not the timekeeper's that is the official count.
By the sixth round, Ali's sight had cleared, and a clearly enraged Ali fought a blisteringly aggressive round landing combinations of punches at all angles seemingly at will.
He was more angry about that shot than he was about the car wreck.
Sonny was the second youngest child.
"The public is not with me.
After he won the title, Liston relocated to Denver permanently, saying, "I'd rather be a lamppost in Denver than the mayor of Philadelphia."
As Liston pursued his target Ali retreated away, using his foot speed to slip away into open space in the ring, largely circling to the left and away from the threat of a Liston left hook.
He had a whiplash, so they took him to the hospital", said boxing trainer Johnny Tocco.
Following an investigation, Las Vegas police concluded that there were no signs of foul play and declared Liston's death a heroin overdose.
He then outpointed Julius Griffin, winner of the New York Golden Gloves Tournament of Champions, to capture the Intercity Golden Gloves Championship on March 26.
World Light Heavyweight Champion José Torres said, "It was a perfect punch."
Banker said, "Sheriff Ralph Lamb told me, 'Tell your pal Sonny to stay away from the West Side because we're going to bust the drug dealers.'"
Ali initially stood over his fallen opponent, gesturing and yelling at him, "Get up and fight, sucker!"
On May 5, 1956, a policeman confronted Liston and a friend about a cab parked near Liston's home.
Before his bout with Liston, Muhammad Ali consulted Machen and was advised that the key to success was to make Liston lose his temper.
The toxicology report said his body was too decomposed for the tests to be conclusive.
And I said, 'whoa, whoa, back up baby.
When Patterson met with the president in January 1962, Kennedy suggested that Patterson avoid Liston, citing Justice Department concerns over Liston's ties to organized crime.
At this time, the head coach of the St. Louis Golden Gloves team, Tony Anderson, stated that Liston was the strongest fighter he had ever seen.
Tocco said that the living room furniture was in disarray, but the house did not yet smell of death.
"Better get me out of this ring, he is going to kill me!"
Dave Anderson of the ''New York Times'' said Liston "looked awful" in his last workout before the fight.
America's first look at Liston since the Ali rematch was when he fought fifth–ranked Henry Clark in a nationally broadcast bout in July 1968.
This victory is regarded by some as Liston's most impressive performance.
He said they found Sonny lying on his bed with a needle sticking out of his arm.
The victim sought out the executioner."
On January 1, Liston's wife called Johnny Tocco and said she hadn't heard from her husband in three days and was worried.
After Liston arose, Walcott wiped off his gloves.
Liston's physique was artificially enhanced with towels under his robe when he entered the ring.
Inter-Continental said local veteran Sam Silverman was the promoter.
According to Liston's trainer, Willie Reddish, Liston cancelled a planned tour to Africa in 1963 because he refused to get the required inoculations.
He returned with four consecutive knockout victories in Sweden between July 1966 and April 1967, all four co-promoted by former World Heavyweight Champion Ingemar Johansson.
Many people who knew Liston insisted that he was afraid of needles and never would have used heroin.
But as it approached, there were fears that the promoters were tied to organized crime and Massachusetts officials, most notably Suffolk County District Attorney Garrett Byrne, began to have second thoughts.
Liston, with a 25-pound weight advantage ( to ), knocked out Patterson at 2:06 of the first round, putting him down for the count with a powerful left hook to the jaw.
Liston made his professional debut on September 2, 1953, knocking out Don Smith in the first round in St. Louis, where he fought his first five bouts.
Many in attendance did not see Ali deliver the punch.
Tobe and Helen had 12 children together.
"I didn't know what the heck was going on", Angelo Dundee, Ali's trainer, recalled on an NBC special 25 years later.
Liston became the No.
Louis Globe-Democrat'' reported that he was 22.
Liston trained hard for the rematch, which was scheduled to take place November 13, 1964, in Boston.
McDonough, however, claimed Walcott was looking at the crowd and never at him.
His father, Tobe Liston, was in his mid-40s when he and his wife, Helen Baskin, who was almost 30 years younger than Tobe, moved to Arkansas from Mississippi in 1916.
and he was pointing at some little bandage over the needle mark in his arm.
Geraldine called Sonny's attorney and his doctor, but did not notify the police until two to three hours later.
He apparently was at the dealers' house shortly before they got busted.
Felix later said Ali was seconds from being disqualified.
Liston suffered his first defeat in his eighth fight on September 7, 1954, losing against Marty Marshall, a journeyman with an awkward style.
Liston turned to crime and led a gang of toughs who committed muggings and armed robberies.
Though the opening round saw Ali largely on the defensive, it was soon established that Ali could reverse roles quickly and take to the offensive with a remarkably fast series of combinations delivered to Liston's head.
Rogin discounted speculation that Patterson had thrown the fight, writing: "The genesis of all this wide-eyed theorizing and downright baloney was the fact that many spectators failed to see the knockout blows."
''The Ring'' magazine ranked Liston as the seventh-greatest heavyweight of all time.
Because of that, the dealers may have thought Sonny ratted on them and they shot him with a hot dose as retribution.
And Tex Maule of ''Sports Illustrated'' wrote, "The blow had so much force it lifted Liston's left foot, upon which most of his weight was resting, well off the canvas."
When he tried to muscle in for a bigger share of the action, Conrad surmised that his employers got him very drunk, took him home, and stuck him with a needle.
Rogin wrote that Patterson backers expected him to "go inside on Liston, fire away and then run like a thief in the night.
"There is power in both his left and his right, even though the fists move with the languor of motoring royalty or as if passing through a gaseous envelope more dense than air."
One month later, Liston was accused of impersonating a police officer by using a flashlight to wave down a female motorist in Fairmount Park, although all charges were later dropped.
He is a relatively elementary, one-track fighter."
The promoters needed a new location quickly, whatever the size, to rescue their closed circuit television commitment around the country.
Liston signed a contract in September 1953, exclaiming: "Whatever you tell me to do, I'll do."
Dr. Alexander Robbins, chief physician for the Miami Beach Boxing Commission, diagnosed Liston with a torn tendon in his left shoulder.
In the novel, Liston not only drinks but also pops pills and works as a sometime enforcer for a heroin ring in Las Vegas.
Arthur Daley of the ''New York Times'' wrote that Liston's handlers knew he "didn't have it anymore."
I know it", Liston said afterward.
His family, but not Sonny Liston, can be found in the 1930 census, and in the 1940 census he was listed as 10 years old.
The bout would need to be delayed by six months.
''Sports Illustrated'' predicted a Patterson victory in 15 rounds, stating: "Sonny has neither Floyd's speed nor the versatility of his attack.
So I get him down, I get the sponge and I pour the water into his eyes trying to cleanse whatever's there, but before I did that I put my pinkie in his eye and I put it into my eye.
In 1958, Liston returned to boxing.
He particularly resented a 1961 arrest by a black patrolman for loitering, claiming to have merely been signing autographs and chatting with fans outside a drug store.
In an Associated Press poll, 64 of 102 reporters picked Patterson.
He also wrote that Liston's win over Patterson proved that "in a fair fight between good and evil, evil must win."
Liston captured the Chicago Golden Gloves Tournament of Champions on March 6, 1953, with a victory over 1952 Olympic Heavyweight Champion Ed Sanders.
"The only thing my old man ever gave me was a beating", Liston said.
Walcott never did pick up the count.
"He was afraid of needles", echoed Father Edward Murphy.
Liston's noticeably more muscular left arm, crushing left jab and powerful left hook lent credence to the widely held belief that he was left-handed but utilized an orthodox stance.
On winning the Heavyweight Championship of the World, Liston had a speech prepared for the crowd that friends had assured him would meet him at the Philadelphia airport.
"He said: 'Look what they did!'
He won eight fights that year, six by knockout.
Skeptics called the knockout blow "the phantom punch."
Helen had one child before she married Tobe, and Tobe had 13 children with his first wife.
Sergeant Dennis Caputo of the Clark County Sheriff's Department was one of the first officers on the scene.
It was the third-fastest knockout in a world heavyweight title fight and the first time the champion had been knocked out in round one.
There was something caustic in both eyes."
At one point, Ali was wiping his eyes with his right hand while extending his left arm—"like a drunk leaning on a lamppost" Bert Sugar wrote—to keep Liston at bay.
Sonny thrashed the pecans from his brother-in-law's tree and sold them in Forrest City.
Liston's wife also reported that her husband would refuse basic medical care for common colds because of his dislike of needles.
Liston was caught in January 1950.
Many in the small crowd had not even settled in their seats when the fight was stopped.
"He said, 'cut the gloves off.
Some believe the police covered up what happened.
During an era when white journalists still described black sportsmen in stereotypes, Liston had long been a target of racially charged slurs; he was called a "gorilla" and "a jungle beast" in print.
Liston won fourteen consecutive bouts, thirteen by knockout, before fighting third-ranked Leotis Martin in December 1969.
1 contender in 1960, but the handlers of World Heavyweight Champion Floyd Patterson refused to give him a shot at the title because of Liston's links to organized crime.
Many did not see the punch land and some of those who did see it land, didn't think it was powerful enough to knock Liston out.
Writer Jack McKinney said, "I watched Sonny.
The previous month, Schreibauer had won a bronze medal in the European Championships.
Liston assaulted the officer, breaking his knee and gashing his face.
He rolled over, got to his right knee and then fell on his back again.
However, Machen's taunting and his spoiling tactics of dodging and grappling—at one point almost heaving Liston over the ropes—so alienated the audience that Liston received unaccustomed support from the crowd.
Ali called it "the anchor punch."
C'mon now, this is for the title, this is the big apple.
Ali later said in round five he could only see a faint shadow of Liston during most of the round, but by circling and moving frantically he managed to avoid Liston and somehow survive.
He gave his age as 20, while the ''St.
(3) The mob promised Liston some money to throw the second Ali fight, but they never paid him.
Many theorized that a substance used on Liston's cuts by Joe Pollino, his cutman, may have inadvertently caused the irritation.
Ali confessed later he had been hurt by the punch, but Liston was unable to press his advantage home.
Some found it suspicious that authorities could not locate any drug paraphernalia that Liston presumably would have needed to inject the fatal dose, such as a spoon to cook the heroin or a tourniquet to wrap around his arm.
The fight ranks as one of the shortest heavyweight title bouts in history.
Walcott never began a count in the ring because of Ali's non-compliance and his physical struggle with getting Ali to go to that neutral corner.
Helen Baskin moved to St. Louis, Missouri, with some of her children, leaving Liston—aged around 13, according to his later reckonings—in Arkansas with his father.
Patterson's mistake was that he "did not punch enough and frequently tried to clinch with Liston....In these feckless clinches he only managed to tie up one of Liston's arms.
Three days before the fight, Ali needed emergency surgery for a strangulated hernia.
Liston returned to the United States and won seven fights, all by knockout, in 1968.
Liston went down at 1:44, got up at 1:56, and Walcott stopped the fight at 2:12.
For confetti we can use torn-up arrest warrants."
A clearly angered Liston rallied at the end of the round, as Ali seemed tired, and delivered punishing shots to Ali's body.
Liston decked Martin with a left hook in the fourth round and dominated most of the fight, but Martin came back and knocked Liston out cold in the ninth round.
One of the victories was over Amos Johnson, who had recently defeated British champion Henry Cooper.
"The timekeeper was waving both hands and saying, 'I counted him out—the fight is over,'" Walcott said after the fight.
"He would do everything to avoid taking shots."
Elizabeth Bear wrote the short story "Sonny Liston Takes the Fall", published in ''The Del Rey Book of Science Fiction and Fantasy'' in 2008.
Early in his career, Liston faced capable opponents.
There is no record of Liston's birth.
The bout was stopped after the ninth round due to cuts over both of Wepner's eyes.
Tocco called the police, and they broke into the house.
Although widely regarded as unbeatable, Liston lost the title in 1964 to 7–1 underdog Muhammad Ali.
Many African-Americans disdained Liston.
Liston also appears in the sequel, ''Blood's a Rover''.
Roy Harris, who had gone 13 rounds with Floyd Patterson in a title match, was crushed in one round by Liston.
A stoic Liston finished the fight but lost by an eight-round split decision.
The official time of the stoppage was announced as 1:00 into the first round, which was wrong.
Liston won his final fight, a tough match against future world title challenger Chuck Wepner in June 1970.
Some found it hard to believe that the punch could have floored a man like Liston.
He became known to the St. Louis police as the "Yellow Shirt Bandit", due to the shirt he wore during robberies.
Also, scar tissue, possibly from needle marks, was found in the bend of Liston's left elbow.
The fight lasted four seconds longer than the first one.
Liston made his second title defense on February 25, 1964, in Miami Beach, Florida against Cassius Clay (soon to change his name to Muhammad Ali).
Liston would later employ McCarter as a sparring partner.
However, there were again rumors of alcohol abuse in training.
The year 1959 was a banner one for Liston: after knocking out contender Mike DeJohn in six rounds, he faced Cleveland Williams, a fast-handed fighter who was billed as the hardest-hitting heavyweight in the world.
Biographer Wilfrid Sheed wrote in his book, ''Muhammad Ali: A Portrait in Words and Photographs'', that Ali's protests were heard by ringside members of the Nation of Islam who initially suspected Dundee had blinded his fighter and that the trainer deliberately wiped his own eyes with the corner sponge to demonstrate to Ali's approaching bodyguards that he had not intentionally blinded him.
And the Muslims were coming up.
"There was nothing Sonny feared more than a needle.
Civic leaders were also reluctant, worrying that Liston's unsavory character would set a bad example to youth.
