This kept the settlement situation in disarray.
Today, most are employed in industry and tourism, but the dress and folklore of the ''vaquero'' is still important.
A number of Yaquis, Seris and Guaimas on and around the Tetakawi Hill, making a living from fishing.
The area is home to sea lions and a type of bat that fishes.
However, for the rest of the century, Gándara and succeeding governors would support a centralized government, leading to political instability in the state.
Development of the educational system has lowered the rates of illiteracy.
Among their most important rituals is one called the Vikita, which occurs in July, with dances and song to encourage rainfall during the area’s short rainy season.
It extends into the far upper part of the Gulf of California.
Another area where there have been gains are municipalities with industry, such as in Hermosillo and along the United States border.
Sonora's border with the United States is  long, and runs through desert and mountains, from the western Chihuahuan Desert, through an area of grasslands and oak mountain areas to the Sonoran Desert west of Nogales.
From 2003 to 2009 the number of hotels in the state has increased from 321 to 410 and the number of rooms from 13,226 to 15,806, over 20%.
It is the largest island of Mexico, measuring .
The Mexican government stated the reason for the maps was to help Mexican avoid dangerous areas that have caused deaths from the desert's heat.
There is also an aquarium called the Acuario de Cer-Mar, which is a research center open to the public.
The Casas Grandes tradition in Sonora was an extension of the Río Sonora tradition based in the modern state of Chihuahua, which exterted its influence down to parts of the Sonoran coast.
United States tourists mostly visit Puerto Peñasco, San Carlos and Navajoa and prefer areas they consider friendly, with no “anti-U.S.” sentiment.
They were followed by the ''Siete Leyes Constitutionales'' ("Seven Constitutional Laws"), which remained in effect until 1837.
This tradition has a distinctive ceramic complex.
They still practice a number of traditional rituals such as cremation upon death so that the soul can pass on to the afterlife without the body encumbering it.
Many of these lodgings are filled with people who cannot cross the border.
Eighty-eight percent of all water taken from above and below the surface is used for agriculture.
The most important museums in the state are the Museo de Sonora, the Museo Costumbrista de Sonora, Museo Étnico de los Yaquis, Museo Étnico de los Seris, Museo de la Lucha Obrera, Museo de la Casa del General and the Museo del Niño la Burbuja, which are visited by over 180,000 people per year.
These plains are between  and  wide, wedged between the Sierra Madre and the Gulf of California, which began to form between 5.5 and 6 million years ago.
The state recommends this route in the fall when the chili pepper and peanut harvest occurs.
Most moisture comes in from the Pacific Ocean and the tropics, which is pushed against the Sierra Madre.
In the 1950s, with the widespread use of radio, the popularity of the genre rose as the ''norteño'' music of Nuevo León, Durango and other states were heard.
In addition to livestock, mining is another traditional element of Sonora’s economy, beginning with a major find near the city of Álamos.
As moist air masses move inland from the Pacific and the tropics and are forced against the mountains, they cool and this leads to precipitation, mostly rain but occasional snows in the highest regions.
In hot and arid or semi arid lands, evaporation vastly exceeds precipitation.
The Yaqui resistance continued into the 20th century, with the expulsions reaching a peak between 1904 and 1908, by which time about one quarter of this population had been deported.
Since the 1990s, it has experienced large-scale development along its  of beaches, which have calm seas.
This has led to a surge in hotel infrastructure, especially in Puerto Peñasco.
People on both sides of the wall have mixed feelings about it.
The state’s tourism suffered in 2008 and 2009, mostly due to the economic downturn and the AHN1 influenza crisis, which brought hotel occupancy rates down about 30%.
To enhance tourism in areas away from the primary beaches, the state of Sonora has set up several tourist routes for promotion as well as gained "Pueblo Mágico" status for one of its smaller cities.
Most of the population along this border lives on the Sonoran side, many of which have moved here for the opportunities created by the maquiladoras and other businesses.
In 1953, students and professors were given more say in operations.
The Seris call themselves the Comcáac, which means “the people” in the Seri language.
Many migrants now come to the Arizona border between Agua Prieta and Nogales, with Naco as one of the preferred routes for "coyotes" (also called "polleros" or "enganchadores") or smugglers who offer to take migrants across.
Agriculture is the most important economic activity in the state, mostly with the production of grains.
Its border with the United States is  long.
In various locations, a basket variety called “caritas" are made in a globe shape and have a lid.
If these rains fail, the area suffers.
In 2011, remains of Gomphothere were found; the evidence suggests that humans did in fact kill two of them here.
These airports connect the state with 112 other locations both in Mexico and abroad.
This group has lost its traditional rituals, and the language died out in the 1950s.
After this, the Jesuits began to move into Pima and Tohono O'odham territories.
No empire or other system was present for the Spaniards to co-opt for domination purposes.
The state's geography is divided into three regions created by the rise of the Sierra Madre Occidental mountains and the separation of the Baja California Peninsula, with all three running roughly north-south.
The Yaqui and Mayo languages are mutually intelligible, and the two peoples are believed to have been united until relatively recently.
In Aconchi, palm fronds are used to make hats and baskets called guaris, used for food storage.
With population of the Mexican  split half indigenous and half Spanish, about one-quarter of the indigenous population lived in Sonora alone.
Many plants are rainfall sensitive, with most trees and shrubs growing leaves and flowers just before or during the rainy season, then drop their leaves afterwards.
The busiest domestic travel times are Holy Week, summer and Christmas, with the overall busiest months being January, April, July, August and December.
This word roughly means “I don’t know” or “I don’t understand.” The traditional territory of this ethnicity is known as the Pimería, and it is divided into two regions: the Pimería Alta and the Pimería Baja.
It ranks second in four-lane highways, surpassed only by Chihuahua.
Discontent with this one-party system became prominent in the northern states of Mexico, including Sonora.
Most visit to relax and experience another culture.
Over the following decades, they moved into growing communities such as Magdalena and Cananea.
They end even earlier in the extreme south of the state as the storm systems retreat, with the dry season lasting eight or nine months in this part of the state.
This influence extends into popular music.
Baskets made of reeds are made in Ures along with hats.
One consequence of this was alcoholism among the native peoples.
In contrast to bands from other states, which were duets, Sonoran bands were trios before becoming quartets and quintets with the addition of more musical instruments.
Some of the available activities include jet skiing, boating, sailing, sports fishing, scuba diving and snorkeling.
There is some small scale farming done in the state, especially in the highlands areas, growing corn and other staples mostly for auto consumption, highly dependent on the rainy season in the late summer as there is no irrigation.
Most spend only the day.
By the end of the 20th century, these enterprises had a large influence on the expansion and modernization of the border area, including Sonora.
However, those municipalities with none of these economic advantages do not see population growth and some see population decreases.
Shortly after this, the state's current constitution was written in 1871, and its capital was permanently moved to Hermosillo.
Illegal crossings taking place through tunnels, hidden cars and trucks or most commonly, simply passing through a gap in the fence, especially in the more remote areas.
The route begins in the mountains of Álamos and ends at the beaches of Huatabampo.
Sonora is one of Mexico’s leading fish producing states, with 70% of Mexico’s total coming from the Pacific coast, including the Gulf of California.
These include the churches and missions in Caborca, Pitiquito, Oquitoa, Átil, Tubutama, Imuris, Cucurpe and Magdalena.
El Desemboque is a small Seri village with beaches located  northwest of Hermosillo, just south of Puerto Libertad.
The French were not defeated in the state until the Battle of Llanos de Ures in 1866 by Pesqueria, Jesús García Morales and Ángel Martínez.
Bahía Kino is named after the Jesuit missionary, who visited the area in the 17th century.
They also did not intermarry with the newcomers, isolating themselves.
Another theory states that Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and his companions, who had wrecked off the Florida coast and made their way across the continent, were forced to cross the arid state from north to south, carrying an image of ''Nuestra Señora de las Angustias'' ("Our Lady of Anguish") on a cloth.
Some were returned to China but many others were forced to enter the United States through the border with Sonora, even though Chinese exclusion laws were still in effect there.
Machaca, or ''carne seca'', is still enjoyed, although refrigeration has eliminated the need to dry meat.
Sonoran governor Rodolfo Elias Calles was responsible for the expulsion of most Chinese-Mexican families into United States territory.
Encroachment on this land led to uprisings and guerilla warfare by the Yaquis after 1887.
The area is home to a very large number of marine species.
They would remain as such through the rest of the colonial period until 1823.
Like in other parts of Mexico, Sonoran cuisine is basically a mixture of indigenous and Spanish influences.
The Orquesta Filharmonica de Sonora (Sonora Philharmonic Orchestra) is a state-sponsored institution which offers concerts in all of the entity’s major cities.
Indigenous response was a mixture of accommodation and violence, as different strategies were employed by different groups at different times.
A third theory, written by Father Cristóbal de Cañas in 1730, states that the name comes from the word for a natural water well, ''sonot'', which the Spaniards eventually modified to "''Sonora''".
During much of the prehistoric period, the environmental conditions were less severe than they are today, with similar but more dense vegetation spread over a wider area.
There are also rocky beaches along with those with fine sand.
Evidence of human existence in the state dates back over 10,000 years, with some of the best-known remains at the San Dieguito Complex in the El Pinacate Desert.
Basketmaking is still widely practiced in the state, with hand made wares available in local markets such as in Bahía Kino, Punta Chueca and El Desemboque.
The initial attraction of Sonora for the Spaniards was its fertile farmlands along the river valleys and its position as part of a corridor linking the central Mexican highlands around Mexico City up the Pacific coast and on into Arizona and points north.
One example is the Hospedaje Santa María, which is a run-down, two-story building.
Many of these people are known as skilled carpenters, making furniture as well as delicate figures of wood.
Herbal medicine is still widely practiced, especially in rural areas.
Habitats and vegetation vary greatly depending on elevation and rainfall.
These were now Mexicans rather than Spaniards, and later in the century, it was a major draw for North Americans.
The Isla Tiburón is  from Bahia Kino in the Gulf of California.
Those made near the ocean often have marine designs.
The most popular musical styles of the area is ''norteño'' ("northern"), which includes Banda.
This along with other events in the country eventually led to the end of the one-party system when Vicente Fox was elected president in 2000.
These end by March or April when the fronts are no longer strong enough to reach this far south.
The name Pima was given to them by the Spaniards because the word ''pima'' would be said in response to most questions asked to them in Spanish.
The four most important destinations in the state for leisure and business travelers include Nogales, Hermosillo, Guaymas and Puerto Peñasco, with beach destinations preferred by most leisure travelers.
El Himalaya Beach is located forty km from Guaymas.
In this year, they were granted an ejido.
The reserve has a site museum, which displays the area history from its formation to the present.
Major agricultural reform was begun in the 1940s in the Mayo River area, when the delta was cleared of natural vegetation and made into farmland.
Yaquis in Arizona travel south to the Yaqui River area for festival, especially Holy Week, and Yaquis travel north to Arizona for cultural reasons as well.
The major commercial port is in Guaymas, with smaller ones, mostly for tourism located in San Carlos, Puerto Peñasco and Bahia Kino.
''Los Algodones'' ("The Cottons") is named for its dunes of white sand, which can be compared to cotton balls.
Huatabampito is an area of beaches in the south of the state.
Many of Sonora’s incoming migrants from other parts of Mexico come to work at these factories.
Musicians include waltz composer Rodolfo Campodónico, opera singer Alfonso Ortiz Tirado, Arturo Márquez and classical music composer Pedro Vega Granillo.
The beaches extend for ten km and end at the bay of San Jorge on the south end.
However, Mexican officials state that the figures are higher, with over four hundred dying in Arizona deserts in 2005 alone.
There are sand dunes with arid zone vegetation as well as a small estuary.
For most of the 20th century, Mexico was dominated by the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
After Díaz was deposed, Carranza competed for power against Álvaro Obregón and others.
However, by that time almost all of Sonora’s Chinese-Mexicans had disappeared.
Puerto Peñasco is located in the extreme northwest of the state in the Upper Gulf somewhat near where the Colorado River empties.
One of its main attractions is the Playa de los Algodones, called such because its sand dunes look like cotton balls.
Sonora has one Pueblo Mágico, which is Álamos, which was called Ostimuri by the native population.
This bay’s beaches have white sand, with warm calm waters off of them.
Many Arizonans travel and cross one of the crossings to eat and shop, mostly to experience something different from doing the same at home.
The Tohono O’odham, still referred to as the Pápago by Spanish speakers, have inhabited the most arid areas of the state, and are mostly found in Caborca, Puerto Peñasco, Sáric, Altar and Plutarco Elías Calles in the north of the state.
The Guarijíos are related to the Tarahumaras and the Cáhitas.
While members of the Tohono O’odham have special border crossing privileges, these have become endangered as Mexican farmers encroach on tribal lands in Sonora, which are vulnerable to drug smugglers.
Items include pots, pans, plates and decorative items.
These are assembly plants run by mostly United States companies, which have certain duty and tax breaks.
For centuries they have inhabited the central coast of the state, especially in Punta Chueca, El Desemboque and Kino Viejo as well as a number of islands in the Gulf of California in and around the Isla Tiburón.
Seventy percent of the territory, or , is covered in desert vegetation or arid grasslands.
The area gets drier from here west and the last third of the border is generally uninhabited.
Within three years of the change, more than seventy foreign companies, mostly United States and Canadian enterprises, opened offices in Hermosillo.
The six border crossings are essential to the existence and extent of the communities that surround them, as most of them function as ports for the passage of goods between the two countries.
The island was once inhabited by the Seris, and they still consider it their territory.
Economic growth in the state since the Mexican Revolution has led to steady population growth.
The wall in Naco is four meters high and made of steel.
After 1880, this rail system was extended north into the United States, making it an important part of binational economic relations to this day.
Some of the Seris’ best work is located in a museum in Bahia Kino.
The higher elevations of the state and riverbanks contain large quantities of trees.
The most prolific art of the state is literature, which includes poetry, novels, plays and essays.
Most forests are located in the northeast of the state, covering about 6.4% of the state.
Many of the best known early works have anonymous composers.
The current name is from Spanish (disembarkation point), but the Seri name for the area means "where there are clams."
Carranza tried to suppress political opposition in Sonora, which led to the Plan of Agua Prieta, which formalized the resistance to Carranza by Obregón and his allies (primarily Abelardo L. Rodríguez, Benjamín Hill and Plutarco Elías Calles).
Another traditional practice is the use of tattoos.
About 90% of the state’s population is Catholic, with about 5% belonging to Evangelical or Protestant groups and over 7% professing some other faith.
In 1691, what are now the states of Sonora and Sinaloa were joined into an entity called the ''Provincias de Sonora, Ostimuri, y Sinaloa''.
It is located extreme northwest of the state.
The east of the state is dominated by the Sierra Madre Occidental, which has less extreme temperatures and relatively more rainfall due to altitude.
Important contemporary writers from the state include poet and playwright Abrigael Bohórquez, novelist Gerardo Cornejo Murrieta, writer and musician Armando Zamora, writer and literary critic Ignacio Mondaca Romero, narrator César Gándara, essayist and journalist Eve Gil, short story and novel writer Sylvia Aguilar Zéleny and poet and novelist Iván Figueroa.
This town was founded in 1683, when a mineral deposit by the name of La Europea was discovered.
Mining operations also destroy nearby forests due to the demand for building materials and fuel.
Many people make a living by catering migrants or working as "coyote" guides.
Mass expulsions were mostly carried out in Sonora and Sinaloa, partly because of their large populations, but the Chinese, often with their Mexican wives and children, were deported from all over the country.
It is a mesa with mountains which cover , containing pine and tropical forests, rivers, arroyos, rock formations and dirt roads.
A study by Balling in 1998 showed higher soil and air temperatures in areas that have been overgrazed, deforested and otherwised cleared land, likely due to the lack of shading vegetation, which leads to higher soil evaporation and desert conditions.
Their traditional diet almost entirely consisted of hunted animals and fish.
The Kickapoos are not native to Sonora, but migrated here from the United States over a century ago.
San Carlos, with its Los Algodones Beach is one of the most visited areas on the Sonoran coast.
It contains a kilometer of beaches and a canyon which has two distinct microclimates, one arid and desert-like and the other subtropical.
For this reason, Bahía Viejo calls itself ''la perla del Mar de Cortés'' ("the pearl of the Gulf of California").
Before it can be carved, this wood must be dried thoroughly, a process that can take up to five years.
The preservation of history is important to the Yaqui, especially the struggles they have had to maintain their independence.
The major indigenous dances include the Deer Dance, the Pascola and the Matachines, which is mostly performed in Huatabampo.
In 2001, the state produced 1,477,686 heads of cattle, 1,229,297 pigs, 38,933 sheep, 33,033 goats, 83,260 horses and 11,988,552 heads of domestic fowl.
The state contains a total of 24,396&nbsp;km of highways.
Sonorans and other ''norteños'' (northerners) have a reputation for being hard working and frugal, and being more individualistic and straightforward than other Mexicans.
In 1832, the capital was moved to Arizpe.
When Mexican federal troops arrived two days later, they put everything to a brutal end, with the suspected leaders of the strike executed.
In addition, the Yaqui people resisted European intrusion on their lands, effectively keeping the Spaniards out of their area until the 17th century.
Though evidence exists of trade between the peoples of Sonora and Mesoamerica, Guasave in Sinaloa is  the most north-westerly point considered Mesoamerican.
The music especially resonated with youth which worked in fields and on ranches.
However, most attacks were repelled.
Only recently has ''norteño'' music been accepted by social classes outside those with which it developed.
The Río Sonora culture is located in central Sonora from the border area to modern Sinaloa.
These restrictions were relaxed starting in 1992, with the only restriction that the operating company be Mexican.
The walls, which have shut down much of the illegal crossing into Texas and California, have also been built on parts of the Arizona border, especially between towns such as the two Nacos and the two Nogaleses.
The instuition offers degrees in over forty specialities through six divisions.
The best known of these is the carving of figures from ironwood (''palo fierro'' in Spanish), which is a very dense, almost black wood that sinks in water.
These jams can result in lines about eight miles long.
Federal troops have been stationed here due to the violence, which has the population divided.
He began his first mission at Cucurpe, then established churches and missions in other villages such as Los Remedios, Imuris, Magdalena, Cocóspera, San Ignacio, Tubutama and Caborca.
Authorities on each side work to keep out from the other that which is undesirable.
Eighty members remain in Sonora and they have lost their ancestral language, which was part of the Algonquin family, with the last speaker dying in 1996, although the language is still widely spoken in other Kickapoo communities, especially in Coahuila.
In 1821, the colonial era in Sonora was ended by the Mexican War of Independence, which started in 1810.
In the 1930s, a group of fishermen established a village in what is now known as Kino Viejo.
Activities for visitors include kayaking, paddleboats, scuba diving and fishing.
Several theories exist as to the origin of the name "Sonora".
The Ruta de las Missiones ("Missions Route") covers the principle stops of Jesuit missionary Eusebio Kino, as the worked to establish the many religious institutions which are part of the state’s identity.
However, most of the agriculture continues to shift away from small farms producing for local markets to largescale commercial agro-industry.
This effectively ended the war, but hostilities had again destroyed the Sonoran economy.
Seafood is generally cooked in very simple dishes, such as fish tacos, seafood soups, rice with shrimp or squid and shrimp meatballs.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the government forced out most foreign interests in Mexican mining, beginning with the increasing restriction of ownership in Mexican mining companies.
There are also caves as well as a solor observatory.
Sonora is the leading producer of gold, copper, graphite, molybdenum, and wollastonite.
The governor of Coahuila, Venustiano Carranza, sought refuge in Sonora, and became one of the principal political leaders during the rest of the war, with his main base of operations in Hermosillo.
