By February of that year, production was apparently completed on a sound version of ''The Devil's Playground'', arguably qualifying it as the first Australian talking motion picture; however, the May press screening of Commonwealth Film Contest prizewinner ''Fellers'' is the first verifiable public exhibition of an Australian talkie.
By the early 1930s, the talkies were a global phenomenon.
The emergence of sound film effectively separated deaf from hearing audience members once again."
The combination of sound and the Great Depression led to a wholesale shakeout in the business, resulting in the hierarchy of the Big Five integrated companies (MGM, Paramount, Fox, Warners, RKO) and the three smaller studios also called "majors" (Columbia, Universal, United Artists) that would predominate through the 1950s.
Film historian Mariann Lewinsky argues,
For some years, American inventor E. E. Norton's Cameraphone was the primary competitor to the Gaumont system (sources differ on whether the Cameraphone was disc- or cylinder-based); it ultimately failed for many of the same reasons that held back the Chronophone.
That June, De Forest entered into an extended legal battle with an employee, Freeman Harrison Owens, for title to one of the crucial Phonofilm patents.
Domestic competition, however, eclipsed Phonofilm.
Beginning in 1914, ''The Photo-Drama of Creation'', promoting Jehovah's Witnesses' conception of mankind's genesis, was screened around the United States: eight hours worth of projected visuals involving both slides and live action were synchronized with separately recorded lectures and musical performances played back on phonograph.
The necessity of staying within range of still microphones meant that actors also often had to limit their movements unnaturally.
The big sound film sensations of the year all took advantage of preexisting celebrity.
Fueling the boom was the emergence of an important new cinematic genre made possible by sound: the musical.
Vitaphone still had legal exclusivity, but having lapsed in its royalty payments, effective control of the rights was in ERPI's hands.
De Forest's process continued to be used through 1927 in the United States for dozens of short Phonofilms; in the UK it was employed a few years longer for both shorts and features by British Sound Film Productions, a subsidiary of British Talking Pictures, which purchased the primary Phonofilm assets.
In May, Warner Bros. sold back its exclusivity rights to ERPI (along with the Fox-Case sublicense) and signed a new royalty contract similar to Fox's for use of Western Electric technology.
In the short term, the introduction of live sound recording caused major difficulties in production.
There were consequences, as well, for other technological aspects of the cinema.
Apparently, dialogue scenes were also recorded, but the results were unsatisfactory and the film was never publicly screened incorporating them.
The new moving-coil speaker system was installed in New York's Warners Theatre at the end of July and its patent submission, for what Western Electric called the No.
No studio besides Warner Bros. released even a part-talking feature until the low-budget-oriented Film Booking Offices of America (FBO) premiered ''The Perfect Crime'' on June 17, 1928, eight months after ''The Jazz Singer''.
Dialogueless, it contains only a few songs performed by Richard Tauber.
In a variable-density process, the lines are of varying darkness; in a variable-area process, the lines are of varying width.)
Such was the blunt proclamation of critic Viktor Shklovsky, one of the leaders of the Russian formalist movement, in 1927.
It appears that the first Japanese sound film, ''Reimai'' (''Dawn''), was made in 1926 with the De Forest Phonofilm system.
These were the first true sound films exhibited by a Hollywood studio.
There would be no others for more than six years.
Yet another Elstree-made movie, it was rather less German at heart than ''Les Trois masques'' and ''La Route est belle'' were French; a BIP production with a British scenarist and German director, it was also shot in English as ''Atlantic''.
The inaugural Tobis Filmkunst production, it was not a drama, but a documentary sponsored by a shipping line: ''Melodie der Welt'' (''Melody of the World''), directed by Walter Ruttmann.
In September, the studio released another Al Jolson part-talking picture, ''The Singing Fool'', which more than doubled ''The Jazz Singer'''s earnings record for a Warners movie.
The first year in which sound film production predominated over silent film—not only in the United States, but also in the West as a whole—was 1929; yet the years 1929 through 1933 are represented by three dialogueless pictures (''Pandora's Box'' 1929, ''Zemlya'' 1930, ''City Lights'' 1931) and zero talkies in the ''Time Out'' poll.
Sound films were not better, just more economical.
Buster Keaton was eager to explore the new medium, but when his studio, MGM, made the changeover to sound, he was quickly stripped of creative control.
Whether sound was captured on cylinder, disc, or film, none of the available technology was adequate for big-league commercial purposes, and for many years the heads of the major Hollywood film studios saw little benefit in producing sound motion pictures.
As ''Photoplay'' editor James Quirk put it in March 1924, "Talking pictures are perfected, says Dr. Lee De Forest.
With Hollywood's wholesale adoption of the talkies, the competition between the two fundamental approaches to sound-film production was soon resolved.
Composer Lou Lichtveld was among a number of contemporary artists struck by the film: "''Melodie der Welt'' became the first important sound documentary, the first in which musical and unmusical sounds were composed into a single unit and in which image and sound are controlled by one and the same impulse."
The rival Shochiku studio began the successful production of sound-on-film talkies in 1931 using a variable-density process called Tsuchibashi.
The new year would finally see the emergence of sound cinema as a significant commercial medium.
RKO, which hadn't even existed in September 1928 and whose parent production company, FBO, was in the Hollywood minor leagues, by the end of 1929 was established as one of America's leading entertainment businesses.
For a time, multiple-camera shooting was used to compensate for the loss of mobility and innovative studio technicians could often find ways to liberate the camera for particular shots.
In 1930, the first Polish talkies premiered, using sound-on-disc systems: ''Moralność pani Dulskiej'' (''The Morality of Mrs. Dulska'') in March and the all-talking ''Niebezpieczny romans'' (''Dangerous Love Affair'') in October.
With the coming of the talkies, those featured performances—usually staged as preludes—were largely eliminated as well.
The end of silent film in the West and in Japan was imposed by the industry and the market, not by any inner need or natural evolution.... Silent cinema was a highly pleasurable and fully mature form.
Though sound-on-film would eventually become the universal standard for synchronized sound cinema, Lauste never successfully exploited his innovations, which came to an effective dead end.
The Hindustani ''Heer Ranjha'' was produced in Lahore, Punjab, the following year.
''The Jazz Singer'' had its European sound premiere at the Piccadilly Theatre in London on September 27, 1928.
The agreement did not resolve all the patent disputes, and further negotiations were undertaken and concords signed over the course of the 1930s.
After rereleasing a few silent feature hits, such as ''Seventh Heaven'', with recorded music, Fox came out with its first original Movietone feature on September 23: ''Sunrise'', by acclaimed German director F. W. Murnau.
These appear to be the first publicly exhibited films with projection of both image and recorded sound.
* Distribution: phonograph discs added expense and complication to film distribution
Although De Forest ultimately won the case in the courts, Owens is today recognized as a central innovator in the field.
No agreement was reached, but within a year Edison commissioned the development of the Kinetoscope, essentially a "peep-show" system, as a visual complement to his cylinder phonograph.
Fox Movietone soon followed Vitaphone into disuse as a recording and reproduction method, leaving two major American systems: the variable-area RCA Photophone and Western Electric's own variable-density process, a substantial improvement on the cross-licensed Movietone.
In 1907, French-born, London-based Eugene Lauste—who had worked at Edison's lab between 1886 and 1892—was awarded the first patent for sound-on-film technology, involving the transformation of sound into light waves that are photographically recorded direct onto celluloid.
The primary issue was synchronization: pictures and sound were recorded and played back by separate devices, which were difficult to start and maintain in tandem.
Several of the fundamental problems caused by the transition to sound were soon solved with new camera casings, known as "blimps", designed to suppress noise and boom microphones that could be held just out of frame and moved with the actors.
''Melodie der Welt'' was a direct influence on the industrial film ''Philips Radio'' (1931), directed by Dutch avant-garde filmmaker Joris Ivens and scored by Lichtveld, who described its audiovisual aims:
If the theatre-going public accepts this vitiation of its entertainment program a deplorable decline in the Art of Music is inevitable.
The enduring popularity of the silent medium in Japanese cinema owed in great part to the tradition of the ''benshi'', a live narrator who performed as accompaniment to a film screening.
Sound-on-film would ultimately win out over sound-on-disc because of a number of fundamental technical advantages:
As actress Louise Brooks suggested, there were other issues as well:
The development of commercial sound cinema had proceeded in fits and starts before ''The Jazz Singer'', and the film's success did not change things overnight.
On January 16, 1929, the first European feature film with a synchronized vocal performance and recorded score premiered: the German production ''Ich küsse Ihre Hand, Madame'' (''I Kiss Your Hand, Madame'').
Questionable, I say, because I spoke decent English in a decent voice and came from the theater.
As with Lauste and Tigerstedt, Tykociner's system would never be taken advantage of commercially; however, De Forest's soon would.
Warner Bros.' ''The Better 'Ole'', technically similar to ''Don Juan'', followed in October.
FBO had come under the effective control of a Western Electric competitor, General Electric's RCA division, which was looking to market its new sound-on-film system, Photophone.
The other internationally acclaimed sound drama of the year was ''Westfront 1918'', directed by G. W. Pabst for Nero-Film of Berlin.
Much to his company's benefit, he would be proven very wrong—between the 1927–28 and 1928–29 fiscal years, Warners' profits surged from $2 million to $14 million.
The American Federation of Musicians took out newspaper advertisements protesting the replacement of live musicians with mechanical playing devices.
Over the course of 1930–31, the only major players using sound-on-disc, Warner Bros. and First National, changed over to sound-on-film recording.
And a good benshi was a star demanding star payment.
In June, a Fox sound newsreel depicting his return welcomes in New York and Washington, D.C., was shown.
(In both sorts of systems, a specially-designed lamp, whose exposure to the film is determined by the audio input, is used to record sound photographically as a series of minuscule lines.
No great volume of evidence is required to answer this question.
As historian Richard B. Jewell describes, "The sound revolution crushed many small film companies and producers who were unable to meet the financial demands of sound conversion."
More than just their position as film accompanists was usurped; according to historian Preston J. Hubbard, "During the 1920s live musical performances at first-run theaters became an exceedingly important aspect of the American cinema."
The most popular narrators were stars in their own right, solely responsible for the patronage of a particular theatre."
During that same twelve-month span, Paramount's profits rose by $7 million, Fox's by $3.5 million, and Loew's/MGM's by $3 million.
Conceived as a silent film, it was given a Tobis-recorded score and a single talking sequence—the first dialogue scene in a French feature.
Once the first talkie features appeared, the conversion to full sound production happened as rapidly in India as it did in the United States.
It was a double system, that is, the sound was on a different piece of film from the picture....
A Tobis Filmkunst production, about one-quarter of the movie contained dialogue, which was strictly segregated from the special effects and music.
In ''Blackmail'', Hitchcock manipulated the reproduction of a character's monologue so the word "knife" would leap out from a blurry stream of sound, reflecting the subjective impression of the protagonist, who is desperate to conceal her involvement in a fatal stabbing.
Lillian Gish departed, back to the stage, and other leading figures soon left acting entirely: Colleen Moore, Gloria Swanson, and Hollywood's most famous performing couple, Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford.
Paramount, the industry leader, put out its first talkie in late September, ''Beggars of Life''; though it had just a few lines of dialogue, it demonstrated the studio's recognition of the new medium's power.
On July 6, 1928, the first all-talking feature, ''Lights of New York'', premiered.
Though the country's film industry was among the first to produce both sound and talking features, the full changeover to sound proceeded much more slowly than in the West.
Cinematic innovators attempted to cope with the fundamental synchronization problem in a variety of ways.
The film cost Warner Bros. only $23,000 to produce, but grossed $1.252 million, a record rate of return surpassing 5,000%.
Three major problems persisted, leading to motion pictures and sound recording largely taking separate paths for a generation.
This could play for 11 minutes, the running time of 1000&nbsp;ft of film at 90&nbsp;ft/min (24 frames/s).
The studios, in parallel, were still not entirely convinced of the talkies' universal appeal—through mid-1930, the majority of Hollywood movies were produced in dual versions, silent as well as talking.
These and similar techniques became part of the vocabulary of the sound comedy film, though as special effects and "color", not as the basis for the kind of comprehensive, non-naturalistic design achieved by Clair.
Parallel with improvements in sound-on-film technology, a number of companies were making progress with systems that recorded movie sound on phonograph discs.
Eight days later, Aubert Franco-Film came out with ''Le Collier de la reine'' (''The Queen's Necklace''), shot at the Épinay studio near Paris.
Sound also forced the abandonment of the noisy arc lights used for filming in studio interiors.
Expectations swiftly changed, and the sound "fad" of 1927 became standard procedure by 1929.
On March 12, 1929, the first feature-length talking picture made in Germany had its premiere.
Greta Garbo was the one non–native English speaker to retain Hollywood stardom on both sides of the great sound divide.
It was a smash box office success for the mid-level studio, earning a total of $2.625 million in the United States and abroad, almost a million dollars more than the previous record for a Warners film.
As a cinema owner you didn't have to pay the wages of musicians and benshi any more.
At first, the sound films incorporating synchronized dialogue—known as "talking pictures", or "'''talkies'''"—were exclusively shorts; the earliest feature-length movies with recorded sound included only music and effects.
The first successful European dramatic talkie was the all-British ''Blackmail''.
''Show Girl in Hollywood'' (1930), from First National Pictures (which Warner Bros. had taken control of thanks to its profitable adventure into sound), gives a behind-the-scenes look at some of the techniques involved in shooting early talkies.
In the United States, they helped secure Hollywood's position as one of the world's most powerful cultural/commercial systems (see Cinema of the United States).
One 1929 ad that appeared in the ''Pittsburgh Press'' features an image of a can labeled "Canned Music / Big Noise Brand / Guaranteed to Produce No Intellectual or Emotional Reaction Whatever" and reads in part:
Sweden's first talkie, ''Konstgjorda Svensson'' (''Artificial Svensson''), premiered on October 14.
Though the success of ''The Jazz Singer'' was due largely to Jolson, already established as one of America's biggest music stars, and its limited use of synchronized sound hardly qualified it as an innovative sound film (let alone the "first"), the movie's profits were proof enough to the industry that the technology was worth investing in.
However, conditions were rarely ideal, and the new, improved Kinetophone was retired after little more than a year.
The system developed by Case and his assistant, Earl Sponable, given the name Movietone, thus became the first viable sound-on-film technology controlled by a Hollywood movie studio.
A British International Pictures (BIP) production, it was recorded on RCA Photophone, General Electric having bought a share of AEG so they could access the Tobis-Klangfilm markets.
It cannot be otherwise because the quality of music is dependent on the mood of the artist, upon the human contact, without which the essence of intellectual stimulation and emotional rapture is lost.
Janet Gaynor became a top star with the synch-sound but dialogueless ''Seventh Heaven'' and ''Sunrise'', as did Joan Crawford with the technologically similar ''Our Dancing Daughters'' (1928).
Though few in the industry predicted it, silent film as a viable commercial medium in the United States would soon be little more than a memory.
A few innovative commercial directors immediately saw the ways in which sound could be employed as an integral part of cinematic storytelling, beyond the obvious function of recording speech.
Suddenly those without stage experience were regarded as suspect by the studios; as suggested above, those whose heavy accents or otherwise discordant voices had previously been concealed were particularly at risk.
In his first film, the Paramount ''Applause'' (1929), Rouben Mamoulian created the illusion of acoustic depth by varying the volume of ambient sound in proportion to the distance of shots.
The defendant stands accused in front of the American people of attempted corruption of musical appreciation and discouragement of musical education.
President Calvin Coolidge, opera singer Abbie Mitchell, and vaudeville stars such as Phil Baker, Ben Bernie, Eddie Cantor and Oscar Levant appeared in the firm's pictures.
The first sound feature film to receive near-universal critical approbation was ''Der Blaue Engel'' (''The Blue Angel''); premiering on April 1, 1930, it was directed by Josef von Sternberg in both German and English versions for Berlin's UFA studio.
The following month an accord was reached on patent cross-licensing, full playback compatibility, and the division of the world into three parts for the provision of equipment.
Nineteen-thirty-one also saw the first Bengali-language film, ''Jamai Sasthi'', and the first movie fully spoken in Telugu, ''Bhakta Prahlada''.
In February 1929, sixteen months after ''The Jazz Singer'''s debut, Columbia Pictures became the last of the eight studios that would be known as "majors" during Hollywood's Golden Age to release its first part-talking feature, ''Lone Wolf's Daughter''.
Another basic problem—famously spoofed in the 1952 film ''Singin' in the Rain''—was that some silent-era actors simply did not have attractive voices; though this issue was frequently overstated, there were related concerns about general vocal quality and the casting of performers for their dramatic skills in roles also requiring singing talent beyond their own.
In late May, the first all-color, all-talking feature, Warner Bros.' ''On with the Show!
Vitaphone, as this system was now called, was publicly introduced on August 6, 1926, with the premiere of the nearly three-hour-long ''Don Juan''; the first feature-length movie to employ a synchronized sound system of any type throughout, its soundtrack contained a musical score and added sound effects, but no recorded dialogue—in other words, it had been staged and shot as a silent film.
On April 15, 1923, at New York City's Rivoli Theater, came the first commercial screening of motion pictures with sound-on-film, the future standard: a set of shorts under the banner of De Forest Phonofilms, accompanying a silent feature.
To exploit this license the Vitaphone Corporation was organized with Samuel L. Warner as its president.
Studio heads, now forced into unprecedented decisions, decided to begin with the actors, the least palatable, the most vulnerable part of movie production.
The following year, Fox purchased the North American rights to the Tri-Ergon system, though the company found it inferior to Movietone and virtually impossible to integrate the two different systems to advantage.
In Japan, where the popular film tradition integrated silent movie and live vocal performance, talking pictures were slow to take root.
''Points West'', a Hoot Gibson Western released by Universal Pictures in August 1929, was the last purely silent mainstream feature put out by a major Hollywood studio.
The first feature film originally presented as a talkie was ''The Jazz Singer'', released in October 1927.
In May, as well, Fox had released the first Hollywood fiction film with synchronized dialogue: the short ''They're Coming to Get Me'', starring comedian Chic Sale.
Not until May 1928 did the group of four big studios (PDC had dropped out of the alliance), along with United Artists and others, sign with ERPI for conversion of production facilities and theaters for sound film.
By the same token, the viability of the benshi system facilitated a gradual transition to sound—allowing the studios to spread out the capital costs of conversion and their directors and technical crews time to become familiar with the new technology.
Beginning in 1922, the research branch of Western Electric began working intensively on recording technology for both sound-on-disc and sound-on film synchronised sound systems for motion-pictures.
Cameras were often undercranked or overcranked to improve exposures or for dramatic effect.
The career of Harold Lloyd, one of the top screen comedians of the 1920s, declined precipitously.
Over the next few years they developed it into a predictable and reliable device that made electronic amplification possible for the first time.
Unlike Fox-Case's Movietone and De Forest's Phonofilm, which were variable-density systems, Photophone was a variable-area system—a refinement in the way the audio signal was inscribed on film that would ultimately become the standard.
On February 27, 1888, a couple of days after photographic pioneer Eadweard Muybridge gave a lecture not far from the laboratory of Thomas Edison, the two inventors privately met.
The first American talkie to be widely honored was ''All Quiet on the Western Front'', directed by Lewis Milestone, which premiered April 21.
The talking scenes will require different handling, but the general construction of the story will be much the same."
The "natural" sounds of the settings were also audible.
During these years, as well, the American studios began abandoning the Western Electric system for RCA Photophone's variable-area approach—by the end of 1936, only Paramount, MGM, and United Artists still had contracts with ERPI.
The two devices were brought together as the Kinetophone in 1895, but individual, cabinet viewing of motion pictures was soon to be outmoded by successes in film projection.
As director Akira Kurosawa later described, the benshi "not only recounted the plot of the films, they enhanced the emotional content by performing the voices and sound effects and providing evocative descriptions of events and images on the screen....
Thus the watershed period from the coming of sound into the early Depression saw the studio system finally coalesce, with the individual studios coming to terms with their own identities and their respective positions within the industry.
As one distributor of the period said, "With the coming of the talkies, the Indian motion picture came into its own as a definite and distinctive piece of creation.
If proper synchronization of sound and picture was achieved in recording, it could be absolutely counted on in playback.
None of these pictures made much impact.
Vitaphone's dominating presence in sound-equipped theaters, however, meant that for years to come all of the Hollywood studios pressed and distributed sound-on-disc versions of their films alongside the sound-on-film prints.
From the beginning of history, men have turned to musical expression to lighten the burdens of life, to make them happier.
As talking pictures emerged, with their prerecorded musical tracks, an increasing number of moviehouse orchestra musicians found themselves out of work.
''So'' is castor oil."
Since 1934, with the sole exception of 1952, India has been among the top three movie-producing countries in the world every single year.
Many similar experiments were pursued by Dziga Vertov in his 1931 ''Entuziazm'' and by Chaplin in ''Modern Times'', a half-decade later.
It was given a British trade screening in March 1929, as was a part-talking film made entirely in the UK: ''The Clue of the New Pin'', a British Lion production using the sound-on-disc British Photophone system.
As ERPI began to wire theaters around Europe, Tobis-Klangfilm claimed that the Western Electric system infringed on the Tri-Ergon patents, stalling the introduction of American technology in many places.
Musical authorities know that the soul of the Art is lost in mechanisation.
The patents of all three concerns were cross-licensed.
In 1919, the same year that DeForest received his first patents in the field, three German inventors patented the Tri-Ergon sound system.
To render the half-musical impressions of factory sounds in a complex audio world that moved from absolute music to the purely documentary noises of nature.
* Audio quality: phonograph discs, Vitaphone's in particular, had superior dynamic range to most sound-on-film processes of the day, at least during the first few playings; while sound-on-film tended to have better frequency response, this was outweighed by greater distortion and noise
Within just a few weeks of ''Alam Ara'''s March 1931 premiere, the Calcutta-based Madan Pictures had released both the Hindi ''Shirin Farhad'' and the Bengali ''Jamai Sasthi''.
By the end of 1930, the Phonofilm business would be liquidated.
On October 31, ''Les Trois masques'' debuted; a Pathé-Natan film, it is generally regarded as the initial French feature talkie, though it was shot, like ''Blackmail'', at the Elstree studio, just outside London.
Theatres in many cities are offering synchronised mechanical music as a substitute for Real Music.
By September 1925, De Forest and Case's working arrangement had fallen through.
In 1919, American inventor Lee De Forest was awarded several patents that would lead to the first optical sound-on-film technology with commercial application.
Most of India's early talkies were shot in Bombay, which remains the leading production center, but sound filmmaking soon spread across the multilingual nation.
In 1929, film box-office receipts comprised 16.6 percent of total spending by Americans on recreation; by 1931, the figure had reached 21.8 percent.
A major hit, it was made with Vitaphone, which was at the time the leading brand of sound-on-disc technology.
All other countries, among them Italy, France, and England, are open to both parties.
So I said to the sound man, 'Why not use two mikes and two channels and combine the two tracks in printing?'"
The situation was particularly acute in the Soviet Union; as of May 1933, fewer than one out of every hundred film projectors in the country was as yet equipped for sound.
It was not "Germany's First Talking Film", as the marketing had it, but it was the first to be released in the United States.
Concerns that language differences would hamper U.S. film exports turned out to be largely unfounded.
The alliance then sat back and waited to see what sort of results the forerunners came up with.
Music is a well-nigh universally beloved art.
In 1902, Léon Gaumont demonstrated his sound-on-disc Chronophone, involving an electrical connection he had recently patented, to the French Photographic Society.
During 1929, most of the major European filmmaking countries began joining Hollywood in the changeover to sound.
Clair created teasing confusions between on- and off-screen sound.
Meanwhile, Warner Bros. had released three more talkies, all profitable, if not at the level of ''The Jazz Singer'': In March, ''Tenderloin'' appeared; it was billed by Warners as the first feature in which characters spoke their parts, though only 15 of its 88 minutes had dialogue.
In the first, 1930 edition of his global survey ''The Film Till Now'', British cinema pundit Paul Rotha declared, "A film in which the speech and sound effects are perfectly synchronised and coincide with their visual image on the screen is absolutely contrary to the aims of cinema.
Produced with the Vitaphone system, most of the film does not contain live-recorded audio, relying, like ''Sunrise'' and ''Don Juan'', on a score and effects.
While the introduction of sound led to a boom in the motion picture industry, it had an adverse effect on the employability of a host of Hollywood actors of the time.
In 1934, ''Sati Sulochana'', the first Kannada talking picture to be released, was shot in Kolhapur, Maharashtra; ''Srinivasa Kalyanam'' became the first Tamil talkie actually shot in Tamil Nadu.
He also experimented with asynchronous audio tricks, as in the famous scene in which a chase after a coat is synched to the cheers of an invisible football (or rugby) crowd.
An increasing number of motion picture systems relied on gramophone records—known as sound-on-disc technology; the records themselves were often referred to as "Berliner discs", after one of the primary inventors in the field, German-American Emile Berliner.
A musical comedy with a barebones plot, it is memorable for its formal accomplishments, in particular, its emphatically artificial treatment of sound.
* Production and capital cost: it was generally less expensive to record sound onto disc than onto film and the exhibition systems—turntable/interlock/projector—were cheaper to manufacture than the complex image-and-audio-pattern-reading projectors required by sound-on-film
Several European nations with minor positions in the field also produced their first talking pictures—Belgium (in French), Denmark, Greece, and Romania.
(Griffith's ''Dream Street'' had essentially been a "goat gland.")
Rich to exploit the system for commercial motion pictures; he founded Vitagraph, in which Warner Bros. acquired a half interest, just one month later.
On August 23, the modest-sized Austrian film industry came out with a talkie: ''G’schichten aus der Steiermark'' (''Stories from Styria''), an Eagle Film–Ottoton Film production.
''Interference'', Paramount's first all-talker, debuted in November.
Using the sound-on-disc Minatoki system, the leading Nikkatsu studio produced a pair of talkies in 1929: ''Taii no musume'' (''The Captain's Daughter'') and ''Furusato'' (''Hometown''), the latter directed by Kenji Mizoguchi.
