Other well-known dishes are ''Bulgogi'' (불고기), grilled marinated beef, ''Gimbap'' (김밥), and ''Tteokbokki'' (떡볶이), a spicy snack consisting of rice cake seasoned with gochujang or a spicy chili paste.
Its southern tip lies on the Korea Strait and the East China Sea.
Competitive video gaming, also called eSports (sometimes written e-Sports), has become more popular South Korea in recent years, particularly among young people.
Baekje was a great maritime power; its nautical skill, which made it the Phoenicia of East Asia, was instrumental in the dissemination of Buddhism throughout East Asia and continental culture to Japan.
At the end of World War&nbsp;II, the Japanese surrendered to Soviet and U.S. forces who occupied the northern and southern halves of Korea, respectively.
In February 2016, the Kaesong complex was closed by Seoul in reaction to North Korea's launch of a rocket earlier in the month unanimously condemned by the United Nations security council.
The green-based economic strategy is a comprehensive overhaul of South Korea's economy, utilizing nearly two percent of the national GDP.
However, the name ''Joseon'' was still widely used by Koreans to refer to their country, though it was no longer the official name.
The country adopted a new educational program to increase the number of their foreign students through 2010.
High civil liberties led to the rise of a globally influential pop culture such as K-pop and K-drama, a phenomenon called the Korean Wave, known for its distinctive fashionable and trendy style.
South Korea can be divided into four general regions: an eastern region of high mountain ranges and narrow coastal plains; a western region of broad coastal plains, river basins, and rolling hills; a southwestern region of mountains and valleys; and a southeastern region dominated by the broad basin of the Nakdong River.
Before the formation of South Korea, Korean independence fighters worked with Chinese soldiers during the Japanese occupation.
The 1953 armistice, never signed by South Korea, split the peninsula along the demilitarized zone near the original demarcation line.
After defeating the Khitan Empire, which was the most powerful empire of its time, in the Goryeo-Khitan War, Goryeo experienced a golden age that lasted a century, during which the Tripitaka Koreana was completed and there were great developments in printing and publishing, promoting learning and dispersing knowledge on philosophy, literature, religion, and science; by 1100, there were 12 universities that produced famous scholars and scientists.
According to the 2005 census, Seoul had a population of  inhabitants.
Beginning in 2001, South Korea had so far deployed 24,000 troops in the Middle East region to support the War on Terrorism.
Most South Korean middle schools and high schools have school uniforms, modeled on western-style uniforms.
Korea was annexed by Imperial Japan in 1910 due to its strategic and central location, after whose surrender in 1945, it was divided into North and South Korea.
King Yeongjo and King Jeongjo particularly led a new renaissance of the Joseon Dynasty.
Hip hop, R&B, rock, electronic dance and ballad oriented acts have become dominant in the South Korean popular music scene, though trot is still popular among older South Koreans.
With longstanding animosity following the Korean War from 1950 to 1953, North Korea and South Korea signed an agreement to pursue peace.
Home of Samsung, the world's leading smartphone and TV maker, LG and Hyundai-Kia, South Korea was named the world's most innovative country in the Bloomberg Innovation Index, ranking first in business R&D intensity and patents filed per GDP.
In addition, bachelor's degrees are held by 65 percent of South Koreans aged 25–34, the most in the OECD (whose global average is 39 percent).
'''Korean e-Sports Association'''
Among Asian countries, China was the most receptive, investing 1.4 billion in South Korea, with much of the investment within its service sector, a sevenfold increase from 2001.
In early 2007, the U.S. Secretary of Defense and ROK Minister of National Defense determined that South Korea will assume wartime operational control of its forces on December 1, 2015.
South Korea is especially strong in short track speed skating.
South Korea ranked number 10 overall in the 2014 NRI ranking, up from 11 in 2013.
An estimated 90% of South Koreans own a mobile phone.
It went into effect on March 15, 2012.
Korean women were forced to the war front to serve the Imperial Japanese Army as sexual slaves, called comfort women.
Globally, it ranks highly in personal safety, education, job security, ease of doing business and healthcare quality, with the world's third highest health adjusted life expectancy.
Both North and South Korea continue to officially claim sovereignty over the entire peninsula and any outlying islands.
USFK will transform into a new joint-warfighting command, provisionally described as Korea Command (KORCOM).
Every 15th day of the 8th lunar month, Koreans celebrate the Midautumn Festival, in which Koreans visit their ancestral hometowns and eat a variety of traditional Korean foods.
In 1960, a student uprising (the "April 19 Revolution") led to the resignation of the autocratic, corrupt President Syngman Rhee.
EU trade with South Korea exceeded €65 billion in 2008 and has enjoyed an annual average growth rate of 7.5% between 2004 and 2008.
Today, freedom of religion is guaranteed by the constitution, and there is no state religion.
Fewer than 30,000 South Koreans are thought to be Muslims, but the country has some 100,000 resident foreign workers from Islamic countries such as Bangladesh, Indonesia and Pakistan.
* &nbsp;Challengers League
The term ''Koryŏ'' also widely became used to refer to Goguryeo, which renamed itself ''Koryŏ'' in the 5th century.
A North Korean invasion led to the Korean War (1950–53).
Under its current constitution the state is sometimes referred to as the Sixth Republic of South Korea.
Longstanding issues such as Japanese war crimes against Korean civilians, visits by Japanese politicians to Yasukuni Shrine honoring Japanese soldiers killed at war (including some class A war criminals), the negationist re-writing of Japanese textbooks relating Japanese atrocities during World War&nbsp;II, and the territorial disputes over Liancourt Rocks, known in South Korea as "Dokdo", continue to trouble Korean-Japanese relations.
Nevertheless, EU companies have significant problems accessing and operating in the South Korean market because of stringent standards and testing requirements for products and services often creating barriers to trade.
Buddhism flourished during this time, and many Korean Buddhists gained great fame among Chinese Buddhists and contributed to Chinese Buddhism, including: Woncheuk, Wonhyo, Uisang, Musang, and Kim Gyo-gak, a Silla prince whose influence made Mount Jiuhua one of the Four Sacred Mountains of Chinese Buddhism.
About three thousand islands, mostly small and uninhabited, lie off the western and southern coasts of South Korea.
The earliest religion practiced was Korean shamanism.
The name ''Korea'' is derived from one of them, Goguryeo, also known as ''Koryŏ'', which was a powerful empire and one of the great powers in East Asia, ruling Northeast China and parts of Russia and Inner Mongolia under Gwanggaeto the Great.
Most South Koreans live in urban areas, because of rapid migration from the countryside during the country's quick economic expansion in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s.
Other religions include Islam and various new religious movements such as Jeungsanism, Cheondoism and Wonbuddhism.
North and South Korea are still technically at war (having never signed a peace treaty after the Korean War) and share the world's most heavily fortified border.
Home of the UN Green Climate Fund and GGGI, South Korea is a leader in low carbon green growth, committed to helping developing countries as a major DAC and Paris Club contributor and rated highly in peaceful tolerance and inclusion of minorities.
The greening initiative includes such efforts as a nationwide bike network, solar and wind energy, lowering oil dependent vehicles, backing daylight savings and extensive usage of environmentally friendly technologies such as LEDs in electronics and lighting.
The school year is divided into two semesters, the first of which begins in the beginning of March and ends in mid-July, the second of which begins in late August and ends in mid-February.
'''IAAF World Championships in Athletics'''
Korean Independence Day falls on March 1, and commemorates the March 1 Movement of 1919.
Today, the CIA World Factbook describes South Korea's democracy as a "fully functioning modern democracy".
Traditional Korean meals are noted for the number of side dishes, ''banchan'' (반찬), which accompany steam-cooked short-grain rice.
South Korean television shows have become popular outside of Korea.
There are also seven domestic airports, and a large number of heliports.
From time to time, South Korea has sent its troops overseas to assist American forces.
A 2014 Euromonitor study found that South Koreans drink the most alcohol on a weekly basis compared to the rest of the world.
Chun subsequently created the National Defense Emergency Policy Committee and took the presidency according to his political plan.
It has been praised for various reasons, including its comparatively high results and its major role in ushering South Korea's economic development.
Local governments are semi-autonomous, and contain executive and legislative bodies of their own.
A sizable arsenal of many artillery systems, including 1,700 self-propelled K55 and K9 Thunder howitzers and 680 helicopters and UAVs of numerous types, are assembled to provide additional fire, reconnaissance, and logistics support.
* &nbsp;Korean Grand Prix
A period of political instability followed, broken by General Park Chung-hee's May 16 coup against the weak and ineffectual government the next year.
Several Korean players have gone on to play in Major League Baseball.
A second carrier, Asiana Airlines, established in 1988, also serves domestic and international traffic.
However, South Korean and Japanese relations later soured because of conflicting claims of sovereignty over the Liancourt Rocks, in what became known as the Liancourt Rocks dispute.
Goguryeo was the largest and most powerful among them, and competed with various Chinese dynasties during its 700 years of history.
The prevailing ideology of the time was Neo-Confucianism, which was epitomized by the seonbi class: nobles who passed up positions of wealth and power to lead lives of study and integrity.
Despite the coexistence of the spellings ''Corea'' and ''Korea'' in 19th century publications, some Koreans believe that Japan, around the time of the Japanese occupation, intentionally standardised the spelling on ''Korea'', making Japan appear first alphabetically.
* &nbsp;Muju/Jeonju Winter 1997
Hallyu's positive effects of the nation's entertainment industry are not limited to within its culture industry, according to a study by the Hyundai Research Institute.
Academic success within the South Korean paradigm is the primary determinant of socioeconomic status in the country earmarked by the promise of prestige white collar professional jobs with a large corporate ''chaebol'' such as LG or Samsung, or jobs within the public sector.
'''FIFA World Cup'''
While South Korea's request for military support was denied by the United States, North Korea's military was heavily reinforced by the Soviet Union.
October 3 is National Foundation Day.
* &nbsp;Korean Basketball League
South Korea's smaller but more advanced artillery force and wide range of airborne reconnaissance platforms are pivotal in the counter-battery suppression of North Korea's large artillery force, which operates more than 13,000 artillery systems deployed in various state of fortification and mobility.
The schedules are not uniformly standardized and vary from school to school.
Following the surrender of Japan, in 1945, the ''Republic of Korea'' (/) was adopted as the legal name for the new country.
* &nbsp;Seoul Summer 1986
They can make a living out of their activity and top players can even make a significant amount of money with some high end Starcraft II players ending up making six figure salaries.
Baseball was first introduced to Korea in 1905 and has since become increasingly popular, with some sources claiming it has surpassed football as the most popular sport in the country.
South Korea is a constitutional democracy.
Previously, Koreans of mixed race were exempt from military duty but no exception from 2011.
Both in its regular bilateral contacts with South Korea and through its FTA with Korea, the EU is seeking to improve this situation.
In the 2nd century BC, Wiman Joseon fell to Han China near the end of the century.
Kimchi (김치), a fermented, usually spicy vegetable dish is commonly served at every meal and is one of the best known Korean dishes.
South Korea tends to have a humid continental climate and a humid subtropical climate, and is affected by the East Asian monsoon, with precipitation heavier in summer during a short rainy season called ''jangma'' (장마), which begins end of June through the end of July.
Using this infrastructure, the country has developed the first digital textbooks in the world, which will be distributed for free to every primary and secondary school nationwide by 2013.
According to the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, the number of scholarships for foreign students in South Korea would have (under the program) doubled by that time, and the number of foreign students would have reached 100,000.
Following the Coup d'état, Chun Doo-hwan planned to rise to power through several measures.
In 1967, South Korea obliged the mutual defense treaty, by sending a large combat troop contingent to support the United States in the Vietnam War.
, South Korea and Turkey are in negotiations regarding construction of two nuclear reactors.
For example, migrants from China (PRC) make up 56.5% of foreign nationals, but approximately 70% of the Chinese citizens in Korea are ''Joseonjok (조선족 in Korean)'', PRC citizens of Korean ethnicity.
In addition to contesting for control of the Korean Peninsula, Goguryeo had many military encounters with various Chinese dynasties, most notably the Goguryeo–Sui War, in which Goguryeo defeated a huge force said to number over a million men.
The free trade agreement was approved in September 2010, and took effect on July 1, 2011.
Historical dramas have included ''Faith'', ''Dae Jang Geum'', ''The Legend'', ''Dong Yi'', ''Moon Embracing the Sun'', and ''Sungkyunkwan Scandal''.
The average annual precipitation varies from  in Seoul to  in Busan.
In 1988, Seoul hosted the 1988 Summer Olympics.
In October the Soviet Union declared Kim Il-sung's government as sovereign over both parts.
Stimulated by the economic growth in the 1970s and 1980s, active redevelopment saw new horizons in architectural design.
Of the rest, most are Buddhist or Christian.
A long history of invasions by neighbors and the unresolved tension with North Korea have prompted South Korea to allocate 2.6% of its GDP and 15% of all government spending to its military (Government share of GDP: 14.967%), while maintaining compulsory conscription for men.
Another multibillion-dollar project was the restoration of Cheonggyecheon, a stream running through downtown Seoul that had earlier been paved over by a motorway.
The team's 2009 final game against Japan was widely watched in Korea, with a large screen at Gwanghwamun crossing in Seoul broadcasting the game live.
After nearly 30 years of war, Goryeo continued to rule Korea, though as a tributary ally to the Mongols.
There were several groups who fought for independence, the most notable being the ''Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea'' (/).
In November 2009 South Korea joined the OECD Development Assistance Committee, marking the first time a former aid recipient country joined the group as a donor member.
Many political leaders, including U.S. President Barack Obama, have praised the country's rigorous school system, from which over 85 percent of South Korean high school graduates go on to college.
However, the birthrate has increased by 5.7% in 2010 and Korea no longer has the world's lowest birthrate.
The new official name has its origin in the ancient country of Gojoseon (Old Joseon).
Today, it is the world's fifth largest exporter and seventh largest importer with the G20's largest budget surplus and highest credit rating of any country in East Asia.
The Republic of Korea, with both regular and reserve military force numbering  regular personnel among a total national population of  people, has the second highest number of soldiers per capita in the world, after the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
South Korea's education system is technologically advanced and it is the world's first country to bring high-speed fibre-optic broadband internet access to every primary and secondary school nationwide.
Korean Air, founded in 1962, served 21,640,000 passengers, including 12,490,000 international passengers in 2008.
On July 6, 2011 Pyeongchang was chosen by the IOC to host the 2018 Winter Olympics.
The population has also been shaped by international migration.
'''FINA World Aquatics Championships'''
During World War&nbsp;II, more than 100,000 Koreans served in the Imperial Japanese Army.
Seoul hosted the 1967 and 1995 Asian Basketball Championship.
Later Silla carried on the maritime prowess of Baekje, which acted like the Phoenicia of medieval East Asia, and during the 8th and 9th centuries dominated the seas of East Asia and the trade between China, Korea and Japan, most notably during the time of Jang Bogo; in addition, Silla people made overseas communities in China on the Shandong Peninsula and the mouth of the Yangtze River.
South Koreans drink 13.7 shots of liquor per week on average and, of the 44 other countries analyzed, Russia, the Philippines, and Thailand follow.
Following the Armistice, South Korea and the U.S. agreed to a "Mutual Defense Treaty", under which an attack on either party in the Pacific area would summon a response from both.
The industrialization and urbanization of South Korea have brought many changes to the way Korean people live.
Dramas have tended to have a romantic focus, such as ''Princess Hours'', ''You're Beautiful'', ''Playful Kiss'', ''My Name is Kim Sam Soon'', ''Boys Over Flowers'', ''Winter Sonata'', ''Autumn in My Heart'', ''Full House'', ''City Hunter'', ''All About Eve'', ''Secret Garden'', ''I Can Hear Your Voice'', ''Master's Sun'', ''My Love from the Star'' and ''Descendants of the Sun''.
In the 1950s and 1960s, modern rules were standardized, with taekwondo becoming an official Olympic sport in 2000.
Although there were no formal diplomatic ties between South Korea and Japan after the end of World War&nbsp;II, South Korea and Japan signed the Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea in 1965 to establish diplomatic ties.
* &nbsp;National League
Contemporary architectural efforts have been constantly trying to balance the traditional philosophy of "harmony with nature" and the fast-paced urbanization that the country has been going through in recent years.
It has also developed links with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations as both a member of ''ASEAN Plus three,'' a body of observers, and the East Asia Summit (EAS).
In 2002, South Korea and Japan jointly co-hosted the 2002 FIFA World Cup.
However, the polling did not indicate the extent to which respondents follow both sports.
The expanded martial law closed universities, banned political activities and further curtailed the press.
Korean cuisine usually involves heavy seasoning with sesame oil, ''doenjang'' (된장), a type of fermented soybean paste, soy sauce, salt, garlic, ginger, and ''gochujang'' (고추장), a hot pepper paste.
However, the Korean economy developed significantly during Park's tenure and the government developed the nationwide expressway system, the Seoul subway system, and laid the foundation for economic development during his 17-year tenure.
South Korea hosted the G-20 Summit in Seoul in November 2010.
The U.S. Eighth Army, Seventh Air Force, and U.S.
Another type is ''jjigae'' (찌개), a stew that is typically heavily seasoned with chili pepper and served boiling hot.
Toyotomi Hideyoshi led the Japanese forces, but his advance was halted by Korean forces (most notably the Joseon Navy led by Admiral Yi Sun-sin and his renowned "turtle ship") with assistance from Righteous Army militias formed by Korean civilians, and Ming Dynasty Chinese troops.
Winter temperatures are higher along the southern coast and considerably lower in the mountainous interior.
On October 1, Armed Forces day is celebrated, honoring the military forces of South Korea.
Until the 1990s, trot and ballads dominated South Korean popular music.
The Seoul National Capital Area has  inhabitants (about half of South Korea's entire population) making it the world's second largest metropolitan area.
After the second Manchu invasion in 1637, Joseon experienced a nearly 200-year period of peace.
Academic pressure to achieve top grades is consequently fierce, especially when applying for elite high schools and universities throughout the country with many participating in intense outside tutoring to supplement classes to gain a competitive academic edge over their peers.
The southern coast is subject to late summer typhoons that bring strong winds, heavy rains and sometime floods.
Metal chopsticks have been discovered in Goguryeo archaeological sites.
South Korea's annual birthrate is approximately 9 births per 1000 people.
South Korea's terrain is mostly mountainous, most of which is not arable.
King Taejo declared the new name of Korea as "Joseon" in reference to Gojoseon, and moved the capital to Hanseong (one of the old names of Seoul).
Chun's assumption of the presidency in the events of May 17, triggered nationwide protests demanding democracy, in particular in the city of Gwangju, to which Chun sent special forces to violently suppress the Gwangju Democratization Movement.
Nuclear power in South Korea supplies 45% of electricity production, and research is very active with investigation into a variety of advanced reactors, including a small modular reactor, a liquid-metal fast/transmutation reactor and a high-temperature hydrogen generation design.
With rising tourist prospects, especially from foreign countries outside of Asia, the South Korean government has set a target of attracting 20 million foreign tourists a year by 2017.
Later the Han Dynasty set up Four Commanderies of Han in 108 BC.
It has the world's fastest Internet speed and highest smartphone ownership, ranking first in ICT Development, e-Government and 4G LTE coverage.
This document has been revised several times since its first promulgation in 1948 at independence.
The Hyundai Research Institute reported that the Korean Wave has a direct impact in encouraging direct foreign investment back into the country through demand for products, and the tourism industry.
The social stigma associated with vocational careers and not having a university degree continues to be a major issue facing the country.
Since the success of the film ''Shiri'' in 1999, Korean film has begun to gain recognition internationally.
In June 2009, the first spaceport of South Korea, Naro Space Center, was completed at Goheung, Jeollanam-do.
In 2012, South Korea scored fifth in reading and mathematics and seventh in science on the PISA 2012 Tests.
Rainfall is concentrated in the summer months of June through September.
No peace treaty was ever signed, resulting in the two countries remaining technically at war.
It has participated in most major conflicts that the United States has been involved in the past 50 years.
South Korea occupies the southern portion of the Korean Peninsula, which extends some  from the Asian mainland.
The two failed KSLV-I launch vehicles were based on the Universal Rocket Module, the first stage of the Russian Angara rocket, combined with a solid-fueled second stage built by South Korea.
South Korea has sought the assistance of foreign countries such as Russia through MTCR commitments to supplement its restricted domestic rocket technology.
South Korea is an emerging exporter of nuclear reactors, having concluded agreements with the UAE to build and maintain four advanced nuclear reactors, with Jordan for a research nuclear reactor, and with Argentina for construction and repair of heavy-water nuclear reactors.
Upon the onset of the Korean War, U.S. forces were sent to defend against an invasion from North Korea of the South.
Korean art has been highly influenced by Buddhism and Confucianism, which can be seen in the many traditional paintings, sculptures, ceramics and the performing arts.
"Certificate Trading – Part of the Solution or Part of the Problem?"
Since the early 2000s, this religion has regained popularity among Koreans.
There are many significant regional dishes that have proliferated in different variations across the country in the present day.
During its height, Balhae controlled most of Manchuria and parts of the Russian Far East.
, just under half of the South Korean population expressed no religious preference.
Later that year, Kim received the Nobel Peace Prize "for his work for democracy and human rights in South Korea and in East Asia in general, and for peace and reconciliation with North Korea in particular."
* &nbsp;Pyeongchang Winter 2018
Baekje was once a great military power on the Korean Peninsula, especially during the time of Geunchogo, but was critically defeated by Gwanggaeto the Great and declined.
Constitution Day is on July 17, and it celebrates the promulgation of Constitution of the Republic of Korea.
Other major cities include Busan (), Incheon (), Daegu (), Daejeon (), Gwangju () and Ulsan ().
The country – already the world's most wired – plans to build a nationwide next-generation network which will be 10 times faster than broadband facilities in order to reduce energy usage.
Popular Korean alcoholic beverages include Soju, Makgeolli and Bokbunja ju.
Korean architecture entered a new phase of development during the post-Korean War reconstruction, incorporating modern architectural trends and styles.
However, the Mongol invasions in the 13th century greatly weakened Goryeo.
Peace has since mostly continued with the two agreeing to work peacefully for reunification and the South solidifying peace as a regional power with the world's 10th largest defence budget.
* &nbsp;Busan Summer 2002
While the country ranks highly in international assessments, stifling of creativity as well as the rigor and intense stress of its educational system has been criticized.
However, it has retained many broad characteristics and with the exception of the short-lived Second Republic of South Korea, the country has always had a presidential system with an independent chief executive.
Christianity is South Korea's largest religion, accounting for more than half of all South Korean religious adherents.
There are approximately 13.7 million Christians in South Korea today; about 63% of Korean Christians belong to Protestant churches, while 37% belong to the Roman Catholic Church.
Post-war modern Korean art started to flourish in the 1960s and 1970s, when South Korean artists took interest in geometrical shapes and intangible subjects.
Despite the animosity, reconciliation efforts have been present from the very beginning of the separation between North and South Korea.
Retrieved March 16, 2009 at: www.uni-salzburg.at/politikwissenschaft/lauber
South Korean corporations Samsung and LG were ranked first and third largest mobile phone companies in the world in the first quarter of 2012, respectively.
