South Africa is often referred to as the "Rainbow Nation" to describe the country's newly developing multicultural diversity in the wake of segregationist apartheid ideology.
The name "South Africa" is derived from the country's geographic location at the southern tip of Africa.
South Africa has cultivated a burgeoning astronomy community.
The British annexed the Cape Colony in 1806, and continued the frontier wars against the Xhosa; the British pushed the eastern frontier through a line of forts established along the Fish River and they consolidated the territory by encouraging British settlement.
While xenophobia is still a problem, recent violence has not been as widespread as initially feared.
Most deaths are experienced by economically active individuals, resulting in many AIDS orphans who in many cases depend on the state for care and financial support.
Another uniquely South African flowering plant group is the genus Protea.
It is famous for the most extensive areas of indigenous forests in South Africa (a generally forest-poor country).
There are an estimated 200,000 indigenous traditional healers in South Africa, and up to 60% of South Africans consult these healers, generally called sangomas or inyangas.
These populations mainly lived in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban, Cape Town, and Port Elizabeth.
South African literature emerged from a unique social and political history.
South African Muslims comprise mainly those who are described as Coloureds and those who are described as Indians.
Six nuclear devices were completed between 1980 and 1990, but all were dismantled before South Africa signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1991.
In Dutch the country was named ''Republiek van Zuid-Afrika'', replaced in 1983 by the Afrikaans ''Republiek van Suid-Afrika''.
Mafadi in the Drakensberg at  is the highest peak in South Africa.
However, the statistics which purport to show a brain drain are disputed and also do not account for repatriation and expiry of foreign work contracts.
Most of them also participate in the Indian Premier League.
Durban Surfer Jordy Smith won the 2010 Billabong J-Bay competition making him the no 1 ranked surfer in the world.
This was south of the furthest point reached in 1485 by his predecessor, the Portuguese navigator Diogo Cão (Cape Cross, north of the bay).
In November 2006, South Africa became the first African country to legalise same-sex marriage.
The most prevalent biome in South Africa is the grassland, particularly on the Highveld, where the plant cover is dominated by different grasses, low shrubs, and acacia trees, mainly camel-thorn and whitethorn.
South Africa is a nation of about 55 million (2016) people of diverse origins, cultures, languages, and religions.
With more than 20,000 different plants, or about 10% of all the known species of plants on Earth, South Africa is particularly rich in plant diversity.
The President appoints a Deputy President and Ministers, who form the Cabinet which consists of Departments and Ministries.
Some of these state-owned companies have not been profitable, such as SAA, which has required bailouts totaling 30 billion rand ($2.3 billion) over 20 years.
With the exception of that of Barnard, all of these advancements were recognised with Nobel Prizes.
As they expanded east, the Dutch settlers met the southwesterly migrating Xhosa people in the region of the Fish River.
According to the 2001 census, Christians accounted for 79.8% of the population, with a majority of them being members of various Protestant denominations (broadly defined to include syncretic African initiated churches) and a minority of Roman Catholics and other Christians.
Plantations of imported tree species are predominant, particularly the non-native eucalyptus and pine.
In the first quarter of 2011, confidence levels for graduate professionals were recorded at a level of 84% in a PPS survey.
The country is a member of the Group of 77 and chaired the organisation in 2006.
Most of the plants are evergreen hard-leaf plants with fine, needle-like leaves, such as the sclerophyllous plants.
While South Africa's many broadcasters and publications reflect the diversity of the population as a whole, the most commonly used language is English.
Statistics South Africa asks people to describe themselves in the census in terms of five racial population groups.
Breyten Breytenbach was jailed for his involvement with the guerrilla movement against apartheid.
During the 1950s, ''Drum'' magazine became a hotbed of political satire, fiction, and essays, giving a voice to urban black culture.
Of note is Brenda Fassie, who launched to fame with her song "Weekend Special", which was sung in English.
Furthermore, it has promoted Rainwater harvesting and mini hydropower.
Penny Heyns won Olympic Gold in the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games.
African initiated churches formed the largest of the Christian groups.
Note the course of the Great Escarpment to the north of these mountain ranges.)
They were superseded by Bantu/Nguni peoples with their own vocabularies of art forms.
Due to the aridity of the land, only 13.5% can be used for crop production, and only 3% is considered high potential land.
However, the vast majority of black South Africans were not enfranchised until 1994.
The mid-eastern, and highest part of the plateau is known as the Highveld.
Most foreign embassies are located in Pretoria.
The Senior Certificate examination takes place at the end of grade 12 and is necessary for tertiary studies at a South African university.
French is spoken in South Africa by migrants from Francophone Africa.
A 2008 study revealed that HIV/AIDS infection in South Africa is distinctly divided along racial lines: 13.6% of blacks are HIV-positive, whereas only 0.3% of whites have the disease.
The skills drain in South Africa tends to demonstrate racial contours given the skills distribution legacy of South Africa and has thus resulted in large white South African communities abroad.
It was imported before the codification of European law into the Napoleonic Code and is comparable in many ways to Scots law.
Many white South Africans also speak European languages, including Portuguese (also spoken by black Angolans and Mozambicans), German, and Greek, while some Asians in South Africa speak Asian languages, such as Gujarati, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, and Urdu.
South Africa is one of the founding members of the African Union (AU), and has the second largest economy of all the members.
Winters in South Africa occur between June and August.
The coastal belt below the south and south-western stretches of the Great Escarpment contains several ranges of Cape Fold Mountains which run parallel to the coast, separating the Great Escarpment from the ocean.
The Xhosa reached the Great Fish River, in today's Eastern Cape Province.
The white minority (less than 20%) controlled the vastly larger black majority.
After a long and sometimes violent struggle by the African National Congress and other anti-apartheid activists both inside and outside the country, discriminatory laws began to be repealed or abolished from 1990 onwards.
It also has a relatively high GDP per capita compared to other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa ($11,750 at PPP as of 2012).
On 4 December, he landed at Walfisch Bay (now known as Walvis Bay in present-day Namibia).
In the most recent election, held on 7 May 2014, the African National Congress (ANC) won 62.2% of the vote and 249 seats, while the main opposition, the Democratic Alliance (DA) won 22.2% of the vote and 89 seats.
Further east on the south coast, rainfall is distributed more evenly throughout the year, producing a green landscape.
South Africa signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 4 June 1994, and became a party to the convention on 2 November 1995.
From 2004 onward economic growth picked up significantly; both employment and capital formation increased.
South African cuisine is heavily meat-based and has spawned the distinctively South African social gathering known as a ''braai'', or barbecue.
The scattered tribes of Khoisan peoples moving into South Africa from around 10000 BC had their own fluent art styles seen today in a multitude of cave paintings.
Public expenditure on education was at 5.4% of the 2002–05 GDP.
In recent years, the SANDF has become a major peacekeeping force in Africa, and has been involved in operations in Lesotho, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Burundi, amongst others.
Nevertheless, South Africa has been identified as a middle power in international affairs, and maintains significant regional influence.
The Little Karoo is historically, and still, famous for its ostrich farming around the town of Oudtshoorn.
The adult literacy rate in 2007 was 88.7%.
Its economy is the second-largest in Africa, and the 34th-largest in the world.
In golf, Gary Player is generally regarded as one of the greatest golfers of all time, having won the Career Grand Slam, one of five golfers to have done so.
Climate change is expected to bring considerable warming and drying to much of this already semi-arid region, with greater frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as heatwaves, flooding and drought.
While many blacks have risen to middle or upper classes, the overall unemployment rate of blacks worsened between 1994 and 2003.
It has also served in multi-national UN peacekeeping forces such as the United Nations Force Intervention Brigade for example.
The fourth chapter of the Constitution of South Africa, states that "The seat of Parliament is Cape Town, but an Act of Parliament enacted in accordance with section 76(1) and (5) may determine that the seat of Parliament is elsewhere."
During the 20th century, the black majority sought to recover its rights from the dominant white minority, with this struggle playing a large role in the country's recent history and politics.
In 2004, the swimming team of Roland Schoeman, Lyndon Ferns, Darian Townsend and Ryk Neethling won the gold medal at the Olympic Games in Athens, simultaneously breaking the world record in the 4x100 freestyle relay.
The first hominin fossil discovered in Africa, the Taung Child was found near Taung in 1924.
Representatives of the British East India Company did call sporadically at the Cape in search of provisions as early as 1601, but later came to favour Ascension Island and St. Helena as alternative ports of refuge.
There are several species of water-storing succulents like aloes and euphorbias in the very hot and dry Namaqualand area.
The three dominant hospital groups, Mediclinic, Life Healthcare and Netcare, together control 75% of the market.
Unlike most of the world's poor countries, South Africa does not have a thriving informal economy.
This is believed to be potentially damaging for the regional economy, and is almost certainly detrimental for the well-being of those reliant on the healthcare infrastructure.
About 84% of the population depend on the public healthcare system, which is beset with chronic human resource shortages and limited resources.
He reached as far up the eastern coast of Africa as, what he called, ''Rio do Infante'', probably the present-day Groot River, in May 1488, but on his return he saw the Cape, which he first named ''Cabo das Tormentas'' (Cape of Storms).
In 1874, Sir Henry Bartle Frere was sent to South Africa as High Commissioner for the British Empire to bring such plans into being.
The legally institutionalised segregation became known as ''apartheid''.
In 2015, Oliver Hermanus film The Endless River became the first South African film selected for the Venice Film Festival.
After each parliamentary election, the National Assembly elects one of its members as President; hence the President serves a term of office the same as that of the Assembly, normally five years.
The coastal belt to the north of the Cape Peninsula is bounded on the west by the Atlantic Ocean and the first row of north-south running Cape Fold Mountains to the east.
The Zulu nation spectacularly defeated the British at the Battle of Isandlwana.
These unofficial languages may be used in certain official uses in limited areas where it has been determined that these languages are prevalent.
This relatively well-watered area is home to a great proportion of the country’s commercial farmlands, and contains its largest conurbation (Gauteng Province).
Famous current cricket players include AB de Villiers, Hashim Amla, Dale Steyn, Vernon Philander, Faf du Plessis etc.
The climatic zones range from the extreme desert of the southern Namib in the farthest northwest to the lush subtropical climate in the east along the Mozambique border and the Indian Ocean.
This intensified the European-South African efforts to gain control over the indigenous peoples.
Extensive fossil remains have been recovered from a series of caves in Gauteng Province.
Queen Elizabeth II was stripped of the title Queen of South Africa, and the last Governor-General, namely Charles Robberts Swart, became State President.
Despite this, South Africa is still burdened by a relatively high rate of poverty and unemployment, and is also ranked in the top 10 countries in the world for income inequality, measured by the Gini coefficient.
In terms of purchasing power parity, South Africa has the seventh-highest per capita income in Africa.
Along with many African nations, South Africa has been experiencing a "brain drain" in the past 20 years.
Many immigrants to South Africa continue to live in poor conditions, and the immigration policy has become increasingly restrictive since 1994.
South Africa is located at the southernmost region of Africa, with a long coastline that stretches more than  and along two oceans (the South Atlantic and the Indian).
These people were mainly from Zimbabwe, though many also come from Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia.
In 1487, the Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias led the first European voyage to land in southern Africa.
South Africa has a generally temperate climate, due in part to being surrounded by the Atlantic and Indian Oceans on three sides, by its location in the climatically milder Southern Hemisphere and due to the average elevation rising steadily towards the north (towards the equator) and further inland.
Some of the biggest state-owned companies are Eskom, the electric power monopoly, South African Airways (SAA), and Transnet, the railroad and ports monopoly.
At , South Africa is the 25th-largest country in the world and is comparable in size to Colombia.
The British returned with greater numbers, more experience, and new strategy in the Second Boer War (1899–1902) but suffered heavy casualties through attrition; nonetheless, they were ultimately successful.
They also sowed vegetables in the fertile soil.
Rapes are also perpetrated by children (some as young as ten).
It was believed that many of the persons who claimed no affiliation with any organised religion adhered to traditional African religion.
The Union was a dominion that included the former territories of the Cape and Natal colonies, as well as the republics of Orange Free State and Transvaal.
Despite the fact that English is recognised as the language of commerce and science, it ranked fourth, and was listed as the first language of only 9.6% of South Africans in 2011 but remains the de facto lingua franca of the nation.
Restrictive labour regulations have contributed to the unemployment malaise.
However, all ten other official languages are represented to some extent or another.
Other sites include Swartkrans, Gondolin Cave Kromdraai, Coopers Cave and Malapa.
South Africa is one of the worst affected countries in the world when it comes to invasion by alien species with many (e.g.
In the late 1970s, South Africa initiated a programme of nuclear weapons development.
Sydney Brenner won most recently, in 2002, for his pioneering work in molecular biology.
Afrikaans music covers multiple genres, such as the contemporary Steve Hofmeyr, the punk rock band Fokofpolisiekar and the singer-songwriter Jeremy Loops.
Excluding the Prince Edward Islands, the country lies between latitudes 22° and 35°S, and longitudes 16° and 33°E.
In at least some major South African ecosystems, an exceptionally high percentage of fungi are highly specific in terms of the plants with which they occur.
A series of wars, called the Cape Frontier Wars, were fought over conflicting land and livestock interests.
The fynbos biome, which makes up the majority of the area and plant life in the Cape floristic region, one of the six floral kingdoms, is located in a small region of the Western Cape and contains more than 9,000 of those species, making it among the richest regions on earth in terms of plant diversity.
The country is one of the few in Africa never to have had a coup d'état, and regular elections have been held for almost a century.
Ultimately, F. W. de Klerk opened bilateral discussions with Nelson Mandela in 1993 for a transition of policies and government.
There are significant numbers of baobab trees in this area, near the northern end of Kruger National Park.
The Natives' Land Act of 1913 severely restricted the ownership of land by blacks; at that stage natives controlled only 7% of the country.
The British returned Cape Town to the Dutch Batavian Republic in 1803, the Dutch East India Company having effectively gone bankrupt by 1795.
The plays of Athol Fugard have been regularly premiered in fringe theatres in South Africa, London (The Royal Court Theatre) and New York.
In 1652, a century and a half after the discovery of the Cape sea route, Jan van Riebeeck established a refreshment station at the Cape of Good Hope, at what would become Cape Town, on behalf of the Dutch East India Company.
It is also a founding member of the AU's New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).
During the Dutch and British colonial years, racial segregation was mostly informal, though some legislation was enacted to control the settlement and movement of native people, including the Native Location Act of 1879 and the system of pass laws.
South Africa hosted and won the 1995 Rugby World Cup and won the 2007 Rugby World Cup in France.
South Africa undertook a nuclear weapons programme in the 1970s According to former state president FW de Klerk, the decision to build a "nuclear deterrent" was taken "as early as 1974 against a backdrop of a Soviet expansionist threat."
South Africa is alleged to have conducted a nuclear test over the Atlantic in 1979, although this is officially denied.
After 1994 government policy brought down inflation, stabilised public finances, and some foreign capital was attracted, however growth was still subpar.
The President and the Cabinet may be removed by the National Assembly by a motion of no confidence.
There are even smaller reserves of forests that are out of the reach of fire, known as montane forests.
The most southerly portion of this coastal belt is known as the Swartland and Malmesbury Plain, which is an important wheat growing region, relying on winter rains.
There have been a number of incidents of political repression as well as threats of future repression in violation of this constitution leading some analysts and civil society organisations to conclude that there is or could be a new climate of political repression, or a decline in political tolerance.
The struggle to control these important economic resources was a factor in relations between Europeans and the indigenous population and also between the Boers and the British.
The World Bank classifies South Africa as an upper-middle-income economy, and a newly industrialized country.
The narrow coastal strip between the most seaward Cape Fold Mountain range (i.e., the LangebergOuteniqua mountains) and the ocean has a moderately high year-round rainfall, especially in the George-Knysna-Plettenberg Bay region, which is known as the Garden Route.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in 2008 reported over 200,000 refugees applied for asylum in South Africa, almost four times as many as the year before.
'''South Africa''', officially the '''Republic of South Africa''' (RSA), is the southernmost sovereign state in Africa.
There is great diversity in South African music.
Mark Shuttleworth founded an early Internet security company Thawte, that was subsequently bought out by world-leader VeriSign.
(See Bantu expansion.)
Many of the unofficial languages of the San and Khoikhoi people contain regional dialects stretching northwards into Namibia and Botswana, and elsewhere.
Dias continued down the western coast of southern Africa.
After apartheid ended, South Africa was readmitted to the Commonwealth of Nations.
The Boers founded the Boer Republics: the South African Republic (now Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and North West provinces) and the Orange Free State (Free State).
Kwaito is said to have taken over radio, television, and magazines.
black wattle, Port Jackson willow, ''Hakea'', ''Lantana'' and ''Jacaranda'') posing a significant threat to the native biodiversity and the already scarce water resources.
South Africa has a 3 tier system of education starting with primary school, followed by high school and tertiary education in the form of (academic) universities and universities of technology.
The remaining population consists of Africa's largest communities of European (white), Asian (Indian), and multiracial (coloured) ancestry.
Its pluralistic makeup is reflected in the constitution's recognition of 11 official languages, which is among the highest number of any country in the world.
The then Prime Minister Jan Smuts wrote the preamble to the United Nations Charter.
Dutch interest was aroused after 1647, when two employees of the Dutch East India Company were shipwrecked there for several months.
South Africa is the 25th-largest country in the world by land area, and with close to 53 million people, is the world's 24th-most populous nation.
Nadine Gordimer became the first South African to be awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1991.
In this regard it is third only to Bolivia and India in number.
According to the 2015 UNAIDS Report, South Africa has an estimated 7 million people living with HIV&nbsp;– more than any other country in the world.
If correct, then the number of South African fungi dwarfs that of its plants.
It is the southernmost country on the mainland of the Old World or the Eastern Hemisphere.
Many refugees have now also started to work and live in rural areas in provinces such as Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape.
In 1990 the National Party government took the first step towards dismantling discrimination when it lifted the ban on the African National Congress and other political organisations.
Winters in this region are cold, although snow is rare.
Other notable exceptions are the film ''Tsotsi'', which won the Academy Award for Foreign Language Film at the 78th Academy Awards in 2006 as well as ''U-Carmen e-Khayelitsha'', which won the Golden Bear at the 2005 Berlin International Film Festival.
The south and south-western parts of the plateau (at approximately 11001800m above sea level), and the adjoining plain below (at approximately 700800m above sea levelsee map on the right) is known as the Great Karoo, which consists of sparsely populated scrubland.
In the year ended March 2014 there were 17,068 murders and the murder rate was 32.2 per 100,000 - about five times higher than the global average of 6 per 100,000.
To the north of Highveld, from about the 25°30'S line of latitude, the plateau slopes downwards into the Bushveld, which ultimately gives way to the Limpopo lowlands or Lowveld.
It became the first country (followed by Ukraine) with nuclear capability to voluntarily renounce and dismantle its programme and in the process signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1991.
While whites enjoyed the highest standard of living in all of Africa, comparable to First World Western nations, the black majority remained disadvantaged by almost every standard, including income, education, housing, and life expectancy.
South Africa's most popular sports are soccer, rugby and cricket.
The lowland area (700800m above sea level) to the north of the Swartberg mountain range up to the Great Escarpment is the lowland part of the Great Karoo (see map at top right), which is climatically and botanically almost indistinguishable from the Karoo above the Great Escarpment.
Statistics from the South African Environmental Affairs department show a record 1215 rhinos have been killed in 2014.
It is estimated that there are 1,200,000 orphans in South Africa.
Due to this varied topography and oceanic influence, a great variety of climatic zones exist.
Vegetation becomes even more sparse towards the northwest due to low rainfall.
The Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions estimates over 100,000 people were driven from their homes.
The South African National Defence Force (SANDF) was created in 1994, as an all volunteer force composed of the former South African Defence Force, the forces of the African nationalist groups (Umkhonto we Sizwe and Azanian People's Liberation Army), and the former Bantustan defence forces.
Child and baby rape incidences are some of the highest in the world, largely as a result of the virgin cleansing myth, and a number of high-profile cases (sometimes as young as eight months) have outraged the nation.
The first human-to-human heart transplant was performed by cardiac surgeon Christiaan Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in December 1967, Max Theiler developed a vaccine against yellow fever, Allan McLeod Cormack pioneered x-ray computed tomography, and Aaron Klug developed crystallographic electron microscopy techniques.
South Africa scored well in the categories of Rule of Law, Transparency & Corruption and Participation & Human Rights, but was let down by its relatively poor performance in Safety & Security.
The targets were mainly migrants and refugees seeking asylum, but a third of the victims were South African citizens.
During the early 1800s, many Dutch settlers departed from the Cape Colony, where they had been subjected to British control.
South Africa houses many endemic species, among them the critically endangered riverine rabbit (''Bunolagus monticullaris'') in the Karoo.
These people, who are a physically distinct population from other Africans, have their own cultural identity based on their hunter-gatherer societies.
Several important scientific and technological developments have originated in South Africa.
Nearly 50 murders are committed each day in South Africa.
Muslims accounted for 1.5% of the population, Hindus 1.2%, traditional African religion 0.3% and Judaism 0.2%.
The link between HIV, a virus spread primarily by sexual contact, and AIDS was long denied by prior president Thabo Mbeki and then health minister Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, who insisted that the many deaths in the country are due to malnutrition, and hence poverty, and not HIV.
Zuma asserted that BRICS member countries would also work with each other through the UN, the Group of Twenty (G20) and the India, Brazil South Africa (IBSA) forum.
South Africa has no legally defined capital city.
It is the country's legislative capital.
