One of them was designated as a nationwide civilian broadcast, another was for military service and the other two stations included a French language broadcast station and foreign language station broadcasting in Chinese, English, Khmer and Thai.
From 1969 to 1971 there were about 22,000 ARVN combat deaths per year.
The emerging South Vietnamese middle class and youth in the 1960s became increasingly more Westernised, and followed American cultural and social trends, especially in music, fashion and social attitudes in major cities like Saigon.
Finally, largely as a result of U.S. air and naval support, as well as determination by ARVN soldiers, the Easter Offensive was halted.
A Vietnamese emperor, Bảo Đại, residing in Huế, was the nominal ruler of Annam, which had parallel French and Vietnamese systems of administration.
In early 1966, protesters influenced by popular Buddhist monk Thích Trí Quang attempted an uprising in Quang's hometown of Da Nang.
The North called this the "Ho Chi Minh Campaign".
Slowly, ARVN began to expand from its counter-insurgency role to become the primary ground defense against the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese.
Many of the evacuees were taken directly by helicopter to multiple aircraft carriers waiting off the coast.
There were over 25,000 South Vietnamese casualties during the ceasefire period.
Television was introduced to South Vietnam on 7 February 1966 with black-and-white FCC system.
Throughout this period, the level of U.S. aid and political support increased.
He was re-elected unopposed in 1971, receiving a suspiciously high 94% of the vote on an 87% turn-out.
The Republic of Vietnam was proclaimed on 26 October 1955 with Ngô Đình Diệm as its first president.
The Geneva Accords promised elections in 1956 to determine a national government for a united Vietnam.
''Christian Science Monitor'' Saigon correspondent Dan Sutherland observed in 1970 that "Under its new press law, South Vietnam now has one of the freest presses in Southeast Asia, and the daily paper with the biggest circulation here happens to be sharply critical of President Thieu....Since the new press law was promulgated nine months ago, the government has not been able to close down ''Tin Sang'' or any other newspaper among the more than 30 now being published in Saigon."
There were four AM and one FM radio stations, all of them owned by government (VTVN), named Radio Vietnam.
A summary of human rights under the Thieu regime was provided by Congressman Leo Ryan, who was a strong critic of U.S. policy in Vietnam:  "Although South Vietnam is no bastion of democratic principles, the worst charges of widespread repression of fundamental human rights are overblown.
The North Vietnamese army captured the city, placing the Viet Cong flag over the Independence Palace.
The NVA had a vastly greater supply of new equipment and ammunition.
General Dương Văn Minh became president, but after only three months, he was ousted in January 1964 by General Nguyễn Khánh.
Faced with few viable options, the South tried to form a coalition government that would be palatable to the Communists, one that favored negotiated peace and neutrality.
On 26 October 1956, the military was reorganised by the administration of President Ngô Đình Diệm who established the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN, pronounced "arvin").
Their occupation armies were withdrawn from Laos and Cambodia.
China militarily seized control of the Paracels in 1974.
The assault combined infantry wave assaults, artillery and the first massive use of tanks by the North Vietnamese.
Because the new coalition government would be headed by Big Minh, General Vien immediately submitted his resignation to then President of South Vietnam Trần Văn Hương, who succeeded President Thieu as President.
The government remains a collective dictatorship under the close control of the Communist Party.
South Vietnam maintained a free-market economy and ties to the west.
With the support of the United States government and the CIA, ARVN officers led by General Dương Văn Minh staged a coup and killed him in 1963.
Democratic Republic of Vietnam and Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam were merged together to become the current Socialist Republic of Vietnam through the 1976 election, which was held on 25 April 1976.
It received international recognition in 1949 as the "State of Vietnam" (1949&ndash;55), and later as the "Republic of Vietnam" (1955&ndash;75).
Nguyễn Văn Thiệu resigned on 21 April 1975, and fled to Taiwan.
Diệm was overthrown in a coup on 2 November 1963 with the tacit approval of the U.S.
By bringing the war to Vietnam's cities, however, and  by demonstrating the continued strength of communist forces, it marked a turning point in U.S. support for the government in South Vietnam.
Public reaction was unfavourable and on 4 June 1973 the U.S. Senate passed the Case–Church Amendment to prohibit such intervention.
During these years, the United States began taking full control of the war against the NLF and the role of the ARVN became less and less significant.
In 1955, Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm rigged a referendum, which ended with a 98% vote in favour of deposing Bảo Đại.
He launched an anti-communist denunciation campaign (To Cong) against remnants of the communist Viet Cong.
It had few remaining operational tanks and artillery pieces, as well as a shortage of spare parts, and ammunition.
Coup attempts followed in September and February, the latter resulting in Air Marshall Nguyễn Cao Kỳ becoming prime minister and Nguyễn Văn Thiệu becoming nominal head of state.
North Vietnam controlled South Vietnam under military occupation, while the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam, which had been proclaimed in June 1969 by the NLF, became the nominal government.
The unified Socialist Republic of Vietnam was inaugurated on 2 July 1976.
Initially, the nation was a republic with former Emperor Bảo Đại as Head of State.
U.S. President Nixon dispatched more bombers to provide air support for ARVN when it seemed that South Vietnam was about to be overrun.
In 1970 they performed well in Cambodia and were executing 3 times as many operations as they had during the American war period.
As the military situation deteriorated, ARVN troops started deserting.
On 26 October 1955, Diệm declared himself the president of the newly proclaimed Republic of Vietnam.
He nominated his Vice President Trần Văn Hương as his successor.
The economy was greatly assisted by American aid and the presence of large numbers of Americans in the country between 1961 and 1973.
The National Liberation Front had made great progress and was close to declaring provisional revolutionary governments in large areas."
The North was not interested in negotiations, however, and its tanks rolled into Saigon largely unopposed which led to the Fall of Saigon.
Former emperor Bảo Đại accepted the position of chief of state (''quoc truong'').
After the signing of the Paris Peace Accords in 1973, all U.S. military forces withdrew from South Vietnam and theoretically the war officially ended, however clashes between ARVN and Viet Cong forces continued.
Hanoi directed the insurgency, which grew in intensity.
During the hours leading up to the surrender, the United States undertook a massive evacuation of its embassy in Saigon, Operation Frequent Wind.
The new administration of Richard Nixon introduced a policy of Vietnamization to reduce U.S. combat involvement.
In 1965, the feuding civilian government voluntarily resigned and handed power back to the nation's military, in the hope this would bring stability and unity to the nation.
Political prisoners in South Vietnam numbered only in the thousands.
After World War II, the Viet Minh, led by Ho Chi Minh, proclaimed the establishment of a Democratic Republic of Vietnam in Hanoi in September, 1945.
Thiệu used the aftermath of the Tet Offensive to sideline Kỳ, his chief rival, and ran for re-election unopposed in 1971.
The ARVN forces were greatly outnumbered by the advancing North Vietnamese army.
The North Vietnamese quickly moved to marginalise non-communist members of the PRG and integrate South Vietnam into the communist North.
Lacking U.S. air support, the ARVN could not hold them back.
After promising not to do so during the 1964 election campaign, in 1965 President Lyndon B. Johnson decided to send in much larger numbers of combat troops, and conflict steadily escalated to become what is commonly known as the Vietnam War.
He refused and was held captive until the end of the coup and was released only because of his close friendship with one of the coup leaders.
Its capital was Saigon.
With respect to the question of reunification, the non-communist Vietnamese delegation objected strenuously to any division of Vietnam, but lost out when the French accepted the proposal of Viet Minh delegate Phạm Văn Đồng, who proposed that Vietnam eventually be united by elections under the supervision of "local commissions".
The evacuees included U.S. government personnel as well as high-ranking members of the ARVN and other South Vietnamese who were seen as potential targets for persecution by the Communists.
But as Saigon began to roll back the Viet Cong, they found it necessary to adopt a new strategy, hammered out at a series of meetings in Hanoi in March 1973, according to the memoirs of Trần Văn Trà.
All resistance crumbled.
Afterward, the country introduced economic reforms that created a market economy in the mid-1990s.
Neither the United States government nor Ngô Đình Diệm's State of Vietnam signed anything at the 1954 Geneva Conference.
President Huong, knowing the 1963 coup history, granted General Vien's resignation request, (Vien had submitted his resignation to President Thieu many times and had always been turned down).
Kỳ and Thieu functioned in those roles until 1967, bringing much-desired stability to the government.
Between Tonkin in the north and Cochinchina in the south was the protectorate of Annam.
On 31 January 1968, the NVA and the Viet Cong broke the traditional truce accompanying the Tết (Lunar New Year) holiday.
The Diệm government's military defeats against the Viet Cong and its repressions against Buddhists led to a loss of support among the populace as well as among Diệm's support in the Kennedy administration in the U.S.
In 1963, at the Battle of Ap Bac, some 1,400 ARVN troops were defeated by only 350 Viet Cong guerrillas.
Thieu quickly consolidated power much to the dismay of those who hoped for an era of more political openness.
The "pits" were above ground and were protected from the elements by a normal roof ten feet above the ceiling bars.
The Vietnam War began in 1959 with an uprising by Viet Cong forces armed and controlled by Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
In many districts, there were more votes to remove Bảo Đại than there were registered voters.
Until late 1965, multiple coups and changes of government occurred, with some civilians being allowed to give a semblance of civil rule overseen by a military junta.
A repressive leader, Ky was greatly despised by his fellow countrymen.
Relations with the public also remained poor as their only counter to Viet Cong organising was to resurrect the Strategic Hamlet Program, which many peasants resented.
As historian James Gibson summed up the situation: "Strategic hamlets had failed….
Xuân Lộc was taken and on 30 April 1975, initiated the Fall of Saigon.
A gas pipeline would be built from North Vietnam to Viet Cong headquarters in Lộc Ninh, about  north of Saigon.
South Vietnam went through many political changes during its short life.
The State of Vietnam was created through co-operation between anti-communist Vietnamese and the French government on 14 June 1949.
In 1963, Ngô Đình Diệm was assassinated in a coup d'état carried out by ARVN officers led by Dương Văn Minh ('Big Minh'), supported by the CIA.
In June 1965, Kỳ's influence over the ruling military government was solidified when he forced civilian prime minister Phan Huy Quát from power.
The film, produced in the 1950s and 60s, some produced by Freedom Productions (a South Vietnamese film production company), included newsreels, ''Vietnam Documentary'', propaganda and raw video footage.
They imposed censorship and suspended civil liberties, and intensified anticommunist efforts.
After Diệm was killed in a military ''coup'' led by general Dương Văn Minh in 1963, there was a series of short-lived military governments.
The colonial struggle in Vietnam became part of the global Cold War in October 1949 when a victorious Chinese communist army arrived on Vietnam's northern border.
President John F. Kennedy increased the size of the advisory force fourfold and allowed the advisers to participate in combat operations, and later acquiesced in the removal of President Diệm in a military ''coup''
After only one week in office, Trần Văn Hương handed over the presidency to General Dương Văn Minh ("Big Minh").
Despite the end of French colonial rule, the French language still maintained a strong presence in South Vietnam where it was used in administration, education (especially at the secondary and higher levels), trade and diplomacy.
The poll was supervised by his younger brother, Ngô Đình Nhu.
The Battle of Dong Xoai in 1965 was another humiliating ARVN defeat.
The French, who needed troops to fight in Algeria, completely withdrew from Vietnam by April 1956.
Apart from the mainland, the Republic of Vietnam also administered the Paracels and Spratly Islands.
Designed for one prisoner, but, because of overcrowded conditions, often used to imprison three, they measured roughly five by ten feet at the ground and were just under ten feet high.
'''South Vietnam''', officially the '''Republic of Vietnam''' (), was a state governing the southern half of Vietnam from 1955 to 1975.
Early on, the focus of the army was combating the guerrilla fighters of the Viet Cong, or National Liberation Front, an insurgent movement supplied by North Vietnam.
Khánh sought to capitalize on the crisis with the Vũng Tàu Charter, a new constitution that would have curtailed civil liberties and concentrated his power, but was forced to back down faced with widespread protests and strikes.
Generals tended to be political appointees and corruption was rampant.
The South Vietnamese regime was incapable of winning the peasantry because of its class base among landlords.
The retreat became a rout.
Starting in 1968, South Vietnam began calling up every available man for service in the ARVN, reaching a strength of a million soldiers by 1972.
The evacuation was forced to stop by the U.S. Navy.
(ICC) stated that fair, unbiased elections were not possible, reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement.
In July 1955, Diệm announced in a broadcast that South Vietnam would not participate in the elections specified in the Geneva accords.
In Saigon, Diệm was credited with 133% of the vote and he went on to proclaim himself the president of the newly formed Republic of Vietnam.
However, the officer corps was still the biggest problem, and after the 1973 Paris Peace Accords, the ARVN lacked necessary military supplies and weapons as a result of a cutback of U.S. financial aid and assistance.
In August 1974, Nixon was forced to resign as a result of the Watergate scandal and the U.S. Congress voted to reduce assistance to South Vietnam from $1 billion a year to $700 million.
It is not doubted that there are some political prisoners, but neither the populace as a whole nor the opposition political leaders appear to be living in fear of government repression."
Fighting reached a climax during the Tet Offensive of 1968, when there were over 1.5 million South Vietnamese soldiers and 500,000 U.S. soldiers in South Vietnam.
The military nominated Nguyễn Văn Thiệu as their candidate, and he was elected with a plurality of the popular vote.
Electrical production increased fourteen-fold between 1954 and 1973 while industrial output increase by an average of 6.9 percent annually.
The term "South Vietnam" became common usage in 1954, when the Geneva Conference provisionally partitioned Vietnam into communist and non-communist parts.
They are still in the Library.
The situation in South Vietnam further deteriorated.
Radio Vietnam started its operation in 1955 under then president Ngo Dinh Diem, and ceased operation on 30 April 1975, with the broadcast of surrender by Duong Van Minh during the Fall of Saigon.
It was code-named Nguyễn Huệ after the Vietnamese emperor who defeated the Chinese in 1789.
All the Marines and diplomats were evacuated, but thousands of South Vietnamese citizens waited vainly at the U.S. embassy compound, and one block away at the former USAID and CIA office space in the Pittman Apartment House on 22 Gia Long Street atop the roof for helicopters that never came.
Cultural life was strongly influenced by China until French domination in the 18th century.
Before World War II, the southern third of Vietnam was the colony of Cochinchina, which was administered as part of French Indochina.
Following American withdrawal from the war in 1973, the South Vietnamese government continued fighting the North Vietnamese, until, overwhelmed by a conventional invasion by the North, it finally unconditionally surrendered on 30 April 1975, the day of the surrender of Saigon.
Indeed, there was no longer a ‘regime’ in the sense of a relatively stable political alliance and functioning bureaucracy.
U.S. aid peaked at $2.3 billion in 1973, but dropped to $1.1 billion in 1974.
In July 1954, France and the Viet Minh (later the Viet Cong) agreed at the Geneva Conference that the State of Vietnam would rule the territory south of the 17th parallel, pending unification on the basis of supervised elections in 1956.
Hồ purged non-communist politicians from the DRV.
Diệm attempted to stabilize South Vietnam by defending against Viet Cong activities.
General Cao Văn Viên, then Colonel and Commander of the Airborne Brigade, had been captured and held by the Big Minh faction and threatened with execution unless he ordered his troops to join the coup.
With U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, the English language was also later introduced to the military and became a secondary diplomatic language.
The ruling elite population of South Vietnam was known to speak French as its primary language.
The value of the ARVN was highly questionable in this period.
He gave the order that all deserters would be executed and pulled enough forces together so that the North Vietnamese army failed to take Huế.
By this time, the Ho Chi Minh trail, once an arduous mountain trek, had been upgraded into a drivable highway with gasoline stations.
* NWB-TV on channel 11, operated by Armed Forces Radio and Television Service, catered to American troops in South Vietnam.
Its sovereignty was recognized by the United States and by some eighty-seven other nations.
The United States, under President Kennedy sent advisors and a great deal of financial support to aid ARVN in combating the Viet Cong.
In desperation, Thiệu recalled Nguyễn Cao Kỳ from retirement as a military commander, but resisted calls to name his old rival prime minister.
Under pressure from the U.S., they held elections for president and the legislature in 1967, Thiệu being elected president with 34% of the vote in a widely criticized poll.
Phan Khắc Sửu was named head of state, but power remained with a junta of generals led by Khánh, which soon fell to infighting.
Thieu ruled until the final days of the war, resigning in April 1975.
The most crucial moment of truth for the ARVN came with General Võ Nguyên Giáp's 1972 Easter Offensive, the first all-out invasion of South Vietnam by the communists.
The French Indochina War began on 19 December 1946, with the French regaining control of Hanoi and other northern cities.
Instead, civil government and military operations had virtually ceased.
They weren’t good—few prison cells are—but they were far less horrible than we were led to believe by the critics."
ARVN and President Diệm began to be criticised by the foreign press when the troops were used to crush southern religious groups like the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo as well as to raid Buddhist temples, which Diệm claimed were harboring Communist guerrillas.
They were also plagued by continuing problems of severe corruption among the officer corps.
The radio stations across the former South were later reused by the communist regime to broadcast their state-run radio service.
In 1949, anti-communist Vietnamese politicians formed a rival government in Saigon led by former emperor Bảo Đại.
In desperation, President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu fired the incompetent General Hoàng Xuân Lãm and replaced him with ARVN's best commander, General Ngô Quang Trưởng.
Although the U.S. was highly critical of them, the ARVN continued to be entirely U.S. armed and funded.
Diệm, however, viewed the election as a test of authority.
The situation within the ranks of the military stabilised in mid-1965 when the Vietnam Air Force chief Nguyễn Cao Kỳ became Prime Minister, with General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu as the figurehead chief of state.
As Prime Minister, Kỳ consolidated control of the South Vietnemese government and ruled the country with an iron fist.
However, South Vietnamese Premier Ngô Đình Diệm, who preferred American sponsorship to French, rejected the agreement.
The Embassy of the Republic of Vietnam in Washington donated 527 reels of South Vietnamese-produced film to the Library of Congress during the embassy's closure following the Fall of Saigon.
Dương Văn Minh was the nation's last president and unconditionally surrendered to the Communist forces a few days after assuming office.
Diệm's removal and assassination set off a period of political instability and declining legitimacy of the Saigon government.
Languages spoken by minority groups included Chinese, Khmer, and other languages spoken by Montagnard groups.
He acted against criminal factions by launching military campaigns against three powerful main sects; the Cao Đài, Hòa Hảo and the Bình Xuyên organised crime syndicate whose military strength combined amounted to approximately 350,000 soldiers.
It was more "evolved", and French interests were stronger than in other parts of Indochina, notably in the form of French-owned rubber plantations.
At that time, the traditional culture began to acquire an overlay of western characteristics.
A plan to improve logistics was prepared so that the North Vietnamese Army would be able to launch a massive invasion of the South, projected for 1976, before Saigon's army could be fully trained.
South Vietnam was formerly a member of ACCT, Asian Development Bank (ADB), World Bank (IBRD), International Development Association (IDA), International Finance Corporation (IFC), IMF, International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Intelsat), Interpol, IOC, ITU, League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (LORCS), UNESCO and Universal Postal Union (UPU).
In June 1946, France declared Cochinchina a republic within French Indochina.
General Dương Văn Minh, recently appointed president by Trần Văn Hương, unconditionally surrendered the city and government bringing the Republic of Vietnam and also the Army of the Republic of Vietnam to an end.
This was known as the "Bảo Đại Solution."
Despite a peace treaty concluded in January 1973, fighting continued until the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong armies overran Saigon on 30 April 1975, marking the end of the South Vietnamese state.
In 1967, South Vietnam held its first elections under the new system.
When Vietnam was divided, 800,000 to 1 million North Vietnamese, mainly (but not exclusively) Roman Catholics, sailed south as part of Operation Passage to Freedom due to a fear of religious persecution in the North.
As Saigon's delegation did not sign the Geneva accords, it was not bound by it.
An iconic image of the evacuation is the widely seen footage of empty Huey helicopters being jettisoned over the side of the carriers, to provide more room on the ship's deck for more evacuees to land.
In 1968, the NLF ceased to be an effective fighting organization after the Tet Offensive and the war was largely taken over by regular army units of North Vietnam.
Diệm was credited with 98 percent of the votes.
His American advisors had recommended a more modest winning margin of "60 to 70 percent."
During the same period, rice output increased by 203 percent and the number of students in university increased from 2,000 to 90,000.
In the confusion that followed Big Minh took power, but was only the first in a succession of ARVN generals to assume the presidency of South Vietnam in a period of intense political instability.
Despite successes in politics, economics, and social change in the first 5 years, Diệm quickly became a dictatorial leader.
General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu led the country from 1967 until 1975.
Diệm held a referendum on 23 October 1955 to determine the future of the country.
At the time of the conference, it was expected that the South would continue to be a French dependency.
Meanwhile, the Gulf of Tonkin incident of 2 August 1964 led to a dramatic increase in direct American participation in the war, with nearly 200,000 troops deployed by the end of the year.
In Saigon, 133 percent of the registered population reportedly voted to remove Bảo Đại.
General Vien then escaped to the U.S. as a civilian once his resignation was effective and formalised.
On 15 March 1973, U.S. President Richard Nixon implied that the U.S. would intervene militarily if the communist side violated the ceasefire.
In 1975, the communists of North Vietnam launched an offensive in the South, which became known as the Ho Chi Minh Campaign.
The Viet Cong resumed offensive operations and by January 1974 it had recaptured the territory that it had lost earlier.
The communist leaders had expected that the ceasefire terms would favour their side.
Covering major cities in South Vietnam, started with a one-hour broadcast per day then increased to six hours in the evening during the 1970s.
* THVN-TV (Truyền hình Việt Nam-TV) on channel 9, featuring Vietnamese-language shows, news, and special announcements from Saigon.
A French governor in Hanoi administered Cochinchina, as well as the northern third of Vietnam (then the protectorate of Tonkin).
The oil price shock of October 1973 caused significant damage to the South Vietnamese economy.
