Memorable hurricanes to hit South Carolina include Hazel (1954) and Hugo (1989), both Category 4 hurricanes.
Due to the changing economics of farming, much of the land is now reforested in Loblolly pine for the lumber industry.
The northwestern part of the Piedmont is also known as the Foothills.
Highest in elevation is the Blue Ridge Region, containing an escarpment of the Blue Ridge Mountains, which continue into North Carolina and Georgia, as part of the southern Appalachian Mountains.
Brooks was retaliating for a speech Sumner had given in which he attacked slavery and insulted South Carolinians.
About 30 Native American Tribes lived in what is now South Carolina at the time the first Europeans arrived in the region.
The northern Carolina coast lacked a good harbor, so many of the farmers used Virginia's ports to conduct their trade.
The most important were the Catawba (Siouan language), Cherokee (Iroquoian languages), and Yamasee (Muskhogean language).
It separated because of political reasons as the settlers wanted political power.
There are also numerous historic sites and museums scattered throughout the state paying homage to many events and periods in the state's history from Native American inhabitation to the present day.
Governor "Pitchfork Ben Tillman", a Populist, led the effort to disenfranchise the blacks and poor whites, although he controlled Democratic state politics from the 1890s to 1910 with a base among poor white farmers.
Two of the strongest hurricanes to strike South Carolina in recent history were Hurricane Hazel (1954) and Hurricane Hugo (1989).
The region would later be claimed by both the Spanish and the French.
* Hilton Head Airport – Hilton Head Island/Beaufort
Every member has in him a certain mixture of… colored blood.
Also located in this area is Caesars Head State Park.
In the mid to late 1870s, white Democrats used paramilitary groups such as the Red Shirts to intimidate and terrorize black voters.
Mills built to harness this resource encouraged the growth of several cities, including the capital, Columbia.
In 1629, King Charles I gave the southern colonies to Robert Heath.
During the constitutional convention in 1895, he supported another man's proposal that the state adopt a one-drop rule, as well as prohibit marriage between whites and anyone with any known African ancestry.
The state also converted its agricultural base from cotton to more profitable crops; attracted large military bases through its powerful Democratic congressional delegation, part of the one-party South following disfranchisement of blacks at the turn of the century; and created tourism industries.
The state is also home to numerous minor league professional teams.
This change is intended to result in healthier babies and fewer unnecessary costs for South Carolina.
Early in the 20th century, South Carolina developed a thriving textile industry.
The term early elective is defined as a labor induction or Cesarean section between 37–39 weeks that is not medically based.
The Upstate region contains the roots of an ancient, eroded mountain chain.
There was $5,114 spent on health expenses per capita in the state, compared to the US average of $5,283.
In 1877, the federal government withdrew its troops as part of the Compromise of 1877 that ended Reconstruction.
As it violated international treaties, this law was declared unconstitutional by Supreme Court Justice William Johnson.
Inland, the average January overnight low is around  in Columbia and temperatures well below freezing in the Upstate.
King Charles gave eight aristocrats a royal charter to settle Carolina (Carolina is Latin for "Charlesian") because earlier they had helped him regain his throne.
South Carolina averages around 50 days of thunderstorm activity a year.
They regained political control of the state under conservative white "Redeemers" and pro-business Bourbon Democrats.
Slave labor was integral to the economic success of rice and indigo as commodity crops.
The larger rivers are navigable up to the fall line, providing a trade route for mill towns.
The struggle of the Civil Rights Movement took place in South Carolina as well as other places in the South.
His ruling was not enforced.
General William Tecumseh Sherman marched through the state in early 1865, destroying numerous plantations, and captured the state capital of Columbia on February 17.
The first European to land was Francisco Gordillo in 1521, from Spain.
Legislators were now supposed to represent
According to the South Carolina Arts Commission, creative industries generate $9.2 billion annually and support over 78,000 jobs in the state.
While precipitation is abundant the entire year in almost the entire state, the coast tends to have a slightly wetter summer, while inland, March tends to be the wettest month and winter the driest season, with November being the driest month.
South Carolina became the first state to vote to secede from the Union on December 20, 1860.
Industrial outputs include: textile goods, chemical products, paper products, machinery, automobiles and automotive products and tourism.
On February 5, 1778, South Carolina became the first state to ratify the Articles of Confederation, the initial governing document of the United States.
There are 1,950 foreign-owned firms operating in South Carolina employing almost 135,000 people.
As part of its response, the state passed a Negro Seamen Act, requiring foreign and northern black sailors to be prohibited from interacting with people in South Carolina ports.
Sephardic Jews had prospered in contributing to the state and by 1800, South Carolina had the largest population of Jews in the United States.
The state's infant mortality rate was 9.4 deaths per 1,000 births compared to the US average of 6.9 deaths.
Parts of Carolina (mostly the coastal areas) had been colonized earlier by Spain (see Fort Caroline), but battles between the Spanish and the Native Americans resulted in the Spanish people retreating to Florida, Cuba, Mexico, and Central and South America.
The Sandhills are remnants of coastal dunes from a time when the land was sunken or the oceans were higher.
It is generally hilly, with thin, stony clay soils, and contains few areas suitable for farming.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) brought 1.06 billion dollars to the state economy in 2010.
Five years later, in 1526, another Spaniard, Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón, founded the first European settlement in the territory that now constitutes the United States.
With urbanization their governments have become increasingly important in the state.
Indigo became an important commodity crop for the dyeing of textiles.
Snowfall in South Carolina is somewhat uncommon in most of the state, while coastal areas receive less than an inch (2.5&nbsp;cm) annually on average.
As of 2010, South Carolina is the American state with the highest per capita Baha'i population with 17,559 adherents, making it the second largest religion in the state.
Its first attempt at nullification was in 1822, following discovery of a conspiracy for a slave rebellion led by Denmark Vesey, a freed slave.
The American Revolution caused a shock to slavery in the South.
The state became a hotbed of racial and economic tensions during the Populist and Agrarian movements of the 1890s.
The Fall Line, which marks the limit of navigable rivers, runs along the boundary of the Sandhills and the Piedmont, which has rolling hills and clay soils.
On January 17, 1781, the Battle of Cowpens won by the American forces, marked the beginning of the decline in British fortunes.
A 2009 statewide poll by the University of South Carolina Institute for Public Service and Policy Research found that 67% of residents had participated in the arts in some form during the past year and on average citizens had participated in the arts 14 times in the previous year.
The 1895 constitution overturned local representative government, reducing the role of the counties to agents of state government, effectively ruled by the General Assembly, through the legislative delegations for each county.
Starting January 1, 2013, South Carolina was one of the first states that no longer pays for 'early elective' deliveries of babies, under either Medicaid and private insurance.
The capital and largest city is Columbia with a 2013 population of 133,358; the Greenville-Anderson-Mauldin metropolitan area had a 2013 population of 850,965.
South Carolina has historically had a weak executive branch and a strong legislature.
There are several large venues in the state that can house major events, such as Colonial Life Arena in Columbia, Bon Secours Wellness Arena in Greenville, and North Charleston Coliseum.
Several changes to the state constitution have affected the office of the governor and the cabinet.
South Carolinian troops participated in major Confederate campaigns, but no major battles were fought inland.
In 2015, the national average SAT score was 1490.
The counties lacked representative government until home rule was passed in 1975.
The Charleston Earthquake of 1886 was the largest quake ever to hit the Southeastern United States.
The Fortune 1000 list includes SCANA, Sonoco Products and ScanSource.
There were 26 percent of children and 13 percent of elderly living in poverty in the state, compared to 23 percent and 13 percent, respectively, doing so in the US.
After the American Civil War, it was readmitted into the United States on June 25, 1868.
For overall health care, South Carolina is ranked 33rd out of the 50 states, according to the Commonwealth Fund, a private health foundation working to improve the health care system.
After the Stono Rebellion of 1739, the colony prohibited importing African slaves through Charleston for ten years, having observed they were more likely to cause rebellions than slaves from the Caribbean, who were already "seasoned" or those born in the colony.
This status continued until 1973, when the state constitution was amended to provide for home rule for the counties.
South Carolina suffered 18,666 military deaths during the American Civil War, which was nearly one-third of the white male population of fighting age.
Leading South Carolina figures, such as governors Charles Pinckney and William Moultrie, backed with money and actions the French plans to further their political, strategic, and commercial goals in North America.
The state postponed such a one-drop law for years.
The mountains of extreme northwestern South Carolina tend to have the most substantial snow accumulation.
South Carolina is a right-to-work state and many businesses utilize staffing agencies to temporarily fill positions.
The environment here is that of the Appalachian-Blue Ridge forests ecoregion.
Planters had taken their families (and sometimes slaves) to points inland for refuge.
South Carolina has many venues for visual and performing arts.
South Carolina was the first state to ratify the Articles of Confederation and the eighth state to ratify the U.S. Constitution on May 23, 1788.
They are geographically comprehensive; all areas of the state are included in counties.
Domtar, located in Rock Hill, is the only Fortune 500 company headquartered in South Carolina.
South Carolina is also prone to tropical cyclones and tornadoes.
A person was not eligible to sit in the State House of Representatives unless he was legally seized and possessed in his own right of a settled freehold estate of 500 acres of land and 10 Negroes, or at least 150 pounds sterling, clear of debt.
Southern Carolina prospered from the fertility of the Low Country and the harbors, such as that at Charles Town (later Charleston).
Residents of urban areas had been found to be markedly underrepresented in the legislature under the county-based system.
In the early years, not many people bought land there, so the proprietors lowered the price on some portions.
To prevent that from happening again, Democrats gained passage of a new constitution in 1895 that effectively disfranchised almost all blacks and many poor whites by new requirements for poll taxes, residency, and literacy tests that dramatically reduced the voter rolls.
South Carolina has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification ''Cfa''), although high-elevation areas in the Upstate area have fewer subtropical characteristics than areas on the Atlantic coastline.
Most people supported the French Revolution (1789–1795), as the French had been allies and they were proud of their own revolution.
The Gibbes Museum of Art in Charleston, the Greenville County Museum of Art, the Columbia Museum of Art, Spartanburg Art Museum, and the South Carolina State Museum in Columbia among others provide access to visual arts to the state.
Carolina did not develop as planned.
In addition, indigo became a commodity crop, also developed with the skills of African slaves.
The colony of Carolina was settled by wealthy English aristocrats, mostly migrating from Barbados, where they had already set up sugar plantations.
As a result of Jackson's threat of force, the South Carolina state convention was re-convened and repealed the Ordinance of Nullification in March.
Major agricultural outputs of the state are: tobacco, poultry, cattle, dairy products, soybeans, hay, rice, and swine.
Carolina was settled to make profit from trade and also by selling land.
From 1790 until 1865,  wealthy landowners and slave owners were firmly in exclusive control of South Carolina.
In 1993, the state passed an amendment requiring a limited cabinet (all of whom must be popularly elected).
The French made several attempts at colonization which failed because of the hostility of Indian tribes and a lack of provisions.
The fall line was an important early source of water power.
Some notable tornadoes have struck South Carolina, and the state averages around 14 tornadoes annually.
* Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport – Greenville/Spartanburg
* Myrtle Beach International Airport – Myrtle Beach
In 1782 they decided to evacuate their troops by the end of the year.
They established public education, welfare institutions, and home rule for counties, expanding democracy.
During this time the state had changed, with increasing urbanization, but rural counties retained proportionally more power as the legislature was based in representatives elected from counties rather than population districts.
They have sent good soldiers to the Confederate Army, and are now landowners and taxpayers.
During the early part of the 20th century, thousands of African Americans left South Carolina and other southern states for jobs and better opportunities in northern, Midwestern and western cities.
South Carolina politics between 1783 and 1795 were marred by rivalry between a Federalist elite supporting Alexander Hamilton and the central government in Philadelphia and a large proportion of common people.
It is continuing a steady decline with an unemployment rate of 8.9% as of March 2012.
Rice cultivation was developed on a large scale with the help of skills and techniques of slaves imported from rice-growing regions of Africa.
The natural areas of the coastal plain are part of the Middle Atlantic coastal forests ecoregion.
South Carolina is composed of five geographic areas, or physiographic provinces, whose boundaries roughly parallel the Atlantic coastline.
The state's coastline contains many salt marshes and estuaries, as well as natural ports such as Georgetown and Charleston.
He drew blood and injured Sumner badly enough that the latter was unable to serve for several months.
Under presidential Reconstruction (1865–66), freedmen (former slaves) were given limited rights.
Antebellum South Carolina did more to advance nullification and secession than any other Southern state.
In 1780, South Carolinian loyalists to the British crown helped British troops recapture South Carolina from the previously successful rebels.
If the person was a non-resident, he was required to own a settled freehold estate of 500 pounds sterling, clear of debt.
Anti-abolitionist feelings ran strong in South Carolina, where the economy depended on slave labor and which had a majority-slave population.
According to the University of South Carolina's Arnold School of Public Health, Consortium for Latino Immigration Studies, South Carolina's foreign-born population grew faster than any other state between 2000 and 2005.
The state's teen birth rate was 53 births per 1,000 teens, compared to the average of 41.9 births for the US, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.
However,  the Topper Site has been tentatively dated to about 30,000 years ago.
It would be a cruel injustice and the source of endless litigation, of scandal, horror, feud, and bloodshed to undertake to annul or forbid marriage for a remote, perhaps obsolete trace of Negro blood.
Just west of the coastal plain is the Sandhills region.
Since 1994, BMW has had a production facility in Spartanburg County near Greer.
The busiest by passenger volume is Charleston International Airport.
At the southeastern edge of the Piedmont is the fall line, where rivers drop to the coastal plain.
The doors would be open to scandal, malice and greed; to statements on the witness stand that the father or grandfather or grandmother had said that A or B had Negro blood in their veins.
Reapportionment made obvious the need for other changes to county structure, leading to the legislature passing the constitutional amendment.
On November 20, 2014, South Carolina became the 35th state to legalize same-sex marriages.
In the northwest corner of the state are the Blue Ridge Mountains, the smallest geographical region in the state.
The 1865 Constitution changed this process, requiring a popular election.
Some members of the convention realized that prominent white families with some African ancestry could be affected by such legislation.
This settlement was named San Miguel de Gualdape and was founded with 600 settlers, including African slaves, but was abandoned three months later.
In 1856, Democrat South Carolina congressman Preston Brooks entered the United States Senate chamber and, with a metal-tipped cane, beat Massachusetts Republican Senator Charles Sumner.
The bays tend to be oval, lining up in a northwest to southeast orientation.
Many thousands of slaves fled to British authorities to obtain freedom; and many of those left with the British in the last days of the war.
more or less equal numbers of people."
Areas with better drainage make excellent farmland, though some land is swampy.
They created the large earthworks of dams and canals required to irrigate the rice fields.
South Carolina consist of the subtropical coniferous forest biome that is found through the entire state.
According to the United States Census Bureau, as of 2014, South Carolina had an estimated population of 4,896,146, which is an increase of 63,664 from the prior year and an increase of 270,782, or 5.85%, since the year 2010.
By 1896, only 5,500 black voters remained on the voter registration rolls, although they constituted a majority of the state's population.
By 1930 South Carolina had a white majority for the first time since 1708.
South Carolina is the 40th most extensive and the 23rd most populous U.S. state.
As each county had one state senator, that person had considerable power.
Virginian legislators adopted a one-drop law in 1924, forgetting that their state had many people of mixed ancestry among those who identified as white.
Boeing opened an aircraft manufacturing facility in Charleston in 2011, which serves as one of two final assembly sites for the 787 Dreamliner.
On March 26, 1776, the colony adopted the Constitution of South Carolina becoming the first republic in America.
In South Carolina, slaves made up a majority of the population after 1708, and the demand for labor was so high that many were imported from Africa.
There were 2.6 physicians per 1,000 people compared to the US average of 3.2 physicians.
The terrain is flat and the soil is composed entirely of recent sediments such as sand, silt, and clay.
This was the first U.S. legislation denying individual states the right to secede.
As of January 2, 2016, there were 2,948,772 registered voters.
After the war, South Carolina was restored to the United States during Reconstruction.
This is less than some of the states further south, and it is slightly less vulnerable to tornadoes than the states which border on the Gulf of Mexico.
Until the 1868 presidential election, South Carolina's legislature, not the voters, chose the state's electors for the presidential election.
* Charleston International Airport – North Charleston
John Locke, an English philosopher, wrote a constitution for the colony that covered topics such as land divisions and social rankings.
The current United States Constitution was proposed for adoption by the states on September 17, 1787, and South Carolina was the 8th state to ratify it, on May 23, 1788.
She took over managing the plantation when he was assigned elsewhere.
Others secured their freedom by escaping to perceived friendlier locations during the turmoil.
The 1895 state constitution overturned this, reducing the role of counties and strengthening the relative role of the state legislature; essentially the counties were agents of the state and ruled by the General Assembly through the legislative delegation for each county.
South Carolina is also a top destination for golf and water sports.
Thousands of Loyalists and slaves left with them.
They grew tobacco, and sold timber and tar, both categories of naval stores needed by England.
Further inland are the Sandhills, ancient dunes from what used to be South Carolina's coast millions of years ago.
The name ''Carolina'' dates back to October 30, 1629, when King Charles I granted a patent to Sir Robert Heath for the lands south of 36 degrees and north of 31 degrees, "under the name, in honor of that king, of Carolina."
In the summer, South Carolina is hot and humid, with daytime temperatures averaging between  in most of the state and overnight lows averaging  on the coast and from  inland.
South Carolina students averaged 1442.
One of the nation's major performing arts festivals, Spoleto Festival USA, is held annually in Charleston.
Its GDP as of 2013 was $183.6 billion, with an annual growth rate of 3.13%.
Any man who is half a man would be ready to blow up half the world with dynamite to prevent or avenge attacks upon the honor of his mother in the legitimacy or purity of the blood of his father.
Fires began that night and by next morning, most of the central city was destroyed.
The highest recorded temperature is  in Johnston and Columbia on June 29, 2012, and the lowest recorded temperature is  at Caesars Head on January 21, 1985.
The interior receives a little more snow, although nowhere in the state averages more than  of snow annually.
If the law is made as it now stands respectable families in Aiken, Barnwell, Colleton, and Orangeburg will be denied the right to intermarry among people with whom they are now associated and identified.
Much of the Piedmont was once farmed.
On December 20, 1860, when it became clear that Abraham Lincoln, an opponent of the expansion of slavery into new territories, would become the next U.S. president, South Carolina became the first U.S. state to declare its secession from the Union.
It split into northern and southern Carolina, creating two different colonies.
* Florence Regional Airport – Florence
In addition, due to substantial French Huguenot immigration during the colonial years, Charleston was one of the most French-influenced cities in the USA.
It is believed that the first humans settled in the current South Carolina about 15,000 years ago.
The state is occasionally affected by tropical cyclones.
South Carolina was the last state to choose its electors in this manner.
This was done in order to suppress Klan violence against African-American and white voters in the South.
The ''Crescent'' route serves the Upstate cities, the ''Silver Star'' serves the Midlands cities, and the ''Palmetto'' and ''Silver Meteor'' routes serve the low country cities.
And, 34 percent of children were overweight or obese, compared to the US average of 32 percent.
A Republican-Populist biracial coalition took power away from White Democrats temporarily.
