The Great South Basin off the coast of Otago and Southland at over 500,000&nbsp;km2 (covering an area 1.5 times New Zealand’s land mass) is one of New Zealand’s largest undeveloped offshore petroleum basins with prospects for both oil and gas.
Also known as the '''Wairau Massacre''' in most older texts, it was the first serious clash of arms between the two parties after the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi and the only one to take place in the South Island.
This group is made up of elected representatives and senior management from 12 councils and the Department of Internal Affairs.
It has the only maximum/medium security accommodation for women prisoners in New Zealand.
This quake struck at about lunchtime and was centred closer at Lyttelton, and shallower than the prior quake, consequently causing extensive damage.
Geologically, the peninsula comprises the eroded remnants of two large shield volcanoes (Lyttelton formed first, then Akaroa).
Hydroelectric reservoirs are common in South Canterbury and Central Otago, the largest of which is Lake Benmore, on the Waitaki River.
Christchurch is the driest city, receiving about 640&nbsp;mm (25&nbsp;in) of rain per year while Invercargill is the wettest, receiving about 1,150&nbsp;mm (45&nbsp;in).
Parts of the South Island principally Southland and the very southern most areas of Otago near the border with Southland are famous for its people speaking what is often referred to as the "Southland burr", a semi-rhotic, Scottish-influenced dialect of the English language.
Historical maxima and minima are 42.4&nbsp;°C (108.3&nbsp;°F) in Rangiora, Canterbury and −21.6&nbsp;°C (−6.9&nbsp;°F) in Ophir, Otago.
Some of the birds pictured are long extinct, including moa and Haast's eagles.
After a public consultation, the board officially named the island South Island or Te Waipounamu in October 2013.
The total insurance costs of this event were estimated to reach up to $11&nbsp;billion according to the New Zealand Treasury.
* a consortium led by OMV New Zealand Limited (Austria) which includes PTTEP Offshore Investment Company Ltd (Thailand), Mitsui Exploration and Production Australia Pty Ltd (Japan); and
Due to substantial losses, these were cancelled between the late 1960s and early 1980s.
Early in 1848 Edward John Eyre was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of New Munster.
Advancing glaciers eroded large steep-sided valleys, and often carried piles of moraine (rocks and soil) that acted as natural dams.
Together, the Mount Cook and Westland National Parks have been declared a World Heritage Site.
A large number of radio stations serve communities throughout the South Island; these include independent stations, but many are owned by organisations such as Radio New Zealand, The Radio Network, and MediaWorks New Zealand.
The first game was played in 1897 and the last match was played in 1995.
It is the 16th deepest lake in the world.
The three successful permit holders are:
These divisions were at first of geographical significance only, not used as a basis for the government of the colony, which was centralised in Auckland.
The deepest (462&nbsp;m) is Lake Hauroko, in western Southland.
Four Māori died and three were wounded in the incident, while among the Europeans the toll was 22 dead and five wounded.
In Māori legend, the South Island existed first, as the boat of Maui, while the North Island was the fish that he caught.
; Hanmer Forest Park : Situated in the Canterbury region.
The other main industry groups are manufacturing, mining, construction, energy supply, education, health and community services.
The Provincial Council of New Munster had only one legislative session, in 1849, before it succumbed to the virulent attacks of settlers from Wellington.
The South Island is a major centre for electricity generation, especially in the southern half of the island and especially from hydroelectricity.
A Premier of New Zealand, Sir Julius Vogel, was amongst the first people to make this call, which was voted on by the New Zealand Parliament as early as 1865.
The Crusaders and Highlanders represent the upper and lower South Island respectively in rugby union's Super Rugby competition; and Canterbury, Otago, Southland Stags, Tasman Makos all participate in provincial rugby's ITM Cup.
The South Island has seven regional stations (either non-commercial public service or privately owned) that broadcast only in one region or city: 45 South TV, Channel 9, Canterbury Television, CUE, Mainland Television, Shine TV, and Visitor TV.
There are some 3,820 lakes in New Zealand with a surface area larger than one hectare.
While the majority of the time the South Island exports electricity to the North Island via the link, it is also used to import thermally-generated North Island electricity in years of low hydro levels.
Governor Sir George Grey, sensible to the pressures, inspired an ordinance of the General Legislative Council under which new Legislative Councils would be established in each province with two-thirds of their members elected on a generous franchise.
In 1861 gold was discovered at Gabriel's Gully in Central Otago, sparking a gold rush.
Timaru was constructed on rolling hills created from the lava flows of the extinct Mount Horrible, which last erupted many thousands of years ago.
These include the Fox and Franz Josef glaciers on the West Coast, and the Tasman, Hooker, Mueller and Murchison glaciers in the east.
Four are governed by an elected regional council, while three are governed by territorial authorities (the second tier of local government) which also perform the functions of a regional council and thus are known as unitary authorities.
Ngāi Tahu continued to push south, conquering Kaikoura.
In 1865 Parliament voted on a Bill to make the South Island independent: it was defeated 17 to 31.
On 1 March at 12:51, a week after the tragedy, New Zealand observed a two-minute silence.
; Fiordland National Park : (12,519&nbsp;km2, established 1952) The largest national park in New Zealand and one of the largest in the world.
It is a summary of the movements in market capitalisation of each South Island based listed company.
The level of most glacial lakes in the upper parts of the Waitaki and Clutha rivers are controlled for electricity generation.
The HMNZS ''Canterbury'', which was docked at Lyttelton when the quake struck, was involved in providing local community assistance, in particular by providing hot meals.
Dunedin became the wealthiest city in the country and many in the South Island resented financing the North Island’s wars.
The South Island, with an area of , is the largest land mass of New Zealand; it contains about one quarter of the New Zealand population and is the world's 12th-largest island.
Thousands of people took up this offer to relocate temporarily in the wake of the event.
"South Island will be adhered to in all cases".
The New Zealand Police is the primary law enforcement agency of New Zealand including the South Island.
Rolleston prison is located in Rolleston, another satellite town of Christchurch.
* Hakatere Conservation Park
In December 1642, Tasman anchored at the northern end of the island in Golden Bay which he named Moordenaar's Bay (Murderers Bay) before sailing northward to Tonga following a clash with Māori.
Banks Peninsula forms the most prominent of these volcanic features.
Three decentralised Police Districts cover the entire South Island with each being commanded by a Superintendent and having a central station from which subsidiary and suburban stations are managed.
It was subsequently Anglicised as ''New Zealand'' by British naval captain James Cook of HM Bark ''Endeavour'' who visited the islands more than 100 years after Tasman during (1769–1770).
The '''South Island''' or '''''Te Waipounamu''''' is the larger of the two major islands of New Zealand, the other being the smaller but more populous North Island.
A number of lakes in the Fiordland and Otago regions also fill glacial valleys.
Christchurch residents reported chimneys falling in through roofs, cracked ceilings and collapsed brick walls.
Charcoal drawings can be found on limestone rock shelters in the centre of the South Island, with over 500 sites stretching from Kaikoura to North Otago.
one of the reasons for listing as a World Heritage site.
Lake Wakatipu fills a large glacial valley, as do lakes Hakapoua, Poteriteri, Monowai and Hauroko in the far south of Fiordland.
Invercargill Prison, in Invercargill, accommodates up to 172 minimum to low-medium security prisoners.
In 1851 the Provincial Legislative Councils were permitted to be partially elective.
In prose, the two main islands of New Zealand are called ''the North Island'' and ''the South Island'', with the definite article.
It can accommodate up to 98 prisoners.
The West Coast alone spans the distance between Wellington and Auckland.
Offshore oil and gas is likely to become an increasing important part of the South Island economy into the future.
Teams were provided by Australia, United States, Singapore, Britain, Taiwan, Japan and China.
Market analyst, Greg Easton from Craigs Investment Partners commented that such a substantial find it could well turn Dunedin from the Edinburgh of the south to the Aberdeen of the south.
Other native reserves and parks
It is divided along its length by the Southern Alps, the highest peak of which is Aoraki/Mount Cook at 3754&nbsp;metres (12,316&nbsp;ft), with the high Kaikoura Ranges to the northeast.
The South Island has ten daily newspapers and a large number of weekly community newspapers; major daily newspapers include the Ashburton Guardian, Greymouth Star, The Marlborough Express, The Nelson Mail, Oamaru Mail, Otago Daily Times, The Press, Southland Times, The Timaru Herald, and West Coast Times.
The Waitaki River is the largest at 1738&nbsp;MW of installed capacity.
While most of the electricity generated in the South Island is transported via the 220&nbsp;kV grid (plus 110&nbsp;kV and 66&nbsp;kV connectors) to major demand centres, including Christchurch, Dunedin, and Tiwai Point Aluminium Smelter, around one-sixth of it is exported to the North Island to meet its large (and increasing) power demands via the HVDC Inter-Island link.
They were drawn by early Māori, but by the time Europeans arrived, local Māori did not know the origins of the drawings.
The most significant freight is coal from West Coast mines to the port of Lyttelton for export.
The New Zealand Customs Service whose role is to provide border control and protect the community from potential risks arising from international trade and travel, as well as collecting duties and taxes on imports to the country has offices at Christchurch International Airport, Dunedin, Invercargill, Lyttelton and Nelson.
The Southern Police District with its headquarters in Dunedin spans from Oamaru in the North through to Stewart Island in the far South covers the largest geographical area of any of the 12 police districts in New Zealand.
; Mount Richmond Forest Park : Situated in the Marlborough region.
Separate trading floors operated in both Christchurch and Dunedin until the late 1980s.
The branch lines that remain in operation serve ports (Bluff Branch and Port Chalmers Branch), coal mines (Ohai Branch and Rapahoe Branch), and a dairy factory (Hokitika Branch).
The South Island has 8 of New Zealand's 10 biggest lakes.
After destroying Te Maiharanui's village they took their captives to Kapiti and killed them.
It is normal to use the preposition ''in'' rather than ''on''.
Lake Te Anau has three western arms which are fiords (and are named so).
Conditions vary sharply across the regions from extremely wet on the West Coast to semi-arid in the Mackenzie Basin of inland Canterbury.
The final services to operate ran between Dunedin's City Centre and the suburb of Mosgiel, and they ceased in 1982.
The remains of this violent origin can be seen in the basalt of the surrounding hills.
When New Zealand was separated from the colony of New South Wales in 1841 and established as a Crown colony in its own right, the Royal Charter effecting this provided that "the principal Islands, heretofore known as, or commonly called, the 'Northern Island', the 'Middle Island', and 'Stewart's Island', shall henceforward be designated and known respectively as 'New Ulster', 'New Munster', and 'New Leinster'".
Tourism is a huge earner for the South Island.
It accommodates around 320 male prisoners of minimum to low-medium security classifications and includes ''Kia Marama'' a sixty-bed unit that provides an intensive 9-month treatment programme for male child sex offenders.
In July 2007 the New Zealand Government awarded oil and gas exploration permits for four areas of the Great South Basin, situated in the volatile waters off the Southern Coast of New Zealand.
The portion of crater rim lying between Lyttelton Harbour and Christchurch city forms the Port Hills.
Lake McKerrow to the north of Milford Sound is a fiord with a silted-up mouth.
; Lake Sumner Forest Park : Situated in the Canterbury region.
Dunedin was the headquarters of the Union Steam Ship Company, once the largest shipping company in the Southern Hemisphere.
The desire for the South Island to form a separate colony was one of the main factors in moving the capital of New Zealand from Auckland to Wellington that year.
The peninsula formed as offshore islands, with the volcanoes reaching to about 1,500&nbsp;m above sea level.
Supported by Waitaki Mayor Alex Familton and Invercargill Mayor Tim Shadbolt, Bob Parker said that increased cooperation and the forming of a new South Island-wide mayoral forum were essential to representing the island's interests in Wellington and countering the new Auckland Council.
The Southern District has three distinct Areas headed by Inspectors; Otago Rural, Southland and Dunedin.
The sub-national GDP of the South Island was estimated at US$27.8 billion in 2003, 21% of New Zealand's national GDP.
All schools were closed until 8 September so they could be checked.
The Broken River Ski Area and the Craigieburn Valley Ski Area lie within its borders.
Christchurch International Airport was closed following the earthquake and flights in and out of it cancelled.
The Air New Zealand CEO increased the domestic airline traffic from Christchurch to Wellington and Auckland.
The climate in the South Island is mostly temperate.
The South Island covers  and is influenced by a temperate climate.
Tasman called them ''Staten Landt'', after the ''States General of the Netherlands'', and that name appeared on his first maps of the country.
The 611&nbsp;km HVDC Inter-Island was commissioned in 1965, linking Benmore Dam on the Waitaki River in Southern Canterbury, with Haywards substation in Lower Hutt in the North island, with cables crossing Cook Strait between Fighting Bay and Oteranga Bay.
The mean temperature for the South Island is 8&nbsp;°C (46&nbsp;°F).
At cricket, the South Island is represented by the Canterbury Wizards, Central Stags, and Otago Volts in the Plunket Shield, one day domestic series, and the HRV Twenty20 Cup.
; Abel Tasman National Park : (225&nbsp;km2, established 1942) Has numerous tidal inlets and beaches of golden sand along the shores of Tasman Bay.
The secondary Midland Line branches from the Main South Line in Rolleston and passes through the Southern Alps via the Otira Tunnel to the West Coast and its terminus in Greymouth.
Maps, headings, tables and adjectival expressions use ''South Island'' without "the".
It will examine potential projects where there are real and achievable benefits, for example in roads, information technology and library services and then allocate the project to a group of willing council CEOs for progression.
Ngāi Tahu prevailed, and killed many Ngāti Toa, although Te Rauparaha again escaped.
From there they spread further south and into the West Coast.
The east side of the island is home to the Canterbury Plains while the West Coast is famous for its rough coastlines such as Fiordland, very high proportion of native bush, and Fox and Franz Josef Glaciers.
Captain William Cargill, a veteran of the Peninsular War, served as the colony's first leader: Otago citizens subsequently elected him to the office of Superintendent of the Province of Otago.
The South Island has a State Highway network of 4,921&nbsp;km.
Four of the territorial councils (one city and three districts) also perform the functions of a regional council and are known as unitary authorities.
Most areas have between 600 and 1600&nbsp;mm of rainfall with the most rain along the West Coast and the least rain on the East Coast, predominantly on the Canterbury Plains.
The South Island's railway network has two main lines, two secondary lines, and a few branch lines.
In 1827-1828 Ngāti Toa under the leadership of Te Rauparaha successfully attacked Ngāi Tahu at Kaikoura.
The first Europeans known to reach the South Island were the crew of Dutch explorer Abel Tasman who arrived in his ships ''Heemskerck'' and ''Zeehaen''.
The South Island saw the final use of steam locomotives in New Zealand.
Several South Island nationalist groups have emerged over recent years including the South Island Party with a pro-South agenda, fielded candidates in the 1999 General Election.
The Main North Line from Picton to Christchurch and the Main South Line from Lyttelton to Invercargill via Dunedin together comprise the South Island Main Trunk Railway.
A layer of loess, a rather unstable fine silt deposited by the foehn winds which bluster across the plains, covers the northern and western flanks of the peninsula.
In the 1860s, several thousand Chinese men, mostly from the Guangdong province, migrated to New Zealand to work on the South Island goldfields.
* Greymouth Petroleum Limited (New Zealand)
The earthquake was reported to have caused widespread damage and power outages.
It has a 32 percent larger landmass than the North Island so is sometimes referred to as the "mainland" of New Zealand, especially by South Island residents, but only 23 percent of New Zealand's  million inhabitants live there.
A number of other secondary routes are now closed, including the Otago Central Railway, the isolated Nelson Section, and the interdependent Waimea Plains Railway and Kingston Branch.
In 1907 the Minister for Lands gave instructions to the Land and Survey Department that the name Middle Island was not to be used in future.
Secession movements have surfaced several times in the South Island.
The island is also known as ''Te Waka a Māui'' which means "Māui's Canoe".
On 4 September 2010, the South Island was struck by a 7.1 magnitude earthquake, which caused extensive damage, several power outages, and many reports of aftershocks.
Included in the park are glaciers, scenic lakes and dense rainforest, plus remains of old gold mining towns along the coast.
On 13 October 2010, South Island Mayors led by Bob Parker of Christchurch displayed united support for a Southern Mayoral Council.
; Nelson Lakes National Park : (1,018&nbsp;km2, established 1956) A rugged, mountainous area in Nelson Region.
In the early stages of European (Pākehā) settlement of the country, the South Island had the majority of the European population and wealth due to the 1860s gold rushes.
Christchurch also hosted the 1974 Commonwealth Games.
Nearly all (98.7%) of the island's electricity is generated by hydroelectricity, with most of the remainder coming from wind generation.
About a sixth of these glaciers covered more than 10&nbsp;hectares.
There was only one death recorded following the quake; however there were many injuries.
The 390&nbsp;km2, Carrack/Caravel prospect has the potential to deliver more than the equivalent of  of oil and gas.
The Otago Settlement, sponsored by the Free Church of Scotland, took concrete form in Otago in March 1848 with the arrival of the first two immigrant ships from Greenock (on the Firth of Clyde) — the ''John Wickliffe'' and the ''Philip Laing''.
Due to the demand of citizens wishing to leave the city, the national airline Air New Zealand, offered a $50 Domestic Standby airfare.
It is New Zealand's smallest national park.
Fiordland National Park, Abel Tasman National Park, Westland National Park, Aoraki/Mount Cook National Park, Queenstown, Kaikoura and the Marlborough Sounds are regarded as the main tourism destinations in the South Island and amongst the Top 10 destinations in New Zealand.
It includes the celebrated Pancake Rocks at Punakaiki.
The New Zealand Army was also deployed to assist police and enforce the curfew.
A local state of emergency was declared at 10:16&nbsp;am on 4 September for the city, and evacuations of parts were planned to begin later in the day.
Due to the gold rushes of the 1860s, the South Island had regional stock exchanges in Christchurch, Dunedin and Invercargill – all of which were affiliated in the Stock Exchange Association of New Zealand.
Extinct species include the South Island goose, South Island giant moa, harpagornis and South Island piopio.
In February 2012, the South Island Strategic Alliance (SISA) involving nearly all the Councils of the South Island was formed.
Many South Island bird species are now extinct, mainly due to hunting by humans and predation by cats and rats introduced by humans.
In comparison to most countries, where steam locomotives were last used on insubstantial rural and industrial operations, the very last services run by steam locomotives were the premier expresses between Christchurch and Invercargill: the South Island Limited until 1970 and the Friday and Sunday night services until 1971.
An inventory of South Island glaciers during the 1980s indicated there were about 3,155 glaciers with an area of at least one hectare (2.5&nbsp;acres).
In 2010, the island generated 18,010&nbsp;GWh of electricity, 41.5% of New Zealand's total electricity generation.
By 1839 Ngāi Tahu and Ngāti Toa established peace and Te Rauparaha released the Ngāi Tahu captives he held.
The name New Munster was given by the Governor of New Zealand, Captain William Hobson, in honour of Munster, the Irish province in which he was born.
A curfew from 7&nbsp;pm on 4 September to 7&nbsp;am on 5 September was put in place.
Kaiapoi was engaged in a three-month siege by Te Rauparaha, during which his men successfully sapped the pā.
There are 22 police stations in the Tasman District, with 6 being sole-charge - or one-person - stations.
Commuter trains operated multiple routes around Christchurch and Dunedin, plus a service between Invercargill and Bluff.
The Tasman Police District has a total of 302 sworn police officers and 57 civilian or nonsworn staff.
However, the 1846 Constitution Act was later suspended, and only the Provincial government provisions were implemented.
The first European settlement in the South Island was founded at Bluff in 1823 by James Spencer, a veteran of the Battle of Waterloo.
On 30 May 2003, New Zealand Stock Exchange Limited formally changed its name to New Zealand Exchange Limited, trading as NZX.
The drawings are estimated to be between 500 and 800 years old, and portray animals, people and fantastic creatures, possibly stylised reptiles.
Each province had its own legislature known as a Provincial Council that elected its own Speaker and Superintendent.
Passenger services were once extensive.
Subsequently, the architecturally significant Dunedin Railway Station has been used solely by the TGR's tourist trains, the Taieri Gorge Limited along the Otago Central Railway and the Seasider to Palmerston.
Formal marriages between the leading families in the two tribes sealed the peace.
The New Zealand Forest Service had used the area as an experimental forestry area and there is now an environmental issue with the spread of wilding conifers.
It extends southwards from the forested shores of Lake Rotoiti and Rotoroa to the Lewis Pass National Reserve.
Content ranges from local news, access broadcasts, satellite sourced news, tourist information and Christian programming to music videos.
The final steam-hauled service in New Zealand, headed by a member of the JA class, ran on 26 October 1971.
Ngāti Toa then visited Kaiapoi, ostensibly to trade.
An unidentified group is promoting a bid for the South Island to host the 2022 Winter Olympics.
The last eruptive phase ended some ten million years ago, leaving the prominent peak of Mount Cargill.
These plains reach their widest point where they meet the hilly sub-region of Banks Peninsula.
Said to mean "the Water(s) of Greenstone", this name possibly evolved from ''Te Wāhi Pounamu'' "the Place Of Greenstone".
After inspection, the runway at Christchurch Airport was found to be in good order.
; Kahurangi National Park : (4,520&nbsp;km2, established 1996) Situated in the north-west of the South Island, Kahurangi comprises spectacular and remote country and includes the Heaphy Track.
They then attacked Ngāi Tahu on Banks Peninsula and took the pā at Onawe.
It is bordered to the north by Cook Strait, to the west by the Tasman Sea, and to the south and east by the Pacific Ocean.
Grey implemented the ordinance with such deliberation that neither Council met before advice was received that the United Kingdom Parliament had passed the New Zealand Constitution Act 1852.
It was slowly filled in with mud, and fossils of fish and crocodiles have been found there.
In January 1827, the French explorer Jules Dumont d'Urville arrived in Tasman Bay on the corvette Astrolabe.
January and February are the warmest months while July is the coldest.
; Victoria Forest Park : Situated in the West Coast region.
There are eighteen peaks of more than 3000&nbsp;metres (9800&nbsp;ft) in the South Island.
The South Island economy is strongly focused on tourism and primary industries like agriculture.
Five and a half months later, the 22 February Christchurch earthquake of 6.3 magnitude caused far more additional damage in Christchurch, resulting in 181 deaths.
