Mechanization and consolidation of agriculture has contributed greatly to the declining number of smaller family farms and the resulting economic and demographic challenges facing rural towns.
The Black Hills are the location of Black Elk Peak (7,242&nbsp;ft or 2,207&nbsp;m above sea level), the highest point in South Dakota and also the highest point in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains.
Further to the west, the James River Basin is mostly low, flat, highly eroded land, following the flow of the James River through South Dakota from north to south.
The ''Sioux City Journal'' also covers parts of South Dakota.
As of the 2000 census, South Dakota ranked fifth-lowest in the nation in both population and population density.
In the 14th century, the Crow Creek Massacre occurred, in which several hundred men, women, and children were killed near the Missouri River.
Although most rural counties and small towns have lost population, the Sioux Falls area, the larger counties along Interstate 29, the Black Hills, and many Indian reservations have all gained population.
Since statehood, Republicans have carried the state's electoral votes in all but five presidential elections: 1896, 1912 (By Theodore Roosevelt's Progressive Party), 1932, 1936 and 1964.
Some  of railroad track were built in South Dakota during the late 19th century and early 20th century, but only  are active.
The ecology of the state features species typical of a North American grassland biome.
Mount Rushmore National Memorial in the Black Hills was established in 1925.
The geography of the Black Hills, long considered sacred ground by Native Americans, differs from its surroundings to such an extent that it can be considered separate from the rest of western South Dakota.
A 1995 study by the U.S. Census Bureau found that 58% of homes on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation did not have a telephone.
Like that of other U.S. states, the structure of the government of South Dakota follows the same separation of powers as the federal government, with executive, legislative, and judicial branches.
There are currently nine television stations broadcasting in South Dakota; South Dakota Public Television broadcasts from a number of locations around the state, while the other stations broadcast from either Sioux Falls or Rapid City.
The first inhabitants were Paleoindian hunter-gatherers, and disappeared from the area around 5000 BC.
The case remains unsettled, as the Lakota refuse to accept the money and instead insist on the return of the land.)
Agriculture has historically been a key component of the South Dakota economy.
Key events in the 20th century included the Dust Bowl and Great Depression, increased federal spending during the 1940s and 50s for agriculture and defense, and an industrialization of agriculture that has much reduced family farming.
The reservations' isolation also inhibits their ability to generate revenue from gaming casinos, an avenue that has proved profitable for many tribes closer to urban centers.
European contact with the area began in 1743, when the LaVérendrye brothers explored the region.
Universities in South Dakota host a variety of sports programs.
The Coteau des Prairies is a plateau bordered on the east by the Minnesota River Valley and on the west by the James River Basin.
Once the southern portion of the Dakota Territory, South Dakota became a state on November 2, 1889, simultaneously with North Dakota.
It is named after the Lakota and Dakota Sioux Native American tribes, who comprise a significant portion of the population and historically dominated the entire territory.
Black Hills mammals include deer, elk (wapiti), bighorn sheep, mountain goats, pine marten, and mountain lions, while the streams and lakes contain several species of trout.
South Dakota's history and rural character still strongly influence the culture of the state.
South Dakota's culture reflects the state's American Indian, rural, Western, and European roots.
Railroads have played an important role in South Dakota transportation since the mid-19th century.
Businesses on the reservation collect the tax and the state refunds to the Indian Tribes the percentage of sales tax collections relating to the ratio of Indian population to total population in the county or area affected.
The governor serves for a four-year term, and may not serve more than two consecutive terms.
The Peter Norbeck National Scenic Byway is located in the Black Hills, while the Native American Scenic Byway runs along the Missouri River in the north-central part of the state.
2.06% (15,292) of the population spoke Spanish, 1.39% (10,282) spoke Dakota, and 1.37% (10,140) spoke German.
Females made up approximately 50.2% of the population.
His accounts of the 19th-century Indian Wars and Ghost Dance movement, and his deep thoughts on personal visions and Native American religion, form the basis of the book ''Black Elk Speaks,'' first published in 1932.
The constitution may be amended either by a majority vote of both houses of the legislature, or by voter initiative.
The service industry is the largest economic contributor in South Dakota.
Black Elk Peak, formerly named Harney Peak, with an elevation of , is the state's highest point, while the shoreline of Big Stone Lake is the lowest, with an elevation of .
Also located in the state are the shorter Interstates 190, a spur into central Rapid City, and 229, a loop around southern and eastern Sioux Falls.
A working paleontological dig, the site contains one of the largest concentrations of mammoth remains in the world.
Two national parks have been established in South Dakota, both located in the southwestern part of the state.
The experiences of the Dust Bowl, coupled with local bank foreclosures and the general economic effects of the Great Depression, resulted in many South Dakotans leaving the state.
Despite the state's general Republican and conservative leanings, Democrats have found success in various statewide elections, most notably in those involving South Dakota's congressional representatives in Washington.
Wind Cave National Park, established in 1903 in the Black Hills, contains an extensive cave network as well as a large herd of bison.
Hammon, of Rapid City, played for the WNBA's New York Liberty and San Antonio Silver Stars before becoming an assistant coach for the NBA's San Antonio Spurs in 2014.
This trend has continued in recent years, with 30 of South Dakota's counties losing population between the 1990 and the 2000 census.
The Missouri River serves as a boundary in terms of geographic, social, and political differences between eastern and western South Dakota.
The North American continental pole of inaccessibility is located between Allen and Kyle,  from the nearest coastline.
During the 1930s, several economic and climatic conditions combined with disastrous results for South Dakota.
The unemployment rate in Fort Thompson, on the Crow Creek Reservation, is 70%, and 21% of households lack plumbing or basic kitchen appliances.
The Black Hills are in the southwestern part of South Dakota and extend into Wyoming.
A growing population and political concerns (admitting two states meant having four new senators) caused Dakota Territory to be divided in half and President Benjamin Harrison signed proclamations formally admitting both South Dakota and North Dakota to the union on November 2, 1889.
These gained renewed popularity in the United States when ''Little House on the Prairie'' was adapted and produced as a television series in the .
Several major U.S. highways pass through the state.
The current governor is Dennis Daugaard, a Republican from Garretson.
The change has been characterized as "rural flight" as family farming has declined.
In 1855, the U.S. Army bought Fort Pierre but abandoned it in 1857 in favor of Fort Randall to the south.
Popular species of game include pheasants, white-tailed deer, mule deer, and turkeys, as well as waterfowl such as Canada geese, snow geese, and mallards.
South Dakota experiences a temperate continental climate, with four distinct seasons and precipitation ranging from moderate in the east to semi-arid in the west.
The state supreme court, with four justices and a chief justice, is the highest court in the state.
Other major South Dakota rivers include the Cheyenne, James, Big Sioux, and White Rivers.
However, several years ago SDSU decided to move their teams from Division II to Division I, a move that has since been followed by the University of South Dakota.
As in all other states except Maine and neighboring Nebraska, South Dakota's electoral votes are granted in a winner-take-all system.
U.S. routes 12, 14, 16, 18 and 212 travel east and west, while U.S. routes 81, 83, 85 and 281 run north and south.
The Sioux declined to grant mining rights or land in the Black Hills, and war broke out after the U.S. failed to stop white miners and settlers from entering the region.
Flood control, hydroelectricity, and recreational opportunities such as boating and fishing are provided by the dams and their reservoirs.
In 1995 the legislature passed a law to make English the "common language" of the state.
As of the 2000 census, 1.90% of the population aged 5 or older speak German at home, while 1.51% speak Lakota or Dakota, and 1.43% Spanish.
Rivers and lakes of the grasslands support populations of walleye, carp, pike, bass, and other species.
The state bird, the ring-necked pheasant, has adapted well to the area after being introduced from China.
There are 703 public schools in 168 school districts, giving South Dakota the highest number of schools per capita in the United States.
South Dakota and Montana are the only states sharing a land border which is not traversed by a paved road.
Ad valorem property taxes are local taxes and are a large source of funding for school systems, counties, municipalities and other local government units.
Smaller geographic regions of this area include the Coteau des Prairies, the Dissected Till Plains, and the James River Valley.
The population of South Dakota declined by more than 7% between 1930 and 1940.
Mills is from the town of Pine Ridge and competed at the 1964 Summer Olympic Games in Tokyo, becoming the only American to win a gold medal in the 10,000-meter event.
South Dakota is the 17th most expansive, but the 5th least populous and the 5th least densely populated of the 50 United States.
Fertile topsoil was blown away in massive dust storms, and several harvests were completely ruined.
The five most valuable agricultural products in South Dakota are cattle, corn (maize), soybeans, wheat, and hogs.
Formations from the Paleozoic Era form the outer ring of the Black Hills; these were created between roughly 540 and 250&nbsp;million years ago.
Targets of anglers include walleye in the eastern glacial lakes and Missouri River reservoirs, Chinook salmon in Lake Oahe, and trout in the Black Hills.
Eastern South Dakota is home to most of the state's population, and fertile soil in this area is used to grow a variety of crops.
In 24 counties, at least 20% of the population is over the age of 65, compared with a national rate of 12.8%.
89.8% of the adult population has earned at least a high school diploma, and 25.8% has earned a bachelor's degree or higher.
Famous South Dakota athletes include Billy Mills, Mike Miller, Mark Ellis, Becky Hammon, Brock Lesnar, Chad Greenway, and Adam Vinatieri.
During that time, nine counties had a population loss of greater than 10%, with Harding County, in the northwest corner of the state, losing nearly 19% of its population.
This sector includes the retail, finance, and health care industries.
The culture, economy, and geography of western South Dakota have more in common with the West than the Midwest.
Fishing and hunting are both popular outdoor activities in South Dakota.
South Dakota is divided into 35 legislative districts, with voters electing two representatives and one senator per district.
Harrison had the papers shuffled to obscure which one was signed first and the order went unrecorded.
In recent decades, South Dakota has been transformed from a state dominated by agriculture to one with a more diversified economy.
The financial service industry began to grow in the state as well, with Citibank moving its credit card operations from New York to Sioux Falls in 1981, a move that has since been followed by several other financial companies.
The various tribes hold many annual pow wows at their reservations throughout the state, to which non-Native Americans are sometimes invited.
The park features an eroded, brightly colored landscape surrounded by semi-arid grasslands.
Rail transportation in the state is confined only to freight, however, as South Dakota is one of the few states without any Amtrak service.
The first television station in the state, KELO-TV, began airing in Sioux Falls in 1953.
Oscar Howe (Crow) was born on the Crow Creek Indian Reservation and won fame for his watercolor paintings.
Among KELO's early programs was ''Captain 11'', an afternoon children's program.
Commonly cited as the last major armed conflict between the United States and the Lakota Sioux Nation, the massacre resulted in the deaths of at least 146 Sioux, many of them women and children.
Two billion-year-old Precambrian formations, the oldest rocks in the state, form the central core of the Black Hills.
Mount Rushmore, a major tourist destination, is located there.
Because of its low population, South Dakota does not host any major league professional sports franchises.
South Dakota was the first state to eliminate caps on interest rates.
These are the youngest rock and sediment layers in the state, and are the product of several successive periods of glaciation which deposited a large amount of rocks and soil, known as till, over the area.
The state legislature is made up of two bodies, the Senate, which has 35 members, and the House of Representatives, with 70 members.
All three are Republicans.
Additionally, dams on the Missouri River create four large reservoirs: Lake Oahe, Lake Sharpe, Lake Francis Case, and Lewis and Clark Lake.
In 1944, the Pick&ndash;Sloan Plan was passed as part of the Flood Control Act of 1944 by the U.S. Congress, resulting in the construction of six large dams on the Missouri River, four of which are at least partially located in South Dakota.
Badlands National Park was created in 1978.
Government spending is another important segment of the state's economy, providing over ten percent of the gross state product.
For many years, South Dakota was one of the only states in the country without a NCAA Division I football or basketball team.
Below the circuit courts are the magistrate courts, which deal with more minor criminal and civil actions.
Eventually the US defeated the Sioux and broke up the Great Sioux Reservation into five reservations, settling the Lakota in those areas.
The structure of the state government is laid out in the Constitution of South Dakota, the highest law in the state.
It is located on the eastern edge of the Black Hills, and was founded in 1876.
Eastern South Dakota has many natural lakes, mostly created by periods of glaciation.
Contemporary political issues in South Dakota include the costs and benefits of the state lottery, South Dakota's relatively low rankings in education spending (particularly teacher pay), and recent legislative and electoral attempts to ban abortion in the state.
Citibank, which was the largest bank holding company in the United States at one time, established national banking operations in South Dakota in 1981 to take advantage of favorable banking regulations.
South Dakota is situated in the north-central United States, and is considered a part of the Midwest by the U.S. Census Bureau; it is also part of the Great Plains region.
The state does have a number of minor league and independent league teams, all of which play in either Sioux Falls or Rapid City.
The five-day event drew over 460,000 attendees in 2013; significant considering the state has a total population of 850,000.
In the south, east of the Black Hills, lie the South Dakota Badlands.
Many of Redlin's works are on display at the Redlin Art Center in Watertown.
As of 2016, Republicans hold a 15% voter registration advantage over Democrats and hold large majorities in both the state House of Representatives and Senate.
In United States presidential elections, South Dakota is allotted three of 538 votes in the Electoral College.
The Great Plains cover most of the western two-thirds of South Dakota.
South Dakota is the sixth leading ethanol-producing state in the nation.
The Missouri River is the largest and longest river in the state.
Mammals in this area include bison, deer, pronghorn, coyotes, and prairie dogs.
Five of the state's counties are wholly within the boundaries of sovereign Indian reservations.
A number of annual events celebrating the state's ethnic and historical heritage take place around the state, such as Days of '76 in Deadwood, Czech Days in Tabor, and the annual St. Patrick's Day and Cinco de Mayo festivities in Sioux Falls.
31 U.S. soldiers were also killed in the conflict.
Additionally, a Democrat has not won the governorship since 1974.
South Dakota has also produced several notable artists.
In 2012, South Dakota voted for Republican nominee Mitt Romney over Democratic President Barack Obama by a margin of 18%.
South Dakota can generally be divided into three regions: eastern South Dakota, western South Dakota, and the Black Hills.
Pierre is the state capital and Sioux Falls, with a population of about 165,000, is South Dakota's largest city.
This area features rocks such as limestone, which were deposited here when the area formed the shoreline of an ancient inland sea.
Settlement of the area, mostly by people from the eastern United States as well as western and northern Europe, increased rapidly,  especially after the completion of an eastern railway link to Yankton in 1873.
Other sports, such as cycling and running, are also popular in the state.
Terry Redlin, originally from Watertown, is an accomplished painter of rural and wildlife scenes.
Only Alaska has been carried fewer times by Democrat presidential candidates.
South Dakota contains two National Scenic Byways.
The Missouri River also contains the pre-historic paddlefish.
The tourism industry has grown considerably since the completion of the interstate system in the 1960s, with the Black Hills becoming more important as a destination.
The I-29 corridor features generally higher rates of population and economic growth than areas in eastern South Dakota that are further from the interstate.
Not even George McGovern, the Democratic nominee in 1972 as well as a native South Dakotan, was able to carry the state.
Young people have moved to cities for other employment.
As the reservations have exercised more sovereignty, some Sioux have returned to them from urban areas.
The two largest television media markets in South Dakota are Sioux Falls-Mitchell, with a viewership of 246,020, and Rapid City, with a viewership of 91,070.
The center of population of South Dakota is located in Buffalo County, in the unincorporated county seat of Gann Valley.
Another important sector in South Dakota's economy is tourism.
Other events in the state include the Tour de Kota, a , six-day cycling event that covers much of eastern and central South Dakota, and the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally, which draws hundreds of thousands of participants from around the United States.
As of 2006, South Dakota has a total primary and secondary school enrollment of 136,872, with 120,278 of these students being educated in the public school system.
At times the Black Hills are combined with the rest of western South Dakota, and people often refer to the resulting two regions divided by the Missouri River as West River and East River.
American Indians have been becoming more active in state and county electoral politics.
While several Democratic senators have represented South Dakota for multiple terms at the federal level, the state government is largely controlled by the Republican Party, whose nominees have carried South Dakota in each of the last 12 presidential elections.
By the early 19th century, the Sioux had largely replaced the Arikara as the dominant group in the area.
American Indians, largely Lakota, Dakota, and Nakota (Sioux), are predominant in several counties and comprise 20 per cent of the population in West River.
Delta Air Lines, Frontier Airlines, and Allegiant Airlines, as well as commuter airlines using the brand affiliation with major airlines serve the two largest airports.
The effect of rural flight has not been spread evenly through South Dakota, however.
In 1981, Tim Giago founded the ''Lakota Times'' as a newspaper for the local American Indian community on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation.
6.54% of the population spoke a language other than English.
Fishing contributes over $224&nbsp;million to South Dakota's economy, and hunting contributes over $303&nbsp;million.
Below the supreme court are the circuit courts; 41 circuit judges serve in seven judicial circuits in the state.
''Captain 11'' ran from 1955 until 1996, making it the longest continuously running children's television program in the nation.
While Dunn worked most of his career as a commercial illustrator, his most famous works showed various scenes of frontier life; he completed these near the end of his career.
Rapid City has a hockey team named the Rapid City Rush, who play in the ECHL.
The Crazy Horse Memorial is a large mountainside sculpture near Mt.
The two markets rank as 114th and 177th largest in the United States, respectively.
Various localities have local levies so that in some areas the rate is 6 percent.
Today, the largest newspaper in the state is the Sioux Falls ''Argus Leader'', with a Sunday circulation of 63,701 and a weekday circulation of 44,334.
in 1762 the entire region became part of the Spanish Louisiana until 1802.
Custer State Park holds an annual Buffalo Roundup, in which volunteers on horseback gather the park's herd of around 1,500 bison.
Other universities in the state compete at the NCAA's Division II or III levels, or in the NAIA.
Although other industries have expanded rapidly in recent decades, agricultural production is still very important to the state's economy, especially in rural areas.
They play at the Sanford Pentagon.
Due to a higher elevation and level of precipitation, the Black Hills ecology differs significantly from that of the plains.
The ''Rapid City Journal'', with a Sunday circulation of 32,638 and a weekday circulation of 27,827, is South Dakota's second largest newspaper.
Wilder's daughter, Rose Wilder Lane, who became a well-known writer in her own right, was born near De Smet in 1886.
The newspaper, now published in New York and known as ''Indian Country Today'', is currently available in every state in the country.
Of the people residing in South Dakota, 65.7% were born in South Dakota, 31.4% were born in another US state, 0.6% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 2.3% were born in another country.
Vinatieri is an NFL placekicker who grew up in Rapid City and attended SDSU.
Several other cities in the state also have commercial air service: Aberdeen Regional Airport, Huron Regional Airport, Pierre Regional Airport, and Watertown Regional Airport, some of which is subsidized by the Essential Air Service program.
In 2007, the site of the recently closed Homestake gold mine near Lead was chosen as the location of a new underground research facility, the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory.
South Dakota's 2008 average public school teacher salary of $36,674, compared to a national average of $52,308, was the lowest in the nation.
The sculpture of four U.S. Presidents was carved into the mountainside by sculptor Gutzon Borglum.
Layers deposited during the Pleistocene epoch, starting around two million years ago, cover most of eastern South Dakota.
South Dakota has  of highways, roads, and streets, along with  of interstate highways.
South Dakota's first newspaper, the ''Dakota Democrat'', began publishing in Yankton in 1858.
The South Dakota Board of Regents, whose members are appointed by the governor, controls the six public universities in the state.
Over the last several decades, the population in many rural areas has declined in South Dakota, in common with other Great Plains states.
Lincoln County near Sioux Falls was the seventh fastest-growing county (by percentage) in the United States in 2010.
The Stampede and Storm share the Denny Sanford Premier Center.
In the late 19th century, European-American settlement intensified after a gold rush in the Black Hills and the construction of railroads from the east.
Custer's expedition took place despite the fact that the US had granted the entire western half of present-day South Dakota (West River) to the Sioux in 1868 by the Treaty of Laramie as part of the Great Sioux Reservation.
The legislature meets for an annual session which begins on the second Tuesday in January and lasts for 30 days; it also meets if a special session is called by the governor.
In 1874, gold was discovered in the Black Hills during a military expedition led by George A. Custer and miners and explorers began illegally entering land promised to the Lakota.
The South Dakota Special Tax Division regulates some taxes including cigarette and alcohol-related taxes.
