The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, pushed for socialist revolution in the Soviets and on the streets.
The Soviet Union maintained its status as one of the world's two superpowers for four decades through its hegemony in Eastern Europe, military strength, economic strength, aid to developing countries, and scientific research, especially in space technology and weaponry.
Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians shared close cultural ties, while other groups did not.
The Soviet Union suffered greatly in the war, losing around 27 million people.
According to statistics from 1986, the number of higher education students per the population of  10,000 was 181 for the USSR, compared to 517 for the U.S.
In December 1936, Stalin unveiled a new Soviet Constitution.
The development of these writing systems was very successful, even though some flaws were detected.
The Soviet Union became the first country to adopt a planned economy, whereby production and distribution of goods were centralized and directed by the government.
However, after 1970, the growth, while still positive, steadily declined much more quickly and consistently than in other countries despite a rapid increase in the capital stock (the rate of increase in capital was only surpassed by Japan).
File:Soviet Union Muslim Population 1979 (full).png|Map showing the distribution of Muslims within the Soviet Union in 1979
An analysis of the official data from the late 1980s showed that after worsening in the late-1970s and the early 1980s, adult mortality began to improve again.
Smaller groups included Roman Catholics, Jews, Buddhists, and a variety of Protestant sects.
The Chechen separatist movement of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria lacks any international recognition.
These improvements continued into the 1960s, when the life expectancy in the Soviet Union surpassed that of the United States.
Citizens directly entering the work force had the constitutional right to a job and to free vocational training.
In the summer of 1991, the New Union Treaty, which would have turned the Soviet Union into a much looser Union, was agreed upon by eight republics.
An underground dissident literature, known as ''samizdat'', developed during this late period.
In the ensuing Cold War, the two sides clashed indirectly using mostly proxies.
At the start, this decline grew very rapidly but gradually slowed down between 1970 and 1975.
Significant amounts of Soviet resources during the Cold War were allocated in aid to the other socialist states.
For a short period, quality was sacrificed for quantity.
As a result, the USSR was transformed from a largely agrarian economy into a great industrial power, leading the way for its emergence as a superpower after World War II.
At the same time, workers' councils, known in Russian as "Soviets", sprang up across the country.
David Wilson, a historian, believed that the gas industry would account for 40 percent of Soviet fuel production by the end of the century.
Famines ensued, causing millions of deaths; surviving kulaks were persecuted and many sent to Gulags to do forced labour.
The Supreme Soviet (successor of the Congress of Soviets and Central Executive Committee) was nominally the highest state body for most of the Soviet history, at first acting as a rubber stamp institution, approving and implementing all decisions made by the party.
The Soviet government headed by Vladimir Lenin gave small language groups their own writing systems.
For the first time since the 1920s, it refused to rubber stamp proposals from the party and Council of Ministers.
From 1932 to 1934, the Soviet Union participated in the World Disarmament Conference.
According to historian Geoffrey Hosking, "...excess deaths during the 1930s as a whole were in the range of 10–11 million."
It failed, with Russian President Boris Yeltsin playing a high-profile role in facing down the coup, resulting in the banning of the Communist Party.
The Baltic states are not successor states to the Soviet Union; they are instead considered to have ''de jure'' continuity with their pre-World War II governments through the non-recognition of the original Soviet incorporation in 1940.
The Soviet Union was a one-party federation, governed by the Communist Party with Moscow as its capital.
Khrushchev's reforms in agriculture and administration, however, were generally unproductive.
It remained stable during most years, although in the 1970s, it went down slightly, possibly because of alcohol abuse.
On 8 December 1991, the presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus (formerly Byelorussia), signed the Belavezha Accords, which declared the Soviet Union dissolved and established the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in its place.
The immediate period following the establishment of the Soviet state included a struggle against the Orthodox Church, which the revolutionaries considered an ally of the former ruling classes.
These languages were then assimilated into another language, mostly Russian.
Later, during Stalin's rule, Soviet culture was characterized by the rise and domination of the government-imposed style of socialist realism, with all other trends being severely repressed, with rare exceptions, for example Mikhail Bulgakov's works.
On 25 December 1991, Gorbachev resigned and the remaining twelve constituent republics emerged from the dissolution of the Soviet Union as independent post-Soviet states.
Among further restrictions, those adopted in 1929, a half-decade into Stalin's rule, included express prohibitions on a range of church activities, including meetings for organized Bible study.
Consumer goods, particularly outside large cities, were often scarce, of poor quality and limited choice.
The Congress now elected the Supreme Soviet, which became a full-time parliament, much stronger than before.
However, by December, all except Russia and Kazakhstan had formally declared independence.
The Soviet Union used the inquisitorial system of Roman law, where the judge, procurator, and defense attorney collaborate to establish the truth.
It gained additional powers relating to the approval of the Five-Year Plans and the Soviet government budget.
In place of the internationalism expressed by Lenin throughout the Revolution, it aimed to build Socialism in One Country.
Soviet forces eventually captured Berlin in 1945.
No formal separation of powers existed between the Party, Supreme Soviet and Council of Ministers that represented executive and legislative branches of the government.
The eastern part in Asia extended to the Pacific Ocean to the east and Afghanistan to the south, and, except some areas in Central Asia, was much less populous.
The rises in both adult and infant mortality were not explained or defended by Soviet officials, and the Soviet government simply stopped publishing all mortality statistics for ten years.
Although in theory prices were legally set from above, in practice the actual prices were often negotiated, and informal horizontal links (between producer factories etc.)
Religious influence had been strong in the Russian Empire.
Karelia was split off from Russia as a Union Republic in March 1940 and was reabsorbed in 1956.
Later, the Comecon supplied aid to the eventually victorious Communist Party of China, and saw its influence grow elsewhere in the world.
Soviet Russia had to resolve similar conflicts with the newly established Republic of Finland, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia, and the Republic of Lithuania.
In March, the Soviets ended involvement in the war for good and signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
The Communist Party maintained its dominance over the state largely through its control over the system of appointments.
Constitutionally, the USSR was a federation of constituent Union Republics, which were either unitary states, such as Ukraine or Byelorussia (SSRs), or federal states, such as Russia or Transcaucasia (SFSRs), all four being the founding republics who signed the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR in December 1922.
It had five climate zones: tundra, taiga, steppes, desert, and mountains.
Some ethnic groups voluntarily assimilated, while others were brought in by force.
All key economic decisions were taken by the political leadership.
The Russian Federation is seen as the legal ''continuator'' state and is for most purposes the heir to the Soviet Union.
The judiciary was not independent of the other branches of government.
While the RSFSR was technically only one republic within the larger union, it was by far the largest (both in terms of population and geography), most powerful, and most highly developed.
Yet despite the turmoil of the mid-to-late 1930s, the Soviet Union developed a powerful industrial economy in the years before World War II.
The late 1930s saw a shift towards the Axis powers.
At the beginning, the Soviet authorities placed great emphasis on the elimination of illiteracy.
From 1975 and 1980, it grew even slower, only 2.6 percent.
The nonaggression pact made possible Soviet occupation of Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Bessarabia, northern Bukovina, and eastern Poland.
Ukraine has refused to recognize exclusive Russian claims to succession of the USSR and claimed such status for Ukraine as well, which was codified in Articles 7 and 8 of its 1991 law On Legal Succession of Ukraine.
The signing of the treaty, however, was interrupted by the August Coup—an attempted coup d'état by hardline members of the government and the KGB who sought to reverse Gorbachev's reforms and reassert the central government's control over the republics.
During this time, a distinctive period of Soviet culture developed characterized by conformist public life and intense focus on personal life.
By 1940, as many as 90 percent of the churches, synagogues, and mosques that had been operating in 1917 were closed.
If the parents did not agree, the child was automatically assigned the ethnicity of the father.
On 1 February 1924, the USSR was recognized by the British Empire.
This included some openness and contact with other nations and new social and economic policies with more emphasis on commodity goods, allowing living standards to rise dramatically while maintaining high levels of economic growth.
Education also became important in giving rise to the New Man.
The same year, the USSR, in fulfillment of its agreement with the Allies at the Yalta Conference, denounced the Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact in April 1945 and invaded Manchukuo and other Japan-controlled territories on 9 August 1945.
In October 1927, Grigory Zinoviev and Leon Trotsky were expelled from the Central Committee and forced into exile.
He shortly aftwerward denounced Stalin's use of repression in 1956 and proceeded to ease Stalin's repressive controls over party and society.
According to Stanley Fischer and William Easterly, growth could have been faster.
By the early-to-mid-1980s, the Soviet authorities tried to solve the road problem by ordering the construction of new ones.
Under command economy, consumers had almost no influence over production, so the changing demands of a population with growing incomes could not be satisfied by supplies at rigidly fixed prices.
In late November of the same year, unable to coerce the Republic of Finland by diplomatic means into moving its border  back from Leningrad, Joseph Stalin ordered the invasion of Finland.
Soviet military force was used to suppress anti-Stalinist uprisings in Hungary and Poland in 1956.
The infant mortality rate increased from 24.7 in 1970 to 27.9 in 1974.
It retained ownership of all former Soviet embassy properties, as well as the old Soviet UN membership and permanent membership on the Security Council.
Two-thirds of it was a coastline.
During this period, the number of churches fell from 20,000 to 10,000 from 1959 to 1965, and the number of synagogues dropped from 500 to 97.
Both Christian and non-Christian establishments were shut down by the thousands in the 1920s and 1930s.
A long and bloody Civil War ensued between the Reds and the Whites, starting in 1917 and ending in 1923 with the Reds' victory.
It was this significant lack of flexibility that was exploited by the US to undermine the strength of the Soviet Union and thus foster its reform.
The late 1960s and the 1970s witnessed a reversal of the declining trajectory of the rate of mortality in the USSR, and was especially notable among men of working age, but was also prevalent in Russia and other predominantly Slavic areas of the country.
Although serfdom was abolished in 1861, it was done on terms unfavorable to the peasants and served to encourage revolutionaries.
Many held their first free elections in the Soviet era for their own national legislatures in 1990.
Historian Matthew White wrote that it was an open secret that the Soviet Union's federal structure was "window dressing" for Russian dominance.
The country developed rapidly, as millions of peasants were moved into industrialized cities.
In practice, however, the degree of control the party was able to exercise over the state bureaucracy, particularly after the death of Stalin, was far from total, with the bureaucracy pursuing different interests that were at times in conflict with the party.
The Constitutional Oversight Committee reviewed the constitutionality of laws and acts.
The Cold War emerged in 1947 as the Soviet bloc confronted the Western states that united in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949.
The economy was formally directed by central planning, carried out by Gosplan and organized in five-year plans.
The total population was estimated at 293 million in 1991.
Due to rigid state planning and bureaucracy, the Soviets remained far behind technologically in chemistry, biology, and computers when compared to the First World.
This expansion had a tremendous effect.
Film, as a means of influencing a largely illiterate society, received encouragement from the state; much of director Sergei Eisenstein's best work dates from this period.
In 1991, the Soviet Union had a pipeline network of  for crude oil and another  for natural gas.
Amid other accommodations to religious faith after Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, churches were reopened, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a religious hour, and a historic meeting between Stalin and Orthodox Church leader Patriarch Sergius of Moscow was held in 1943.
The Soviet Union's highest mountain was Communism Peak (now Ismoil Somoni Peak) in Tajikistan, at .
The country's system of education was highly centralized and universally accessible to all citizens, with affirmative action for applicants from nations associated with cultural backwardness.
Initially, Lenin was to be replaced by a "troika" consisting of Grigory Zinoviev of the Ukrainian SSR, Lev Kamenev of the Russian SFSR, and Joseph Stalin of the Transcaucasian SFSR.
The plan was developed in 1920 and covered a 10 to 15-year period.
The Central Committee in turn voted for a Politburo (called the Presidium between 1952–1966), Secretariat and the General Secretary (First Secretary from 1953 to 1966), the de facto highest office in the USSR.
Many of these legislatures proceeded to produce legislation contradicting the Union laws in what was known as the "War of Laws".
Still the influence of the world economy on the USSR was limited by fixed domestic prices and a state monopoly on foreign trade.
Over those two years that averages to over one thousand executions a day.
In the late 1950s, a confrontation with China regarding the USSR's rapprochement with the West and what Mao Zedong perceived as Khrushchev's revisionism led to the Sino–Soviet split.
Soviet demographers and health specialists remained silent about the mortality increases until the late-1980s, when the publication of mortality data resumed and researchers could delve into the real causes.
The few remaining Soviet institutions that had not been taken over by Russia ceased to function by the end of 1991.
An agreement was made between the Soviet Union and the United States to remove enemy nuclear missiles from both Cuba and Turkey, concluding the crisis.
Between July 1956 and September 1991, there were 15 union republics (see map below).
The Soviet Union was officially established in December 1922 with the union of the Russian, Ukrainian, Byelorussian, and Transcaucasian Soviet republics, each ruled by local Bolshevik parties.
Credit was discouraged, but widespread.
This did not last, however, and Nikita Khrushchev eventually won the power struggle by the mid-1950s.
Nikita Khrushchev tried to make education more accessible, making it clear to children that education was closely linked to the needs of society.
In the mid-1980s, the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, sought to further reform and liberalize the economy through his policies of ''glasnost'' and ''perestroika''.
It included foreign intervention, the execution of the former tsar and his family, and the famine of 1921, which killed about five million people.
Official relations between the Orthodox Church and the Soviet government again warmed to the point that the Brezhnev government twice honored Orthodox Patriarch Alexy I with the Order of the Red Banner of Labour.
According to a 1990 estimate, the majority were Russians (50.78%), followed by Ukrainians (15.45%) and Uzbeks (5.84%).
Under Yuri Andropov, KGB chairman in 1967–1982 and General Secretary from 1982 to 1983, the KGB engaged in the suppression of political dissent and maintained an extensive network of informers, reasserting itself as a political actor to some extent independent of the party-state structure, culminating in the anti-corruption campaign targeting high party officials in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
This led to the rise of strong nationalist and separatist movements inside the USSR as well.
In 1939, almost a year after the United Kingdom and France had concluded the Munich Agreement with Germany, the USSR dealt with the Nazis as well, both militarily and economically during extensive talks.
Local authorities were organized likewise into party committees, local Soviets and executive committees.
Although it has been debated whether the Soviet Union intended to invade Germany once it was strong enough, Germany itself broke the treaty and invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, starting what was known in the USSR as the "Great Patriotic War".
In contrast, the Soviet Union was offensively and defensively maneuvering in the acquisition and utilization of the worldwide technology, to increase the competitive advantage that they acquired from the technology, while preventing the US from acquiring a competitive advantage.
The formal proclamation was made from the stage of the Bolshoi Theatre.
A union of multiple subnational Soviet republics, its government and economy were highly centralized.
Many writers were imprisoned and killed.
In 1924, during the national delimitation in Central Asia, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan were formed from parts of the Russia's Turkestan ASSR and two Soviet dependencies, the Khorezm and Bukharan SSRs.
The economic shocks that accompanied wholesale privatization were associated with sharp increases in mortality.
Soviet religious establishments overwhelmingly rallied to support the war effort during the Soviet war with Nazi Germany.
This event would later be known as the Great October Socialist Revolution.
Meanwhile, the automobile industry was growing at a faster rate than road construction.
In an attempt to avoid a third short-lived leader, in 1985, the Soviets turned to the next generation and selected Mikhail Gorbachev.
Partly due to Soviet policies, some of the smaller minority ethnic groups were considered part of larger ones, such as the Mingrelians of Georgia, who were classified with the linguistically related Georgians.
Since its independence in 1991 Ukraine has continued to pursue claims against Russia in foreign courts, seeking to recover its share of the foreign property that was owned by the Soviet Union.
By their calculation, per capita income of Soviet Union in 1989 should have been twice as high as it was considering the amount of investment, education and population.
7 November 1917) by revolutionaries led by the Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin.
All leaders of the Communist Party before Gorbachev died in office, except Georgy Malenkov and Khrushchev, both dismissed from the party leadership amid internal struggle within the party.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the Soviet Union heavily relied on fossil fuel exports to earn hard currency.
That night, the Soviet flag was lowered for the last time, and the Russian tricolor was raised in its place.
The Battle of Stalingrad, which lasted from late 1942 to early 1943, dealt a severe blow to the Germans from which they never fully recovered and became a turning point in the war.
During the arms race of the Cold War, the Soviet economy was burdened by military expenditures, heavily lobbied for by a powerful bureaucracy dependent on the arms industry.
In 1962, he precipitated a crisis with the United States over the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
By the fall, Gorbachev could no longer influence events outside of Moscow, and he was being challenged even there by Yeltsin, who had been elected President of Russia in July 1991.
State and party structures of the constituent republics largely emulated the structure of the central institutions, although the Russian SFSR, unlike the other constituent republics, for most of its history had no republican branch of the CPSU, being ruled directly by the union-wide party until 1990.
On 28 December 1922, a conference of plenipotentiary delegations from the Russian SFSR, the Transcaucasian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR and the Byelorussian SSR approved the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR and the Declaration of the Creation of the USSR, forming the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
After the socialist revolution, the life expectancy for all age groups went up.
A referendum for the preservation of the USSR was held on 17 March 1991 in nine republics (the remainder having boycotted the vote), with the majority of the population in those nine republics voting for preservation of the Union.
On 3 April 1922, Stalin was named the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
In June 1941 the Germans invaded, opening the largest and bloodiest theater of war in history.
The economy, already suffering from reduced petroleum export revenues, started to collapse.
Despite the foundation of the Soviet state as a federative entity of many constituent republics, each with its own political and administrative entities, the term "Soviet Russia"strictly applicable only to the Russian Federative Socialist Republicwas often applied to the entire country by non-Soviet writers and politicians.
They were not controlled by the general party membership, as the key principle of the party organization was democratic centralism, demanding strict subordination to higher bodies, and elections went uncontested, endorsing the candidates proposed from above.
The Brezhnev era also introduced a rule that required all university applicants to present a reference from the local Komsomol party secretary.
The prevailing mood of the Soviet leadership at the time of Brezhnev's death in 1982 was one of aversion to change.
After the severe economic collapse caused by the war, Lenin replaced War Communism with the New Economic Policy (NEP) in 1921, legalising free trade and private ownership of smaller businesses.
The regime loosened its emphasis on socialist realism; thus, for instance, many protagonists of the novels of author Yury Trifonov concerned themselves with problems of daily life rather than with building socialism.
The street network and automotive industry remained underdeveloped, and dirt roads were common outside major cities.
The Supreme Court supervised the lower courts (People's Court) and applied the law as established by the Constitution or as interpreted by the Supreme Soviet.
Map of the Union Republics between 1956–1991
The Union constitutions, which were promulgated in 1918, 1924, 1936 and 1977, did not limit state power.
Soviet efforts to expand social, political and economic opportunities for women constitute "the earliest and perhaps most far-reaching attempt ever undertaken to transform the status and role of women."
The need for fuel declined in the Soviet Union from the 1970s to the 1980s, both per ruble of gross social product and per ruble of industrial product.
The authors attribute this poor performance to low productivity of capital in the Soviet Union.
This was known as de-Stalinization.
Yuri Andropov was 68 years old and Konstantin Chernenko 72 when they assumed power; both died in less than two years.
All citizens of the USSR had their own ethnic affiliation.
The other 11 post-Soviet states are considered newly-independent successor states to the Soviet Union.
Article 42 of the 1977 Soviet Constitution gave all citizens the right to health protection and free access to any health institutions in the USSR.
Across the Bering Strait was the United States.
Depending on the degree of power consolidation, it was either the Politburo as a collective body or the General Secretary, who always was one of the Politburo members, that effectively led the party and the country (except for the period of the highly personalized authority of Stalin, exercised directly through his position in the Council of Ministers rather than the Politburo after 1941).
A massive unplanned second economy grew up alongside the planned one at low levels, providing some of the goods and services that the planners could not.
Upon the forced retirement of Khrushchev, the party leader was prohibited from this kind of double membership, but the later General Secretaries for at least some part of their tenure occupied the largely ceremonial position of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the nominal head of state.
In the early 1960s, the Soviets awarded 40% of chemistry PhDs to women, compared to only 5% who received such a degree in the United States.
Censorship was relaxed as well.
Gorbachev resigned as General Secretary, only remaining President for the final months of the existence of the USSR.
Gorbachev resigned as general secretary in late August, and soon afterward the Party's activities were indefinitely suspended—effectively ending its rule.
At the beginning of World War II, Stalin signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany; the treaty delayed confrontation between the two countries.
In 1929, Tajikistan was split off from the Uzbekistan.
On 19–21 August 1991, a group of hardliners staged an abortive coup attempt.
Brezhnev's next two successors, transitional figures with deep roots in his tradition, did not last long.
During this time, Yeltsin took over what remained of the Soviet government, including the Moscow Kremlin.
Some researchers regarded the rise as largely real, a consequence of worsening health conditions and services.
The system was governed less by statute than by informal conventions, and no settled mechanism of leadership succession existed.
The Congress of People's Deputies was established, the majority of whose members were directly elected in competitive elections held in March 1989.
In December, the Bolsheviks signed an armistice with the Central Powers, though by February 1918, fighting had resumed.
Following Stalin's death in 1953, a period of political and economic liberalization, known as "de-Stalinization" and "Khrushchev's Thaw", occurred under the leadership of Nikita Khrushchev.
Before Leonid Brezhnev became General Secretary, the healthcare system of the Soviet Union was held in high esteem by many foreign specialists.
His policy of ''glasnost'' freed public access to information after decades of heavy government censorship.
