The earliest Japanese textual reference to the soybean is in the classic ''Kojiki'' (Records of Ancient Matters), which was completed in 712 CE.
By 1935, every Ford car had soy involved in its manufacture.
The soybean was first cultivated in Italy by 1760 in the Botanical Garden of Turin.
This spread was due to the establishment of sea and land trade routes.
The soybean arrived in the Caribbean in the form of soy sauce made by Samuel Bowen in Savannah, Georgia, in 1767.
Depending of the soybean variety, node growth may cease once flowering begins.
The cover article in the Center for Science in the Public Interest's September 2014 newsletter reported that a controlled study at USC prompted by suggestive epidemiological evidence found no impact on cognitive skills of years of soy vs milk protein diet enrichment.
However, the details of where, when, and under what circumstances soybean developed a close relationship with people are poorly understood.
Common soybean products include soy sauce, soy milk, tofu, soy meal, soy flour, textured vegetable protein (TVP), tempeh, soy lecithin and soybean oil.
Soybeans are one of the "biotech food" crops that have been genetically modified, and genetically modified soybeans are being used in an increasing number of products.
* Defatted soy flour is obtained from solvent extracted flakes, and contains less than 1% oil.
The genus ''Glycine'' Willd.
A 2003 study concluded the RR gene had been bred into so many different soybean cultivars, there had been little decline in genetic diversity, but "diversity was limited among elite lines from some companies".
Remarkably, seeds such as soybeans containing very high levels of protein can undergo desiccation, yet survive and revive after water absorption.
The chemical reaction is:
Farms were increasing production to meet with government demands, and Henry Ford became a great leader in the soybean industry.
GM crops require extensive certification before they can be legally imported into the European Union, where there is considerable supplier and consumer reluctance to use GM products for consumer or animal use.
Before flowering, roots can grow 1.9&nbsp;cm (0.75 inch) per day.
In rare cases, true anaphylaxis may also occur.
They caution however that soy supplements should be avoided.
The meal is 'toasted' (a misnomer because the heat treatment is with moist steam) and ground in a hammer mill.
Under ideal conditions, stem growth continues, producing new nodes every four days.
While the oligosaccharides raffinose and stachyose protect the viability of the soybean seed from desiccation (see above section on physical characteristics) they are not digestible sugars, so contribute to flatulence and abdominal discomfort in humans and other monogastric animals, comparable to the disaccharide trehalose.
Like some other crops of long domestication, the relationship of the modern soybean to wild-growing species can no longer be traced with any degree of certainty.
During the war, the soybean was discovered as fertilizer by the United States Department of Agriculture.
On 18 February 2008, Weston A.
Alternatively, '''raw''' soy flour omits the roasting step.
Extruded Full-Fat soy flour, ground in an Alpine mill, can replace/extend EGGS in baking and cooking Full-fat soy flour is a component of the famous Cornell Bread recipe (think pizza)
A 2001&nbsp;literature review suggested that women with current or past breast cancer should be aware of the risks of potential tumor growth when taking soy products, based on the effect of phytoestrogens to promote breast cancer cell growth in animals.
Glycitein is a phytoestrogen with weak estrogenic activity, comparable to that of the other soy isoflavones.
* "Natural or full-fat soy flour is made from unextracted, dehulled beans, and contains about 18% to 20% oil."
Soybeans were a crucial crop in East Asia long before written records began.
Vegetable types cook more easily, have a mild, nutty flavor, better texture, are larger in size, higher in protein, and lower in oil than field types.
Approximately 85% of the world's soybean crop is processed into soybean meal and soybean oil, the remainder processed in other ways or eaten whole.
Soybeans were first introduced to North America from China in 1765, by Samuel Bowen, a former East India Company sailor who had visited China in conjunction with James Flint, the first Englishman legally permitted by the Chinese authorities to learn Chinese.
Together, protein and soybean oil content account for 56% of dry soybeans by weight (36% protein and 20% fat, table).
In the United States, the bulk of the harvest is solvent-extracted with hexane, and the "toasted" defatted soymeal (50% protein) then makes possible the raising of farm animals (e.g.
Ford's interest led to two bushels (120 pounds) of soybeans being used in each Ford car, as well as products like the first commercial soy milk, ice cream and all-vegetable nondairy whipped topping.
By 2005, the top soybeans exporters were Argentina (39% of world soybean exports), United States (37%) and Brazil (16%), while top importers were China (41% of world soybean imports), European Union (22%), Japan (6%) and Mexico (6%).
Soy's content of isoflavones are as much as 3&nbsp;mg/g dry weight.
Further, when the analysis was limited to the 11 studies that provided evidence that the control and soy diets were matched, soy protein was found to lower LDL by 5.2 percent.
Ford's involvement with the soybean opened many doors for agriculture and industry to be linked more strongly than ever before.
Price Foundation submitted a petition for removal of this health claim.
"Die Kultur der Soja in Oesterreich," p.&nbsp;14-18).
Its high oil content requires the use of a specialized Alpine Fine Impact Mill to grind rather than the usual hammer mill.
The origin of soy bean cultivation remains scientifically debated.
For people who suffer from gout, eating foods containing moderate or high levels of purines may make the condition worse.
The fruit is a hairy pod that grows in clusters of three to five, each pod is 3–8&nbsp;cm long (1–3&nbsp;in) and usually contains two to four (rarely more) seeds 5–11&nbsp;mm in diameter.
It remains only a minor crop there, but its uses for human food are growing steadily.
: N2 + 8 H+ + 8 e− → 2 NH3 + H2
Tofu and soy milk producers prefer the higher protein cultivars bred from vegetable soybeans originally brought to the United States in the late 1930s.
In 1875 he first grew the soybeans in Vienna, then in early 1876 he sent samples of seeds to seven cooperators in central Europe, who planted and tested the seeds in the spring of 1876, with good or fairly good results in each case.
In 1936, Ford Motor Company developed a method where soybeans and fibers were rolled together producing a soup which was then pressed into various parts for their cars, from the distributor cap to knobs on the dash board.
In 1997, about 8% of all soybeans cultivated for the commercial market in the United States were genetically modified.
Soybeans are a globally important crop, providing oil and protein.
A prototype vehicle, colloquially titled the "Soybean Car", was built in 1941 out of such plastics.
Vitamin and mineral fortification can be used to make soy products nutritionally equivalent to animal protein; the protein quality is already roughly equivalent.
Furthermore, recent research suggests that soy protein decreases postprandial triglyceride levels, which is increasingly viewed as important for reducing coronary heart disease risk.
Soybeans and soy products contain significant amounts of purines, a class of organic compounds.
2S albumins form a major group of homologous storage proteins in many dicot species and in some monocots but not in grasses (cereals).
The "garden" cultivars are generally not suitable for mechanical combine harvesting because there is a tendency for the pods to shatter upon reaching maturity.
Like most plants, soybeans grow in distinct morphological stages as they develop from seeds into fully mature plants.
Often soybeans drop their leaves before the seeds are fully mature.
One of these studies, published in the ''Journal of Nutrition'', concludes that there are:
Mature trifoliolate leaves, having three to four leaflets per leaf, are often between  long and  broad.
It is very difficult to give a reliable estimate of the true prevalence of soy allergy in the general population.
Whole soybeans contain from 0.17 to 6.16% saponins, 0.35 to 2.3% in defatted soy flour and 0.06 to 1.9% in tofu.
No beneficial effects, however, have been shown in clinical research to lower the risk of cardiovascular diseases, including high blood cholesterol levels, prostate cancer or respiratory infections.
Subsequent to this first pair, mature nodes form compound leaves with three blades.
Ford also informed in public relation releases that in 1935 over five million acres (20,000&nbsp;km) was dedicated to growing soybeans in the United States.
The beans contain significant amounts of phytic acid, dietary minerals and B vitamins.
A 2006 commentary reviewed the relationship with soy and breast cancer.
They stated that soy may decrease the risk of breast cancer, but cautioned that the impact of isoflavones on breast tissue needs to be evaluated at the cellular level in women at high risk for breast cancer.
These cotyledons both act as leaves and as a source of nutrients for the immature plant, providing the seedling nutrition for its first 7 to 10 days.
Andrew McClung showed in the early 1950s that with soil amendments the Cerrado  region of Brazil would grow soybeans.
During the Great Depression, the drought-stricken (Dust Bowl) regions of the United States were able to use soy to regenerate their soil because of its nitrogen-fixing properties.
Wild soybeans were discovered in northeastern Australia in 1770 by explorers Banks and Solander.
They succeeded in making a textile fiber of spun soy protein fibers, hardened or tanned in a formaldehyde bath, which was given the name Azlon.
The nutritional value of soybean and each cooked staple depends on the processing and the method of cooking: boiling, frying, roasting, baking, etc.
However, the Council does not recommend taking soy dietary supplements as there is no evidence they are either effective or safe at preventing or treating cancers.
25&nbsp;g/day soy protein was established as the threshold intake because most trials used at least this much protein and not because less than this amount is inefficacious.
The Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) of soy protein is the nutritional equivalent of meat, eggs, and casein for human growth and health.
Older infants can suffer a more severe disorder with vomiting, diarrhoea that may be bloody, anemia, weight loss and failure to thrive.
Soybean seed contains 18-19% oil.
To extract soybean oil from seed, the soybeans are cracked, adjusted for moisture content, rolled into flakes and solvent-extracted with commercial hexane.
Variegated and bicolored seed coats are also common.
Soy is also used in tempeh: the beans (sometimes mixed with grain) are fermented into a solid cake.
The soybean was first cultivated in France by 1779 (and perhaps as early as 1740).
The following table shows the nutrient content of green soybean and other major staple foods, each in respective raw form.
Difficulties with coexistence and subsequent traces of cross-contamination of non-GM stocks have caused shipments to be rejected and have put a premium on non-GM soy.
Many people have claimed soybeans in Asia were historically only used after a fermentation process, which lowers the high phytoestrogens content found in the raw plant.
An allergy test that is positive demonstrates that the immune system has formed IgE antibodies to soy proteins.
He found soybeans and corn to have a range of soluble carbohydrates protecting the seed's cell viability.
Starting in Feb. 1876, he published these results first in various journal articles, and finally in his ''magnum opus'', Die Sojabohne (The Soybean) in 1878.
In 2014, the average worldwide yield for soybean crops was 2.6 tonnes per hectare.
The Cancer Council of New South Wales, Australia has released a statement saying scientific research suggests that overall the moderate consumption of soy products does not appear to present a risk to women with breast cancer, and there is equivocal evidence that consuming large amounts of soy products may have a protective effect against developing breast and prostate cancer.
Cocoa, for example, contains the 7S globulin, which contributes to cocoa/chocolate taste and aroma;, whereas coffee beans (coffee grounds) contain the 11S globulin responsible for coffee's aroma and flavor.
In 1804, the first soyfood product ("Fine India Soy" sauce) was sold in Sydney.
Moderate consumption of soy foods appears safe for both breast cancer survivors and the general population, and may even lower breast cancer risk."
The soybean probably arrived from southern China, moving southward into northern India.
In the higher more northerly latitudes, flowering coincides with the summer solstice, when the plants reach their maximum height.
Cultivation is successful in climates with hot summers, with optimum growing conditions in mean temperatures of ; temperatures of below 20&nbsp;°C and over 40&nbsp;°C (68&nbsp;°F, 104&nbsp;°F) stunt growth significantly.
Henry Ford promoted the soybean, helping to develop uses for it both in food and in industrial products, even demonstrating auto body panels made of soy-based plastics.
A 2009 meta-analysis of the research on the association between soy consumption and prostate cancer risk in men concluded that "consumption of soy foods is associated with a reduction in prostate cancer risk in men."
Furthermore, soy consumption has been shown to have no effect on the levels and quality of sperm.
These must be sprouted, or prepared and cooked for human consumption.
Soy bean from the Jomon period in Japan from 3000 BCE are also significantly larger than wild varieties.
During the 1780s it was grown at at least three other botanical gardens in Italy.
The principal soluble carbohydrates of mature soybeans are the disaccharide sucrose (range 2.5–8.2%), the trisaccharide raffinose (0.1–1.0%) composed of one sucrose molecule connected to one molecule of galactose, and the tetrasaccharide stachyose (1.4 to 4.1%) composed of one sucrose connected to two molecules of galactose.
Soybeans can be broadly classified as "vegetable" (garden) or field (oil) types.
Though the overall estimated benefits of the adoption of GE soybeans in the United States was $310&nbsp;million, the majority of this benefit was experienced by the companies selling the seeds (40%), followed by biotechnology firms (28%) and farmers (20%).
Soybeans have also been used since 2001 as fermenting stock in the manufacture of a brand of vodka.
The most productive soybean farms in the world in 2014 were in Thailand, with a nationwide average farm yield of 6.2 tonnes per hectare.
Ninety-seven percent of soybean meal production globally is used as livestock feed.
William Morse is considered the 'father' of modern soybean agriculture in America.
The march of soybeans into deforested areas of the Amazon rain forest would come later.
Soy bean was unknown in South China before the Han period From about the first century CE to the Age of Discovery (15–16th century), soybeans were introduced into several countries, such as India, Japan, Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, Malaysia, Burma and Nepal.
Recent research, however, indicates that seeding of wild forms started early (before 5000 BCE) in multiple locations through China, Korea and Japan The Great Soviet Encyclopedia claims soybean cultivation originated in China about 5000 years ago.
A Hitler Youth manual from the 1930s promoted soy beans, which it called "Nazi beans" as an alternative to meat.
Food service, retail and institutional (primarily school lunch and correctional) facilities regularly use such "extended" products.
Soybeans contain a high level of phytic acid, which has many effects including acting as an antioxidant and a chelating agent.
In China, Japan, and Korea, soybean and soybean products are a common part of the diet.
The first of stage of growth is germination, a process that first becomes apparent as a seed's radicle emerges.
Soy did not fare well in the low latitudes.
For this reason, soy is a good source of protein, amongst many others, for vegetarians and vegans or for people who want to reduce the amount of meat they eat.
In 1931, Ford hired chemists Robert Boyer and Frank Calvert to produce artificial silk.
However, the soy isoflavone genistein has been suggested as a chemopreventive agent against pancreatic cancer, by interfering with the chemical pathways that promote the creation and growth of tumors.
The two key early people and organizations introducing the soybean to France were the Society of Acclimatization (starting in 1855) and Li Yu-ying (from 1910).
Soybeans contain the isoflavones, genistein and daidzein, which are phytoestrogen compounds implicated as potentially beneficial factors in cardiovascular diseases and numerous other conditions.
It was usable in the making of suits, felt hats, and overcoats.
Saponins, a class of natural surfactants (soaps), are sterols that are present naturally in a wide variety of food-plants, including vegetables, legumes, and cereals–ranging from beans and spinach to tomatoes, potatoes and oats.
Soybean oil is the primary source of biodiesel in the United States, accounting for 80% of domestic biodiesel production.
Soy flour has 50% protein and 5% fiber.
Soybean plants are vulnerable to a wide range of bacterial diseases, fungal diseases, viral diseases and parasites.
Prior to the 1920 in the USA, the soybean was mainly a forage crop, a source of oil, meal (for feed) and industrial products, with very little used as food.
Soy contains isoflavones like genistein and daidzein.
The subgenus ''Glycine'' consists of at least 25 wild perennial species: for example, ''Glycine canescens'' F.J. Herm.
In Korean cuisine, soybean sprouts (콩나물 ''kongnamul'') are used in a variety of dishes, and are the base ingredient in ''doenjang'', ''cheonggukjang'' and ''ganjang''.
In 1932–33, the Ford Motor Company spent approximately $1,250,000 on soybean research.
Modern crop cultivars generally reach a height of around , and take 80–120&nbsp;days from sowing to harvesting.
These bacteria have the special ability of fixing nitrogen from atmospheric, molecular nitrogen (N2) into ammonia (NH3).
In 2010, the figure was 93%.
Japanese foods made from soya include ''miso'' (味噌), ''nattō'' (納豆), ''kinako'' (黄粉) and ''edamame'' (枝豆), as well as products made with tofu such as atsuage and aburaage.
It has higher levels of protein, thiamine, riboflavin, phosphorus, calcium, and iron than wheat flour.
Soy lecithin can be added (up to 15%) to soy flour to make lecithinated soy flour.
Soybean seeds come in a wide variety sizes and hull colors such black, brown, blue, yellow, and green.
An entire book has been published on the history of soybeans and soyfoods in Greece.
The soybean is used to make a product similar to peanut butter, called SoyNut Butter and with the slogan "I.M.
He and Charles Piper, Dr. C.V. Piper, took what was an unknown Oriental peasant crop in 1910 and transformed it into a 'golden bean' for America becoming one of America's largest farm crops and its most nutritious.
A complete protein is one that contains significant amounts of all the essential amino acids that must be provided to the human body because of the body's inability to synthesize them.
One important pest is the corn earworm moth, which is the most common and destructive pest of soybean growth in Virginia.
Another phytoestrogen in the human diet with estrogen activity is coumestans, which are found in beans, split-peas, with the best sources being alfalfa, clover, and soybean sprouts.
Li started a large tofu factory, where the first commercial soyfoods in France were made.
1935 - Soybeans are first introduced to Greece by Anton Brillmayer, an Austrian soybean breeder (Brillmayer.
The cultivation of soybeans began in the eastern half of northern China by 2000 BCE, but is almost certainly much older.
Although, soybean was introduced into North America in 1765,for the next 155 years, the crop was grown primarily for forage.
Isoflavones are polyphenol compounds, produced primarily by beans and other legumes, including peanuts and chickpeas.
Soy products also are used as a low-cost substitute in meat and poultry products.
Soybeans contain a small but significant 2S storage protein.
Most of the farmers who received seeds from him cultivated them, then reported their results back to him.
Soy protein is essentially identical to the protein of other legume seeds and pulses.
The soy-based meat substitute textured vegetable protein has been used for more than 50&nbsp;years as a way of inexpensively extending ground beef without reducing its nutritional value.
However, HDL (good cholesterol) did not increase by a significant amount.
This arrangement means that the root nodules are sources of nitrogen for legumes, making them relatively rich in plant proteins.
chicken, hog, turkey) on a large industrial scale.
Fermented soy foods include soy sauce, fermented bean paste, natto and tempeh.
One serving, (1 cup or 240 mL) of soy milk, for instance, contains 6 or 7&nbsp;grams of soy protein.
Patents were awarded to him in the early 1990s on techniques for protecting "biological membranes" and proteins in the dry state.
It increases dispersibility and gives it emulsifying properties.
... no clinical concerns with respect to nutritional adequacy, sexual development, neurobehavioral development, immune development, or thyroid disease.
One scenario is seen in very young infants who have vomiting and diarrhoea when fed soy-based formula, which resolves when the formula is withdrawn.
Traditional non-fermented food uses of soybeans include soy milk from which tofu and tofu skin are made.
They can grow in a wide range of soils, with optimum growth in moist alluvial soils with a good organic content.
Soybeans were probably first cultivated in Canada by 1855, and definitely in 1895 at Ontario Agricultural College.
As a result, yeast-raised breads made with soy flour are dense in texture.
The English words "soy" and "soya" are ultimately derived from the Japanese pronunciation of , the Sino-Japanese word for soy sauce, by way of the German adaptation of the same word, ''soja''.
An American Heart Association (AHA) review of a decade long study of soy protein benefits casts doubt on the FDA allowed "Heart Healthy" claim for soy protein and does not recommend isoflavone supplementation.
If the seed coat is cracked, the seed will not germinate.
By the 13th century, the soybean had arrived in Indonesia; it probably arrived much earlier, carried by traders or merchants from southern China.
Raw soybeans, however, aren't edible and cannot be digested.
Legumes such as soybean and chickpeas are the major source of saponins in the human diet.
More than the heat and humidity, it was a lack of seasons that hampered production.
Human sewage sludge can be used as fertilizer to grow soybeans.
These substitutes are readily available in most supermarkets.
Nodulation typically continues for 8 weeks before the symbiotic infection process stabilizes.
The review panel also found that soy isoflavones have not been shown to reduce post-menopausal "hot flashes" and the efficacy and safety of isoflavones to help prevent cancers of the breast, uterus or prostate is in question.
Soybean oil has an omega-6:omega-3 ratio of 7:1.
Soy was introduced to Africa from China in the late 19th century, and is now widespread across the continent.
However it is also self-limiting and will often disappear in the toddler years.
1939 - By now, soybeans have been cultivated in Greece (Matagrin.
Soy milk does not naturally contain significant amounts of digestible calcium.
He cultivated these seeds in Vienna, and soon began to distribute them throughout Central and Western Europe.
Undigested oligosaccharides are broken down in the intestine by native microbes, producing gases such as carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane.
According to the US Food and Drug Administration:
It does not contain gluten.
Baking food with soy flour gives it tenderness, moistness, a rich color, and a fine texture.
''Glycine soja'' is the wild ancestor of ''Glycine max'', and grows wild in China, Japan, Korea, Taiwan and Russia.
The oil is then refined, blended for different applications, and sometimes hydrogenated.
The reason for the discrepancy is likely that soy proteins, the causative factor in allergy, are far less potent at triggering allergy symptoms than the proteins of peanut and shellfish.
As with other glyphosate-tolerant crops, concern is expressed over damage to biodiversity.
