Some important philosophers at the time were Averroes, Ibn Arabi and Maimonides.
'''''Mediterranean''''' Spain – all such coastal regions, from Catalonia to Andalusia – heavy use of seafood, such as ''pescaíto frito'' (fried fish); several cold soups like ''gazpacho''; and many rice-based dishes like ''paella'' from Valencia and ''arròs negre'' (black rice) from Catalonia.
While still driven by the national and existential questions that obsessed the writers of '98, they approached these topics with a greater sense of distance and objectivity.
After an arduous conquest, the peninsula came under the rule of the Roman Empire.
The Mudéjar style, from the 12th to 17th centuries, was developed by introducing Arab style motifs, patterns and elements into European architecture.
Following a great Muslim resurgence in the 12th century, the great Moorish strongholds in the south fell to Christian Spain in the 13th century—Córdoba in 1236 and Seville in 1248.
Spain is organisationally structured as a so-called ''Estado de las Autonomías'' ("State of Autonomies"); it is one of the most decentralised countries in Europe, along with Switzerland, Germany and Belgium; for example, all Autonomous Communities have their own elected parliaments, governments, public administrations, budgets, and resources.
Leading voices include the poet Juan Ramón Jiménez, the academics and essayists Ramón Menéndez Pidal, Gregorio Marañón, Manuel Azaña, Maria Zambrano, Eugeni d'Ors, and Ortega y Gasset, and the novelists Gabriel Miró, Ramón Pérez de Ayala, and Ramón Gómez de la Serna.
With Franco's death in November 1975, Juan Carlos succeeded to the position of King of Spain and head of state in accordance with the law.
Napoleon was forced to intervene personally, defeating several Spanish armies and forcing a British army to retreat.
Only two communities—the Basque Country and Navarre—have full fiscal autonomy.
Depending on the nature of the crop, it was possible to harvest two successive crops in the same year on about 10% of the country's irrigated land.
Even on many international issues beyond western Europe, Spain prefers to co-ordinate its efforts with its EU partners through the European political co-operation mechanisms.
In 1986 Spain joined the European Economic Community, which later became the European Union.
The climate of Spain, its geographic location, popular coastlines, diverse landscapes, historical legacy, vibrant culture and excellent infrastructure, has made Spain's international tourist industry among the largest in the world.
In the last five decades, international tourism in Spain has grown to become the second largest in the world in terms of spending, worth approximately 40&nbsp;billion Euros or about 5% of GDP in 2006.
The Spanish government is offering Spanish nationality to sephardi Jews.
An influential style centred in Barcelona, known as modernisme, produced a number of important architects, of which Gaudí is one.
All were scholars of their national literary heritage, again evidence of the impact of the calls of ''regeneracionistas'' and the Generation of 1898 for Spanish intelligence to turn at least partially inwards.
During the Romanticism, José Zorrilla created one of the most emblematic figures in European literature in Don Juan Tenorio.
In the worsening economic situation of the Great Depression, Spanish politics became increasingly chaotic and violent.
By political custom established by King Juan Carlos since the ratification of the 1978 Constitution, the king's nominees have all been from parties who maintain a plurality of seats in the Congress.
The Meseta Central (often translated as "Inner Plateau") is a vast plateau in the heart of peninsular Spain.
* 1984 — Historic Centre of Córdoba (Córdoba, Andalusia).
In 2008, the government instituted a "Plan of Voluntary Return" which encouraged unemployed immigrants from outside the EU to return to their home countries and receive several incentives, including the right to keep their unemployment benefits and transfer whatever they contributed to the Spanish Social Security.
Most are arrivals in the past century, while some are descendants of earlier Spanish Jews.
Their ranks have since been bolstered by recent immigration, especially from Morocco and Algeria.
These are mostly British, French, German, Dutch, and Norwegian.
Between 1846 and 1932 it is estimated that nearly 5&nbsp;million Spaniards emigrated to the Americas, especially to Argentina and Brazil.
Francisco Goya painted during a historical period that includes the Spanish Independence War, the fights between liberals and absolutists, and the raise of state-nations.
On 1 January 2002, Spain fully adopted the euro, and Spain experienced strong economic growth, well above the EU average during the early 2000s.
There are more than 200,000 migrants from Sub-Saharan Africa living in Spain, principally Senegaleses and Nigerians.
The Islamic transmission of the classics is the main Islamic contributions to Medieval Europe.
Later, Frankish forces established Christian counties on the southern side of the Pyrenees.
In 2008, Spain granted citizenship to 84,170 persons, mostly to people from Ecuador, Colombia and Morocco.
Autonomous communities are the first level administrative division in the country.
* 1993 — Archaeological Ensemble of Mérida (Badajoz, Extremadura).
Along the Pyrenees in Girona, a small exclave town called Llívia is surrounded by France.
A study made by the Union of Islamic Communities of Spain demonstrated that there were about 1,700,000 inhabitants of Muslim background living in Spain , accounting for 3-4% of the total population of Spain.
A number of trading settlements of Phoenicians, Greeks and Carthaginians developed on the Mediterranean coast.
Fossil fuels together generated 58% of Spain's electricity in 2009, just below the OECD mean of 61%.
Jesús Luis Cunchillos argues that the root of the term ''span'' is the Phoenician word ''spy'', meaning "to forge metals".
These events foreshadowed the conflict between conservatives and liberals in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
In Spain there are over forty professional orchestras, including the Orquestra Simfònica de Barcelona, Orquesta Nacional de España and the Orquesta Sinfónica de Madrid.
Smaller numbers of immigrants from several Sub-Saharan countries have recently been settling in Spain.
* 1985 — Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct (Segovia, Castile-León).
This early global expansion is a competitive advantage over its competitors and European neighbours.
The Republic offered political autonomy to the linguistically distinct regions of Basque Country, Catalonia and Galicia and gave voting rights to women and was increasingly dominated by left wing political parties.
The Kingdom of León was the strongest Christian kingdom for centuries.
Almadén (Ciudad Real, Castile-La Mancha – Spanish part) and Idrija (Slovene Littoral – Slovenian part).
Since the 1940s Spain has called for the return of Gibraltar.
This status permitted Christians and Jews to practice their religions as ''People of the Book'' but they were required to pay a special tax and had legal and social rights inferior to those of Muslims.
In the North African Spanish autonomous city of Melilla, Riff Berber is spoken by a significant part of the population.
Distinct traditional regional identities within Spain include the Basques, Catalans, Galicians, Andalusians and Valencians, although to some extent all of the 17 Autonomous Communities will claim a distinct historic identity.
Additionally, there are highways along the Atlantic (Ferrol to Vigo), Cantabrian (Oviedo to San Sebastián) and Mediterranean (Girona to Cádiz) coasts.
In the Senate, the ratio is even lower, since there are only 79 women out of 263 (30.0%).
In Catalonia, two additional divisions exist, the ''comarques'' (sing.
The cultures of the Celtic and Iberian populations were gradually Romanised (Latinised) at differing rates in different parts of Hispania.
Another statistically significant factor is the large number of residents of EU origin typically retiring to Spain's Mediterranean coast.
The Alans' allies, the Hasdingi Vandals, established a kingdom in Gallaecia, too, occupying largely the same region but extending farther south to the Douro river.
By population, Spain is the sixth largest in Europe and the fifth in the European Union.
In the 11th century, the Muslim holdings fractured into rival Taifa kingdoms, allowing the small Christian states the opportunity to greatly enlarge their territories.
It is a middle power and a developed country with the world's fourteenth largest economy by nominal GDP and sixteenth largest by purchasing power parity.
The only legal party under Franco's post civil war regime was the ''Falange Española Tradicionalista y de las JONS'', formed in 1937; the party emphasised falangism, a form of fascism that emphasised anti-communism, nationalism and Roman Catholicism.
The Generation of 1927, where poets Pedro Salinas, Jorge Guillén, Federico García Lorca, Vicente Aleixandre, Dámaso Alonso.
Spain includes different phytogeographic regions, each with its own floristic characteristics resulting largely from the interaction of climate, topography, soil type and fire, biotic factors.
With the exception of the region surrounding the capital, Madrid, the most populated areas lie around the coast.
''vegueria'') both of which have administrative powers; ''comarques'' being aggregations of municipalities, and the ''vegueries'' being aggregations of ''comarques''.
Impatient with the slow pace of democratic political reforms in 1976 and 1977, Spain's new King Juan Carlos, known for his formidable personality, dismissed Carlos Arias Navarro and appointed the reformer Adolfo Suárez as Prime Minister.
According to Amnesty International (AI), government investigations of such alleged abuses are often lengthy and punishments were light.
The group that has become known as the Generation of 1898 was marked by the destruction of Spain's fleet in Cuba by US gunboats in 1898, which provoked a cultural crisis in Spain.
In Catalonia, Aranese (''aranés''), a local variety of the Occitan language, has been declared co-official along with Catalan and Spanish since 2006.
* 1996 — Historic Walled Town of Cuenca (Cuenca, Castile-La Mancha).
The proportion of Spain's foreign born population increased rapidly from around 1 in 50 in 2000 to almost 1 in 8 in 2010 but has since declined.
* 1998 — Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin on the Iberian Peninsula (Andalusia, Aragon, Castile-La Mancha, Catalonia, Murcia and Valencia regions).
* 1985 — Santiago de Compostela (Old Town) (A Coruña, Galicia).
Spain's National Day (''Fiesta Nacional de España'') is 12 October, the anniversary of the Discovery of America and commemorate Our Lady of the Pillar feast, patroness of Aragon and throughout Spain.
Unemployment stood at 7.6% in October 2006, a rate that compared favourably to many other European countries, and especially with the early 1990s when it stood at over 20%.
On average, the Spanish high-speed train is the fastest one in the world, followed by the Japanese bullet train and the French TGV.
This Gothic kingdom was the first Christian kingdom ruling in the Iberian Peninsula, and in the Reconquista it was the referent for the different kingdoms fighting against the Muslim rule.
The number of immigrants in Spain had grown up from 500,000 people in 1996 to 5.2&nbsp;million in 2008 out of a total population of 46&nbsp;million.
Spain's population density, at 91/km² (235/sq mi), is lower than that of most Western European countries and its distribution across the country is very unequal.
In 2005 the Economist Intelligence Unit's quality of life survey placed Spain among the top 10 in the world.
* 2000 — Palmeral of Elche (Alicante, Valencia).
After the Reconquista in 1492, Muslims did not live in Spain for centuries.
The Napoleonic War left Spain economically ruined, deeply divided and politically unstable.
In the Basque Country, moderate Basque nationalism has coexisted with a radical nationalist movement led by the armed terrorist organisation ETA.
In particular, three main divisions are easily identified:
The famous ''Don Quijote de La Mancha'' by Miguel de Cervantes was written in this time.
Along with France and Morocco, it is one of only three countries to have both Atlantic and Mediterranean coastlines.
Other main airports are located in Majorca (23&nbsp;million passengers), Málaga (13&nbsp;million passengers), Las Palmas (Gran Canaria) (11&nbsp;million passengers), Alicante (10&nbsp;million passengers) and smaller, with the number of passengers between 4 and 10 million, for example Tenerife (two airports), Valencia, Seville, Bilbao, Ibiza, Lanzarote, Fuerteventura.
The ''Reconquista'' (Reconquest) was the centuries-long period in which Christian rule was re-established over the Iberian Peninsula.
However, further military action by Spanish armies, guerrillas and Wellington's British-Portuguese forces, combined with Napoleon's disastrous invasion of Russia, led to the ousting of the French imperial armies from Spain in 1814, and the return of King Ferdinand VII.
In 2010 Spain became the solar power world leader when it overtook the United States with a massive power station plant called La Florida, near Alvarado, Badajoz.
Spanish misticism was an important intellectual fight against Protestantism with Teresa of Ávila, a reformist nun, ahead.
On 19 June 2014, the monarch, Juan Carlos, abdicated in favour of his son, who became Felipe VI.
In 2013 the same survey (now called the "Where-to-be-born index"), ranked Spain 28th in the world.
The programme had little effect; during its first two months, just 1,400 immigrants took up the offer.
The Spanish road system is mainly centralised, with six highways connecting Madrid to the Basque Country, Catalonia, Valencia, West Andalusia, Extremadura and Galicia.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has approximately 46,000 adherents in 133 congregations in all regions of the country and has a temple in the Moratalaz District of Madrid.
For three years the Nationalist forces led by General Francisco Franco and supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy fought the Republican side, which was supported by the Soviet Union, Mexico and International Brigades but it was not supported by the Western powers due to the British-led policy of Non-Intervention.
It was the first empire on which it was said that the sun never set.
* 1996 — Silk Exchange of Valencia (Valencia).
On 5 July 2013, Spain sent a letter to the UN expressing these views.
By the mid-1990s the economy had recommenced the growth that had been disrupted by the global recession of the early 1990s.
Despite the conditions, some important scientists and engineers emerged.
The largest public company is Canal de Isabel II, which serves the metropolitan area of Madrid.
Continued wars and other problems eventually led to a diminished status.
There is the claim that "Hispania" derives from the Basque word ''Ezpanna'' meaning "edge" or "border", another reference to the fact that the Iberian Peninsula constitutes the southwest corner of the European continent.
* 2000 — Catalan Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Boí (Lleida, Catalonia).
* 1999 — San Cristóbal de La Laguna (Tenerife, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands).
The islet is now deserted and without any sign of sovereignty.
During the Golden Age we find painters such as El Greco, José de Ribera and Francisco Zurbarán.
It took the Romans nearly two centuries to complete the conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, though they had control of it for over six centuries.
The little Pheasant Island in the River Bidasoa is a Spanish-French condominium.
Andalusia also took that denomination in its first Statute of Autonomy, even though it followed the longer process stipulated in the constitution for the rest of the country.
However, in the legislative branch, as of July 2010 only 128 of the 350 members of the Congress were women (36.3%).
Mediterranean trade and cultural exchange flourished.
* 1997 — San Millán Yuso and Suso Monasteries (La Rioja).
On 30 May 1982 Spain joined NATO, following a referendum.
In Atapuerca fossils have been found of the earliest known hominins in Europe, the Homo antecessor.
Progressively, other communities in revisions to their Statutes of Autonomy have also taken that denomination in accordance to their historical regional identity, such as the Valencian Community, the Canary Islands, the Balearic Islands, and Aragon.
*** Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for the Presidency: Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría.
''Hispania'' may derive from the poetic use of the term ''Hesperia'', reflecting the Greek perception of Italy as a "western land" or "land of the setting sun" (''Hesperia'', ''Ἑσπερία'' in Greek) and Spain, being still further west, as ''Hesperia ultima''.
Spain is one of the world's leading countries in the development and production of renewable energy.
The vegetation of Spain is varied due to several factors including the diversity of the relief, the climate and latitude.
In the field of classical music, Spain has produced a number of noted composers such as Isaac Albéniz, Manuel de Falla and Enrique Granados and singers and performers such as Plácido Domingo, José Carreras, Montserrat Caballé, Alicia de Larrocha, Alfredo Kraus, Pablo Casals, Ricardo Viñes, José Iturbi, Pablo de Sarasate, Jordi Savall and Teresa Berganza.
The Spanish claim makes a distinction between the isthmus that connects the Rock to the Spanish mainland on the one hand, and the Rock and city of Gibraltar on the other.
In 2014, the LOE was partially modified by the newer LOMCE law (''Ley Orgánica para la Mejora de la Calidad Educativa''), or Fundamental Law for the Improvement of the Education System, commonly called ''Ley Wert'' (Wert Law).
Regarding punctuality, it is second in the world (98.54% on-time arrival) after the Japanese Shinkansen (99%).
As Renaissance New Monarchs, Isabella and Ferdinand centralised royal power at the expense of local nobility, and the word ''España'', whose root is the ancient name ''Hispania'', began to be commonly used to designate the whole of the two kingdoms.
Various regional styles of folk music abound in Aragon, Catalonia, Valencia, Castile, the Basque Country, Galicia and Asturias.
The reason for this early expansion is the booming interest towards Spanish language and culture in Asia and Africa and a corporate culture that learned to take risks in unstable markets.
The island lies  just off the coast of Morocco,  from Ceuta and  from mainland Spain.
The PSOE was replaced in government by the Partido Popular (PP) after the latter won the 1996 General Elections; at that point the PSOE had served almost 14 consecutive years in office.
Beginning in the late 15th century, large numbers of Iberian colonists settled in what became Latin America and at present most white Latin Americans (who make up about one-third of Latin America's population) are of Spanish or Portuguese origin.
In the spirit of general "Realism", Realist authors opted for depictions of everyday and banal activities and experiences, instead of romanticised or stylised presentations.
Thousands of music fans also travel to Spain each year for internationally recognised summer music festivals Sónar which often features the top up and coming pop and techno acts, and Benicàssim which tends to feature alternative rock and dance acts.
This same study shows that of the Spaniards who identify themselves as religious, 59% hardly ever or never go to church, 15% go to church some times a year, 8% some time per month and 14% every Sunday or multiple times per week.
Alberto Contador is the leading Spanish cyclist and has won several Grand Tour titles including two Tour de France titles.
Since 2000, Spain has experienced high population growth as a result of immigration flows, despite a birth rate that is only half the replacement level.
In 1895 and 1896 the Cuban War of Independence and the Philippine Revolution  broke out and eventually the United States became involved.
The Portuguese writer José Saramago, also awarded with the prize, lived for many years in Spain and spoke both Portuguese and Spanish.
* 2006 — Vizcaya Bridge (Biscay, Basque Country).
* 1986 — Old Town of Cáceres (Cáceres, Extremadura).
King Ferdinand VII's attempt to re-assert control proved futile as he faced opposition not only in the colonies but also in Spain and army revolts followed, led by liberal officers.
Spanish culture is marked by strong historic ties to Catholicism, which played a pivotal role in the country's formation and subsequent identity.
Over time, large Moorish populations became established, especially in the Guadalquivir River valley, the coastal plain of Valencia, the Ebro River valley and (towards the end of this period) in the mountainous region of Granada.
It is heavily influenced by seafood available from the waters that surround the country, and reflects the country's deep Mediterranean roots.
Prior to the Second World War, Spain suffered a devastating civil war and came under the rule of an authoritarian government, which oversaw a period of stagnation that was followed by a surge in the growth of the economy.
Muslims imported a rich intellectual tradition from the Middle East and North Africa.
Almost every aspect of Spanish life is permeated by its Roman heritage, making Spain one of the major Latin countries of Europe.
Crop areas were farmed in two highly diverse manners.
Food is traditionally conserved by salting, like Spanish ham, or immersed in olive oil, like Manchego cheese.
Meat production for domestic consumption became the single most important agricultural activity, accounting for 30% of all farm-related production in 1983.
Indeed, some of the regional identities may even conflict with the Spanish one.
Within the EU, Spain had the 2nd highest immigration rate in percentage terms after Cyprus, but by a great margin, the highest in absolute numbers, up to 2008.
In the 8th century, nearly all of the Iberian Peninsula was conquered (711–718) by largely Moorish Muslim armies from North Africa.
It is some  smaller than France and  larger than the US state of California.
For some people, Spain's identity consists more of an overlap of different regional identities than of a sole Spanish identity.
It remained neutral during World War I (see Spain in World War I).
The Iberians inhabited the Mediterranean side of the peninsula, from the northeast to the southeast.
Spain's conquest by France benefited Latin American anti-colonialists who resented the Imperial Spanish government's policies that favoured Spanish-born citizens (Peninsulars) over those born overseas (Criollos) and demanded retroversion of the sovereignty to the people.
The incident ended when both countries agreed to return to the status quo ante which existed prior to the Moroccan occupation of the island.
The Romanised cultures of the Iberian Peninsula interacted with Muslim and Jewish cultures in complex ways, giving the region a distinctive culture.
Though Spanish society has become considerably more secular in recent decades, the influx of Latin American immigrants, who tend to be strong Catholic practitioners, has helped the Catholic Church to recover.
The Napoleonic invasions of Spain led to chaos, triggering independence movements that tore apart most of the empire and left the country politically unstable.
In 2005, Spain instituted a three-month amnesty programme through which certain hitherto undocumented aliens were granted legal residency.
What the programme failed to do, the sharp and prolonged economic crisis has done from 2010 to 2011 in that tens of thousands of immigrants have left the country due to lack of jobs.
Major opera houses include the Teatro Real, the Gran Teatre del Liceu, Teatro Arriaga and the El Palau de les Arts Reina Sofía.
'''''Atlantic''''' Spain – the whole Northern coast, including Asturian, Basque, Cantabrian and Galician cuisine – vegetable and fish-based stews like ''caldo gallego'' and ''marmitako''.
The constitutional history of Spain dates back to the constitution of 1812.
The most notable were Miguel Servet, Santiago Ramón y Cajal, Narcís Monturiol, Celedonio Calatayud, Juan de la Cierva, Leonardo Torres y Quevedo and Severo Ochoa.
Then a Spanish town, it was conquered by an Anglo-Dutch force in 1704 during the War of the Spanish Succession on behalf of Archduke Charles, pretender to the Spanish throne.
The legal situation concerning Gibraltar was settled in 1713 by the Treaty of Utrecht, in which Spain ceded the territory in perpetuity to the British Crown stating that, should the British abandon this post, it would be offered to Spain first.
In 2010, the Basque city of Bilbao was awarded with the Lee Kuan Yew World City Prize, and its mayor at the time, Iñaki Azkuna, was awarded the World Mayor Prize in 2012.
Other writers from this period are Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer, José de Espronceda, Rosalía de Castro or Mariano José de Larra.
Judaism was practically non-existent in Spain from the 1492 expulsion until the 19th century, when Jews were again permitted to enter the country.
Two 15th-century Spanish Jewish scholars, Don Isaac Abrabanel and Solomon ibn Verga, gave an explanation now considered folkloric.
Due to its historical and geographical diversity, Spanish architecture has drawn from a host of influences.
In the tourist areas of the Mediterranean coast and the islands, English and German are widely spoken by tourists, foreign residents, and tourism workers.
The best known artefacts of these prehistoric human settlements are the famous paintings in the Altamira cave of Cantabria in northern Iberia, which were created from 35,600 to 13,500 BCE by Cro-Magnon.
While its most famous event is the ''encierro'', or the running of the bulls, which happens at 8:00 am from 7 to 14 July, the week-long celebration involves many other traditional and folkloric events.
:''See also ASCAMM, Associació Catalana d'Empreses constructores de Motlles i Matrius''
The Byzantines established an enclave, Spania, in the south, with the intention of reviving the Roman empire throughout Iberia.
An important provincial city founded by the Romans and with an extensive Roman era infrastructure, Córdoba became the cultural capital, including fine Arabic style architecture, during the time of the Islamic Umayyad dynasty.
The last Nasrid sultanate of Granada, a Muslim tributary state would finally surrender in 1492 to the Catholic monarchs Queen Isabella I of Castile and King Ferdinand II of Aragon.
Though initial suspicions focused on the Basque terrorist group ETA, evidence soon emerged indicating Islamist involvement.
** Prime Minister of Spain (''Presidente del Gobierno'', literally ''President of the Government''): Mariano Rajoy Brey, elected 20 November 2011.
'''Spain''' (;  ), officially the '''Kingdom of Spain''' (), is a sovereign state largely located on the Iberian Peninsula in southwestern Europe, with archipelagos in the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea, and several small territories on and near the North African coast.
One of the most famous is San Fermín, in Pamplona.
* 2003 — Renaissance Monumental Ensembles of Úbeda and Baeza (Jaén, Andalusia).
* a Legislative Assembly whose members must be elected by universal suffrage according to the system of proportional representation and in which all areas that integrate the territory are fairly represented;
Spain's extensive history with many cultural influences has led to a unique cuisine.
The 2 May 1808 revolt was one of many nationalist uprisings across the country against the Bonapartist regime.
Altogether, about 22% of the entire Spanish population attends religious services at least once per month.
Through exploration and conquest or royal marriage alliances and inheritance, the Spanish Empire expanded to include vast areas in the Americas, islands in the Asia-Pacific area, areas of Italy, cities in Northern Africa, as well as parts of what are now France, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.
Approximately two million Spaniards migrated to other Western European countries between 1960 and 1975.
Iberia enters written records as a land populated largely by the Iberians, Basques and Celts.
In the late 19th century nationalist movements arose in the Philippines and Cuba.
