However, rebelling units in some important cities—such as Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, Bilbao and Málaga—were unable to capture their objectives, and those cities remained under the control of the government.
The '''Spanish Civil War''' (), widely known in Spain simply as '''The Civil War''' () or '''The War''' (), took place from 1936 to 1939 and was fought between the Republicans, who were loyal to the democratic, left-leaning Second Spanish Republic, and the Nationalists, a falangist group led by General Francisco Franco.
Mention of García Lorca's death was forbidden during Franco's regime.
The plan was discovered in Morocco on 17 July, which prompted the conspirators to enact it immediately.
Intellectuals strongly favoured the Republicans.
This was against initial opposition from both the government and charitable groups, who saw the removal of children from their native country as potentially harmful.
The Republic's supporters within Spain ranged from centrists who supported a moderately-capitalist liberal democracy to revolutionary anarchists who opposed the Republic but sided with it against the coup forces.
Like clergy, civilians were executed in Republican territories.
The rebels termed themselves ''Nacionales'', normally translated "Nationalists", although the former implies "true Spaniards" rather than a nationalistic cause.
Thousands of Republicans were imprisoned and at least 30,000 executed.
The view of historians, including Helen Graham, Paul Preston, Antony Beevor, Gabriel Jackson and Hugh Thomas, is that the mass executions behind the Nationalists lines were organized and approved by the Nationalists rebel authorities, while the executions behind the Republican lines were the result of the breakdown of the Republican state and anarchy:
The cost of the Soviet Union arms was more than the value of Spain's gold reserves, the fourth-largest in the world, estimated at US $500 million (1936 prices), 176 tonnes of which was transferred through France.
Azaña came close to resigning.
In this respect, the war was an indicator of the growing instability across Europe.
Though General Secretary Joseph Stalin had signed the Non-Intervention Agreement, the Soviet Union contravened the League of Nations embargo by providing material assistance to the Republican forces, becoming their only source of major weapons.
The Regular Spanish Air force commander Andres Garcia La Calle was openly critical of Malraux's military efficiency but recognized his usefulness as a propagandist.
From there, they were transferred to the Miranda de Ebro camp for "purification" according to the Law of Political Responsibilities.
Simone Weil added herself for a while to the anarchist columns of Buenaventura Durruti, but was expelled from the front by other fighters, who feared she inadvertently shot them because she was shortsighted.citation needed By the account of her biographer Simone Petrement, she was evcuated from the front after a matter of weeks because of an injury sustained in a cooking accident.
The Nationalists had secured the support of around half of Spain's territorial army, some 60,000 men, joined by the Army of Africa, made up of 35,000 men, and a little under half of Spain's militaristic police forces, the Assault Guards, the Civil Guards, and the Carabineers.
The Italian CTV would, at its peak, supply the Nationalists with 50,000 men.
The USSR sent a number of military advisers to Spain (2,000–3,000), and, while Soviet troops were fewer than 500 men at a time, Soviet volunteers often operated Soviet-made tanks and aircraft, particularly at the beginning of the war.
The painting has since been heralded as an anti-war work and a symbol of peace in the 20th century.
On one hand, many of the rifles and field guns provided were old, obsolete or otherwise of limited use (some dated back to the 1860s).
The main Nationalist advance to cross the Jarama and cut the supply to Madrid by the Valencia road, termed the Battle of Jarama, led to heavy casualties (6,000–20,000) on both sides.
Nazi Germany's actions included the formation of the multitasking Condor Legion, a unit composed of volunteers from the Luftwaffe and the German Army (''Heer'') from July 1936 to March 1939.
He put this stand into practice by various means, including organizing agricultural workers to maintain food supplies, and through humanitarian work with war refugees.
The government refused to allow arms shipments and sent warships to try to stop shipments.
On 26 April, the Condor Legion bombed the town of Guernica, killing 200–300 and causing significant damage.
In Granada, where working-class neighborhoods were hit with artillery and right-wing squads were given free rein to kill government sympathizers, at least 2,000 people were murdered.
With his ranks swelled by Italian troops and Spanish colonial soldiers from Morocco, Franco made another attempt to capture Madrid in January and February 1937, but was again unsuccessful.
In 1868 popular uprisings led to the overthrow of Queen Isabella II of the House of Bourbon.
ignored warnings of a military conspiracy involving several generals, who decided that the government had to be replaced to prevent the dissolution of Spain.
The dispute was between an ultimately victorious government&nbsp;–Communist forces and the anarchist CNT.
The Nationalist group was supported by a number of conservative groups, including the Spanish Confederation of Autonomous Right-wing Groups (''Confederación Española de Derechas Autónomas'', or CEDA), monarchists such as the religious conservative (Catholic) Carlists, and the Falange Española Tradicionalista y de las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional Sindicalista, a fascist group.
The Legion spearheaded many Nationalist victories, particularly in aerial combat, while Spain further provided a proving ground for German tank tactics.
In total, estimates of material provided by the USSR to the Republicans vary between 634 and 806 planes, 331 and 362 tanks, and 1,034 and 1,895 artillery pieces.
The Republican government was anticlerical, and supporters attacked and murdered Roman Catholic clergy in reaction to the news of military revolt.
A few well-known people fought on the Republican side, such as English novelist George Orwell (who wrote ''Homage to Catalonia'' (1938), an account of his experiences in the war) and Canadian thoracic surgeon Norman Bethune, who developed a mobile blood-transfusion service for front-line operations.
Support for the Rivera regime gradually faded, and he resigned in January 1930.
Despite the Irish government's prohibition against participating in the war, around 600 Irishmen, followers of Irish political activist and Irish Republican Army leader Eoin O'Duffy, known as the "Irish Brigade", went to Spain to fight alongside Franco.
Some individuals fled to friendly embassies, which would house up to 8,500 people during the war.
Basque nationalists, heralded by the conservative Basque Nationalist Party, were mildly supportive of the Republican government, although some in Navarre sided with the uprising for the same reasons influencing conservative Catalans.
In total, the rebels shot 189 people.
This would later be the frequent subject of Franquist propaganda, under the term "Moscow Gold".
In total, Germany provided the Nationalists with 600 planes and 200 tanks.
A rebel force under Colonel Alfonso Beorlegui Canet, sent by General Mola and Colonel Esteban García, undertook the Campaign of Gipuzkoa from July to September.
Franco had effectively won in the north.
This facilitated the defeat of the army insurrection in the main industrial centres, including Madrid, Barcelona, and Valencia, but it allowed anarchists to take control of Barcelona along with large swathes of Aragón and Catalonia.
José Antonio Primo de Rivera was put in prison in mid-March in order to restrict the Falange.
With the establishment of a dictatorship led by General Franco in the aftermath of the war, all right-wing parties fused into the structure of the Franco regime.
As to other works of art, Pablo Picasso painted ''Guernica'' in 1937, taking inspiration from the bombing of Guernica, and in Leonardo de Vinci's ''The Battle of Anghiari''.
They were chiefly defined by their anti-communism, which galvanized diverse or opposed movements like falangists and monarchists.
According to the Nationalists, an estimated 55,000 civilians died in Republican-held territories.
Franco's troops conquered Catalonia in a whirlwind campaign during the first two months of 1939.
Roughly 40,000 foreign nationals fought with the Brigades, though no more than 18,000 were entered into the conflict at any given time.
On 7 March, Nationalists launched the Aragon Offensive, and by 14 April they had pushed through to the Mediterranean, cutting the Republican-held portion of Spain in two.
Some sources claim that by the conflict's end, 20 percent of the nation's clergy had been killed, The "Execution" of the Sacred Heart of Jesus by Communist militiamen at Cerro de los Ángeles near Madrid, on 7 August 1936, was the most infamous of widespread desecration of religious property.
The Republican government allowed for the possibility of self-government for the two regions, whose forces were gathered under the People's Republican Army (''Ejército Popular Republicano'', or EPR), which was reorganized into mixed brigades after October 1936.
In 1944, a group of republican veterans, who also fought in the French resistance against the Nazis, invaded the Val d'Aran in northwest Catalonia, but were defeated after 10 days.
Castillo was leading the unit of Guardia de Asalto that violently suppressed the riots after the funeral of Guardia Civil Lieutenant Anastasio de los Reyes.
General Goded surrendered in Barcelona and was later condemned to death.
On 21 July, the fifth day of the rebellion, the Nationalists captured the central Spanish naval base, located in Ferrol, Galicia.
On 1 August 1936 a pro-Republican rally of 20,000 people confronted Blum, demanding that he send aircraft to the Republicans, at the same time as right-wing politicians attacked Blum for supporting the Republic and being responsible for provoking Italian intervention on the side of Franco.
However, Blum made clear that France reserved the right to provide aid should it wish to the Republic: "We could have delivered arms to the Spanish Government Republicans, a legitimate government... We have not done so, in order not to give an excuse to those who would be tempted to send arms to the rebels Nationalists."
In 1938, George Orwell's ''Homage to Catalonia'', a personal account of his experiences and observations in the war, was published in the United Kingdom.
The Spanish Civil War involved large numbers of non-Spanish citizens who participated in combat and advisory positions.
After the fall of Guernica, the Republican government began to fight back with increasing effectiveness.
The Republican government under Giral resigned on 4 September, unable to cope with the situation, and was replaced by a mostly Socialist organization under Francisco Largo Caballero.
The diversion to Toledo gave Madrid time to prepare a defense, but was hailed as a major propaganda victory and personal success for Franco.
On 5 September, the Nationalists closed the French border to the Republicans in the battle of Irún.
The consolidation of various militias into the Republican Army had started in December 1936.
The attempted suppression of imported materials was largely ineffective, however, and France especially was accused of allowing large shipments to Republican troops.
On the other hand, the T-26 and BT-5 tanks were modern and effective in combat.
Articles 24 and 26 of the 1931 constitution had banned the Society of Jesus.
Significant numbers of volunteers originated in the French Third Republic (10,000), Nazi Germany, the Federal State of Austria (5,000) and the Kingdom of Italy (3,350).
With the onset of the Great Depression, the government attempted to assist rural Spain by instituting an eight-hour day and giving land tenure to farm workers.
The Battle of Teruel was an important confrontation.
Los Reyes was shot by anarchists during the 14 April military parade that commemorated the 5 years of the Republic.
On 21 August 1936, France signed the Non-Intervention Agreement.
A popular front alliance was organized, which narrowly won the 1936 elections.
Republicans were supported by urban workers, agricultural labourers, and parts of the middle class.
The Republican government then launched an all-out campaign to reconnect their territory in the Battle of the Ebro, from 24 July until 26 November, where Franco personally took command.
Two distinct factors led to the uprisings: a series of urban riots and a liberal movement within the middle classes and the military (led by General Joan Prim) concerned with the ultra-conservatism of the monarchy.
Casares did nothing, failing to arrest or buy off Franco.
In dioceses where the Republicans had general control, a large proportion – often a majority – of secular priests were killed.
On 5 March 1939 the Republican army, led by the Colonel Segismundo Casado and the politician Julián Besteiro, rose against the prime minister Juan Negrín and formed the National Defence Council ''(Consejo Nacional de Defensa'' or ''CND)'' to negotiate a peace deal.
''Guernica'', like many important Republican masterpieces, was featured at the 1937 International Exhibition in Paris.
The Basques suffered most from the lack of a suitable air force.
After the restoration of the Bourbons in December 1874, Carlists and Anarchists emerged in opposition to the monarchy.
Romanian volunteers were led by Ion Moța, deputy-leader of the Iron Guard ("Legion of the Archangel Michael"), whose group of Seven Legionaries visited Spain in December 1936 to ally their movement with the Nationalists.
This distress led to the International Brigades, thousands of foreigners of all nationalities who went to Spain to aid the Republic in the fight; they meant a great deal to morale but militarily were not very significant.
In Madrid, the rebels were hemmed into the Montaña barracks, which fell with considerable bloodshed.
In total, Italy provided the Nationalists with 660 planes, 150 tanks, 800 artillery pieces, 10,000 machine guns, and 240,000 rifles.
Communist Santiago Carrillo Solares was accused of the killing of Nationalists in the Paracuellos massacre near Paracuellos del Jarama.
Those in favour of reforming Spain's government vied for political power with conservatives, who tried to prevent reforms from taking place.
Whilst the Communists were forthright in their support of extrajudicial killings, much of the Republican side was appalled by the murders.
General Gonzalo Queipo de Llano managed to secure Seville for the rebels, arresting a number of other officers.
Along with other "undesirable" people, the Spaniards were sent to the Drancy internment camp before being deported to Nazi Germany.
They claimed to represent 53 nations.
However, the intervention also posed the risk of escalating into a world war for which Hitler was not ready.
Control over Spanish Morocco was all but certain.
Leading works of sculpture include Alberto Sánchez Pérez's ''El pueblo español tiene un camino que conduce a una estrella maqueta'' ("The Spanish People Have a Path that Leads to a Star"), a 12.5m monolith constructed out of plaster representing the struggle for a socialist utopia; Julio González's ''La Montserrat'', an anti-war work which shares its title with a mountain near Barcelona, is created from a sheet of iron which has been hammered and welded to create a peasant mother carrying a small child in one arm and a sickle in the other.
Sanjurjo was killed in an aircraft accident while attempting to return from exile in Portugal, whereupon Franco emerged as the leader of the Nationalists.
The agreement with Britain effectively destroyed Republican morale by ending hope of an anti-fascist alliance with Western powers.
However, the timing was changed—the men in the Spanish protectorate in Morocco were to rise up at 05:00 on 18 July and those in Spain proper a day later so that control of Spanish Morocco could be achieved and forces sent back to the Iberian Peninsula to coincide with the risings there.
He was well respected in the Army of Africa, the Spanish Republican Army's toughest military force.
Virtually all Nationalist groups had strong Catholic convictions and supported the native Spanish clergy.
Franco won another victory on 27 September when his troops relieved the siege of the Alcázar in Toledo, which had been held by a Nationalist garrison under Colonel José Moscardó Ituarte since the beginning of the rebellion, resisting thousands of Republican troops, who completely surrounded the isolated building.
The Moroccan ''Fuerzas Regulares Indígenas'' joined the rebellion and played a significant role in the civil war.
Having failed to take the capital, Franco bombarded it from the air and, in the following two years, mounted several offensives to try to encircle Madrid, beginning the three-year Siege of Madrid.
Hugh Thomas concludes that Condés intended to arrest Sotelo and that Cuenca acted on his own initiative, although he acknowledges other sources that dispute this finding.
In 1923 a military coup brought Miguel Primo de Rivera to power; as a result, Spain transitioned to government by military dictatorship.
Fake justice was sought through a commission, known in Russia as ''checas''.
The prime minister was hesitant.
Germany, Italy and the Soviet Union signed on officially, but ignored the embargo.
A similar Nationalist offensive, the Battle of Guadalajara, was a more significant defeat for Franco and his armies.
The repression in the aftermath was brutal.
Azaña led a weak minority government, but soon replaced Zamora as president in April.
Many visited Spain, hoping to find authentic anti-fascism.
Unlike Hitler and Mussolini, Stalin tried to do this covertly.
The Nationals included the majority of the Catholic clergy and practitioners (outside of the Basque region), important elements of the army, most large landowners, and many businessmen.
In 2008 a Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzón, opened an investigation into the executions and disappearances of 114,266 people between 17 July 1936 and December 1951.
In December a new reformist, liberal, and democratic constitution was declared.
In early July, despite the earlier loss at the Battle of Bilbao, the government launched a strong counter-offensive to the west of Madrid, focusing on Brunete.
The Nationalist side included the Carlists and Alfonsists, Spanish nationalists, the fascist Falange, and most conservatives and monarchist liberals.
However, the Blum government provided aircraft to the Republicans through covert means with Potez 540 bomber aircraft (nicknamed the "Flying Coffin") by Spanish Republican pilots), Dewoitine aircraft, and Loire 46 fighter aircraft being sent from 7 August 1936 to December of that year to Republican forces.
Popular perception of communism as a major threat significantly increased during this period.
The Conservatives, in contrast, were united by their fervent opposition to the Republican government and presented a more unified front.
Some 50,000 took refuge, primarily in Mexico City and Morelia, accompanied by $300&nbsp;million in various treasures still owned by the Left.
Twelve successful coups were carried out between 1814 and 1874.
In the ''May Days'' of 1937, many thousands of anarchist and communist Republican soldiers fought for control of strategic points in Barcelona.
Joan Miró created ''El Segador'' (The Reaper), formally titled ''El campesino catalán en rebeldía'' (Catalan peasant in revolt), which spans some 18 feet by 12 feet and depicted a peasant brandishing a sickle in the air, to which Miró commented that "The sickle is not a communist symbol.
About 145 men from Ireland formed the Connolly Column, which was immortalized by Irish folk singer Christy Moore in the song "Viva la Quinta Brigada".
He was replaced by General Dámaso Berenguer, who was in turn himself replaced by Admiral Juan Bautista Aznar-Cabañas; both men continued a policy of rule by decree.
After Francisco Franco's request and encouragement by Hitler, Benito Mussolini joined the war.
Eight days before the new year, Franco threw massive forces into an invasion of Catalonia.
In his capacity as consul in Paris, Chilean poet and politician Pablo Neruda organized the immigration to Chile of 2,200 Republican exiles in France using the ship ''SS Winnipeg''.
Spain was thus left militarily and politically divided.
The conservative, strongly Catholic Basque country, along with Galicia and the more left-leaning Catalonia, sought autonomy or independence from the central government of Madrid.
This, however, allowed Mola to direct the mainland uprising.
Others died in acts of revenge after Republicans heard of massacres carried out in the Nationalist zone.
The Second Battle of the Corunna Road, a Nationalist offensive to the northwest, pushed Republican forces back, but failed to isolate Madrid.
Germany informed the French ambassador in Berlin that Germany would hold France responsible if it supported "the manoeuvres of Moscow" by supporting the Republicans.
In a film co-produced by famous early-twentieth century authors such as Ernest Hemingway and Lillian Hellman, video footage was used as a way to advertise Spain’s need for military and monetary aid.
The new leadership began to unify central command in the republican zone.
The notion of a ''limpieza'' (cleansing) formed an essential part of the rebel strategy, and the process began immediately after an area had been captured.
The Nationalists also persecuted Basques, as they strove to eradicate Basque culture.
In one particular incident, following the capture of Bilbao, they took hundreds of people, including 16 priests who had served as chaplains for the Republican forces, to the countryside or graveyards and murdered them.
The socialist and liberal republicans won almost all the provincial capitals; following the resignation of Aznar's government, King Alfonso XIII fled the country.
French Prime Minister Léon Blum was sympathetic to the republic, fearing that the success of Nationalist forces in Spain would result in the creation of an ally state of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, an alliance that would nearly encircle France.
Ultimately, the Nationalists won, and Franco then ruled Spain for the next 36 years, from April 1939 until his death in November 1975.
Catalan and Basque nationalists were not univocal.
Antiwar and pacifist sentiment was strong in many countries, leading to warnings that the Civil War had the potential of escalating into a second world war.
Although a Non-Intervention Committee was formed, its policies accomplished little and its directives were ineffective.
The uprising's timing was fixed at 17 July, at 17:01, agreed to by the leader of the Carlists, Manuel Fal Conde.
Franco's forces also persecuted Protestants, including murdering 20 Protestant ministers.
Notwithstanding religious matters, Basque nationalists, who were for the most part Catholic, generally sided with the Republicans, although the PNV, Basque nationalist party, was reported passing the plans of Bilbao defenses to the nationalists, in an attempt to reduce the duration and casualties of siege.
Mola was chief planner and second in command.
After large parts of Catalonia were captured in 1938 and 1939, the war ended with the victory of the Nationalists and the exile of thousands of leftist Spaniards, many of whom fled to refugee camps in southern France.
Two days after relieving the siege, Franco proclaimed himself ''Caudillo'' ("chieftain", the Spanish equivalent of the Italian Duce and the German Führer -meaning: 'director') while forcibly unifying the various and diverse falangist, Royalist and other elements within the Nationalist cause.
However, it was much less than the half a million claimed during the war.
In an attempt to remove suspect generals from their posts, the Republican government sacked Franco as chief of staff and transferred him to command of the Canary Islands.
In the last months of 1934, two government collapses brought members of the CEDA into the government.
Some monarchists joined with the then fascist-nationalist Falange Española y de las JONS ("Falange") to help achieve their aims.
This work, also featured at the 1937 International Exhibition in Paris, was shipped back to the Spanish Republic's capital in Valencia following the Exhibition, but has since gone missing or has been destroyed.
In Asturias, prisoners were tortured.
In 1873 Isabella's replacement, King Amadeo I of the House of Savoy, abdicated owing to increasing political pressure, and the short-lived First Spanish Republic was proclaimed.
The Church was against the Republicans' liberal principles, which were fortified by the Spanish Constitution of 1931.
Britain and France led a political alliance of 27 nations that promised non-intervention in the Spanish Civil War, including an embargo on all arms to Spain.
About 5,000 Spaniards died in the Mauthausen concentration camp.
Refugees were confined in internment camps of the French Third Republic, such as Camp Gurs or Camp Vernet, where 12,000 Republicans were housed in squalid conditions.
The killing of Sotelo with police involvement aroused suspicions and strong reactions among the government's opponents on the right.
Many others were put to forced labour, building railways, drying out swamps, and digging canals.
A Republican offensive against Zaragoza was also a failure.
German aid to the Nationalists amounted to approximately £43,000,000 ($215,000,000) in 1939 prices, 15.5 percent of which was used for salaries and expenses and 21.9 percent for direct delivery of supplies to Spain, while 62.6 percent was expended on the Condor Legion.
Air raids committed against Republican cities were another driving factor.
The 19th century was a turbulent time for Spain.
Some Chinese joined the Brigades, and the majority of them eventually returned to China, while some went to prison or French refugee camps, and a handful remained in Spain.
The offensive led to an advance of , and left 25,000 Republican casualties.
On 12 June, Prime Minister Casares Quiroga met General Juan Yagüe, who managed to falsely convince Casares of his loyalty to the republic.
Luis Cuenca, a member of the arresting group and a socialist, summarily executed Calvo Sotelo by shooting him in the back of the neck.
Spanish politics, especially on the left, were quite fragmented, since socialists and communists supported the republic.
The upper age limit was initially set at 12, but raised to 15.
The Bombing of Guernica was the most controversial.
and Alexander Calder's ''Fuente de mercurio'' (Mercury Fountain) a protest work by the American against the Nationalist forced control of Almade'n and the mercury mines there.
The result of the coup was a nationalist area of control containing 11 million of Spain's population of 25 million.
On 21 May 1937, around 4,000 Basque children were taken to the UK on the aging steamship ''SS Habana'' from the Spanish port of Santurtzi.
Farm workers' wages were cut in half, and the military was purged of Republican members.
A large air and sealift of Nationalist troops in Spanish Morocco was organized to the southwest of Spain.
The Royal Italian Navy () played a substantial role in the Mediterranean blockade, and ultimately Italy supplied machine guns, artillery, aircraft, tankettes, the Aviazione Legionaria, and the Corpo Truppe Volontarie (CTV) to the Nationalist cause.
On 26 March, the Nationalists started a general offensive, on 28 March the Nationalists occupied Madrid and, by 31 March, they controlled all Spanish territory.
Some liberals, in a tradition that had started with the Spanish Constitution of 1812, sought to limit the power of the monarchy of Spain and to establish a liberal state.
Many shipments were lost or arrived only partially matching what had been authorized.
They also besieged Madrid and the area to its south and west for much of the war.
The Spanish Republican Navy suffered from the same problems as the army—many officers had defected or had been killed after trying to do so.
As pressure mounted with the increasing success of the Nationalists, many civilians were executed by councils and tribunals controlled by competing Communist and anarchist groups.
The reforms of 1812 did not last after King Ferdinand VII dissolved the Constitution and ended the Trienio Liberal government.
A contributory factor in the successful Republican defense was the effectiveness of the Fifth Regiment and later the arrival of the International Brigades, though only an approximate 3,000 foreign volunteers participated in the battle.
Quick action by either the rebels or anarchist militias was often enough to decide the fate of a town.
Republicans controlled under half of the rifles and about a third of both machine guns and artillery pieces.
