In Australia, red sparkling wine are often made from the Shiraz grape.
Along with Pinot Meunier, the three varieties combined accounted for around 40% of vines planted, which appears to reflect a significant growth in interest in English sparkling wines.
Since 1985, use of the term ''methode champenoise'' has been banned in all wines produced or sold in the European Union.
Sparkling wine have also been produced in Central and Eastern Europe since the early 19th-century.
per hectare for all varietals, and a maximum grape yield of 70%.
In Champagne there are over 19,000 vineyard owners, only 5,000 of which are owned by Champagne producers.
After fermentation the base wines are then blended to form a ''cuvee''.
In Romania, sparkling wine is mostly made in Panciu.
Prosecco is made in both fully sparkling (''spumante'') and lightly sparkling (''frizzante'') styles.
Another style of sparkling wine found in France are those made according to the ''methode ancestrale'' which skips the process of disgorgement and produces wines with slight sweetness and still containing the particles of dead yeast matter in the form of lees in the bottle.
Most is inexpensive tank method fizz, but 20% is very good quality Champagne method from Pinot and Chardonnay.
"Pearl of Azerbaijan" is a kind of red sparkling wine made from Madrasa grapes in Azerbaijan.
In France, there are eight appellations for sparkling wine which include the designation Crémant in their name:
French sparkling wines made according to the Champagne method of fermentation in the bottle, but sometimes use different grape varieties, are known as ''Cremants'' and are governed under their own ''Appellation d'origine contrôlée'' (AOC) regulations.
Their Rhein Extra, still produced in the same building, was served at the coronation of King Ferdinand I at Alba Iulia, in October 1922.
The wine is noted for its low alcohol levels around 8% and fresh, grapey flavors.
Stuttgart-born Schlumberger had worked in the Champagne house Ruinart before he moved to Vienna in 1842.
The names used by the German producers for their sparkling wines in the 19th century were "Mousseux", "Sect" or "Champagne" (or ''Champagner''), but the 1919 Treaty of Versailles forbade Germany the use of this name, long before European Union regulations prohibited its use outside the Champagne region.
Together, these two decision produced the situation of the name Sekt being possible to apply to sparkling wines of varying quality level.
Methode Cap Classique or MCC denotes a South African sparkling wine made by the traditional Champagne method.
Approximately 26 of the Niagara Peninsula wineries produce some sparkling wine, where annual production averages about 55,000 cases (500,000 litres).
While this gas is able to be released during the first fermentation, efforts are taken during the second fermentation to retain the gas and have it dissolve into the wine.
Nowadays, it is more common to encounter Sovetskoye Shampanskoye produced in a dry or semi-dry style.
It also comes with a ''Schaumwein'' tax, which since 2005 has been 136 euro per hectoliter, corresponding to 1.02 euro per 0.75 liter bottle.
Trento DOC wines are distinguished by their straw-yellow color.
Care is taken to avoid tannins and other phenolic compounds with many premium producers still choosing to harvest by hand rather than risk mechanical harvesting which may split the berries and encourage maceration between the skins and juice.
(Wine expert Tom Stevenson puts the number at 250 million.)
In 2010, Chardonnay and Pinot noir were the two most commonly planted grape varieties in English vineyards.
These sparkling wines are often referred to by their local name or region, such as Espumante from Portugal, Cava from Spain, Franciacorta, Trento DOC, Oltrepò Pavese Metodo Classico and Asti from Italy (the generic Italian term for sparkling wine being ''spumante'') and Cap Classique from South Africa.
The most well known is the ''Traditional'' or ''"Champagne method"'' where the base ''cuvee'' is bottled with a mixture of sugar and yeast.
Australian sparkling wine production has come a long way in a very short period of time with several notable French Champagne houses investing in production.
*Anjou mousseux AOC
Sparkling wines designated Crémant ("creamy") were originally named because their lower carbon dioxide pressures were thought to give them a creamy rather than fizzy mouth-feel.
When in the late 1980s lobbying by Champagne producers led to ''méthode champenoise'' being forbidden within the European Union as a designation for the traditional method, the term Crémant was given its present definition.
*Blanquette de Limoux AOC
The Hungarian equivalent for sparkling wine is ’'''pezsgő'''’.
Cava is a Greek term that was used to refer to a "high end" table wine or wine cellar, and comes from the Latin word "cava" which means cave in English.
The amount of pressure in the wine is determined by the amount of sugar added during the tirage stage at the beginning of the secondary fermentation with more sugar producing increased amount of carbon dioxide gas and thus pressure in the wine.
There are several methods used to carry out this secondary fermentation.
In Austria, Sekt is often made in the ''méthode champenoise'' with the Welschriesling and Grüner Veltliner grapes giving the wine a golden hue color.
A dosage mixture of fresh wine and some sugar syrup is used to adjust the sweetness level of the wine after it has been disgorged.
only from grapes from one of the 13 quality wine regions in Germany.
Some of the premium wines are often made using the Riesling, Pinot blanc, Pinot gris and Pinot noir grapes, with much of it drunk locally rather than exported.
This tax was famously introduced by Emperor Wilhelm II in 1902 to fund the expansion of the Imperial Navy.
Current US regulations ban the use of the term "champagne" on any wines not produced in Champagne except if the label was in use before 2006.
Some of these are exclusively sparkling wine appellations, and some are appellations allowing both still and sparkling wine to be made.
The majority of Sekt produced (around 95%) is made by the Charmat method with the remaining premium Sekt being made according to the ''méthode traditionnelle''.
Tasmania is the current hot bed of Australian Sparkling wine with both the traditional grape varieties and method of secondary fermentation being employed.
The sparkling Blanquette de Limoux is composed predominately of Mauzac and is aged for nine months.
The first Austrian producer of sparkling wine was Robert Alwin Schlumberger, who presented his first sparkling wine in 1846 under the name ''Vöslauer weißer Schaumwein'' (White sparkling wine of Vöslau).
At the end of the 19th century the two most important wineries were ''József Törley és Társa'' moving from Reims, France to Budafok in 1882 and ''Louis és César-François'' founded in 1886.
A rise in consumer demand and an ever-broadening selection of cool climate grapes has led to an increase in fresh and delightful sparkling wines ranging from bone dry extra brut to off-dry demi-secs, from blanc de blanc to blanc de noir to sparkling rosé.
Champagne is produced at the far extreme of viticultural circumstances, where the grape struggles to ripen in a long drawn out growing season.
Sparkling wine is also made according to the Charmat method and red sparkling Pinotage can also be found.
Most of the Hungarian sparkling wines are made by the charmat and transvasée methods and a small but steadily growing amount by the traditional, champagneois method.
After seeing the success of the Champagne region, Raventós decided to create the dry sparkling wine that has become the reason for the region's continued success.
It is not uncommon for a premium Champagne to age for 7 years or more prior to release.
Unique to Ontario and generally referred to as Icewine Dosage, this sparkling wine is produced by topping a Traditional Method, dry sparkling wine with a dosage of Icewine, which results in a slightly off-dry sparkler with a hint of Icewine.
The wines may go through malolactic fermentation, though producers wishing to make fruitier, simpler wines will usually forgo this step.
While there are examples of varietal sparkling wines, such as ''blanc de blancs'' (white of whites) made from 100% Chardonnay, most sparkling wines are blends of several grape varieties, vineyards and vintages.
Trento DOC is an appellation for white and rosé sparkling wines made according to the méthode traditionnelle.
When the wine was shipped to and bottled in England, the fermentation process would restart when the weather warmed and the cork-stoppered wine would begin to build pressure from carbon dioxide gas.
These include Moët et Chandon's  Domaine Chandon, Louis Roederer's Roederer Estate, and Taittinger's Domaine Carneros.
One of the by products of fermentation is the creation of carbon dioxide gas.
'''Sparkling wine''' is a wine with significant levels of carbon dioxide in it, making it fizzy.
Sekt labeled as ''Deutscher Sekt'' is made exclusively from German grapes, and ''Sekt b.A.''
AOC laws do allow cuvées with Sauvignon blanc, Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot noir, Gamay, Côt, Pineau d'aunis and Grolleau but those grapes are rarely used in a significant amount.
The fresh yeast and sugar mixture is added to the wine which rapidly stimulates fermentation in the pressurized environment.
Rhein Azuga Cellars, now owned by Halewood International, was established in 1892 and still uses the same methods and even tools from that era.
The majority of these Crémant de Loire are produced around the city of Saumur and are a blend of the Chardonnay, Chenin blanc and Cabernet franc.
Often the names have been altered to fit the exact country, e.g.
The Trento DOC is also famous.
While some skin exposure may be desirable in the production of rosé sparkling wines and some ''blanc de noirs'' (white of blacks), most sparkling wine producers take extended precautions to limit the amount of skin contact.
The French terms "''Mousseux''" or "''Crémant''" are used to refer to sparkling wine not made in the Champagne region, such as Blanquette de Limoux produced in Southern France.
Methode Cap Classique tends to be very fruity due to the high temperatures of the South African Wine lands.
*Touraine mousseux AOC
This method produces large bubbles that quickly dissipate and is generally only used in the cheapest sparkling wines.
The grapes, most commonly Chardonnay, Pinot noir and Pinot meunier, are used to make several base wines that are assembled together to make Champagne.
Like its German counterpart, Austrian Sekt can be made trocken (dry) or halbtrocken (medium dry).
There is also a product made from a blend of sparkling Pinot wine and fresh handpicked strawberry pulp.
Today, there are over 100 vineyards in England producing sparkling wines with Nyetimber, Ridgeview and Chapel Down being some of the largest producers.
After 5 minutes following consumption, the group that had the sparkling wine had 54 milligrams of alcohol in their blood while the group that had the same sparkling wine, only flat, had 39 milligrams.
In the ''methode ancestrale'' the disgorgement step is skipped and the wine is sold with the lees still present as sediment in the wine.
It is speculated that the bubbles in sparkling wine may speed up alcohol intoxication by helping the alcohol to reach the bloodstream faster.
Austria's history of producing sparkling wine dates back to the Austro-Hungarian empire.
Wine was often transported to England in wooden wine barrels where merchant houses would then bottle the wine for sale.
The regions of Gaillac, Limoux and Clairette de Die are the most well-known producers of ''methode ancestrale'' wines.
Excellent examples of the traditional dry and full-bodied style are Seppelt Sparkling Shiraz Vintage, Peter Rumball, Morris Sparkling Shiraz Durif and d'Arenberg's Sparkling Chambourcin.
*Saumur mousseux AOC
The classic example of a sparkling wine is champagne, which is exclusively produced in the Champagne region of France.
Recently production of sparkling wine have started in the United Kingdom again, after a long hiatus since some of the earliest examples of sparkling wine was produced there.
Despite being a traditional Champagne grape, Chardonnay was not used in the production of Cava until the 1980s.
The most well-known example of sparkling wine is that of Champagne from the Champagne wine region of France.
The Champenois vigorously defend use of the term "Champagne" to relate the specific wine produced in the Champagne wine region.
The amount of sugar (dosage) added after the second fermentation and aging varies and will dictate the sweetness level of the sparkling wine.
(Vini Frizzanti di Qualità Prodotti in Regioni Determinate): Quality ''Vini frizzanti'' made within defined regions are generally labeled as such.
Sauvignon blanc and Chenin blanc have been the traditional Cap Classique grapes but the use of Chardonnay and Pinot noir have been on the increase.
The sparkling wine of Cava was created in 1872 by Josep Raventós.
Through the process of riddling and eventually disgorgement, the dead yeast cells (lees) are removed from the wine while still maintaining the dissolved carbon dioxide gas.
Whilst most sparkling wine is produced from Chardonnay, Pinot noir and possibly Pinot Meuniere, an Australian speciality is sparkling Shiraz, a red sparkling wine produced from Shiraz grapes.
* ''Brut'' (fewer than 12&nbsp;grams of sugar per litre)
The bubbles initially form at 20 micrometers in diameter and expand as they gain buoyancy and rise to the surface.
Like the Niagara Peninsula, Prince Edward County's terroir and micro-climate are well suited for cool climate grapes where wineries, such as The Hinterland Wine Company, specialize in the production of sparkling wines.
Unlike still wine production, high sugar levels are not ideal and grapes destined for sparkling wine production may be harvested at higher yields.
Moscato d'Asti is a ''frizzante'' style slightly sparkling version of Asti; it is sweeter and contains even less alcohol, typically around 5.5%.
The primary fermentation of sparkling wine begins like most other wines, though winemakers may choose to use specially cultivated sparkling wine yeasts.
There are also some other French appellations for sparkling wines, which do not carry the name Crémant.
Aligoté is often used to fill out the remaining parts of the blend.
In Champagne, the cuvée blend will rarely have less than 30 wines and sometimes as many as 60 that are taken from grapes spanning 4–6 years of different vintages.
In most countries the word "champagne" is reserved only for the specific type of sparkling wine from the Champagne region of France.
Sparkling wines are also produced in other regions of France as well as other countries around the world.
Valdivieso produce 60% of all sparkling wine in Chile.
Red wine grapes like Pinot noir can be used in the production of white sparkling wines because their juice is initially clear and is only later tinted red through exposure to the color pigments in grape skins.
Champagne laws require that the wine spend a minimum of 15 months on the lees for non-vintage and minimum 3 years for vintage Champagne.
*Crémant de Luxembourg
The majority of Champagnes produced are non-vintage (or rather, multi-vintage) blends.
When they reach the surface they are approximately 1 millimeter in size.
Sparkling-only are:
The frothiness or "mousse" of the sparkler, along with the average size and consistency of the bubbles, can vary depending on the quality of the sparkler and the type of glass used.
Partly aided by the foreign influence, the overall quality of Californian sparkling wine increased with the introduction of the more traditional sparkling wine grapes of Chardonnay, Pinot noir, Pinot Meunier and Pinot blanc into the production.
Germans also call some similar foreign wines ''Sekt'', like ''Krimsekt'' (often red) from Crimea.
Under Spanish ''Denominación de Origen'' laws, Cava can be produced in six wine regions and must be made according to the ''Traditional Method'' with second fermentation in the bottle and uses a selection of the grapes Macabeu, Parellada, Xarel·lo, Chardonnay, Pinot noir, and Subirat.
This designation continues to be used for sparkling wine produced in several countries formerly part of the Soviet Union, including Armenia, Belarus, Moldova, Russia and Ukraine.
The Country is noted for its Prince Edward County Wine and is the fourth and newest Designated Viticultural Area (DVA) in the Province.
Both vintage and non-vintage Franciacorta sparkling wines are made which require 30 and 18 months, respectively, of aging on the lees.
Cool climate weather limits the varieties of grape, and the types of wine that can be made, but it is in this region that sparkling wine has found its standard bearer.
The beginning of significant sparkling wine production in Hungary is dated back to the first half of the 19th century.
As noted above, the designation Crémant was previously used for sparkling wines from the Champagne region which were produced with slightly less carbon dioxide and somewhat lower bottle pressure (typically 2–3 atmospheres instead of 5–6).
After the Soviet era the Hungarian wine sector was reborn.
Other varietals used are Auxerrois, Seyval blanc, Müller-Thurgau, Reichensteiner, and Bacchus.
These wines were rare in comparison to regular, full-pressure Champagne.
The wine is composed primarily of the indigenous grape Mauzac with some Chenin blanc and Chardonnay.
In the Sparkling wine production#transfer method, after the wines have gone through the traditional method including riddling and disgorgement, the bottles are emptied into a large tank where they are then transferred to small and large format wine bottles such as 3 liter ''jeroboam'' and small split sizes used on airlines.
The disturbance caused by one bottle's disintegration could cause a chain reaction, with it being routine for cellars to lose 20–90% of their bottles to instability.
Since the designation Crémant is not reserved exclusively for French use (as a result of it replacing ''méthode champenoise''), it may also be used by producers in other EU countries which fulfill the production criteria.
The English also rediscovered the use of cork stoppers, once used by the Romans but forgotten for centuries after the fall of the Western Roman Empire.
Nucleations are needed to stimulate the formation of bubbles because carbon dioxide has to first diffuse from the wine solution before it can rise out of the glass and into the air.
The wine is produced in the cool hills around the town of Valdobbiadene and are generally dry but sweeter examples are produced.
Numerous quality producers worldwide use the "Traditional" method to make their sparkling wines.
US AVA requirements and wine laws do not regulate the sugar levels and sweetness of wine though most producers tend to follow European standards with Brut wine having less than 1.5% sugar up to Doux having more than 5%.
These Sekts are usually vintage dated with the village and vineyards that the grapes are from.
In Ontario, wineries recognized for their sparkling wines include Henry of Pelham Winery, Jackson-Triggs and Inniskillin.
In the 1980s, some English winemakers started to grow the grape varieties as used in Champagne – Chardonnay, Pinot noir and Pinot Meunier – and in the ensuing decades availability of English sparkling wines made from these varieties increased.
Either still or sparkling are:
The same traditional method is used in Azuga, where the mountain climate is perfect for the second fermentation of white and rose sparkling wines in passively-cooled above-ground cellars.
*Crémant de Bourgogne
Cheap sparkling wine made with CO2 injection must not be called Sekt, but rather ''Schaumwein'' (German for sparkling wine, literally "foam wine"), semi-sparkling wine is called ''Perlwein''.
French appellation laws dictate that a Crémant must be harvested by hand with yields not exceeding a set amount for their AOC.
European Union regulations define a sparkling wine as any wine with an excess of 3 atmospheres in pressure.
The Franciacorta region, located northwest of Brescia, is home to the largest segment of Italian sparkling wine production.
The press house is often close by the vineyard to where the grapes can be quickly pressed and separated from their skins.
The products have some international popularity, thus Russian made dry and semi-dry versions can be found in the European markets and Moldovan made semi-sweet version from Muscat grapes has been regularly available in the U.S.
An emerging category of sparkling wine in Ontario is sparkling ice wine, which was first crafted accidentally by Canadian wine writer Konrad Ejbich in his home cellar in the Niagara Peninsula.
Törley has since become one of the largest European producers of sparkling wine.
Asti is a slightly sweet sparkler made from the Moscato grape in the province of Asti.
Franciacorta Satèn, a ''Blanc de blancs'', is produced with the reduced 4.5 atmospheres of pressure instead of 6 for an expression of softness.
*Blanquette méthode ancestrale AOC
In 2006, they've become once again official Supplier to the Royal House of Romania, after having this honor between 1920 and 1947.
*Crémant de Bordeaux
Fully sparkling wines, such as Champagne, are generally sold with 5 to 6 atmospheres of pressure in the bottle.
Chile produces around 12 million bottles of sparkling wine per annum of which only around 1.6 million bottles are exported to overseas markets.
Blending is the hallmark of Champagne wine, with most Champagnes being the assembled product of several vineyards and vintages.
Ontario, and in particular the Niagara Peninsula, is the largest wine growing region in Canada.
*Clairette de Die AOC
Though Franciacorta wines are made according to the traditional method, most Italian sparkling wines, in particular Asti and Prosecco, are made with the Charmat method.
Those "grandfathered labels" can only use the term on a wine label if there appears next to that name the appellation of "the actual place of origin".
In areas like Australia, winemakers aim to harvest the grapes at 17 to 20° brix.
(''bestimmter Anbaugebiete'', in parallel to ''Qualitätswein b.A.'')
The first production facility outside France where sparkling wine was produced following the original French recipe was founded in 1825 in Pressburg (today Bratislava) by Johann Fischer and Michael Schönbauer, both Bratislava burghers.
The sweetness of sparkling wine can range from very dry "brut" styles to sweeter "doux" varieties (from the French words for 'raw' and 'sweet', respectively).
Since 2012, Australian mass producers of sparkling wine have begun using screw caps in place of the traditional cork & wire closure.
The rest sell their grapes to the various Champagne houses, ''negociants'' and co-operatives.
To put that in context, the current yield for all types of English wine averages to around 2 million bottles annually.
While many top American sparkling wine producers utilize the traditional methods of production, there are distinct differences in their wine making techniques that have a considerable effect on the taste of the wines.
In 2011, L'Acadie Vineyards won a silver medal at an international competition for sparkling wines in France and in 2012, Benjamin Bridge winery's 2004 Brut Reserve placed higher than a Louis Roederer 2004 Cristal (wine) champagne at a blind tasting held with noted critics, bringing attention to the country's wine industry.
Chardonnay, Pinot noir, Pinot blanc and Pinot Meunier grapes are used.
Commercial production of bottle fermented sparkling wines from grapes grown in England started in the 1960s, although there has been a longer history of sparkling wines made in the UK from imported grapes.
There is a maximum vien yield of 150 q.l.
In California, cuvees are typically derived from around 20 wines taken from 1 to 2 years worth of vintages.
In 1975, Crémant de Loire was given formal recognition as an AOC, and was followed by Crémant de Bourgogne (1975) and Crémant d'Alsace (1976).
The Languedoc wine Crémant de Limoux is produced in the forty one villages around the village of Limoux in the south of France.
The first wineries of sparkling wine were founded near Pozsony (today Bratislava) by ''Johann Fischer and dr. Michael Schönbauer'' in 1825 (first in Central-Europe) and ''Esch és Társa'' in 1835.
Another distinct difference, particularly in Californian sparkling wines, is the favorable Californian climate which allows a vintage wine to be produced nearly every year.
Later, when deliberate sparkling wine production increased in the early 18th century, cellar workers would still have to wear a heavy iron mask that resembled a baseball catcher's mask to prevent injury from spontaneously bursting bottles.
The limestone–chalk soil produces grapes that have a certain balance of acidity, extract and richness that is difficult to replicate in other parts of the world.
It is through the initiation of a secondary fermentation that distinguishes sparkling wine production and gives the wine its characteristic "bubbles".
Pinot noir adds body and fruit while Pinot meunier contributes substantially to the aroma, adding fruit and floral notes.
The introduction of a fresh yeast and food source (the sugar) triggers the fermentation process in the bottle that the wine will eventually be sold in.
The tendency of still wine from the Champagne region to lightly sparkle was noted in the Middle Ages but this was considered a wine fault and was disdained in early Champagne winemaking although it made the pride of other historic sparkling wine production areas like Limoux.
Grapes used (obviously not grown in this climate) are Chardonnay and a mix of Chardonnay and a Romanian variety called Fetească Regală.
In the Soviet Union, sparkling wine was produced under the name Soviet Champagne, or Sovetskoye Shampanskoye, most of it sweet.
The wines must also be aged for a minimum of one year.
The process of carbon injection (or carbonation), the method used to make soda pop fizzy, does not involve initiating a secondary fermentation but rather injecting carbon dioxide gas directly into the wine.
The wines must rest for a minimum of 15 months on their lees for non-vintage, 24 months for vintage, and 36 for riserva.
The first wines produced were made from Riesling, Muscatel, Traminer and Chasselas grapes.
A study conducted at the University of Surrey in the United Kingdom gave subjects equal amounts of flat and sparkling Champagne which contained the same levels of alcohol.
The sparkling quality, of sparkling wine, comes from its carbon dioxide content and may be the result of natural fermentation, either in a bottle, as with the ''traditional method'', in a large tank designed to withstand the pressures involved (as in the Charmat process), or as a result of simple carbon dioxide injection in some cheaper sparkling wines.
This includes objection to the term "Champagne style" to refer to sparkling wines produced outside the Champagne region.
Sparkling rosé are made from the Blaufränkisch grape.
It was produced from Blauer Portugieser grapes growing in vineyards in Bad Vöslau which Schlumberger bought in 1843, and the sparkling wine was an immediate success.
