In later Classical times, Sparta along with Athens, Thebes, and Persia had been the main powers fighting for supremacy against each other.
In 1970 the British School in Athens started excavations in an attempt to locate Mycenaean remains in the area around Menelaion.
It is notable, however, that the only contemporary source with direct experience of the agoge, Xenophon, explicitly denies the sexual nature of the relationship.
However, it maintained its political independence until the Roman conquest of Greece in 146 BC.
In fact, archeology has not produced evidence of this currency, and it is more likely that Sparta simply used currencies minted elsewhere.
Sparta is thought to be the first city to practice athletic nudity, and some scholars claim that it was also the first to formalize pederasty.
In 146 BC Greece was conquered by the Roman general Lucius Mummius.
In 1906, excavations began in Sparta.
Partial excavation of the round building was undertaken in 1892 and 1893 by the American School at Athens.
A new element of Laconophilia by Karl Otfried Müller, who linked Spartan ideals to the supposed racial superiority of the Dorians, the ethnic sub-group of the Greeks to which the Spartans belonged.
Between 431 and 404 BC, Sparta was the principal enemy of Athens during the Peloponnesian War, from which it emerged victorious, though at great cost of lives lost.
Ollier's theory of the "Spartan mirage" has been widely accepted by scholars.
They fought against the Argive Dorians to the east and southeast, and also the Arcadian Achaeans to the northwest.
Besides physical and weapons training, boys studied reading, writing, music and dancing.
Lacedaemonia was not in general use during the classical period and before.
The immediate area around the town of Sparta, the plateau east of the Taygetos mountains, was generally referred as Laconice ().
More than 5,300 of the Spartans and their allies were killed in battle, and 3,500 of Antipater's troops.
At its peak around 500 BC the size of the city would have been some 20,000 – 35,000 free residents, plus numerous helots and perioikoi (“dwellers around”).
What made Sparta's relations with her slave population unique was that the helots, precisely because they enjoyed privileges such as family and property, retained their identity as a conquered people (the Messenians) and also had effective kinship groups that could be used to organize rebellion.
During the Punic Wars Sparta was an ally of the Roman Republic.
In accordance with the Spartan belief that breeding should be between the most physically fit parents, many older men allowed younger, more fit men, to impregnate their wives.
Sparta was subject of considerable admiration in its day, even in its rival, Athens.
The conspicuous display of wealth appears to have been discouraged, although this did not preclude the production of very fine, highly decorated bronze, ivory and wooden works of art and the production of jewellery.
The remaining archaeological wealth consisted of inscriptions, sculptures, and other objects collected in the local museum, founded by Stamatakis in 1872 and enlarged in 1907.
Certain early Zionists, and particularly the founders of Kibbutz movement in Israel, had been influenced by Spartan ideals, particularly as a model for education.
This was, in effect, a primitive form of eugenics.
Unlike Athenian women who wore heavy, concealing clothes and were rarely seen outside the house, Spartan women wore dresses (peplos) slit up the side to allow freer movement and moved freely about the city, either walking or driving chariots.
She was later said to be responsible for decoding a warning that the Persian forces were about to invade Greece; after Spartan generals could not decode a wooden tablet covered in wax, she ordered them to clear the wax, revealing the warning.
These mansions were destroyed, by an earthquake and by fire, and archaeologists consider as the possible palace of Menelaus himself.
These customs, unique to the Spartans, have been interpreted in various ways.
As many as two thousand were selected accordingly, who crowned themselves and went round the temples, rejoicing in their new freedom.
There were two exceptions.
The votive offerings in clay, amber, bronze, ivory and lead found in great profusion within the precinct range, dating from the 9th to the 4th centuries BC, supply invaluable evidence for early Spartan art.
In 480 BC a small force of Spartans, Thespians, and Thebans led by King Leonidas (approximately 300 were full Spartiates, 700 were Thespians, and 400 were Thebans although these numbers do not reflect casualties incurred prior to the final battle), made a legendary last stand at the Battle of Thermopylae against the massive Persian army, inflicting very high casualties on the Persian forces before finally being encircled.
They called themselves "''homoioi''" (equals), pointing to their common lifestyle and the discipline of the phalanx, which demanded that no soldier be superior to his comrades.
Taygetus (2407 m) and to the east by Mt.
These sayings purporting to be from Spartan women were far more likely to be of Athenian origin and designed to portray Spartan women as unnatural and so undeserving of pity.
Allegedly in connection with the Lycurgan Reforms (e.g.
Those like the Spartans who concentrate on the one and ignore the other in their education turn men into machines and in devoting themselves to one single aspect of city's life, end up making them inferior even in that.
The term laconic phrase describes a very terse and concise way of speaking that was characteristic of the Spartans.
In antiquity the city-state was known as '''Lacedaemon''' (; ), while the name Sparta referred to its main settlement on the banks of the Eurotas River in Laconia, in south-eastern Peloponnese.
Eventually, the adjective came to be used alone.
These laws meant that Sparta could not readily replace citizens lost in battle or otherwise and eventually proved near fatal to the continuance of the state as the number of citizens became greatly outnumbered by the non-citizens and, even more dangerously, the helots.
The Spartan poet Tyrtaios refers to Helots being allowed to marry and retaining 50% of the fruits of their labor.
This seems to have been done by ''kryptes'' (sing.
"The helots were invited by a proclamation to pick out those of their number who claimed to have most distinguished themselves against the enemy, in order that they might receive their freedom; the object being to test them, as it was thought that the first to claim their freedom would be the most high spirited and the most apt to rebel.
Dating from the period of the Persian wars, the king lost the right to declare war and was accompanied in the field by two ephors.
The prehistory of the Neolithic, the Bronze Age and the Dark Age (the Early Iron Age) at this moment must be treated apart from the stream of Dorian Spartan history.
Trophimoi or "foster sons" were foreign students invited to study.
He relied heavily on Orosius' ''Historiarum Adversum Paganos'' (5th century AD) and Eusebius of Caesarea's ''Chronicon'' (early 5th century AD) as did Orosius.
The prehistory of Sparta is difficult to reconstruct because the literary evidence is far removed in time from the events it describes and is also distorted by oral tradition.
Real power was transferred to the ephors and to the gerousia.
The superior weaponry, strategy, and bronze armour of the Greek hoplites and their phalanx again proved their worth one year later when Sparta assembled at full strength and led a Greek alliance against the Persians at the battle of Plataea.
465–460 BC), and Thucydides remarked that "Spartan policy is always mainly governed by the necessity of taking precautions against the helots."
As the Spartiate population declined and the helot population continued to grow, the imbalance of power caused increasing tension.
Sparta never fully recovered from the losses that the Spartans suffered at Leuctra in 371 BC and the subsequent helot revolts.
The royal prerogatives were curtailed over time.
Sparta is located in the region of Laconia, in the south-eastern Peloponnese.
This practice was encouraged in order that women bear as many strong-bodied children as they could.
Sparta is often portrayed as being unique in this matter; however, there is considerable evidence that the killing of unwanted children was practiced in other Greek regions, including Athens.
The alliance was initially backed by Persia, whose lands in Anatolia had been invaded by Sparta and which feared further Spartan expansion into Asia.
This was the first time that a Spartan army lost a land battle at full strength.
Adolf Hitler praised the Spartans, recommending in 1928 that Germany should imitate them by limiting "the number allowed to live".
Spartan women were also literate and numerate, a rarity in the ancient world.
Over time, the kings became mere figureheads except in their capacity as generals.
briefly and wittily).
The immediate objective of this unit was to seek out and kill vulnerable helot Laconians as part of the larger program of terrorising and intimidating the helot population.
Unfortunately, poignant as this image may be, it is almost certainly propaganda.
Spartan citizens were debarred by law from trade or manufacture, which consequently rested in the hands of the Perioikoi.
However, other scholars question this interpretation.
Spartan political independence was put to an end when it was eventually forced into the Achaean League after its defeat in the decisive Laconian War by a coalition of other Greek city-states and Rome and the resultant overthrow of its final king Nabis.
In the time of Herodotus, about 450 BC, their judicial functions had been restricted to cases dealing with heiresses, adoptions and the public roads.
Sparta on the other hand is the country of lovely women, a people epithet.
Plutarch's ''Moralia'' contains a collection of "Sayings of Spartan Women", including a laconic quip attributed to Gorgo: when asked by a woman from Attica why Spartan women were the only women in the world who could rule men, she replied "Because we are the only women who are mothers of men".
I285a), while Isocrates refers to the Spartans as "subject to an oligarchy at home, to a kingship on campaign" (iii.
They were the chief priests of the state and also maintained communication with the Delphian sanctuary, which always exercised great authority in Spartan politics.
As a result, they carried out a series of political and social reforms of their own society which they later attributed to a semi-mythical lawgiver, Lycurgus.
The son of Zeus by the nymph Taygete,  he married Sparta, the daughter of Eurotas, by whom he became the father of Amyclas, Eurydice, and Asine.
The second word was Lacedaemon (); this was also used sometimes as an adjective and is the name commonly used in the works of Homer and the Athenian historians Herodotus and Thucydides.
Queen Gorgo, heiress to the throne and the wife of Leonidas I, was an influential and well-documented figure.
It could be used synonymously with Sparta, but typically it was not.
Only native Spartans were considered full citizens and were obliged to undergo the training as prescribed by law, as well as participate in and contribute financially to one of the ''syssitia''.
In ancient times "Many of the noblest and best of the Athenians always considered the Spartan state nearly as an ideal theory realised in practice."
the Athenian treatment of Melos), the male population was not exterminated and the women and children turned into chattel slaves.
In contrast to populations conquered by other Greek cities (e.g.
Nevertheless, it is fair to say that it was less of a disgrace for a soldier to lose his helmet, breastplate or greaves than his hoplon, since the former were designed to protect one man, whereas the hoplon also protected the man on his left.
Even though this war was won by a pan-Greek army, credit was given to Sparta, who besides being the protagonist at Thermopylae and Plataea, had been the de facto leader of the entire Greek expedition.
The higher status of females in Spartan society started at birth; unlike Athens, Spartan girls were fed the same food as their brothers.
Sparta was above all a militarist state, and emphasis on military fitness began virtually at birth.
Around 650 BC, it rose to become the dominant military land-power in ancient Greece.
The legendary period of Spartan history is believed to fall into the Dark Age.
It denoted the terrain on which Sparta was situated.
In the Middle Ages, the political and cultural center of Laconia shifted to the nearby settlement of Mystras, and Sparta fell further in even local importance.
Excavations made from the early 1990s to the present suggest that the area around Menelaion in the southern part of the Eurotas valley seems to have been the center of Mycenaean Laconia.
Furthermore, as a result of their education and the fact that they moved freely in society engaging with their fellow (male) citizens, they were notorious for speaking their minds even in public.
The origins of the powers exercised by the assembly of the citizens called the Apella are virtually unknown because of the lack of historical documentation and Spartan state secrecy.
Slave revolts occurred elsewhere in the Greek world, and in 413 BC 20,000 Athenian slaves ran away to join the Spartan forces occupying Attica.
These are the earliest traces of the original Mycenaean Spartan civilisation, as represented in Homer's ''Iliad''.
The Greek city-wall, built in successive stages from the 4th to the 2nd century, was traced for a great part of its circuit, which measured 48 stades or nearly  (Polyb.
Spartans who could not afford to pay the expenses of the agoge could lose their citizenship.
The periokoi could exploit these resources for their own enrichment, and did.
Insofar as hoplite warfare could be perfected, the Spartans did so.
Some 6,000 helots accumulated enough wealth to buy their freedom, for example, in 227 BC.
Perioikoic hoplites served increasingly with the Spartan army, explicitly at the Battle of Plataea, and although they may also have fulfilled functions such as the manufacture and repair of armour and weapons, they were increasingly integrated into the combat units of the Spartan army as the Spartiate population declined.
The laws regarding a divorce were the same for both men and women.
At the last stand of the Battle of Thermopylae, the Greek dead included not just the legendary three hundred Spartan soldiers but also several hundred Thespian and Theban troops and a number of helots.
However, the earliest certain evidence of human settlement in the region of Sparta consists of pottery dating from the Middle Neolithic period, found in the vicinity of Kouphovouno some two kilometres () south-southwest of Sparta.
The Gerousia then decided whether it was to be reared or not.
Its inhabitants were classified as Spartiates (Spartan citizens, who enjoyed full rights), mothakes (non-Spartan free men raised as Spartans), perioikoi (freedmen), and helots (state-owned serfs, enslaved non-Spartan local population).
The French classicist François Ollier in his 1933 book ''Le mirage spartiate'' ("''The Spartan Mirage''") warned that a major scholarly problem regarding Sparta is that all the surviving accounts of Sparta were written by non-Spartans who often presented an excessively idealized image of Sparta.
High state policy decisions were discussed by this council who could then propose action alternatives to the ''damos'', the collective body of Spartan citizenry, who would select one of the alternatives by voting.
Nor were they confined to their father's house and prevented from exercising or getting fresh air as in Athens, but exercised and even competed in sports.
The reasons for delaying marriage were to ensure the birth of healthy children, but the effect was to spare Spartan women the hazards and lasting health damage associated with pregnancy among adolescents.
He commended it as a model for England.
The ''Agoge'' was designed to encourage discipline and physical toughness and to emphasise the importance of the Spartan state.
It does occur in Greek as an equivalent of Laconia and Messenia during the Roman and early Byzantine periods, mostly in ethnographers and lexica glossing place names.
Sparta also features prominently in modern popular culture (see Sparta in popular culture), particularly the Battle of Thermopylae (see Battle of Thermopylae in popular culture).
Laconophilia is love or admiration of Sparta and of the Spartan culture or constitution.
Civil and criminal cases were decided by a group of officials known as the ephors, as well as a council of elders known as the gerousia.
The husband continued to visit his wife in secret for some time after the marriage.
The gerousia consisted of 28 elders over the age of 60, elected for life and usually part of the royal households, and the two kings.
Nothing distinctive in the archaeology of the Eurotas River Valley identifies the Dorians or the Dorian Spartan state.
As most words for "country" were feminine, the adjective was in the feminine: ''Lacedaemonia'' (, ''Lakedaimonia'').
She first shaved her head to the scalp, then dressed her in a man's cloak and sandals, and laid her down alone on a mattress in the dark.
The temple, which can be dated to the 2nd century BC, rests on the foundation of an older temple of the 6th century, and close beside it were found the remains of a yet earlier temple, dating from the 9th or even the 10th century.
According to Myron of Priene of the middle 3rd century BC:
Certain penalties were imposed upon those who remained unmarried or who married too late in life.
Less information is available about the education of Spartan girls, but they seem to have gone through a fairly extensive formal educational cycle, broadly similar to that of the boys but with less emphasis on military training.
At age 20, the Spartan citizen began his membership in one of the ''syssitia'' (dining messes or clubs), composed of about fifteen members each, of which every citizen was required to be a member.
Boys lived in communal messes and, according to Xenophon, whose sons attended the agoge, the boys were fed "just the right amount for them never to become sluggish through being too full, while also giving them a taste of what it is not to have enough."
Shortly after birth, a mother would bathe her child in wine to see whether the child was strong.
It treats the mythic heroes such as the Heraclids and the Perseids, offering a view of the occupation of the Peloponnesus that contains both fantastic and possibly historical elements.
Allegedly, Spartans were prohibited from possessing gold and silver coins, and according to legend Spartan currency consisted of iron bars to discourage hoarding.
Lacedaemon is now the name of a province in the modern Greek prefecture of Laconia.
Archeology has produced many examples of all these objects, some of which are exquisite.
The structure has been since found to be a semicircular retaining wall of Hellenic origin that was partly restored during the Roman period.
Sparta achieved a series of land victories, but many of her ships were destroyed at the battle of Cnidus by a Greek-Phoenician mercenary fleet that Persia had provided to Athens.
In the Second Messenian War, Sparta established itself as a local power in Peloponnesus and the rest of Greece.
Helots did not have voting rights, although compared to non-Greek chattel slaves in other parts of Greece they were relatively privileged.
Girls as well as boys exercised, possibly in the nude, and young women as well as young men may have participated in the ''Gymnopaedia'' ("Festival of Nude Youths").
Spartan men remained in the active reserve until age 60.
Modern Sparti was re-founded in 1834, by a decree of King Otto of Greece.
Instead, the helots were given a subordinate position in society more comparable to serfs in medieval Europe than chattel slaves in the rest of Greece.
The first refers primarily to the main cluster of settlements in the valley of the Eurotas River: Sparta.
Here each group learned how to bond and rely on one another.
In other Greek city-states, free citizens were part-time soldiers who, when not at war, carried on other trades.
Relations between the helots and their Spartan masters were sometimes strained.
However, there is no evidence of this in archaic Sparta.
Xenophon explicitly denies it, but not Plutarch.
in the mid-8th Century BC), property had been divided into 9,000 equal portions as part of a massive land reform.
When Philip created the league of the Greeks on the pretext of unifying Greece against Persia, the Spartans chose not to join, since they had no interest in joining a pan-Greek expedition unless it were under Spartan leadership.
Descendants of non-Spartan citizens were not able to follow the agoge.
Others in the state were the perioikoi, who were free inhabitants of Spartan territory but were non-citizens, and the helots, the state-owned serfs.
The duties of the kings were primarily religious, judicial, and military.
Thus, upon the conquest of Persia, Alexander the Great sent to Athens 300 suits of Persian armour with the following inscription: ''Alexander, son of Philip, and all the Greeks '''except the Spartans''', give these offerings taken from the foreigners who live in Asia'' emphasis added.
He named the country after himself and the city after his wife.
The valley of the Evrotas is a natural fortress, bounded to the west by Mt.
'''Sparta''' (Doric Greek: ; Attic Greek: ) was a prominent city-state in ancient Greece.
Among other findings, they uncovered the remains of two Mycenaean mansions and found the first offerings dedicated to Helen and Menelaus.
The hollow suggests the Eurotas Valley.
In fact, the Spartans were also rigorously trained in logic and philosophy.
Spartan women enjoyed considerably more rights and equality to men than elsewhere in the classical world.
Only those who had undertaken the Spartan education process known as the agoge were eligible.
From the other half, the Spartiate was expected to pay his mess (syssitia) fees, and the agoge fees for his children.
The "abduction" may have served to ward off the evil eye, and the cutting of the wife's hair was perhaps part of a rite of passage that signaled her entrance into a new life.
The land itself was worked by helots, who retained half the yield.
Each citizen received one estate, a kleros, and thereafter was expected to derive his wealth from it.
The subjugation of 350,000 Helots by 6,000 Spartans was only possible because of the racial superiority of the Spartans."
Thucydides reports that when a Spartan man went to war, his wife (or another woman of some significance) would customarily present him with his hoplon (shield) and say: "With this, or upon this" (Ἢ τὰν ἢ ἐπὶ τᾶς, ''Èi tàn èi èpì tàs''), meaning that true Spartans could only return to Sparta either victorious (with their shield in hand) or dead (carried upon it).
At 40,000 – 50,000 it was one of the largest Greek cities; however, according to Thucydides, the population of Athens in 431 BC was 360,000 – 610,000, making it unlikely that Athens was smaller than Sparta in 5th century BC.
The evidence suggests that Sparta, relatively inaccessible because of the topography of the Taygetan plain, was secure from early on: it was never fortified.
Another practice that was mentioned by many visitors to Sparta was the practice of “wife-sharing”.
A shrine was erected to him in the neighborhood of Therapne.
Alexander was merciful, and he only forced the Spartans to join the League of Corinth, which they had previously refused to join.
Sparta was also used as a model of social purity by Revolutionary and Napoleonic France.
There is considerable evidence that the Spartans, certainly in the archaic period, were not educated as one-sidedly as Aristotle asserts.
For this reason many considered Spartan women polygamous or polyandrous.
When male Spartans began military training at age seven, they would enter the ''Agoge'' system.
Given its military pre-eminence, Sparta was recognized as the overall leader of the combined Greek forces during the Greco-Persian Wars.
This term was sometimes used to refer to all the regions under direct Spartan control, including Messenia.
He prescribed that education for warfare "should begin from the nursery", that children should from kindergarten age be taken to "spend nights in the mountains and valleys".
It then underwent a long period of decline, especially in the Middle Ages, when many Spartans moved to live in Mystras.
The Swiss-French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau contrasted Sparta favourably with Athens in his Discourse on the Arts and Sciences, arguing that its austere constitution was preferable to the more cultured nature of Athenian life.
The Spartans, however, soon afterwards did away with them, and no one ever knew how each of them perished."
The Elizabethan English constitutionalist John Aylmer compared the mixed government of Tudor England to the Spartan republic, stating that "Lacedemonia meaning Sparta, was the noblest and best city governed that ever was".
Herodotus records that as a small girl she advised her father Cleomenes to resist a bribe.
During Alexander's campaigns in the east, the Spartan king, Agis III sent a force to Crete in 333 BC with the aim of securing the island for Sparta.
During the Corinthian War Sparta faced a coalition of the leading Greek states: Thebes, Athens, Corinth, and Argos.
Spartans buried their battle dead on or near the battle field; corpses were not brought back on their hoplons.
One of the most persistent myths about Sparta that has no basis in fact is the notion that Spartan mothers were without feelings toward their off-spring and helped enforce a militaristic lifestyle on their sons and husbands.
Most important, rather than being married off at the age of 12 or 13, Spartan law forbade the marriage of a girl until she was in her late teens or early 20s.
The effects of the war were to reaffirm Persia's ability to interfere successfully in Greek politics and to affirm Sparta's weakened hegemonic position in the Greek political system.
The helots were used as unskilled serfs, tilling Spartan land.
The bridegroom – who was not drunk and thus not impotent, but was sober as always – first had dinner in the messes, then would slip in, undo her belt, lift her and carry her to the bed.
In the modern times, the adjective "spartan" is used to imply simplicity, frugality, or avoidance of luxury and comfort.
Though landlocked, Sparta had a harbor, Gytheio, on the Laconian Gulf.
The Dorians seem to have set about expanding the frontiers of Spartan territory almost before they had established their own state.
Agis next took command of allied Greek forces against Macedon, gaining early successes, before laying siege to Megalopolis in 331 BC.
At the peak of its power Sparta subdued many of the key Greek states and even managed to overpower the elite Athenian navy.
He was supplanted also by the ephors in the control of foreign policy.
