The practice of inclusion (in mainstream classrooms) has been criticized by advocates and some parents of children with special needs because some of these students require instructional methods that differ dramatically from typical classroom methods.
In other cases, they question whether teaching such non-academic subjects, such as pushing a buzzer, is properly the job of the school system, rather than the health care system.
However, there will always be some children, whose learning needs cannot be appropriately met in a regular classroom setting and will require specialised education and resources to provide the level of support they require.
The response to intervention model advocates earlier intervention.
Some of these children may recognize the math symbol or the basic problem; however, they cannot recall the meaning of the symbol or answer to the math fact.
Groups plans are used when a group of students all have similar goals.
''Tsukyu'' are resource rooms that students with milder problems use part-time for specialized instruction individually in small groups.
Legislation opposes the use of modifications that would be unfair to non-disabled students.
In some cases, parents and students protest the students' placement into special education programs.
* '''Excluding irrelevant information''' – Students with disabilities have a difficult time picking out information that is irrelevant.
Having someone else write down answers given verbally.
The Özel Eğitim Kurumları Yönetmeliğ (ÖEKY) requires that students with special needs be provided with a Free Appropriate Public Education in the Least Restrictive Environment that is appropriate to the student's needs.
In the United States, three out of five students with academic learning challenges spend the overwhelming majority of their time in the regular classroom.
Congress responded to these court rulings with the federal Education for All Handicapped Children Act in 1975 (since renamed the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)).
Schools must take students' special education needs into account when assessing their achievements.
"The IEP is meant to address each child’s unique learning issues and include specific educational goals.
Placement, resources, and goals are determined on the basis of the student's needs.
However, this practice is often frowned upon by school districts in the USA in the light of Least Restrictive Environment as mandated in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
They may be exempted from some parts of school examinations, such as students with hearing impairments not taking listening comprehension tests.
For major exams, Canadian schools commonly use accommodations, such as specially printed examinations for students with visual impairments, when assessing the achievements of students with special needs.
Rehabilitation counseling personnel are often association with supported employment services, and typically with "transition to adulthood"  in which multi-decade recommendations for better coordination between the school and the community service sectors have been made at the federal and university levels.
One reason for criticism is that diagnosing SLDs on the basis of the discrepancy between achievement and IQ does not predict the effectiveness of treatment.
Parents of typically developing children sometimes fear that the special needs of a single "fully included" student will take critical levels of attention and energy away from the rest of the class and thereby impair the academic achievements of all students.
Students with special educational needs are given an individualized plan.
'''Performance on basic arithmetic'''
This law required schools to provide services to students previously denied access to an appropriate education.
Some students with disabilities have difficulties understanding how various math concepts relate and what mathematics means to our society.
Common special needs include learning disabilities, communication disorders, emotional and behavioral disorders, physical disabilities, and developmental disabilities.
This is considered a modification if the purpose of the assignment is reading skills acquisition.
Self-contained classrooms, because they are located in a general education school, may have students who remain in the self-contained classroom full-time, or students who are included in certain general education classes.
Some special needs children in Germany do not attend a special school, but are educated in a mainstream school such as a Hauptschule or Gesamtschule (comprehensive school).
The general objective for Statped is to give guidance and support to those in charge of the education in municipalities and county administrations to ensure that children, young people and adults with major and special educational needs are secured well-advised educational and developmental provisions.
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires that students with special needs be provided with a Free Appropriate Public Education in the Least Restrictive Environment that is appropriate to the student's needs.
Disabilities are normally documented by experts.
Advanced instruction is based upon community-referenced instruction, and alignment with transition to adulthood and progressive community practices.
These may be used as substitutes for the text, or as supplements intended to improve the students' reading fluency and phonetic skills.
'''Cognitive Development'''
* ''Förderschule für Blinde'' (school for the blind): for blind children
For example, a student may be placed into the special education programs due to a mental health condition such as obsessive compulsive disorder, depression, anxiety, panic attacks or ADHD, while the student and his parents believe that the condition is adequately managed through medication and outside therapy.
Training of disabled students, particularly at the upper-secondary level, emphasizes vocational education to enable students to be as independent as possible within society.
Students attending special schools generally do not attend any classes in mainstream schools.
In the United States a part-time alternative that is appropriate for some students is sometimes called a resource room.
Critics assert that it is not possible to deliver effectively two or more very different instructional methods in the same classroom.
As a consequence, 98 percent of children with special needs in developing countries do not have access to education.
In addition to how the student is taught the academic curriculum, schools may provide non-academic services to the student.
Poor, refugies are more likely to have limited resources and to employ inexperienced teachers that do not cope well with student behavior problems, "thereby increasing the number of students they referred to special education."
''SENCO'' refers to a special educational needs coordinator, who usually works with schools and the children within schools who have special educational needs.
While many severely disabled children can learn simple tasks, such as pushing a buzzer when they want attention, some children may be incapable of learning.
On national tests, the National Examination Center normally grants most requests for accommodations that are supported by the local school's examination committee.
Use a timer to help with time management.
An ''accommodation'' is a reasonable adjustment to teaching practices so that the student learns the same material, but in a format that is more accessible to the student.
Schools adapt the national guidelines to the needs of individual students.
Another large issue is the lack of resources enabling individuals with special needs to receive an education in the developing world.
According to the 1993 Act on Public Education, students with special educational needs may be exempted from standardized tests or given modified tests.
* ''Förderschule für Sehbehinderte'' (school for the visually impaired): for children who are visually challenged
Sternberg (1999) has argued that early remediation can greatly reduce the number of children meeting diagnostic criteria for learning disabilities.
As a result, the educational progress of students who depend on different instructional methods to learn often fall even further behind their peers.
As an example, students who have autistic spectrum disorders, poor impulse control, or other behavioral challenges may learn self-management techniques, be kept closely on a comfortingly predictable schedule, or given extra cues to signal activities.
Most students have an individual educational plan, but students may have a group plan in addition to, or instead of, an individual plan.
The need and importance of special education was felt in different educational policies of Pakistan in different times.
Accommodations and Modifications to the regular program may include changes in the curriculum, supplementary aides or equipment, and the provision of specialized physical adaptations that allow students to participate in the educational environment as much as possible.
French students with disabilities are normally included in their neighborhood school, although children may be placed in special schools if their personalized plan calls for it.
A university field, termed ''severe disabilities'', also is taught throughout the US university sector in schools of education.
Students with special education who wish accommodations on national exams must provide appropriate documentation to prove that they are disabled.
Special education is regulated centrally.
Among other reasons, lack of resources, financial as well as human, was the major one in this context.
Thus teachers at these school (as well as at schools for the deafblind) are highly specialized professionals.
* Response accommodations:  Typing homework assignments rather than hand-writing them (considered a modification if the subject is learning to write by hand).
In the United States reform came more slowly.
If the student receives modifications to the school-leaving exams, this is noted on the certificate of achievement.
Students may need this help to access subject matter, physically gain access to the school, or meet their emotional needs.
An alternative is a '''special unit''' or '''special classroom''', also called a '''self-contained classroom''', which is a separate room or rooms dedicated solely to the education of students with special needs within a larger school that also provides general education.
Integration can reduce social stigmas and improve academic achievement for many students.
Each student's personalized school plan describes teaching methods, psychological, medical and paramedical services that the school will provide to the student.
* ''Förderschule für Sprachbehinderte'' (school for children with language disorders): for children with language disorders
These classrooms are typically staffed by specially trained teachers, who provide specific, individualized instruction to individuals and small groups of students with special needs.
These are intended ultimately to increase the student's personal and academic abilities.
Students might use a calculator when other students do not.
* ''Förderschule für Schwerhörige'' (school for the hearing impaired): for children who are hearing impaired
For example, the school may modify a reading assignment for a student with reading difficulties by substituting a shorter, easier book.
Modifications may change what is learned, how difficult the material is, what level of mastery the student is expected to achieve, whether and how the student is assessed, or any another aspect of the curriculum.
In other instances, alternative assessments or modifications that simplify tests are permitted, or students with disabilities may be exempted from the tests entirely.
The school must provide everything it promises in the IEP."
* Shorter assignments:  Students may do shorter homework assignments or take shorter, more concentrated tests.
Low academic achievers who also have low IQ appear to benefit from treatment just as much as low academic achievers who have normal or high intelligence.
For example, students who cannot read, even if the inability to read is due to a disability, cannot have the exam read to them, because the exam results should accurately show that the student is unable to read.
Advancement to higher education is also a goal of the government, and it struggles to have institutions of higher learning accept more disabled students.
'''United Kingdom'''
Other presentation accommodations may include designating a person to take notes during lectures or using a talking calculator rather than one with only a visual display.
Children remember this through various chants and rhymes.
These interventions are designed to help learners with special needs achieve a higher level of personal self-sufficiency and success in school and their community, than may be available if the student were only given access to a typical classroom education.
He has also suggested that the focus on learning disabilities and the provision of accommodations in school fails to acknowledge that people have a range of strengths and weaknesses and places undue emphasis on academics by insisting that students should be supported in this arena and not in music or sports.
As with most countries in the world, students who are poor, ethnic minorities, or do not speak the dominant language fluently are disproportionately identified as needing special education services.
* ''Förderschule für Körperbehinderte'' (school for children with physical disabilities): for children with physical disabilities
One in 21 German students attends a special school.
Recently, Government of Pakistan has launched a new National Policy for Persons with Disabilities 2002, which is dynamically being implemented.
Courts ruled that unnecessary and inappropriate segregation of students with disabilities was unconstitutional.
They then receive additional assistance such as participating in a reading remediation program.
;Examples of modifications:
As such, rules vary somewhat from place to place.
If the local school is unable to provide appropriately for an individual student, then the student may be transferred to a special school.
* ''Förderschule für Lernbehinderte'' (special school for learning disabilities):  for children who have challenges that impair learning
After that a special education policy was launched in 1999.
Special education programs need to be individualized so that they address the unique combination of needs in a given student.
Special classes are similar, and may vary the national curriculum as the teachers see fit.
Most students remember that the order is parentheses, exponents, multiplication, division, addition, and then subtraction.
It also posed general funding dilemmas to certain local schools and districts, changed how schools view assessments, and formally introduced the concept of inclusion to many educators, students and parents.
Some parents, advocates, and students have concerns about the eligibility criteria and their application.
* '''Difficulty with the fact retrieval''' – Every child must know their basic facts and be able to retrieve them.
The landmark Brown v. Board of Education decision, which declared unconstitutional the "separate but equal" arrangements in public schools for students of different races, paved the way for PARC v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Mills vs. Board of Education of District of Columbia, which challenged the segregation of students with special needs.
* Scheduling accommodations:  Students may be given rest breaks or extended time on tests (may be considered a modification, if speed is a factor in the test).
These students spend the rest of the day in the mainstream classroom.
* ''Förderschule für Taubblinde'' (school for the deafblind): for children who are deafblind
To ensure that this federal law is obeyed, the government requires every school system provide this type of education to each student in order to receive federal funding.
In Scotland the term Special Educational Needs (SEN), and its variants are not official terminology although the very recent implementation of the Additional Support for Learning Act means that both ''SEN'' and ''ASN'' (Additional Support Needs) are used interchangeably in current common practice.
Accommodations and modifications are noted on the certificate of achievement.
In recent times, places available in special schools are declining as more children with special needs are educated in mainstream schools.
Greek students with special needs may attend either mainstream schools or special schools.
Schools are generally considered autonomous.
Education is controlled by the 26 cantons, and so special education programs vary from place to place.
Schools are not required to maximize the student's potential or to provide the best possible services.
Teachers at those schools are specially trained professionals who have specialized in special needs education while in university.
Linked to this, there is debate about the extent to which students with special needs, whether in mainstream or special settings, should have a specific pedagogy, based on the scientific study of particular diagnostic categories, or whether general instructional techniques are relevant to all students including those with special needs.
* Students can be offered a flexible setting in which to take tests.
For example, if the assessment determines that the student cannot write by hand because of a physical disability, then the school might provide a computer for typing assignments, or allow the student to answer questions verbally instead.
Gifted education is handled separately.
The opposite of special education is ''general education''.
''SENAS'' is the special educational needs assessment service, which is part of the Local Authority.
* '''Following the steps of a strategy''' – Word problems can sometimes cause an issue of a step-by-step process.
* '''Declarative Knowledge'''- This means remembering math facts that children build off of for each new lesson taught by the teacher
However, inclusion is the dominant model.
Students whose disabilities have been certified may be exempted from some standardized tests or given alternative tests.
Accommodations, but not modifications (e.g., simpler questions) are normally approved if they are similar to the accommodations already being used in everyday schoolwork, with the goal of maintaining the exam's integrity while not having students unfairly disadvantaged by factors that are unrelated to what is being tested.
Accommodations may be classified by whether they change the presentation, response, setting, or scheduling of lessons.
Whereas special education is designed specifically for students with special needs, remedial education can be designed for any students, with or without special needs; the defining trait is simply that they have reached a point of underpreparedness, regardless of why.
;Examples of accommodations:
The education offered by the school must be appropriate to the student's individual needs.
In England ''SEN PPS'' refers to the Special Educational Needs Parent Partnership Service.
Special educators provide a continuum of services, in which students with special needs receives varying degrees of support based on their individual needs.
'''Special education''' (also known as '''special needs education''', '''aided education''', '''vocational education''', and '''limb care authority education''')  is the practice of educating students with special educational needs in a way that addresses their individual differences and needs.
In most developed countries, educators modify teaching methods and environments so that the maximum number of students are served in general education environments.
However, children with disabilities have difficulty grasping procedural knowledge.
For students with less obvious disabilities, such as those who have learning difficulties, two primary methods have been used for identifying them: the ''discrepancy model'' and the ''response to intervention model''.
Students with special needs are assessed to determine their specific strengths and weaknesses.
Similar options include designating a person to read to the student, or providing text to speech software.
There has in 2012-2013 been media criticism on the fact that students with light problems such as dyslexia have been placed in special schools, seriously hampering their chances on the labour market.
Important is cooperation od family, school and Education Counselling Centre.
Students with disabilities are normally included in their neighborhood school, although may be placed in special schools.
In the United States, Canada, and the UK, educational professionals use the initialism IEP when referring to a student’s individualized education plan.
Some students with special needs are fully included in the mainstream classroom, with accommodations or modifications as needed.
Deinstitutionalization proceeded in the US beginning in the 1970s following the exposes of the institutions, and it has taken sometime before the Education for All Handicapped Children's Act of 1974, to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and then Individuals with Disabilities Educational Improvement Act (IDEIA) have come into fruition.
Special schools often have a very favorable student-teacher ratio and facilities other schools do not have.
Children with disabilities may forget the order, how to use context clues, etc.
* '''Conceptual Knowledge'''- This is the overall picture.
Some parents and advocates say that these children would be better served by substituting improved physical care for any academic program.
Those few who still have trouble may then receive designation and further assistance.
Parent of students with a learning disability must know what type of disability their child has, so they can get accommodations such as speech therapy, occupational therapy and adaptive physical education.For example, if a student takes an academic test and it indicates that the student struggles with reading comprehension, parents can request speech and language support or classroom accommodations, such as extra time to complete reading and writing tasks.
receive to help them achieve the outcomes.
Education in Canada is the responsibility of the individual provinces and territories.
If the school determines that the student is severely distracted by the normal activities in a large, busy classroom, then the student might be placed in a smaller classroom such as a resource room.
Government-run schools provide special education in varying degrees from the least restrictive settings, such as full inclusion, to the most restrictive settings, such as segregation in a special school.
Schools are required to provide services and resources to students with special educational needs so that they make progress and participate in school.
'''Issues in Math'''
A ''modification'' changes or adapts the material to make it simpler.
For children who are not yet 3, an IFSP.
A ''special school'' is a school catering for students who have special educational needs due to severe learning difficulties, physical disabilities or behavioural problems.
This is a presentation accommodation.
A special education program should be customized to address each individual student's unique needs.
In England and Wales the acronym ''SEN'' for Special Educational Needs denotes the condition of having special educational needs, the services which provide the support and the programmes and staff which implement the education.
* '''Errors in computation''' -The child may be able to actually understand the problem and how to solve it.
In the discrepancy model, a student receives special education services for a specific learning difficulty (SLD) if the student has at least normal intelligence and the student's academic achievement is below what is expected of a student with his or her IQ.
The accommodations are listed on the Primary School Leaving Exam.
The same was also reflected in different medium-term (five-year) plans.
School integration was supported as early as the 1970s, and teacher preparation programs in higher education have carefully taught and instructed graduates on inclusion at the classroom, individual, school, and district levels for decades resulting in dual certification of "regular teachers".
According to the Department of Education, approximately 6 million children (roughly 10 percent of all school-aged children) currently receive some type of special education services.
In some countries, most related services are provided by the schools; in others, they are provided by the normal healthcare and social services systems.
An example of this would be the Order of Operations.
As with most countries in the world, students who are poor, ethnic minorities, or do not speak the dominant language fluently are disproportionately identified as needing special education services.
General education is the standard curriculum presented without special teaching methods or supports.
According to the Department of Education, approximately 10 percent of all school-aged children) currently receive some type of special education services.
Arranging seating assignments to benefit the student, e.g., by sitting at the front of the classroom.
* Skipping subjects: Students may be taught less information than typical students, skipping over material that the school deems inappropriate for the student's abilities or less important than other subjects.
At the first time, in its report, the Commission on National Education (1959) highlighted the importance of special education.
In US government-run schools, the dominant model is inclusion.
Student to teacher ratios are kept low, often 6:1 or lower depending upon the needs of the children.
There are special schools (Swedish:Särskola) for students with low abilities to attend normal education.
Unlike most of the developed world, American schools are also required to provide many medical services, such as speech therapy, if the student needs these services.
Statped consists of 13 resource centres owned by the State, and 4 units for special education, where Statped buys services.
All developed countries permit or require some degree of accommodation for students with special needs, and special provisions are usually made in examinations which take place at the end of formal schooling.
* ''Förderschule für schwer mehrfach Behinderte'' (school for children with severe and multiple disabilities): for children with severe and multiple disabilities who need very special care and attention.
Throughout the mid half of the 20th century, special schools, termed institutions, were not only accepted, but encouraged.
A strong emphasis is placed on the specific needs and positive capabilities of the individual, rather than on limitations.
(Individual Family Service Plan)It contains 1) information on the child’s present level of development in all areas; 2) outcomes for the child and family; and 3) services the child and family will
Unlike most of the developed world, American schools are also required to provide many medical services, such as speech therapy, if the student needs these services.
Related services include developmental, corrective, and other supportive services as are required to assist a student with special needs and includes speech and language pathology, audiology, psychological services, physical therapy, occupational therapy, counseling services, including rehabilitation counseling, orientation and mobility services, medical services as defined by regulations, parent counseling and training, school health services, school social work, assistive technology services, other appropriate developmental or corrective support services, appropriate access to recreation and other appropriate support services.
The discrepancy model depends on the teacher noticing that the students' achievements are noticeably below what is expected.
An example of a disability that may require a student to attend a special school is intellectual disability.
Students must provide documentation Not all desired forms of accommodations are available.
Students with these kinds of special needs are likely to benefit from additional educational services such as different approaches to teaching, the use of technology, a specifically adapted teaching area, or a resource room.
In the United States, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is a federal law that requires that every school system in the nation must provide a free and appropriate public education for every child, ages 3 to 21, regardless of how or how seriously that child may be disabled.
