should not be italicized.
Komarov: a species is a morphological system plus geographic distinctness.
* As many as 10–30 million insects
The term variety, again, in comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied arbitrarily, and for convenience sake."
All species are given a two-part name, a "binomial name", or just "binomial".
Based on various discussions from the first decade of the new millennium, counts can roughly be broken down as follows:
For most vertebrates, this is the biological species concept (BSC), and to a lesser extent (or for different purposes) the phylogenetic species concept (PSC).
is one of the basic units of biological classification and a taxonomic rank.
Nevertheless, no species concept yet proposed is entirely objective, or can be applied in all cases without resorting to judgment.
No other relationships beyond that group were implied.
The best-known taxonomic ranks are, in order: life, domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species.
he attributed the giraffe's long neck to generations of giraffes stretching to reach the leaves of higher treetops).
In other cases common names do not: for example, "deer" refers to a family of 34 species, including Eld's deer, red deer and elk (as the use in American English meaning ''wapiti'', not the use in British English meaning ''moose'').
"I look at the term species", he wrote, "as one arbitrarily given for the sake of convenience to a set of individuals closely resembling each other&nbsp;...
** 12,000 ferns and horsetails
It has nothing to say about species that reproduce asexually, for example, and it is very difficult to apply to extinct species.
''', with the plural form '''species''' abbreviated '''spp.''')
The naming of a particular species may be regarded as a ''hypothesis'' about the evolutionary relationships and distinguishability of that group of organisms.
Although the current scientific understanding of species suggests that there is no rigorous and comprehensive way to distinguish between different species in ''all'' cases, biologists continue to seek concrete ways to operationalize the idea.
Thus, one could argue that these populations constitute a single species, or two distinct species.
Smaller numbers arise from assumptions based on a plateauing of identification of new species (which has technical explanations other than that fewer species remain to be identified).
N.I.Vavilov showed the absence of monotypic species, i.e.
Taxonomists are often referred to as "lumpers" or "splitters" by their colleagues, depending on their personal approach to recognizing differences or commonalities between organisms.
:Once our attention is redirected to the individual, we need another way of making generalizations.
Nikolai Vavilov developed the concept of about a Linnaean species as a definite system.
(Also see Speciation.)
A species is often defined as the largest group of organisms  in which two individuals are capable of reproducing fertile offspring, typically using sexual reproduction.
Some students of Darwin argue that ''all'' species are descended from a common ancestor.
Relations will be more important than categories; functions, which are variable, will be more important than purposes; transitions will be more important than boundaries; sequences will be more important than hierarchies.
The term "phylotype" is often applied to such organisms.
*** As many as 1.1 million arachnids, including ~1 million mites and ~100,000 other arachnids
Among microorganisms, in particular, the problem of species identification is made difficult by discordance between molecular and morphological investigations; these can be categorized as two types: (i) one morphology, multiple lineages (e.g.
In biology, a '''species''' (abbreviated '''sp.
The results of breeding experiments done in artificial conditions may or may not reflect what would happen if the same organisms encountered each other in the wild, making it difficult to gauge whether or not the results of such experiments are meaningful in reference to natural populations.
It was not until 1900 that his work was rediscovered by Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns and Erich von Tschermak, who realised that the "inheritable traits" in Darwin's theory are genes.
The processes that lead to the generation and maintenance of variation such as mutation, crossover and selection are not uniform (see also molecular clock).
When a species is named, it is placed within a genus.
Aristotle used the words ''genus'' and ''species'' to mean generic and specific categories.
Techniques to compare similarity of DNA include DNA-DNA hybridization, and genetic fingerprinting (or DNA barcoding).
When two named species are discovered to be of the same species, the older species name is usually retained, and the newer species name dropped, a process called ''synonymization'', or colloquially, as ''lumping''.
Those that did will, on average, be the ones possessing variations—however slight—that make them slightly better adapted to the environment.
** 1,305,250 invertebrates
Species hypothesized to have the same ancestors are placed in one genus, based on similarities.
Prior to Darwin, naturalists viewed species as ideal or general types, which could be exemplified by an ideal specimen bearing all the traits general to the species.
As a further microbial domain, the issues and difficulties of domain ''Bacteria'' also pertain to any counting of species of ''Archaea'', all the more given their various extreme habitats.
This view was influenced by European scholarly and religious education at the time, which held that the categories of life are dictated by God, in a hierarchical scheme.
A single evolutionary lineage of organisms within which genes can be shared, and that maintains its integrity with respect to other lineages through both time and space.
Animals likewise that differ specifically preserve their distinct species permanently; one species never springs from the seed of another nor vice versa".
The typical textbook definition above works well for most multi-celled organisms, but there are several types of situations in which it breaks down:
DNA-DNA hybridization results have led to misleading conclusions, the pomarine skua – great skua phenomenon being a famous example.
Vavilov formulated a polytypic species concept at the 5th INTERNATIONAL BOTANICAL CONGRESS in Cambridge in August, 1930; put forward the ideas of multiformity of species, relativity of taxonomic criteria and the theory of peripheral accumulation of recessive characters.
It has been argued that this definition of species is not only a useful formulation, but is also a natural consequence of the effect of sexual reproduction on the dynamics of natural selection.
", which may lead to confusion with "ssp.
For example, gray wolves belong to the species ''Canis lupus'', coyotes to ''Canis latrans'', golden jackals to ''Canis aureus'', etc., and all of those belong to the genus ''Canis'' (which also contains many other species).
This assignment to a genus is not immutable; later a different (or the same) taxonomist may assign it to a different genus, in which case the name will also change.
In practice, these definitions often coincide, and the differences between them are more a matter of emphasis than of outright contradiction.
** 63,649 vertebrates
Most modern textbooks follow Ernst Mayr's definition, known as the Biological Species Concept (BSC) of a species as "groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations, which are reproductively isolated from other such groups".
Turtles have been determined to evolve with just one-eighth of the speed of other reptiles on the molecular level, and the rate of molecular evolution in albatrosses is half of what is found in the rather closely related storm-petrels, both being within the Procellariiformes.
This binomial naming convention, later formalized in the biological codes of nomenclature, was first used by Leonhart Fuchs and introduced as the standard by Carolus Linnaeus in his 1753 ''Species Plantarum'' (followed by his 1758 ''Systema Naturae'', 10th edition).
Some older estimates for various eukaryote phyla are:
For example, in many amphibians, most notably in New Zealand's ''Leiopelma'' frogs, the genome consists of "core" chromosomes that are mostly invariable and accessory chromosomes, of which exist a number of possible combinations.
Consequently, any single, universal definition of "species" is necessarily arbitrary.
These other concepts define various species based on more broad (relative to DNA) observations that sometimes are not specific enough to differentiate seemingly similar populations that may in fact differ genetically.
In books and articles, the names of genera and species are usually printed in italics.
; Evolutionarily significant unit (ESU): An evolutionarily significant unit is a population of organisms that is considered distinct for purposes of conservation.
In the 18th century Swedish scientist Carl Linnaeus classified organisms according to shared physical characteristics, and not simply based upon differences.
Differentiating measures include similarity of DNA, morphology, or ecological niche.
This concept has helped identify many new species that were not previously identified using the other concepts (Biological, Morphological, etc.).
Species named in this manner are called ''morphospecies''.
phenotypic plasticity, multiple life-cycle stages).
Sometimes, the aforementioned plural is rendered as "sps.
As a result, this method is not effective when analyzing fossils.
; Genetic species: Based on similarity of DNA of individuals or populations.
Although properties such as DNA-sequences and morphology are used to help separate closely related lineages, this definition has fuzzy boundaries.
This lack of any clear species concept in microbiology has led to some authors arguing that the term "species" is not useful when studying bacterial evolution.
Archaebacteria have been shown to exhibit high rates of horizontal gene transfer (resulting from a bacterial cognate of sex), including between organisms quite separate based on genomic analysis.
Thus PSC can often identify species that otherwise would not have been distinct using other species concepts, such as the Morphological Species Concept, in cases where there may be a lack of morphological or phenotypic traits between the species.
(''species pluralis'', Latin abbreviation for multiple species) in the plural in place of the specific name or epithet (e.g.
Larger numbers address the fact that success in culturing bacteria has only been achieved in half of identified Bacterial phyla (where lack of success in attempts to culture a bacterial isolate limits abilities to study and delineate new species), and address the difficulty of applying traditional botanic and zoologic definitions of species to asexually reproducing bacteria (where more modern sequencing and molecular approaches support higher species tallies).
*** 47,000 crustaceans
This is an expansion of the mate-recognition species concept to allow for post-mating isolation mechanisms; no matter whether populations can hybridize successfully, they are still distinct cohesion species if the amount of hybridization is insufficient to completely mix their respective gene pools.
; Microspecies: A species with very little genetic variability, usually one that reproduces by apomixis.
* In zoological nomenclature, the second part of the name can be called the specific name or the specific epithet.
Biologists have long struggled with determining if organisms belong to the same or different species, and there exist numerous methods and "concepts" that help biologists determine the distinct taxa, such as the Biological Species Concept, the Morphological Species Concept, and more.
This number is very difficult to assess, but the discussed range varies from tens of thousands to billions; most recent approaches and studies appear to favor the larger magnitude number.
species represented by various forms.
DNA is only extremely rarely a direct target of natural selection rather than changes in the DNA sequence enduring over generations being a result of the latter; for example, silent transition-transversion combinations would alter the melting point of the DNA sequence, but not the sequence of the encoded proteins and thus are a possible example where, for example in microorganisms, a mutation confers a change in fitness all by itself.
Moreover, PSC is a method that also works for asexual lineages.
If scientists mean that something applies to all species within a genus, they use the genus name without the specific name or epithet.
While in many cases this definition is adequate, the difficulty of defining species is known as the species problem.
The terminology used for the second term differs between zoological and botanical nomenclature.
** 281,821 angiosperms
** 10,134 red and green algae
The clusters of variations or phenotypes within specimens (i.e.
Various parts of this definition serve to exclude some unusual or artificial matings:
A phylogenetic or cladistic species is an evolutionarily divergent lineage—a lineage that has maintained its hereditary integrity with respect to other lineages through both time and space.
John Ray (1686), an English naturalist, was the first to give a biological definition of the term "species," as follows:
Practically, biologists define species as ''populations of organisms that have a high level of genetic similarity''.
If these variable traits are heritable, then the offspring of the survivors will also possess them.
Taken together, very high numbers of unique archaebacterial types are likely, as in the case of domain Bacteria.
As the ''Archaea'' article notes, "current knowledge on genetic diversity is fragmentary and the total number of archaean species cannot be estimated with any accuracy"&nbsp;... though like domain Bacteria, the number of cultured and studied phyla relative to the total is low (as of 2005, less than 50% of known phyla cultured).
Furthermore, when two species have recently diverged and morphological or observable differences have not yet developed, PSC can still detect the divergence and the existence of two species instead of one.
There is strong evidence of HGT between very dissimilar groups of prokaryotes, and at least occasionally between dissimilar groups of eukaryotes, including some crustaceans and echinoderms.
Thus a "species" is a group of interbreeding organisms.
When early observers began to develop systems of organization for living things, they began to place formerly isolated species into a context.
Abbreviations such as "sp.
However these higher numbers, which were based on the potential deep marine and arthropod diversity, are now considered unlikely.
; Isolation species: A set of actually or potentially interbreeding populations.
This may reflect an adaptation to the same niche, and the transfer of genetic material from one individual to others, through a variety of possible means.
Thus, no matter what variations occur in the individuals or the species, if they spring from the seed of one and the same plant, they are accidental variations and not such as to distinguish a species...
There is no clear line demarcating the ancestral species from the descendant species.
In this way, PSC is applicable to a greater range of cases.
A species that gives rise to another species is a paraphyletic species, or paraspecies.
* Those that as a result of deliberate human action, or occur only in captivity (when the animal's normal mating partners may not be available)
Lamarck suggested that an organism could pass on an acquired trait to its offspring (i.e.
Consequently, some people reject this definition of a species.
From a scientific point of view this can be regarded as a hypothesis that the species is more closely related to other species within its genus (if any) than to species of other genera.
Subspecies as such are not recognized under this definition; either a population is a phylogenetic species or it is not taxonomically distinguishable.
At the time, however, it was still widely believed that there was no organic connection between species, no matter how similar they appeared.
For example, the species commonly known as the longleaf pine is ''Pinus palustris''; the genus name is ''Pinus'', the specific epithet is ''palustris'', the specific name is ''Pinus palustris''.
Darwin's work drew on Thomas Malthus' insight that the rate of growth of a biological population will always outpace the rate of growth of the resources in the environment, such as the food supply.
Moreover, boundaries between species are often fuzzy: there are examples where members of one population can produce fertile offspring of both sexes with a second population, and members of the second population can produce fertile offspring of both sexes with members of a third population, but members of the first and third population cannot produce fertile offspring, or can only produce fertile offspring of the homozygous sex.
Richard Dawkins defines two organisms as conspecific if and only if they have the same number of chromosomes and, for each chromosome, both organisms have the same number of nucleotides (''The Blind Watchmaker'', p.&nbsp;118).
Thus, Neo-Lamarckism, as it is sometimes termed, is not a challenge to the theory of evolution by natural selection.
Aristotle and other pre-Darwinian scientists took the species to be distinct and unchanging, with an "essence", like the chemical elements.
With the acceptance of the natural selection idea of Charles Darwin in the 1860s, however, Lamarck's view of goal-oriented evolution, also known as a teleological process, was eclipsed.
Many of these early delineation schemes would now be considered whimsical and these included consanguinity based on color (all plants with yellow flowers) or behavior (snakes, scorpions and certain biting ants).
This is generally a useful formulation for scientists working with living examples of the higher taxa like mammals, fish, and birds, but more problematic for organisms that do not reproduce sexually.
By the 19th century most naturalists understood that species could change form over time, and that the history of the planet provided enough time for major changes.
Thus, over many generations, adaptive variations will accumulate in the population, while counter-adaptive traits will tend to be eliminated.
Ideally, a species is given a formal, scientific name, although in practice there are very many unnamed species (which have only been described, not named).
His argument relied on a radical shift in perspective from that of Linnaeus: rather than defining species in ideal terms (and searching for an ideal representative and rejecting deviations), Darwin considered variation among individuals to be natural.
in the singular or "spp."
* The authors are confident that some individuals belong to a particular genus but are not sure to which exact species they belong.
At some point in the evolution of such a group, members may diverge from one another: when such a divergence becomes sufficiently clear, the two populations are regarded as separate species.
* Those that involve animals that may be physically and physiologically capable of mating but, for various reasons, do not normally do so in the wild
This led to the understanding of the Linnaean species concept, an integral entity consisting of closely interlinked components where the whole and the parts are merged.
On the other hand, there are many examples of series of three or more distinct populations, where individuals of the population in the middle can interbreed with the populations to either side, but individuals of the populations on either side cannot interbreed.
As further information comes to hand, the hypothesis may be confirmed or refuted.
* The authors use "spp."
Molecular markers are used to determine the genetic similarities or differences in the nuclear or mitochondrial DNA of various species.
To avoid this problem, one should study multiple polymorphic loci to achieve more accurate results.
", this one standing for subspecies instead.
*** 7,093 amphibians
In that case, a species is defined as a separately evolving lineage that forms a single gene pool.
According to intellectual historian Louis Menand,
*** 85,000 mollusks
Nevertheless, a kind of rule of thumb has been established, saying that species of ''Bacteria'' or ''Archaea'' with 16S rRNA gene sequences more similar than 97% to each other need to be checked by DNA-DNA Hybridization if they belong to the same species or not.
Thus, a PSC species is "made" as soon as an evolutionary lineage has started to separate, while a BSC species starts to exist only when the lineage separation is complete.
* There is considerable variation in the degree to which hybridization may succeed under natural conditions, or even in the degree to which some organisms use sexual reproduction between individuals to breed.
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, in his 1809 ''Zoological Philosophy'', offered one of the first logical arguments against creationism.
* 321,212 plants, including:
Dividing a taxon into multiple, often new, taxons is called ''splitting''.
This commonly occurs in the following situations:
Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace provided what scientists now consider as the most powerful and compelling theory of evolution.
the numerous subspecies of honey bees).
The binomial is written in italics when printed and underlined when handwritten.
In plants, polyploidy is extremely commonplace with few restrictions on interbreeding; as individuals with an odd number of chromosome sets are usually sterile, depending on the actual number of chromosome sets present, this results in the odd situation where some individuals of the same evolutionary unit can interbreed with certain others and some cannot, with all populations being eventually linked as to form a common gene pool.
Species and genus are usually defined as part of a larger taxonomic hierarchy.
This definition captures a number of intuitive species boundaries, but it remains imperfect.
longer or shorter tails) would differentiate the species.
Recent interest in inheritance of acquired characteristics centers around epigenetic processes (e.g.
Books and articles sometimes intentionally do not identify species fully and use the abbreviation "sp."
Based on each concept, a species can be defined using different criteria.
a four-winged ''Drosophila'' born to a 2-winged mother is not a different species).
For example, a species complex is a group of closely related species that are very similar in appearance to the point that the boundaries between them are often unclear.
* 1,367,555 non-insect animals, including:
The similarity of species is judged based on comparison of physical attributes, and where available, their DNA sequences.
The total number of eukaryotic species is likely to be  of which about 1.5 million have been already named.
This number has historically varied from a few million to about 100 millions.
This is not a paradox; it is evidence that species are defined by gene frequencies, and thus have fuzzy boundaries.
The results of these techniques caused revolutionary changes in the higher taxonomic categories (such as phyla and classes), resulting in the reordering of many branches of the phylogenetic tree (''see also:'' molecular phylogeny).
In addition, in these and other organisms, horizontal gene transfer (HGT) makes it difficult to define the term species.
Second, it supposes that "species" are not homogeneous, fixed, permanent things; members of a species are all different, and over time species change.
Presence of specific locally adapted traits may further subdivide species into "infraspecific taxa" such as subspecies (and in botany other taxa are used, such as varieties, subvarieties, and formae).
The 'specific name' in botany is always the combination of genus name and specific epithet.
This is the theory of evolution by natural selection.
Often referred to as a species or a ''wildlife species'', an ESU also has several possible definitions, which coincide with definitions of species.
For example, if a study observes only one polymorphic locus of a group of organisms, organisms that should form distinct species could be clumped into one species (as members of closely related but distinct species may be identical at this one locus).
; Recognition species: Based on shared reproductive systems, including mating behavior.
The Phylogenetic Species Concept (PSC) focuses on nucleotide divergence and classifies species as the smallest group of populations that can be distinguished by a unique set of traits (determined genetically).
Since the environment effectively selects which organisms live to reproduce, it is the environment (the "fight for existence") that selects the traits to be passed on.
All species definitions assume that an organism acquires its genes from one or two parents very like the "daughter" organism, but HGT makes that assumption false.
This is particularly common in paleontology.
Over many generations, the entire population would be a species of long-necked animals.
Biologists have proposed a range of more precise definitions, but the definition used is a pragmatic choice that depends on the particularities of the species of concern.
However, most taxonomists would disagree.
Species of Bovidae (i.e., cattle, sheep, goats and antelopes) for example, should be split up into far more species based on this concept.
Darwin argued that it was populations that evolved, not individuals.
; Mate-recognition species: A group of organisms that are known to recognize one another as potential mates.
A group of organisms in which individuals are members of the species if they sufficiently conform to certain fixed properties, so that even pre-literate people often recognize the same species as do modern taxonomists.
Bearing in mind the aforementioned problems with categorizing species, the following numbers are only a guide.
The process through which species are formed by evolution is called speciation.
At present, organisations such as the Global Taxonomy Initiative, the European Distributed Institute of Taxonomy and the Census of Marine Life (the last of these only for marine organisms) are trying to improve taxonomy and add previously undiscovered species to the taxonomy system.
Finally, PSC only can be used to study extant species.
For example, ''Boa constrictor'' is one of four species of the ''Boa'' genus.
In the earliest works of science, a species was simply an individual organism that represented a group of similar or nearly identical organisms.
He also established the idea of a taxonomic hierarchy of classification based upon observable characteristics and intended to reflect natural relationships.
The exact level of similarity used in such a definition is arbitrary, but this is the most common definition used for organisms that reproduce asexually (asexual reproduction), such as some plants and microorganisms.
