This made the concept of the stationary aether (to which Lorentz and Poincaré still adhered) useless and revolutionized the concepts of space and time.
from a laser), with a known frequency (''f''), is split to follow two paths and then recombined.
No variation of the speed of light with frequency has been observed in rigorous testing, putting stringent limits on the mass of the photon.
In 1667, the Accademia del Cimento of Florence reported that it had performed Galileo's experiment, with the lanterns separated by about one&nbsp;mile, but no delay was observed.
The ratio between  and the speed  at which light travels in a material is called the refractive index  of the material ().
One way is to measure the actual speed at which light waves propagate, which can be done in various astronomical and earth-based setups.
This applies from small to astronomical scales.
Beyond a boundary called the Hubble sphere, the rate at which their distance from Earth increases becomes greater than the speed of light.
When light is travelling around the globe in an optical fibre, the actual transit time is longer, in part because the speed of light is slower by about 35% in an optical fibre, depending on its refractive index ''n''.
The opposite, group velocities exceeding ''c'', has also been shown in experiment.
However, this represents absorption and re-radiation delay between atoms, as do all slower-than-''c'' speeds in material substances.
Another way to measure the speed of light is to independently measure the frequency ''f'' and wavelength ''λ'' of an electromagnetic wave in vacuum.
The speed at which light propagates through transparent materials, such as glass or air, is less than ; similarly, the speed of radio waves in wire cables is slower than .
However, it is also possible to determine ''c'' from other physical laws where it appears, for example, by determining the values of the electromagnetic constants ''ε''0 and ''μ''0 and using their relation to ''c''.
In such a theory, its speed would depend on its frequency, and the invariant speed&nbsp;''c'' of special relativity would then be the upper limit of the speed of light in vacuum.
In 1729, Bradley used this method to derive that light travelled 10,210 times faster than the Earth in its orbit (the modern figure is 10,066 times faster) or, equivalently, that it would take light 8&nbsp;minutes 12&nbsp;seconds to travel from the Sun to the Earth.
Since then, scientists have provided increasingly accurate measurements.
In the theory of relativity,  interrelates space and time, and also appears in the famous equation of mass–energy equivalence .
Using these units,  does not appear explicitly because multiplication or division by 1 does not affect the result.
As a result, the numerical value of  in metres per second is now fixed exactly by the definition of the metre.
An example involves the quantum states of two particles that can be entangled.
The Essen–Gordon-Smith result, , was substantially more precise than those found by optical techniques.
The phase velocity is important in determining how a light wave travels through a material or from one material to another.
By the 14th century, Sayana had made statements about the speed of light in his commentary on the Hindu Rigveda.
However, it has been suggested in various theories that the speed of light may have changed over time.
The factor&nbsp;''γ'' by which lengths contract and times dilate is known as the Lorentz factor and is given by , where ''v'' is the speed of the object.
Fermat also argued in support of  a finite speed of light.
He was unable to distinguish whether light travel was instantaneous or not, but concluded that if it were not, it must nevertheless be extraordinarily rapid.
If the spatial distance between two events&nbsp;A and&nbsp;B is greater than the time interval between them multiplied by&nbsp;''c'' then there are frames of reference in which&nbsp;A precedes&nbsp;B, others in which&nbsp;B precedes&nbsp;A, and others in which they are simultaneous.
Pierre de Fermat derived Snell's law using the opposing assumption, the more dense the medium the slower light traveled.
This was 100 times less uncertain than the previously accepted value.
Certain quantum effects appear to be transmitted instantaneously and therefore faster than ''c'', as in the EPR paradox.
He explored the consequences of that postulate by deriving the theory of relativity and in doing so showed that the parameter  had relevance outside of the context of light and electromagnetism.
This is one of the proposed changes to be incorporated in the next revision of the SI also termed the ''New SI''.
Typically, one measures the time needed for light to traverse some reference distance in the solar system, such as the radius of the Earth's orbit.
The method of Foucault replaces the cogwheel by a rotating mirror.
Its exact value is '''''' (approximately ), since the length of the metre is defined from this constant and the international standard for time.
He argued that light is substantial matter, the propagation of which requires time, even if this is hidden from our senses.
An actual physical signal with a finite extent (a pulse of light) travels at a different speed.
This value was adopted by the 12th General Assembly of the Radio-Scientific Union in 1957.
Based on that theory, Heron of Alexandria argued that the speed of light must be infinite because distant objects such as stars appear immediately upon opening the eyes.Early Islamic philosophers initially agreed with the Aristotelian view that light had no speed of travel.
As an extreme example of light "slowing" in matter, two independent teams of physicists claimed to bring light to a "complete standstill" by passing it through a Bose–Einstein condensate of the element rubidium, one team at Harvard University and the Rowland Institute for Science in Cambridge, Mass., and the other at the Harvard–Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, also in Cambridge.
Proxima Centauri, the closest star to Earth after the Sun, is around 4.2 light-years away.
The rate of change in the distance between two objects in a frame of reference with respect to which both are moving (their closing speed) may have a value in excess of&nbsp;''c''.
As a consequence of this, if a robot on the surface of Mars were to encounter a problem, its human controllers would not be aware of it until at least five minutes later, and possibly up to twenty minutes later; it would then take a further five to twenty minutes for instructions to travel from Earth to Mars.
In 1960, the metre was redefined in terms of the wavelength of a particular spectral line of krypton-86, and, in 1967, the second was redefined in terms of the hyperfine transition frequency of the ground state of caesium-133.
This receding is not due to motion ''through'' space, but rather to the expansion of space itself.
They kept the 1967 definition of second, so the caesium hyperfine frequency would now determine both the second and the metre.
It is often represented in terms of a ''refractive index''.
The vacuum permittivity may be determined by measuring the capacitance and dimensions of a capacitor, whereas the value of the vacuum permeability is fixed at exactly  through the definition of the ampere.
It is the speed at which all massless particles and changes of the associated fields (including electromagnetic radiation such as light and gravitational waves) travel in vacuum.
A pulse with different group and phase velocities (which occurs if the phase velocity is not the same for all the frequencies of the pulse) smears out over time, a process known as dispersion.
Knowing the distance between the wheel and the mirror, the number of teeth on the wheel, and the rate of rotation, the speed of light can be calculated.
These were aided by new, more precise, definitions of the metre and second.
The speed of light has become important in high-frequency trading, where traders seek to gain minute advantages by delivering their trades to exchanges fractions of a second ahead of other traders.
In the early 1860s, Maxwell showed that, according to the theory of electromagnetism he was working on, electromagnetic waves propagate in empty space at a speed equal to the above Weber/Kohrausch ratio, and drawing attention to the numerical proximity of this value to the speed of light as measured by Fizeau, he proposed that light is in fact an electromagnetic wave.
In 1638, Galileo Galilei proposed an experiment, with an apparent claim to having performed it some years earlier, to measure the speed of light by observing the delay between uncovering a lantern and its perception some distance away.
From this effect he determined that light must travel 10,210 times faster than the Earth in its orbit (the modern figure is 10,066 times faster) or, equivalently, that it would take light 8&nbsp;minutes 12&nbsp;seconds to travel from the Sun to the Earth.
In  Descartes' derivation of Snell's law, he assumed that even though the speed of light was instantaneous, the more dense the medium, the faster was light's speed.
The observed change in the moon's orbital period is caused by the difference in the time it takes light to traverse the shorter or longer distance.
This led Alhazen to propose that light must have a finite speed, and that the speed of light is variable, decreasing in denser bodies.
Also in the 11th century, Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī agreed that light has a finite speed, and observed that the speed of light is much faster than the speed of sound.
René Descartes argued that if the speed of light were to be finite, the Sun, Earth, and Moon would be noticeably out of alignment during a lunar eclipse.
Processors must therefore be placed close to each other to minimize communication latencies; this can cause difficulty with cooling.
In QED, photons are massless particles and thus, according to special relativity, they travel at the speed of light in vacuum.
Sometimes  is used for the speed of waves in ''any'' material medium, and 0 for the speed of light in vacuum.
Using this and the principle of relativity as a basis he derived the special theory of relativity, in which the speed of light in vacuum ''c'' featured as a fundamental constant, also appearing in contexts unrelated to light.
In 1894, Paul Drude redefined  with its modern meaning.
Those photographs, taken today, capture images of the galaxies as they appeared 13&nbsp;billion years ago, when the universe was less than a billion years old.
If the particles are separated and one particle's quantum state is observed, the other particle's quantum state is determined instantaneously (i.e., faster than light could travel from one particle to the other).
Extensions of QED in which the photon has a mass have been considered.
The refractive index of a material may depend on the light's frequency, intensity, polarization, or direction of propagation; in many cases, though, it can be treated as a material-dependent constant.
Modern experiments indicate that the two-way speed of light is isotropic (the same in every direction) to within 6 nanometres per second.
The finite speed of light also limits the theoretical maximum speed of computers, since information must be sent within the computer from chip to chip.
In the 13th century, Roger Bacon argued that the speed of light in air was not infinite, using philosophical arguments backed by the writing of Alhazen and Aristotle.
There are situations in which it may seem that matter, energy, or information travels at speeds greater than&nbsp;''c'', but they do not.
A light-year is the distance light travels in one year, around 9461&nbsp;billion kilometres, 5879&nbsp;billion miles, or 0.3066 parsecs.
Denser media, such as water, glass, and diamond, have refractive indexes of around 1.3, 1.5 and 2.4, respectively, for visible light.
So-called superluminal motion is seen in certain astronomical objects, such as the relativistic jets of radio galaxies and quasars.
It is customary to express the results in astronomical units (AU) per day.
When measured from Earth, the periods of moons orbiting a distant planet are shorter when the Earth is approaching the planet than when the Earth is receding from it.
In the year 1856, Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Rudolf Kohlrausch measured the ratio of the electromagnetic and electrostatic units of charge, 1/√''ε''0''μ''0, by discharging a Leyden jar, and found that its numerical value was very close to the speed of light as measured directly by Fizeau.
Rosa and Dorsey used this method in 1907 to find a value of .
The ''γ'' factor approaches infinity as ''v'' approaches&nbsp;''c'', and it would take an infinite amount of energy to accelerate an object with mass to the speed of light.
A household demonstration of this technique is possible, using a microwave oven and food such as marshmallows or margarine: if the turntable is removed so that the food does not move, it will cook the fastest at the antinodes (the points at which the wave amplitude is the greatest), where it will begin to melt.
Lorentz invariance is an almost universal assumption for modern physical theories, such as quantum electrodynamics, quantum chromodynamics, the Standard Model of particle physics, and general relativity.
In supercomputers, the speed of light imposes a limit on how quickly data can be sent between processors.
This type of behaviour is generally microscopically true of all transparent media which "slow" the speed of light.
Euclid and Ptolemy advanced Empedocles' emission theory of vision, where light is emitted from the eye, thus enabling sight.
These include the equivalence of mass and energy , length contraction (moving objects shorten), and time dilation (moving clocks run more slowly).
This could result in a virtual particle crossing a large gap faster-than-light.
More generally, it is normally impossible for information or energy to travel faster than&nbsp;''c''.
The Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment, radar astronomy and the Deep Space Network determine distances to the Moon, planets and spacecraft, respectively, by measuring round-trip transit times.
In branches of physics in which  appears often, such as in relativity, it is common to use systems of natural units of measurement or the geometrized unit system where .
Aristotle argued, to the contrary, that "light is due to the presence of something, but it is not a movement".
It is impossible to transmit information with a light pulse any faster than the speed of the earliest part of the pulse (the front velocity).
A laser can then be locked to the frequency, and its wavelength can be determined using interferometry.
Furthermore, straight lines rarely occur in global communications situations, and delays are created when the signal passes through an electronic switch or signal regenerator.
If a processor operates at 1 gigahertz, a signal can only travel a maximum of about  in a single cycle.
The speed of light is the upper limit for the speeds of objects with positive rest mass, and individual photons cannot travel faster than the speed of light.
As such, the parameter&nbsp;''c'' is ubiquitous in modern physics, appearing in many contexts that are unrelated to light.
Newton queried whether Rømer's eclipse shadows were coloured; hearing that they were not, he concluded the different colours travelled at the same speed.
Descartes speculated that if the speed of light were found to be finite, his whole system of philosophy might be demolished.
The dimensions were established to an accuracy of about ±0.8&nbsp;μm using gauges calibrated by interferometry.
There are different ways to determine the value of ''c''.
:''c''&nbsp;=&nbsp;&nbsp;=&nbsp;
Outer space is a convenient setting for measuring the speed of light because of its large scale and nearly perfect vacuum.
Similarly, communications between the Earth and spacecraft are not instantaneous.
The current definition uses the recommended value in metres for the previous definition of the astronomical unit, which was determined by measurement.
In 1905 Einstein postulated from the outset that the speed of light in vacuum, measured by a non-accelerating observer, is independent of the motion of the source or observer.
They used it in 1972 to measure the speed of light in vacuum with a  fractional uncertainty of .
From the observation that the periods of Jupiter's innermost moon Io appeared to be shorter when the Earth was approaching Jupiter than when receding from it, he concluded that light travels at a finite speed, and estimated that it takes light 22 minutes to cross the diameter of Earth's orbit.
In exotic materials like Bose–Einstein condensates near absolute zero, the effective speed of light may be only a few metres per second.
In 1904, he speculated that the speed of light could be a limiting velocity in dynamics, provided that the assumptions of Lorentz's theory are all confirmed.
In practical terms, this means that in a material with refractive index less than 1, the absorption of the wave is so quick that no signal can be sent faster than ''c''.
In his 1704 book ''Opticks'', Isaac Newton reported Rømer's calculations of the finite speed of light and gave a value of "seven or eight minutes" for the time taken for light to travel from the Sun to the Earth (the modern value is 8&nbsp;minutes 19&nbsp;seconds).
In 1629, Isaac Beeckman proposed an experiment in which a person observes the flash of a cannon reflecting off a mirror about one mile (1.6&nbsp;km) away.
This is experimentally established in many tests of relativistic energy and momentum.
One argument for this follows from the counter-intuitive implication of special relativity known as the relativity of simultaneity.
As a result of this definition, the value of the speed of light in vacuum is exactly  and has become a defined constant in the SI system of units.
This invariance of the speed of light was postulated by Einstein in 1905, after being motivated by Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism and the lack of evidence for the luminiferous aether; it has since been consistently confirmed by many experiments.
However, no information can be sent using this effect.
Ole Rømer first demonstrated in 1676 that light travels at a finite speed (as opposed to instantaneously) by studying the apparent motion of Jupiter's moon Io.
It is generally assumed that fundamental constants such as&nbsp;''c'' have the same value throughout spacetime, meaning that they do not depend on location and do not vary with time.
The speed of light in vacuum is usually denoted by a lowercase , for "constant" or the Latin  (meaning "swiftness, celerity").
In transparent materials, the refractive index generally is greater than 1, meaning that the phase velocity is less than ''c''.
As the wavelength of the modes was known from the geometry of the cavity and from electromagnetic theory, knowledge of the associated frequencies enabled a calculation of the speed of light.
For example, in 2009, the best estimate, as approved by the International Astronomical Union (IAU), was:
In 1983, the metre was redefined in the International System of Units (SI) as the distance travelled by light in vacuum in 1/ of a second.
NASA must wait several hours for information from a probe orbiting Jupiter, and if it needs to correct a navigation error, the fix will not arrive at the spacecraft for an equal amount of time, creating a risk of the correction not arriving in time.
The difference of ''γ'' from 1 is negligible for speeds much slower than&nbsp;''c'', such as most everyday speeds—in which case special relativity is closely approximated by Galilean relativity—but it increases at relativistic speeds and diverges to infinity as ''v'' approaches ''c''.
In 1856, Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Rudolf Kohlrausch had used  for a different constant later shown to equal  times the speed of light in vacuum.
For example, galaxies far away from Earth appear to be moving away from the Earth with a speed proportional to their distances.
After centuries of increasingly precise measurements, in 1975 the speed of light was known to be  with a measurement uncertainty of 4 parts per billion.
However, the popular description of light being "stopped" in these experiments refers only to light being stored in the excited states of atoms, then re-emitted at an arbitrarily later time, as stimulated by a second laser pulse.
Another reason for the speed of light to vary with its frequency would be the failure of special relativity to apply to arbitrarily small scales, as predicted by some proposed theories of quantum gravity.
An astronomical unit (AU) is approximately the average distance between the Earth and Sun.
Beginning in the 1880s several experiments were performed to try to detect this motion, the most famous of which is the experiment performed by Albert A. Michelson and Edward W. Morley in 1887.
The remaining uncertainty was mainly related to the definition of the metre.
In 1983 the metre was defined as "the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of  of a second", fixing the value of the speed of light at  by definition, as described below.
In 2011, the CGPM stated its intention to redefine all seven SI base units using what it calls "the explicit-constant formulation", where each "unit is defined indirectly by specifying explicitly an exact value for a well-recognized fundamental constant", as was done for the speed of light.
In 1946, Louis Essen and A.C. Gordon-Smith established the frequency for a variety of normal modes of microwaves of a microwave cavity of precisely known dimensions.
By adjusting the path length while observing the interference pattern and carefully measuring the change in path length, the wavelength of the light (''λ'') can be determined.
Historically, the symbol ''V'' was used as an alternative symbol for  the speed of light, introduced by James Clerk Maxwell in 1865.
According to special relativity, the energy of an object with rest mass ''m'' and speed ''v'' is given by , where ''γ'' is the Lorentz factor defined above.
However interferometric determination of wavelength becomes less precise with wavelength and the experiments were thus limited in precision by the long wavelength (~0.4&nbsp;cm) of the radiowaves.
Because light travels about  () in one second, these measurements of small fractions of a second must be very precise.
As similar experiments found comparable results for ''c'', the 15th General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1975 recommended using the value  for the speed of light.
From the angular difference in the position of stars (maximally 20.5 arcseconds) it is possible to express the speed of light in terms of the Earth's velocity around the Sun, which with the known length of a year can be converted to the time needed to travel from the Sun to the Earth.
For example, general relativity predicts that&nbsp;''c'' is also the speed of gravity and of gravitational waves.
The speed of light is of relevance to communications: the one-way and  round-trip delay time are greater than zero.
Previously the AU was not based on the International System of Units but in terms of the gravitational force exerted by the Sun in the framework of classical mechanics.
For example, for visible light the refractive index of glass is typically around 1.5, meaning that light in glass travels at ; the refractive index of air for visible light is about 1.0003, so the speed of light in air is about  (about  slower than ).
Since 1983, the metre has been defined in the International System of Units (SI) as the distance light travels in vacuum in  of a second.
Since the direction of the Earth's velocity changes continuously as the Earth orbits the Sun, this effect causes the apparent position of stars to move around.
None of these options, however, allow information to be transmitted faster than ''c''.
Rømer observed this effect for Jupiter's innermost moon Io and deduced that light takes 22 minutes to cross the diameter of the Earth's orbit.
If a laser beam is swept quickly across a distant object, the spot of light can move faster than&nbsp;''c'', although the initial movement of the spot is delayed because of the time it takes light to get to the distant object at the speed&nbsp;''c''.
In communicating with distant space probes, it can take minutes to hours for a message to get from Earth to the spacecraft, or vice versa.
In models of the expanding universe, the farther galaxies are from each other, the faster they drift apart.
The distance travelled by light from the planet (or its moon) to Earth is shorter when the Earth is at the point in its orbit that is closest to its planet than when the Earth is at the farthest point in its orbit, the difference in distance being the diameter of the Earth's orbit around the Sun.
In other materials, it is possible for the refractive index to become smaller than 1 for some frequencies; in some exotic materials it is even possible for the index of refraction to become negative.
If the dimensions of the resonance cavity are also known, these can be used to determine the wavelength of the wave.
The refractive index of a material is defined as the ratio of ''c'' to the phase velocity&nbsp;''v''p in the material: larger indices of refraction indicate lower speeds.
Since such misalignment had not been observed, Descartes concluded the speed of light was infinite.
The setup as used by Fizeau consists of a beam of light directed at a mirror  away.
In 2009, the observation of the spectrum of gamma-ray burst GRB&nbsp;090510 did not find any difference in the speeds of photons of different energies, confirming that Lorentz invariance is verified at least down to the scale of the Planck length (''l''P&nbsp;=&nbsp;&nbsp;≈ ) divided by 1.2.
This delay was significant for communications between ground control and Apollo 8 when it became the first manned spacecraft to orbit the Moon: for every question, the ground control station had to wait at least three&nbsp;seconds for the answer to arrive.
An option for deriving ''c'' that does not directly depend on a measurement of the propagation of electromagnetic waves is to use the relation between ''c'' and the vacuum permittivity ''ε''0 and vacuum permeability ''μ''0 established by Maxwell's theory: ''c''2&nbsp;=&nbsp;1/(''ε''0''μ''0).
It proposed a new, but completely equivalent, wording of the metre's definition: "The metre, symbol m, is the unit of length; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum to be equal to exactly  when it is expressed in the SI unit ."
Another method is to use the aberration of light, discovered and explained by James Bradley in the 18th century.
When a charged particle does that in a dielectric material, the electromagnetic equivalent of a shock wave, known as Cherenkov radiation, is emitted.
In 1905, Albert Einstein postulated that the speed of light  with respect to any inertial frame is a constant and is independent of the motion of the light source.
A moving observer thus sees the light coming from a slightly different direction and consequently sees the source at a position shifted from its original position.
This definition fixes the speed of light in vacuum at exactly .
However, by adopting Einstein synchronization for the clocks, the one-way speed of light becomes equal to the two-way speed of light by definition.
Radar systems measure the distance to a target by the time it takes a radio-wave pulse to return to the radar antenna after being reflected by the target: the distance to the target is half the round-trip transit time multiplied by the speed of light.
A Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver measures its distance to GPS satellites based on how long it takes for a radio signal to arrive from each satellite, and from these distances calculates the receiver's position.
It is possible for a particle to travel through a medium faster than the phase velocity of light in that medium (but still slower than ''c'').
In the 1270s, Witelo considered the possibility of light travelling at infinite speed in vacuum, but slowing down in denser bodies.
Nowadays, using oscilloscopes with time resolutions of less than one nanosecond, the speed of light can be directly measured by timing the delay of a light pulse from a laser or an LED reflected from a mirror.
However, the only physical entities that are moving are the laser and its emitted light, which travels at the speed&nbsp;''c'' from the laser to the various positions of the spot.
His method was improved upon by Léon Foucault who obtained a value of  in 1862.
The '''speed of light''' in vacuum, commonly denoted , is a universal physical constant important in many areas of physics.
In a medium, light usually does not propagate at a speed equal to ''c''; further, different types of light wave will travel at different speeds.
The communications delay between Earth and Mars can vary between five and twenty minutes depending upon the relative positions of the two planets.
In neither case does any matter, energy, or information travel faster than light.
It is only possible to verify experimentally that the two-way speed of light (for example, from a source to a mirror and back again) is frame-independent, because it is impossible to measure the one-way speed of light (for example, from a source to a distant detector) without some convention as to how clocks at the source and at the detector should be synchronized.
The special theory of relativity explores the consequences of this invariance of ''c'' with the assumption that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames of reference.
Christiaan Huygens combined this estimate with an estimate for the diameter of the Earth's orbit to obtain an estimate of speed of light of , 26% lower than the actual value.
Until either of the particles is observed, they exist in a superposition of two quantum states.
However, this does not represent the speed of any single object as measured in a single inertial frame.
A coherent beam of light (e.g.
To do this, they redefined the metre as: "The metre is the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1/ of a second."
In the second half of the 20th century much progress was made in increasing the accuracy of measurements of the speed of light, first by cavity resonance techniques and later by laser interferometer techniques.
There is a brief delay from the source to the receiver, which becomes more noticeable as distances increase.
During the time it had "stopped," it had ceased to be light.
As a dimensional physical constant, the numerical value of  is different for different unit systems.
The relative uncertainty in these measurements is 0.02 parts per billion (), equivalent to the uncertainty in Earth-based measurements of length by interferometry.
By 1950, repeated measurements by Essen established a result of .
