He completed his last scene on May 24, 1967.
An adaptation of Ernest Hemingway's novella of the same name, Hemingway's agent, Leland Hayward, had previously written to the author: "Of all Hollywood people, the one that comes the closest to me in quality, in personality and voice, in personal dignity and ability, is Spencer Tracy."
He listened, he felt, he said the words without forcing anything."
His personal life was troubled, with a lifelong struggle against alcoholism and guilt over his son's deafness.
Donald Deschner, in his book on Tracy, credits ''Fury'' and ''San Francisco'' as the "two films that changed his career and gave him the status of a major star."
He continued to appear in unpopular films, with ''Me and My Gal'' (1932) setting an all-time low attendance record for the Roxy Theatre in New York City.
Despite the perception of being able to perform effortlessly, acquaintances of Tracy said that he would carefully prepare for each role.
The ''Commonweal'' described him as "one of our best and most versatile young actors".
MGM lent Tracy to Twentieth Century-Fox for the Western film ''Broken Lance'', his only appearance of 1954.
I can accept it only as it was meant to be for a great man—Father Flanagan".
The studio went to efforts to promote the actor, releasing adverts for his second film ''Quick Millions'' (1931) with the headline "A New Star Shines."
He was convinced that John's hearing impairment was a punishment for his own sins.
''Yellow'' opened on September 21; reviews were mixed but it ran for 135 performances.
Acting is not an important job in the scheme of things.
Tracy never returned to live in the family home, although he visited regularly.
In the volcano disaster movie ''The Devil at 4 O'Clock'' (1961), Tracy played a priest for the fourth time in his career.
Tracy was nervous about working with Cohan—one of the most important figures in American theatre—but during rehearsals Cohan announced, "Tracy, you're the best goddamned actor I've ever seen!"
The film was popular with audiences, however, taking in more than $2 million at the box office.
His recovery was described by his doctor as "a kind of miracle".
It was followed later that year by Tracy's only venture into the horror genre, an adaptation of ''Dr.
With little care for his studies and "itching for a chance to go and see some excitement", Tracy enlisted in the United States Navy when he turned 18.
Tracy received strong reviews for his performance, and the movie grossed $4 million worldwide.
Tracy almost died in September 1965: a stay in the hospital following a prostatectomy resulted in his kidneys failing, and he spent the night in a coma.
Tracy's breakthrough came in 1930, when his lead performance in ''The Last Mile'' caught the attention of Hollywood.
There was never again an official separation between Tracy and his wife, but the marriage continued to be troubled.
It reunited him with his debut director, John Ford, after 28 years.
''The Last Mile'' opened on Broadway in February, where Tracy's performance was met by a standing ovation that lasted 14 curtain calls.
Tracy was absent from screens in 1946, the first year since his motion picture debut that there was no Spencer Tracy release.
''Fury'' (1936) was the first film to prove that Tracy could make a success on his own merit.
In reviewing the performance, Jack Moffitt of the ''Hollywood Reporter'' said it was "so intimate and revealing of universal human experience that, to me, it almost transcended acting and became reality."
It was worth around $500,000 at the time of his death.
He failed to report for filming on ''Marie Galante'' in June 1934, and was found in his hotel room, virtually unconscious after a two-week binge.
Rather than being a steady drinker, as commonly thought, he was prone to periods of binging on alcohol.
"It's the second strong comedy in a row for Spencer Tracy, doing the title role, and he socks it", ''Variety'' noted.
Tracy first discovered his talent for acting while attending Ripon College, and he later received a scholarship for the American Academy of Dramatic Arts.
A variety of other roles followed, but it was the lead in ''Dread'', written by Pulitzer Prize-winning dramatist Owen Davis that gave Tracy high hopes for success.
He then portrayed Thomas Edison in ''Edison, the Man''.
Tracy was not someone to express his emotions, but friend Betsy Drake believed he "was ''utterly'' dependent upon Hepburn."
In 1955 Tracy turned down William Wyler's ''The Desperate Hours'' because he refused to take second-billing to Humphrey Bogart.
In January 1930, Tracy was approached about a new play called ''The Last Mile''.
Critics were unenthusiastic about the film, which was nevertheless Tracy's most successful box office outing since ''Father of the Bride''.
He entered Ripon in February 1921, declaring his intention to major in medicine.
Humphrey Bogart, Clark Gable, James Cagney, John Ford, Garson Kanin and Katharine Hepburn also called Tracy the greatest actor of his generation.
Brendan Gill of ''The New Yorker'' wrote that Tracy gave "a faultless and, under the circumstances, heartbreaking performance."
He was loaned to Warner Bros. for ''20,000 Years in Sing Sing'' (1932), a prison drama co-starring Bette Davis.
In 1930, Broadway was being heavily scouted for actors to work in the "talkies", the new medium of sound film.
Tracy was reunited with Gable and Loy for 1938's ''Test Pilot''.
His mother was a Presbyterian from a wealthy Midwestern family, and his father was of Irish Catholic background.
His five years with Fox were unremarkable, and he remained largely unknown to audiences after 25 films.
The film was another commercial and critical success, permanently cementing the notion of Gable and Tracy as a team.
The contract also stated for the first time that his billing was to be "that of a star".
He was the second son of Caroline Brown (1874–1942) and John Edward Tracy (1873–1928), a truck salesman.
After seeing the rushes, Fox immediately offered Tracy a long-term contract.
His only film the following year was ''Without Love'' (1945), a third film with Hepburn that performed well at the box office despite muted enthusiasm from critics.
He was sent to the Naval Training Station in North Chicago, where he was still a student when World War I came to an end.
Charles Matthews, writing for ''The Washington Post'', argues that "Tracy deserves to be remembered for himself, as a master of acting technique".
It was popular with the public, going on to make $1.3 million worldwide.
His performance earned a BAFTA nomination for Best Foreign Actor.
The children were raised in their mother's Episcopalian faith.
She had wanted him for her comeback vehicle, ''The Philadelphia Story'' (1940).
The film depicts the "Judges' Trial", the trial of Nazi judges for their role in the Holocaust.
* 1959: Nomination for ''The Old Man and the Sea''
From September 1933 to June 1934, Tracy had a public affair with Loretta Young, his co-star in ''Man's Castle''.
Immediately following graduation, Tracy joined a new stock company based in White Plains, New York where he was given periphery roles.
In the comedy film, Banks attempts to handle preparations for his daughter's (played by Elizabeth Taylor) upcoming wedding.
Tracy finally achieved some success by joining forces with the notable stock manager William H. Wright in the spring of 1924.
Katharine Hepburn, in an interview six years after Tracy's death, suggested that Tracy wished he had held a different profession.
In poor health, Tracy could only work for two or three hours each day.
The film garnered Tracy some of the strongest reviews of his career—he was nominated for an Academy Award, BAFTA Award and Golden Globe Award for the performance—but it was not a commercial hit.
In the 1930s, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was the most respected movie production studio in Hollywood.
While making ''Woman of the Year'' in September 1941, Tracy began what was to become a lifelong relationship with Katharine Hepburn.
In 1941, Tracy returned to the role of Father Flanagan in ''Men of Boys Town''.
It was a commercial success, but Curtis notes that co-star Lana Turner overshadowed Tracy in most of the reviews.
He told Joan Fontaine, "I can get a divorce whenever I want to, but my wife and Kate like things just as they are."
Biographer James Curtis writes: "Tracy was scarcely a blip on the box office barometer in 1935, a critics' darling and little more".
He made his stage debut in June 1921, playing the male lead in ''The Truth''.
Tracy told a journalist in April, "I'm coming back to Broadway to see if I can still act."
A second child, Louise "Susie" Treadwell Tracy, was born in July 1932.
Tracy's name topped the list of performers, and the comedy became the highest grossing American film of the year.
Tracy left MGM in 1955 and continued to work regularly as a freelance star, despite an increasing weariness as he aged.
She entered the room to find Tracy dead from a heart attack.
Tracy followed it with ''Plymouth Adventure'' (1952), a historical drama set abroad the ''Mayflower'', co-starring Gene Tierney.
It met with a poor response and posted a loss of $1.8 million.
He continues to receive praise from film scholars: critic Leonard Maltin calls Tracy "one of the 20th century’s finest actors", while film historian Jeanine Basinger describes his career as a "golden record of movie achievement".
Cohan wrote a part specifically for Tracy in his next play, ''The Baby Cyclone''.
He followed it later that year with ''Cass Timberlane'', in which he played a judge.
He was uncomfortable feigning a foreign accent, and resented having his hair curled, but the role was a hit with audiences and Tracy won the Academy Award for Best Actor.
Loretta Young remarked that Tracy was "awful" when he was drunk, and he was twice arrested for his behavior while intoxicated.
Tracy made his New York debut in October 1922, in a play called ''The Wedding Guests'', and then his Broadway debut three months later playing a wordless robot in ''R.U.R.''
* 1951: Nomination for ''Father of the Bride''
As he entered his sixties, years of drinking, smoking, taking pills, and being overweight left Tracy in poor health.
''Guess Who's Coming to Dinner'' was included on AFI's list of the 100 greatest American movies, while ''Captains Courageous'' was featured on their list of America's most inspiring movies.
Tracy spent the majority of the next two years at home with Hepburn, living what she described as a quiet life: reading, painting, and listening to music.
The movie was favorably reviewed, but not commercially successful.
It was a difficult production; director Garson Kanin later wrote: "In the ten days prior to the New York opening all the important relationships had deteriorated.
In January 1924 he played his first leading role with a company in Winnipeg, but the organization soon closed.
Tortured by some sort of guilt.
It opened on Broadway in September 1927 and proved to be a hit.
In 1999 the American Film Institute ranked Tracy as the 9th greatest male star of Classic Hollywood Cinema.
''Shanghai Madness'' (1933), meanwhile, gave Tracy a previously unseen sex appeal and served to advance his standing.
''The Sheepman'' previewed in October 1925, but it received poor reviews and closed after its trial run in Connecticut.
On June 10, 1967, 17 days after completing ''Guess Who's Coming to Dinner'', Tracy awakened at 3:00&nbsp;am to make himself a cup of tea in his apartment in Beverly Hills, California.
As a result, Tracy became dependent on barbiturates to sleep, followed by dexedrine to function.
The movie became Tracy's highest grossing picture.
There is nothing in the world quite like it."
He appeared on the stage again only once more in his life.
Tracy was devastated by the news and felt a lifelong guilt over his son's deafness.
''A Guy Named Joe'' (1943) with Irene Dunne surpassed ''San Francisco'' to become his highest-grossing film to date.
From this point on Tracy remained very weak, and Hepburn moved into his home to provide constant care.
Barry Nelson said that Tracy "brought the art of reacting to a new height"; Stanley Kramer declared that Tracy "thought and listened better than anyone in the history of motion pictures".
In those days it wasn't discussed."
I just project myself as I am—plain, trying to be honest."
In 1942 he appeared with Katharine Hepburn in ''Woman of the Year'', beginning a popular partnership that produced nine movies over 25 years.
Despite this attention, Tracy's next two movies went largely unnoticed.
He took the role of Captain T. G. Culpeper in Kramer's comedy ''It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World'' (1963), a small but key part that he was able to complete in nine days.
''The Show Off'' (1934), for which he was lent to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, proved popular, but his subsequent outings continued to be unsuccessful.
Tracy became estranged from his wife in the 1930s, but never divorced, conducting a long-term relationship with Katharine Hepburn in private.
Hepburn was delighted that Tracy was available for ''Woman of the Year'', saying "I was just damned grateful he was willing to work with me."
Following this disappointment, Tracy considered leaving the theatre and returning to Milwaukee for a more stable life.
Tracy made a total of 25 pictures in the five years he was with Fox Film Corporation, most of which lost money at the box office.
* 1939: Win for ''Boys Town''
Hepburn recalled, "He looked so happy to be done with living, which for all his accomplishments had been a frightful burden for him."
The film was released in December, and although reviews were mixed, Curtis notes that "Tracy's performance was singled out for praise in nearly every instance."
As his health worsened he had to cancel commitments to ''Cheyenne Autumn'' (1964) and ''The Cincinnati Kid'' (1965).
And when he's low, he's very, very low."
''Father's Little Dividend'' (1951) was released ten months later and performed well at the box office.
Tracy was absent from screens for almost a year before returning to Twentieth Century-Fox on loan and appearing as Henry M. Stanley in ''Stanley and Livingstone'', his only film of 1939.
The details on how Tracy's relationship with Fox ended are unclear: later in life Tracy maintained that he was fired for his drunken behavior, but the Fox records do not support such an account.
It was followed by the aviation film ''Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo'' (1944).
A Requiem Mass was held for Tracy on June 12 at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Catholic Church in East Hollywood.
Past recipients of the UCLA Spencer Tracy Award include James Stewart, Michael Douglas, Denzel Washington, Tom Hanks, Anthony Hopkins, Kirk Douglas and Morgan Freeman.
Winfield Sheehan, the head of Fox, committed to making Tracy a bankable commodity.
''I Take This Woman'' with Hedy Lamarr was a critical and commercial failure, but the historical drama ''Northwest Passage''—Tracy's first film in Technicolor—proved popular.
After a successful film debut in ''Up the River'', Tracy was signed to a contract with Fox Film Corporation.
At periods in his life, Tracy attended Mass regularly.
They also declared his blood pressure as dangerously high.
James Cagney noted that Tracy was rarely the target of impressionists, because "You can't mimic reserve and control very well" and "there's nothing to imitate except his genius and that can't be mimicked."
Unable to attain funding, ''Dread'' did not open on Broadway.
''Woman of the Year'' was followed by an adaptation of John Steinbeck's ''Tortilla Flat'' (1942) which met with a tepid response.
The trouble caused by the picture fractured Tracy's relationship with MGM.
For the second year running, Tracy received an Academy Award for Best Actor.
In 1953, Tracy returned to the role of a concerned father in ''The Actress''.
Spencer was tense and unbending, could not, or would not, take direction".
On the strength of the two movies, Tracy polled as one of the nation's top stars once again.
He was humble about the recognition, saying in his acceptance speech: "I honestly do not feel that I can accept this award&nbsp;...
His public reputation continued to grow with ''Libeled Lady'' (1936), a screwball comedy that cast him with William Powell, Loy and Harlow.
Curtis writes: "audiences who, just a year earlier, had no clear handle on him, were suddenly turning out to see him.
They were in need of a new male star, and contacted Tracy on April 2, 1935, offering him a seven-year deal.
In 2009, Tracy provided inspiration for the character Carl in Pixar's Oscar-winning film ''Up''.
He immediately sent the Academy Award statuette to Flanagan.
MGM capitalized on Tracy's popularity, casting him in four movies for 1940.
In 2014, a film about Tracy's relationship with Katharine Hepburn was announced to be in development.
It proved a popular draw and their productions were favorably received.
When Tracy arrived there, his own reputation was not strong.
Hepburn commented that he could stop drinking for "months, even years at a time".
To commence filming, Tracy had to be insured for the high premium of $71,000; Hepburn and Kramer both put their salaries in escrow until Tracy completed his scenes.
Tracy drank heavily during his years with Fox, and gained a reputation as an alcoholic.
* 1937: Nomination for ''San Francisco''
Directed by Fritz Lang, Tracy played a man who swears revenge after narrowly escaping death by a lynch mob.
He often belittled the profession, for instance saying to Kanin, "Why do actors think they're so God damn important?
Tracy was hopeful that it would be his break-out role, but despite good reviews this failed to materialize.
The story of a man's rise to prosperity, written by Preston Sturges, Tracy's performance as railroad tycoon Tom Garner received uniformly strong reviews.
He was, however, well known for being a troublemaker.
Ford wanted Tracy for the lead role in his next picture, a prison movie.
Joseph L. Mankiewicz lived with Tracy during the production of ''Test Pilot'', and recounted that the actor would lock himself in his bedroom "working extremely hard" each night.
Production company Fox Film Corporation were unsure about Tracy, saying that he did not photograph well, but Ford convinced them that he was right for the role.
Tracy is interred at Glendale's Forest Lawn Memorial Park, near his wife, Louise and son, John.
He was the first of nine actors to win the award twice, and is one of two actors to receive it consecutively, the other being Tom Hanks.
He was told to lose some of his 210 pounds before filming began, but failed to do so.
Tracy's close friend Chester Erskine pinpointed his acting style as one of "selection"—he strove to give as little as was needed to be effective—reaching "a minimum to make the maximum."
When John was 10 months old, Louise discovered that the boy was deaf.
When he took a position with a struggling company in New Jersey, Tracy was living on an allowance of 35 cents a day.
Dejected, Tracy was forced back to Wright and the stock circuit.
Tracy was humble about his abilities, telling a journalist, "it's just that I try no tricks.
The location filming in the French Alps proved a difficult experience, and he threatened to leave the project.
He nevertheless began to ponder retirement, with Curtis writing that he was "chronically tired, unhappy, ill, and uninterested in work."
In November 1923 he landed a small part on Broadway in the comedy ''A Royal Fandango'', starring Ethel Barrymore.
Neither Tracy nor his wife ever pursued a divorce, despite their estrangement.
Preserving Tracy's legacy, an award for excellence in film acting is bestowed in his name at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Tracy was particularly respected for his naturalism on screen.
Tracy did not appear on the screen again until October 1960, with the release of ''Inherit the Wind'', a film based on the 1925 Scopes "Monkey Trial" which debated the right to teach evolution in schools.
''Man's Castle'' (1933) with Loretta Young was anticipated to be a hit, but made only a small profit.
Despite a weak critical reception the film was a popular success, outgrossing its predecessor and confirming the strength of the partnership.
As a member of the college debate team, Tracy excelled in arguing and public speaking.
Looking to cast the lead role of a murderer on death row, producer Herman Shumlin met with Tracy, and later recounted: "beneath the surface, here was a man of passion, violence, sensitivity and desperation: no ordinary man, and just the man for the part."
Towards the end of his life, Tracy worked almost exclusively for director Stanley Kramer.
A stage partnership was formed with the young actress Selena Royle, who had already made her name on Broadway.
Tracy was born on April 5, 1900, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Director Pete Docter explained that there is "something sweet about these grumpy old guys".
Mordaunt Hall of ''The New York Times'' stated: "No more convincing performance has been given on the screen than Spencer Tracy's impersonation of Tom Garner."
That afternoon, the contract between Tracy and Fox was terminated "by mutual consent".
Tracy's infidelity apparently continued, however, and Tracy is reported to have had an affair with Gene Tierney during the making of ''Plymouth Adventure'' in 1952.
* 1956: Nomination for ''Bad Day at Black Rock''
In 1935 Tracy joined Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, at the time Hollywood's most prestigious studio.
By the 1940s, Tracy was one of the studio's top stars.
Tracy was unhappy with the film, disliking the heavy make-up he needed to portray Hyde.
Joan Crawford likewise expressed her admiration for Tracy's seemingly effortless performances.
Tracy turned down roles in ''Long Days Journey Into Night'' (1962) and ''The Leopard'' (1963), and had to pull out of MGM's all-star ''How the West Was Won'' (1962) when it clashed with ''Judgment at Nuremberg''.
Later in life he remarked, "I never would have gone back to school if there had been any other way of learning to read the subtitles in the movies."
Tracy took a year to commit to the project, in which he played an Irish-American mayor seeking re-election.
