At birth both sexes are about the same size, but mature males are typically 30% to 50% longer and three times as massive as females.
Birth is a social event, as the mother and calf need others to protect them from predators.
One study published in 2010 collected evidence that suggests that female sperm whales may collaborate when hunting Humboldt squid.
The sperm whale belongs to the order Cetartiodactyla, the order containing all cetaceans and even-toed ungulates.
Individual large mature male sperm whales have no non-human predators, and are believed to be too large, powerful and aggressive to be threatened by orcas.
Bones show the same pitting that signals decompression sickness in humans.
In Fiji the teeth are known as ''tabua'', traditionally given as gifts for atonement or esteem (called ''sevusevu''), and were important in negotiations between rival chiefs.
Sexually mature females give birth once every 4 to 20 years (pregnancy rates were higher during the whaling era).
The pyramidal tract is poorly developed, reflecting the reduction of its limbs.
The grooves between the knobs trap a consistent film of air, making it an excellent sound mirror.
Most of the sound energy is then reflected off the frontal sac at the cranium and into the melon, whose lens-like structure focuses it.
The orcas employed a tail outward and tail slapping defensive position against the bull sperm whale similar to that used by female sperm whales against attacking orcas.
Sperm whales usually dive between , and sometimes , in search of food.
The spermaceti organs may also help adjust the whale's buoyancy.
They conjectured that sperm whales use vision to hunt squid, either by detecting silhouettes from below or by detecting bioluminescence.
They are most commonly between six and nine individuals in size but can have more than twenty.
''Ferecetotherium'', found in Azerbaijan and dated to the late Oligocene (about ), is the most primitive fossil that has been found which possesses sperm whale-specific features such as an asymmetric rostrum ("beak" or "snout").
The sperm whale respiratory system has adapted to cope with drastic pressure changes when diving.
Early whalers exploited this behaviour, attracting a whole unit by injuring one of its members.
Plunging to , it is the second deepest diving mammal, following only the Cuvier's beaked whale.
From 1770 to 1775 Massachusetts, New York, Connecticut, and Rhode Island ports produced 45,000 barrels of sperm oil annually, compared to 8,500 of whale oil.
Grown males are known to enter surprisingly shallow bays to rest (whales will be in state of rest during these occasions).
macrocephalus'', two of the names used by Linnaeus.
It was selected because of its specific contribution to the state's history and because of its present-day plight as an endangered species.
It is listed on Appendix II as it has an unfavourable conservation status or would benefit significantly from international co-operation organised by tailored agreements.
It is thought that the nostrils of the land-based ancestor of the sperm whale migrated through evolution to their current functions, the left nostril becoming the blowhole and the right nostril becoming the phonic lips.
Mature males often show scars which seem to be caused by the teeth.
Sperm whaling increased until the mid-nineteenth century.
Popular locations for sperm whale watching include the town of Kaikoura on New Zealand's South Island, Andenes and Tromsø in Arctic Norway; as well as the Azores, where the continental shelf is so narrow that whales can be observed from the shore, and Dominica where a long-term scientific research program, The Dominica Sperm Whale Project, has been in operation since 2005.
A mature sperm whale has few natural predators, although calves and weakened adults are sometimes killed by pods of orcas.
Older skeletons showed the most extensive pitting, whereas calves showed no damage.
It has been stated that sperm whales, as well as other large cetaceans, help fertilise the surface of the ocean by consuming nutrients in the depths and transporting those nutrients to the oceans' surface when they defecate, an effect known as the whale pump.
The blow is a noisy, single stream that rises up to  or more above the surface and points forward and left at a 45° angle.
Although the fossil record is poor, several extinct genera have been assigned to the clade Physeteroidea, which includes the last common ancestor of the modern sperm whale, pygmy sperm whales, dwarf sperm whales, and extinct physeteroids.
The oldest pregnant female ever recorded was 41 years old.
Undigested squid beaks accumulate in the second stomach – as many as 18,000 have been found in some dissected specimens.
The grooves between the knobs trap a film of air that is consistent whatever the orientation or depth of the whale, making it an excellent sound mirror.
Most squid beaks are vomited by the whale, but some occasionally make it to the hindgut.
They prefer ice-free waters over  deep.
They feed on several species, notably the giant squid, but also the colossal squid, octopuses, and fish like demersal rays, but their diet is mainly medium-sized squid.
Males become sexually mature at 18 years.
Other threats include ingestion of marine debris, ocean noise, and chemical pollution.
''Orycterocetus'' fossils have also been found in the North Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, in addition to the west coast of the United States.
Apart from a few famous instances such as the well-documented sinking of the ships ''Essex'' and ''Ann Alexander'' by attackers estimated to weigh only one-fifth as much as the ships, this hypothesis is not well supported in current scientific literature.
The conservation outlook is brighter than for many other whales.
The species is listed as endangered on the United States Endangered Species Act.
Sperm whales are among the most cosmopolitan species.
In addition, male sperm whales have been observed to attack and intimidate orca pods.
File:Sperm whale phonic lips (NASA).jpg|The phonic lips.
Sperm whaling declined in the second half of the nineteenth century, as petroleum came into broader use.
Sperm whales are now occasionally found with pieces of plastic in their stomachs.
After the war, whaling continued unabated to obtain oil for cosmetics and high-performance machinery, such as automobile transmissions.
Most sperm whale fossils date from the Miocene period, .
In the same decade, the British began sperm whaling, employing American ships and personnel.
The spermaceti organ may also play a role by adjusting buoyancy (see below).
The sperm whale has the longest intestinal system in the world, exceeding 300 m in larger specimens.
The head of the whale contains a liquid wax called spermaceti, from which the whale derives its name.
Its surrounding wall, known as the ''case'', is extremely tough and fibrous.
Coastal areas with significant sperm whale populations include the Azores and Dominica.
The sperm whale's distinctive shape comes from its very large, block-shaped head, which can be one-quarter to one-third of the animal's length.
It is estimated that the historic worldwide population numbered 1,100,000 before commercial sperm whaling began in the early eighteenth century.
Calves may be allowed to suckle from females other than their mothers.
However, more recent studies, based on various combinations of comparative anatomy and molecular phylogenetics, criticised Milinkovitch's analysis on technical grounds and reaffirmed that the Odontoceti are monophyletic.
From that date until 1946, the population appears to have partially recovered as whaling activity decreased, and after World War II, the whale population increases to 33 percent of the pre-whaling population.
Melville associated the sperm whale with the Bible's Leviathan.
Between dives, the sperm whale surfaces to breathe for about eight minutes before diving again.
In some taxonomic schemes the families Kogiidae and Physeteridae are combined as the superfamily Physeteroidea (see the separate entry on the sperm whale family).
The sperm whale's unique body is unlikely to be confused with any other species.
Solitary mature males are known to interfere and come to the aid of vulnerable groups nearby.
The main driving force for the sexual segregation of adult sperm whales is scramble competition for mesopelagic squid.
Sperm whales are listed on Appendix I and Appendix II of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS).
The Black Sea's lower layers are also anoxic and contain high concentrations of sulphur compounds such as hydrogen sulphide.
From 1993 to 1996, molecular phylogenetics analyses by Milinkovitch and colleagues, based on comparing the genes of various modern whales, suggested that the sperm whales are more closely related to the baleen whales than they are to other toothed whales, which would have meant that Odontoceti were not monophyletic; in other words, it did not consist of a single ancestral toothed whale species and all its descendants.
The diary of Benjamin Bangs (1721–1769) shows that, along with the bumpkin sloop he sailed, he found three other sloops flensing sperm whales off the coast of North Carolina in late May 1743.
Sperm whales increase levels of primary production and carbon export by depositing iron-rich faeces into surface waters of the Southern Ocean.
The sperm whale is also known as the "cachalot", which is thought to derive from the archaic French for "tooth" or "big teeth", as preserved for example in '''' in the Gascon dialect (a word of either Romance or Basque origin).
Lactation proceeds for 19 to 42 months, but calves, rarely, may suckle up to 13 years.
Fishermen do not target the creatures sperm whales eat, but long-line fishing operations in the Gulf of Alaska have complained about sperm whales stealing fish from their lines.
In comparison, human consumption of seafood is estimated to be .
The brain is the largest known of any modern or extinct animal, weighing on average about , more than five times heavier than a human's, and has a volume of about 8,000&nbsp;cm3.
Friedrich Ratzel in ''The History of Mankind'' reported in 1896 that, in Fiji, whales' or cachalots' teeth were the most-demanded article of ornament or value.
Analyzing the teeth is the preferred method for determining a whale's age.
They may face inwards with their tails out (the 'marguerite formation', named after the flower).
A continuous fat-filled canal transmits received sounds to the inner ear.
Like the age-rings in a tree, the teeth build distinct layers of cementum and dentine as they grow.
Another view holds that exploitation by overwhaling had virtually no effect on the size of the bull sperm whales, and their size may have actually increased in current times on the basis of density dependent effects.
During the hunt, oxygen consumption, together with blood vessel dilation, produces heat and melts the spermaceti, increasing its buoyancy and enabling easy surfacing.
The sperm whale is one of the species originally described by Linnaeus in 1758 in his eighteenth century work, ''Systema Naturae''.
The source of the air forced through the phonic lips is the right nasal passage.
Fossil sperm whales from the Middle Miocene include ''Aulophyseter'', ''Idiorophus'' and ''Orycterocetus'', all of which were found on the west coast of the United States, and ''Scaldicetus'', found in Europe and Japan.
They occurred often in necklaces.
At the posterior end of this spermaceti complex is the frontal sac, which covers the concave surface of the cranium.
The anterior wall is smooth.
This multi-pulse click structure allows researchers to measure the whale's spermaceti organ using only the sound of its clicks.
A 2008 study published in ''Current Biology'' recorded evidence that whales may sleep with both sides of the brain.
The hunting led to the near extinction of large whales, including sperm whales, until bans on whale oil use were instituted in 1972.
''Acrophyseter'', from the late Miocene, also had teeth in both the upper and lower jaws as well as a short rostrum and an upward curving mandible (lower jaw).
Myoglobin, which stores oxygen in muscle tissue, is much more abundant than in terrestrial animals.
The oxygenated blood can be directed towards only the brain and other essential organs when oxygen levels deplete.
The distal sac is connected to the blowhole and the terminus of the left passage.
The sperm whale's eye does not differ greatly from those of other toothed whales except in size.
The irritation of the intestines caused by squid beaks stimulates the secretion of this lubricant-like substance.
An older study, examining whales captured by the New Zealand whaling fleet in the Cook Strait region, found a 1.69:1 ratio of squid to fish by weight.
The most common natural predator of sperm whales is the orca, but pilot whales and false killer whales sometimes harass them.
The lower jaw is the primary reception path for the echoes.
The spermaceti at the core of the organ has a higher wax content than the outer areas.
Like all cetaceans, the spine of the sperm whale has reduced zygapophysial joints, of which the remnants are modified and are positioned higher on the vertebral dorsal spinous process, hugging it laterally, to prevent extensive lateral bending and facilitate more dorso-ventral bending.
Judge Paul Dudley, in his ''Essay upon the Natural History of Whales'' (1725), states that one Atkins, ten or twelve years in the trade, was among the first to catch sperm whales sometime around 1720 off the New England coast.
Below the spermaceti organ lies the "junk" which consists of compartments of spermaceti separated by cartilage.
It is listed on Appendix I as this species has been categorized as being in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant proportion of their range and CMS Parties strive towards strictly protecting these animals, conserving or restoring the places where they live, mitigating obstacles to migration and controlling other factors that might endanger them.
The sperm whale's cerebrum is the largest in all mammalia, both in absolute and relative terms.
The teeth were originally rare in Fiji and Tonga, which exported teeth, but with the Europeans' arrival, teeth flooded the market and this "currency" collapsed.
Odontoceti (toothed whales) breathe air at the surface through a single, S-shaped blowhole, which is extremely skewed to the left.
Sperm whales are not the easiest of whales to watch, due to their long dive times and ability to travel long distances underwater.
The sperm whale is the largest toothed whale, with adult males measuring up to  long and weighing up to .
Only 8 out of 21 sailors survived to be rescued by other ships.
Long-line fishing operations in the Gulf of Alaska complain that sperm whales take advantage of their fishing operations to eat desirable species straight off the line, sparing the whales the need to hunt.
Arguably the most famous sperm whale counter-attack occurred on 20 November 1820, when a whale claimed to be about  long rammed and sank the Nantucket whaleship ''Essex''.
The scientific genus name ''Physeter'' comes from Greek '''' (), meaning "blowpipe, blowhole (of a whale)", or – as a ''pars pro toto'' – "whale".
The sperm whale's ivory-like teeth were often sought by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century whalers, who used them to produce inked carvings known as ''scrimshaw.''
In that sense, petroleum use may be said to have protected whale populations from even greater exploitation.
Females become fertile at around 9 years of age.
The circulatory system has a number of specific adaptations for the aquatic environment.
They will spend much of the time rubbing against each other.
There is disagreement on the claims of adult males approaching or exceeding  in length.
Socializing usually takes place in the afternoon.
However, the recovery from centuries of commercial whaling is a slow process, particularly in the South Pacific, where the toll on breeding-age males was severe.
Ambergris, a solid, waxy, flammable substance produced in the digestive system of sperm whales, was also sought as a fixative in perfumery.
The complex arterial retia mirabilia of the sperm whale are more extensive and larger than those of any other cetacean.
Similar to ruminants the sperm whale has four stomachs.
The Nantucket Whaling Museum has a -long jawbone.
These evolutionary modifications make the spine more flexible but weaker than the spines of terrestrial vertebrates.
They inhabit the Mediterranean Sea, but not the Black Sea, while their presence in the Red Sea is uncertain.
In Asian waters, whales are also observed regularly in coastal waters in places such as Commander and Kuril Islands, Shiretoko Peninsula where is one of few locations whales can be observed from shores, off Kinkasan, vicinity to Tokyo Bay and Boso Peninsula to Izu and Izu Islands, Volcano Islands, Yakushima and Tokara Islands to Ryukyu Islands, Taiwan, Northern Mariana Islands, and so forth.
The second stomach is larger and is where digestion takes place.
Each of these teeth, up to  and  across, are hollow for the first half of their length.
Sperm whales hunt through echolocation.
Sperm whales can live for more than 60 years.
The oversupply led in turn to the development of the European art of scrimshaw.
Its synonymous specific name ''catodon'' means "down-tooth", from the Greek elements '''' ("below") and '''' ("tooth"); so named because it has visible teeth only in its lower jaw.
Such dives can last more than an hour.
Genera from the Oligocene and early and middle Miocene, with the possible exception of ''Aulophyseter'', had teeth in their upper jaws.
Like other whales, the sperm whale's milk has a higher fat content than that of terrestrial mammals: about 36%, compared to 4% in cow milk.
Today the tabua remains an important item in Fijian life.
A sperm whale killed  south of Durban, South Africa after a 1-hour, 50-minute dive was found with two dogfish (Scymnodon sp.
Clicks are generated by forcing air through a pair of phonic lips (also known as "monkey lips" or "museau de singe") at the front end of the nose, just below the blowhole.
When dealing with a threat, sperm whales will use their huge head effectively as a battering ram.
These substances found a variety of commercial applications, such as candles, soap, cosmetics, machine oil, other specialised lubricants, lamp oil, pencils, crayons, leather waterproofing, rust-proofing materials and many pharmaceutical compounds.
Among several regions such as along coastal waters of southern Australia, sperm whales have been considered to be locally extinct.
However, sperm whale ivory contains a much thicker inner layer.
The sperm whale has a lower encephalization quotient than many other whale and dolphin species, lower than that of non-human anthropoid apes, and much lower than humans'.
Mature males average  in length but some may reach , with the head representing up to one-third of the animal's length.
However, due to the distinctive look and large size of the whale, watching is increasingly popular.
The total annual consumption of prey by sperm whales worldwide is estimated to be about .
The teeth are functional, but do not appear to be necessary for capturing or eating squid, as well-fed animals have been found without teeth or even with deformed jaws.
The ribs are bound to the spine by flexible cartilage, which allows the ribcage to collapse rather than snap under high pressure.
The knobbly surface reflects sound waves that come through the spermaceti organ from the phonic lips.
Sperm whale watchers often use hydrophones to listen to the clicks of the whales and locate them before they surface.
The largest ridge was called the 'hump' by whalers, and can be mistaken for a dorsal fin because of its shape and size.
The sperm whale was designated as the Connecticut state animal by the CT General Assembly in 1975.
The total number of sperm whales in the world is unknown, but is thought to be in the hundreds of thousands.
The diameter of the aortic arch increases as it leaves the heart.
Females and their young remain in groups, while mature males leave their "natal unit" somewhere between 4 and 21 years of age.
Albinos have been reported.
There is no direct connection between the internal carotid artery and the vessels of the brain.
This gives it a consistency similar to cottage cheese, which prevents it from dissolving in the water before the calf can eat it.
Though a widely practised art in the nineteenth century, scrimshaw using genuine sperm whale ivory declined substantially after the retirement of the whaling fleets in the 1880s.
Females remain at lower latitudes.
simus'', are placed either in this family or in the family Kogiidae.
Another synonym ''australasianus'' ("Australasian") was applied to sperm whales in the southern hemisphere.
Air that passes through the phonic lips passes into the distal sac, then back down through the left nasal passage.
This recycling of air allows the whale to continuously generate clicks for as long as it is submerged.
The species is now protected by a whaling moratorium, and is currently listed as vulnerable by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
Unlike orcas, sperm whales within a social unit show no significant tendency to associate with their genetic relatives.
Other fossil sperm whales with adaptations similar to this are collectively known as killer sperm whales.
A 67-foot specimen is reported from a Soviet whaling fleet near the Kurile Islands in 1950.
The other adults may jostle and bite the newborn in its first hours.
Like other toothed whales, the sperm whale can retract and protrude its eyes thanks to a 2-cm-thick retractor muscle attached around the eye at the equator.
When echolocating, the sperm whale emits a directionally focused beam of broadband clicks.
Experimental studies attempting to duplicate this effect have been unable to replicate the supposed injuries, casting doubt on this idea.
The flexible ribcage allows lung collapse, reducing nitrogen intake, and metabolism can decrease to conserve oxygen.
The sound then travels backwards along the length of the nose through the spermaceti organ.
Some of the sound will reflect back into the spermaceti organ and back towards the front of the whale's nose, where it will be reflected through the spermaceti organ a third time.
It is analogous to the melon found in other toothed whales.
It is the sole extant species of its genus, ''Physeter'', in the family Physeteridae.
The etymological dictionary of Corominas says the origin is uncertain, but it suggests that it comes from the Vulgar Latin '''', plural of '''', "sword hilt".
The sperm whale, unlike other odontocetes, has only one pair of phonic lips, whereas all other toothed whales have two, and it is located at the front of the nose instead of behind the melon.
By contrast, the second largest toothed whale, Baird's Beaked Whale measures  and weighs up to .
Commercial whaling has ceased, and the species is protected almost worldwide, though records indicate that in the eleven-year period starting from 2000, Japan has caught 51 sperm whales.
The shallow entrances to both the Black Sea and the Red Sea may account for their absence.
In New Zealand, the Māori know them as "rei puta"; such whale tooth pendants were rare objects because sperm whales were not actively hunted in traditional Māori society.
It is among the most sexually dimorphic of all cetaceans.
Females and calves spend about three quarters of their time foraging and a quarter of their time socializing.
Today, males do not usually exceed  in length or  in weight.
), usually found at the sea floor, in its belly.
In both the 1941 to 1942 and 1942 to 1943 seasons, Norwegian expeditions took over 3,000 sperm whales off the coast of Peru alone.
The structure of the junk redistributes physical stress across the skull and may have evolved to protect the head during ramming.
The whales rarely, if ever, leave their group.
Between 184,000 and 236,000 sperm whales were killed by the various whaling nations in the nineteenth century, while in the twentieth century, at least 770,000 were taken, the majority between 1946 and 1980.
This bulbous expansion acts as a windkessel, ensuring a steady blood flow as the heart rate slows during diving.
