Females of the water spider ''Argyroneta aquatica'' build underwater "diving bell" webs that they fill with air and use for digesting prey, molting, mating and raising offspring.
Because spider silk is both light and very strong, attempts are being made to produce it in goats' milk and in the leaves of plants, by means of genetic engineering.
Unlike most arthropods, spiders have no extensor muscles in their limbs and instead extend them by hydraulic pressure.
However, most modern groups of spiders have lost the cribellum.
Each spinneret has many spigots, each of which is connected to one silk gland.
It is similar in tensile strength to nylon and biological materials such as chitin, collagen and cellulose, but is much more elastic.
If courtship is successful, the male injects his sperm from the palpal bulbs into the female's genital opening, known as the ''epigyne'', on the underside of her abdomen.
True spiders have been found in Carboniferous rocks from , and are very similar to the most primitive surviving suborder, the Mesothelae.
Spiders are ectotherms, so environmental temperatures affect their activity.
Silk is mainly composed of a protein very similar to that used in insect silk.
At first, both produced rather sloppy webs, but they adapted quickly.
The largest known fossil spider as of 2011 is the araneid ''Nephila jurassica'', from about , recorded from Daohuogo, Inner Mongolia in China.
Convergent evolution in web construction, in other words use of similar techniques by remotely related species, is rampant.
Spiders are chelicerates and therefore arthropods.
The downside is that the scanning and integrating processes are relatively slow.
Like most arthropods, spiders lack balance and acceleration sensors and rely on their eyes to tell them which way is up.
Although most spiders live for at most two years, tarantulas and other mygalomorph spiders can live up to 25&nbsp;years in captivity.
They have symbolized patience due to their hunting technique of setting webs and waiting for prey, as well as mischief and malice due to their venomous bites.
These spiders also prefer sugar solutions to plain water, which indicates that they are seeking nutrients.
Its body length is almost 25&nbsp;mm, (i.e., almost one inch).
About half the potential prey that hit orb webs escape.
However, the significance of many variations is unclear.
Bilins are found, for example, in ''Micrommata virescens'', resulting in its green color.
Despite the relatively small central nervous system, some spiders (like ''Portia'') exhibit complex behaviour, including the ability to use a trial-and-error approach.
The primitive Liphistiidae, the "trapdoor spiders" of the family Ctenizidae and many tarantulas are ambush predators that lurk in burrows, often closed by trapdoors and often surrounded by networks of silk threads that alert these spiders to the presence of prey.
In addition to arthropods, mygalomorphs are capable of preying on frogs, small mammals, lizards, and snails.
The barbs cause intense irritation but there is no evidence that they carry any kind of venom.
Most spend the majority of their time in burrows, and some run silk tripwires out from these, but a few build webs to capture prey.
Malphigian tubules ("little tubes") extract these wastes from the blood in the hemocoel and dump them into the cloacal chamber, from which they are expelled through the anus.
Ant-mimicry in many spiders and other arthropods may be for protection from predators that hunt by sight, including birds, lizards and spiders.
The trachea were originally connected to the surroundings through a pair of openings called spiracles, but in the majority of spiders this pair of spiracles has fused into a single one in the middle, and moved backwards close to the spinnerets.
Spiders' guts are too narrow to take solids, and they liquefy their food by flooding it with digestive enzymes and grinding it with the bases of their pedipalps, as they do not have true jaws.
Spiders are found worldwide on every continent except for Antarctica, and have become established in nearly every habitat with the exceptions of air and sea colonization.
Various species are known to feed on dead arthropods (scavenging), web silk, and their own shed exoskeletons.
Most of the Liphistiidae construct silk-lined burrows with thin trapdoors, although some species of the genus ''Liphistius'' build camouflaged silk tubes with a second trapdoor as an emergency exit.
Baby spiders pass all their larval stages inside the egg and hatch as spiderlings, very small and sexually immature but similar in shape to adults.
Net-casting spiders weave only small webs, but then manipulate them to trap prey.
After a kill, some ant-mimicking spiders hold their victims between themselves and large groups of ants to avoid being attacked.
The other eyes are thought to be derived from the compound eyes of the ancestral chelicerates, but no longer have the separate facets typical of compound eyes.
Although all arthropods use muscles attached to the inside of the exoskeleton to flex their limbs, spiders and a few other groups still use hydraulic pressure to extend them, a system inherited from their pre-arthropod ancestors.
Most spiders that hunt actively, rather than relying on webs, have dense tufts of fine hairs between the paired claws at the tips of their legs.
Their greater success may be because sphecid wasps, which are often the dominant predators of spiders, much prefer to attack spiders that have flat webs.
However, there has been dissension within the scientific community as to how all these families should be classified, as evidenced by the over 20 different classifications that have been proposed since 1900.
Spiders of the genus ''Heptathela'' have no venom glands although they do have venom gland outlets on the fang tip.
'''Spiders''' (order '''Araneae''') are air-breathing arthropods that have eight legs and chelicerae with fangs that inject venom.
The separated palp remains attached to the female's epigynum for about four hours and apparently continues to function independently.
Social predatory spiders need to defend their prey against kleptoparasites ("thieves"), and larger colonies are more successful in this.
Some pump digestive enzymes from the midgut into the prey and then suck the liquified tissues of the prey into the gut, eventually leaving behind the empty husk of the prey.
Some jumping spiders of the genus ''Portia'' hunt other spiders in ways that seem intelligent, outflanking their victims or luring them from their webs.
Instead they release different pheromones that attract moth flies, and catch them with their front pairs of legs.
The Ch'ol Maya use a beverage created from the tarantula species ''Brachypelma vagans'' for the treatment of a condition they term 'tarantula wind', the symptoms of which include chest pain, asthma and coughing.
Wolf spiders, jumping spiders, fishing spiders and some crab spiders capture prey by chasing it, and rely mainly on vision to locate prey.
Various researchers have suggested that horizontal webs offer compensating advantages, such as reduced vulnerability to wind damage; reduced visibility to prey flying upwards, because of the back-lighting from the sky; enabling oscillations to catch insects in slow horizontal flight.
The construction of cobwebs is less stereotyped than that of orb-webs, and may take several days.
In web-weaving species, precise patterns of vibrations in the web are a major part of the rituals, while patterns of touches on the female's body are important in many spiders that hunt actively, and may "hypnotize" the female.
In a few cases, amber has preserved spiders' egg sacs and webs, occasionally with prey attached; the oldest fossil web found so far is 100&nbsp;million years old.
The white prosoma of ''Argiope'' results from hairs reflecting the light, ''Lycosa'' and ''Josa'' both have areas of modified cuticle that act as light reflectors.
Instead, they have mouths that point forwards and downwards, and all have some means of breathing air.
Spider webs vary widely in size, shape and the amount of sticky thread used.
From sides to center, like pincers
However, these spigots may have been mounted on the underside of the abdomen rather than on spinnerets, which are modified appendages and whose mobility is important in the building of webs.
The pair at the front are of the type called pigment-cup ocelli ("little eyes"), which in most arthropods are only capable of detecting the direction from which light is coming, using the shadow cast by the walls of the cup.
In a few species, such as the Hawaiian happy-face spider, ''Theridion grallator'', several coloration schemes are present in a ratio that appears to remain constant, and this may make it more difficult for predators to recognize the species.
A herbivorous species, ''Bagheera kiplingi'', was described in 2008, but all other known species are predators, mostly preying on insects and on other spiders, although a few large species also take birds and lizards.
The abdomen has no appendages except those that have been modified to form one to four (usually three) pairs of short, movable spinnerets, which emit silk.
Even species that do not build webs to catch prey use silk in several ways: as wrappers for sperm and for fertilized eggs; as a "safety rope"; for nest-building; and as "parachutes" by the young of some species.
A minority of species are social, building communal webs that may house anywhere from a few to 50,000 individuals.
The mid gut bears many digestive ceca, compartments with no other exit, that extract nutrients from the food; most are in the abdomen, which is dominated by the digestive system, but a few are found in the cephalothorax.
Uniquely among chelicerates, the final sections of spiders' chelicerae are fangs, and the great majority of spiders can use them to inject venom into prey from venom glands in the roots of the chelicerae.
Others grind the prey to pulp using the chelicerae and the bases of the pedipalps, while flooding it with enzymes; in these species, the chelicerae and the bases of the pedipalps form a preoral cavity that holds the food they are processing.
Mature female bolas spiders of the genus ''Mastophora'' build "webs" that consist of only a single "trapeze line", which they patrol.
Web-spinning also caused the association of the spider with creation myths, as they seem to have the ability to produce their own worlds.
Arachnids lack some features of other chelicerates, including backward-pointing mouths and gnathobases ("jaw bases") at the bases of their legs; both of these features are part of the ancestral arthropod feeding system.
Araneomorphae account for the great majority of modern spiders, including those that weave the familiar orb-shaped webs.
The peptide GsMtx-4, found in the venom of Brachypelma vagans, is being researched to determine whether or not it could effectively be used for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia, muscular dystrophy or glioma.
The abdomen is soft and egg-shaped.
The stomach in the cephalothorax acts as a pump that sends the food deeper into the digestive system.
Insects that hit the stopping threads fall onto the sheet or are shaken onto it by the spider, and are held by sticky threads on the sheet until the spider can attack from below.
The spiders eat the bolas if they have not made a kill in about 30 minutes, rest for a while, and then make new bolas.
Orange spider egg sac.jpg|Orange spider egg sac hanging from ceiling
The oldest known amber that contains fossil arthropods dates from  in the Early Cretaceous period.
The trachea system has most likely evolved in small ancestors to help resist desiccation.
In captivity, several spider species are also known to feed on bananas, marmalade, milk, egg yolk and sausages.
Observation shows that most male redbacks never get an opportunity to mate, and the "lucky" ones increase the likely number of offspring by ensuring that the females are well-fed.
Lycosidae female carrying young.jpg|Wolf spider carrying its young on its abdomen
Varying placement of webs allows different species of spider to trap different insects in the same area, for example flat horizontal webs trap insects that fly up from vegetation underneath while flat vertical webs trap insects in horizontal flight.
There are at least six types of silk gland, each producing a different type of silk.
The basic radial-then-spiral sequence visible in orb webs and the sense of direction required to build them may have been inherited from the common ancestors of most spider groups.
A few defend themselves against wasps by including networks of very robust threads in their webs, giving the spider time to flee while the wasps are struggling with the obstacles.
These hairs are fine setae (bristles) with fragile bases and a row of barbs on the tip.
In fact, there is no simple relationship between orb web design features and the prey they capture, as each orb-weaving species takes a wide range of prey.
Other views include proposals that: scorpions are more closely related to the extinct marine scorpion-like eurypterids than to spiders; spiders and Amblypygi are a monophyletic group.
Ant-mimicking spiders face several challenges: they generally develop slimmer abdomens and false "waists" in the cephalothorax to mimic the three distinct regions (tagmata) of an ant's body; they wave the first pair of legs in front of their heads to mimic antennae, which spiders lack, and to conceal the fact that they have eight legs rather than six; they develop large color patches round one pair of eyes to disguise the fact that they generally have eight simple eyes, while ants have two compound eyes; they cover their bodies with reflective hairs to resemble the shiny bodies of ants.
This is also the case for some basal araneomorph spiders, like the family Hypochilidae, but the remaining members of this group have just the anterior pair of book lungs intact while the posterior pair of breathing organs are partly or fully modified into tracheae, through which oxygen is diffused into the haemolymph or directly to the tissue and organs.
''Attercopus fimbriunguis'', from  in the Devonian period, bears the earliest known silk-producing spigots, and was therefore hailed as a spider at the time of its discovery.
Structural colors occur in some species, which are the result of the diffraction, scattering or interference of light, for example by modified setae or scales.
The smallest, ''Patu digua'' from Colombia, are less than  in body length.
Guanine is responsible for the white markings of the European garden spider ''Araneus diadematus''.
Juveniles of some spiders in the families Anyphaenidae, Corinnidae, Clubionidae, Thomisidae and Salticidae feed on plant nectar.
It is in many species accumulated in specialized cells called guanocytes.
Although larger spiders use hydraulics to straighten their legs, unlike smaller jumping spiders they depend on their flexor muscles to generate the propulsive force for their jumps.
The palps are 20% of male's body mass in this species, and detaching one of the two improves mobility.
However, they seem to be relatively slow "thinkers", which is not surprising, as their brains are vastly smaller than those of mammalian predators.
These two techniques have also been observed in other deinopids.
Ant-mimicking spiders also modify their behavior to resemble that of the target species of ant; for example, many adopt a zig-zag pattern of movement, ant-mimicking jumping spiders avoid jumping, and spiders of the genus ''Synemosyna'' walk on the outer edges of leaves in the same way as ''Pseudomyrmex''.
It used to be thought that the sticky orb web was an evolutionary innovation resulting in the diversification of the Orbiculariae.
Pollen caught in webs may also be eaten, and studies have shown that young spiders have a better chance of survival if they have the opportunity to eat pollen.
Nectar contains amino acids, lipids, vitamins and minerals in addition to sugars, and studies have shown that other spider species live longer when nectar is available.
However, several ant-mimicking spiders prey either on ants or on the ants' "livestock", such as aphids.
The only living members of the primitive Mesothelae are the family Liphistiidae, found only in Southeast Asia, China, and Japan.
There were about 100 reliably reported deaths from spider bites in the 20th century, compared to about 1,500 from jellyfish stings.
Laboratory studies show that they do so deliberately and over extended periods, and periodically clean themselves while feeding.
Most of those with medically serious bites, such as recluse spiders and widow spiders, would rather flee and bite only when trapped, although this can easily arise by accident.
Since mygalomorphs rarely "balloon" by using air currents for transport, their populations often form clumps.
Arthropods' proprioceptors, sensors that report the force exerted by muscles and the degree of bending in the body and joints, are well understood.
Spider venoms may be a less polluting alternative to conventional pesticides, as they are deadly to insects but the great majority are harmless to vertebrates.
Although the fossil record of spiders is considered poor, almost 1000 species have been described from fossils.
Although the Permian period  saw rapid diversification of flying insects, there are very few fossil spiders from this period.
Male spiders identify themselves by a variety of complex courtship rituals to avoid being eaten by the females.
Anatomically, spiders differ from other arthropods in that the usual body segments are fused into two tagmata, the cephalothorax and abdomen, and joined by a small, cylindrical pedicel.
Scorpions' chelicerae have three sections and are used in feeding.
Those of the genus ''Hyptiotes'' and the family Theridiosomatidae stretch their webs and then release them when prey strike them, but do not actively move their webs.
Because spiders' bodies are quite soft, the vast majority of fossil spiders have been found preserved in amber.
Most detect prey mainly by sensing vibrations, but the active hunters have acute vision, and hunters of the genus ''Portia'' show signs of intelligence in their choice of tactics and ability to develop new ones.
When at rest, the ant-mimicking crab spider ''Amyciaea'' does not closely resemble ''Oecophylla'', but while hunting it imitates the behavior of a dying ant to attract worker ants.
Males of the genus ''Tidarren'' amputate one of their palps before maturation and enter adult life with one palp only.
However, a laboratory study showed that spiders reduce the building of these decorations if they sense the presence of predators.
However, in spiders, it occupies only the upper part of the abdomen, and blood is discharged into the hemocoel by one artery that opens at the rear end of the abdomen and by branching arteries that pass through the pedicle and open into several parts of the cephalothorax.
They have been deemed to be the world's most dangerous spiders on clinical and venom toxicity grounds, though this claim has also been attributed to the Brazilian wandering spider, due to much more frequent accidents.
Males of most species survive a few matings, limited mainly by their short life spans.
They are distinguished by having fangs that oppose each other and cross in a pinching action, in contrast to the Mygalomorphae, which have fangs that are nearly parallel in alignment.
Nor is there much correspondence between spiders' classification and the chemical composition of their silks.
Web-building spiders have poor vision, but are extremely sensitive to vibrations.
An abnormal fear of spiders is called arachnophobia.
Well-known examples include tarantulas, ctenizid trapdoor spiders and the Australasian funnel-web spiders.
Female's reproductive tracts vary from simple tubes to systems that include seminal receptacles in which females store sperm and release it when they are ready.
There is no consistent relationship between the classification of spiders and the types of web they build: species in the same genus may build very similar or significantly different webs.
It is one of the most common specific phobias, and some statistics show that 50% of women and 10% of men show symptoms.
The family Uloboridae has lost its venom glands, and kills its prey with silk instead.
The extinct families Arthrolycosidae, found in Carboniferous and Permian rocks, and Arthromygalidae, so far found only in Carboniferous rocks, have been classified as members of the Mesothelae.
In web-building spiders, all these mechanical and chemical sensors are more important than the eyes, while the eyes are most important to spiders that hunt actively.
The part closest to and attaching the leg to the cephalothorax is the coxa; the next segment is the short trochanter that works as a hinge for the following long segment, the femur; next is the spider's knee, the patella, which acts as the hinge for the tibia; the metatarsus is next, and it connects the tibia to the tarsus (which may be thought of as a foot of sorts); the tarsus ends in a claw made up of either two or three points, depending on the family to which the spider belongs.
However, males of most species survive a few matings, limited mainly by their short life spans.
Some Triassic mygalomorphs appear to be members of the family Hexathelidae, whose modern members include the notorious Sydney funnel-web spider, and their spinnerets appear adapted for building funnel-shaped webs to catch jumping insects.
They placed emphasis on animals and often depicted spiders in their art.
Now, however, it appears that non-orb spiders are a sub-group that evolved from orb-web spiders, and non-orb spiders have over 40% more species and are four times as abundant as orb-web spiders.
Feeding on nectar avoids the risks of struggles with prey, and the costs of producing venom and digestive enzymes.
When a male detects signs of a female nearby he checks whether she is of the same species and whether she is ready to mate; for example in species that produce webs or "safety ropes", the male can identify the species and sex of these objects by "smell".
The appearance of several multi-way branchings in the tree on the right shows that there are still uncertainties about relationships between the groups involved.
The best-known method of prey capture is by means of sticky webs.
Dreamcatchers are depictions of spiderwebs.
The Mygalomorphae, which first appeared in the Triassic period, are generally heavily built and hairy, with large, robust chelicerae and fangs.
The golden wheeling spider, ''Carparachne aureoflava'', of the Namibian desert escapes parasitic wasps by flipping onto its side and cartwheeling down sand dunes.
As with other arthropods, spiders' cuticles would block out information about the outside world, except that they are penetrated by many sensors or connections from sensors to the nervous system.
Spiders often attach highly visible silk bands, called decorations or stabilimenta, to their webs.
The upper sections generally have thick "beards" that filter solid lumps out of their food, as spiders can take only liquid food.
As arthropods they have: segmented bodies with jointed limbs, all covered in a cuticle made of chitin and proteins; heads that are composed of several segments that fuse during the development of the embryo.
Several Carboniferous spiders were members of the Mesothelae, a primitive group now represented only by the Liphistiidae.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped nature.
Experiments have shown that ''Deinopis spinosus'' has two different techniques for trapping prey: backwards strikes to catch flying insects, whose vibrations it detects; and forward strikes to catch ground-walking prey that it sees.
The pattern of segment fusion that forms chelicerates' heads is unique among arthropods, and what would normally be the first head segment disappears at an early stage of development, so that chelicerates lack the antennae typical of most arthropods.
Spiders that have tracheae generally have higher metabolic rates and better water conservation.
It is initially a liquid, and hardens not by exposure to air but as a result of being drawn out, which changes the internal structure of the protein.
In 1973, Skylab 3 took two orb-web spiders into space to test their web-spinning capabilities in zero gravity.
They achieve this by a telephoto-like series of lenses, a four-layer retina and the ability to swivel their eyes and integrate images from different stages in the scan.
Earlier spider fossils come from a few lagerstätten, places where conditions were exceptionally suited to preserving fairly soft tissues.
While guanine is originally an end-product of protein metabolism, its excretion can be blocked in spiders, leading to an increase in its storage.
Members of the family Theridiidae weave irregular, tangled, three-dimensional webs, popularly known as cobwebs.
, at least 45,700 spider species, and 114 families have been recorded by taxonomists.
Walking insects form most of the prey of most deinopids, but one population of ''Deinopis subrufa'' appears to live mainly on tipulid flies that they catch with the backwards strike.
It is now agreed that spiders (Araneae) are monophyletic (i.e., members of a group of organisms that form a clade, consisting of a last common ancestor and all of its descendants).
It shows no sign of segmentation, except that the primitive Mesothelae, whose living members are the Liphistiidae, have segmented plates on the upper surface.
There seems to be an evolutionary trend towards a reduction in the amount of sticky silk used, leading to its total absence in some species.
Spiders use a wide range of strategies to capture prey: trapping it in sticky webs, lassoing it with sticky bolas, mimicking the prey to avoid detection, or running it down.
In all except the most primitive group, the Mesothelae, spiders have the most centralized nervous systems of all arthropods, as all their ganglia are fused into one mass in the cephalothorax.
The mesothelid ''Paleothele montceauensis'', from the Late Carboniferous over , had five spinnerets.
Since many spiders are nocturnal, the extent of nectar consumption by spiders may have been underestimated.
It appears that scopulae get their grip from contact with extremely thin layers of water on surfaces.
Hence spiders have open circulatory systems.
Australian funnel web spiders are a promising source, as most of the world's insect pests have had no opportunity to develop any immunity to their venom, and funnel web spiders thrive in captivity and are easy to "milk".
However, there are no consistent differences between orb webs built for use during the day and those built for use at night.
There are several unusual variants of orb web, many of them convergently evolved, including: attachment of lines to the surface of water, possibly to trap insects in or on the surface; webs with twigs through their centers, possibly to hide the spiders from predators; "ladder-like" webs that appear most effective in catching moths.
However, there is no single explanation for the common use of horizontal orb webs.
In over 60% of cases, the female of the Australian redback spider kills and eats the male after it inserts its second palp into the female's genital opening; in fact, the males co-operate by trying to impale themselves on the females' fangs.
The Jurassic and Cretaceous periods provide a large number of fossil spiders, including representatives of many modern families.
Its place is largely taken by a hemocoel, a cavity that runs most of the length of the body and through which blood flows.
The earliest spiders had cribella, which produced the first silk capable of capturing insects, before spiders developed silk coated with sticky droplets.
The main groups of modern spiders, Mygalomorphae and Araneomorphae, first appear in the Triassic well before .
''Anelosimus eximius'' (in the family Theridiidae) can form colonies of up to 50,000 individuals.
Laboratory studies show that ''Portia'''s instinctive tactics are only starting points for a trial-and-error approach from which these spiders learn very quickly how to overcome new prey species.
Possible medical uses for spider venoms are being investigated, for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia, Alzheimer's disease, strokes, and erectile dysfunction.
The first appendages behind the mouth are called pedipalps, and serve different functions within different groups of chelicerates.
Tarantulas also have silk glands in their feet.
Spiders can generate pressures up to eight times their resting level to extend their legs, and jumping spiders can jump up to 50 times their own length by suddenly increasing the blood pressure in the third or fourth pair of legs.
Spiders generally use elaborate courtship rituals to prevent the large females from eating the small males before fertilization, except where the male is so much smaller that he is not worth eating.
It now appears that the spiral orb web may be one of the earliest forms, and spiders that produce tangled cobwebs are more abundant and diverse than orb-web spiders.
Spiders (Araneae) are distinguished from other arachnid groups by several characteristics, including spinnerets and, in males, pedipalps that are specially adapted for sperm transfer.
The Italian tarantella is a dance to rid the young woman of the lustful effects of a spider bite.
The largest and heaviest spiders occur among tarantulas, which can have body lengths up to  and leg spans up to .
No single design is best for all prey.
