Most live in quiet, clear waters, because sediment stirred up by waves or currents would block their pores, making it difficult for them to feed and breathe.
Some types of cells have a single nucleus and membrane each, but are connected to other single-nucleus cells and to the main syncytium by "bridges" made of cytoplasm.
Sponges have three asexual methods of reproduction: after fragmentation; by budding; and by producing gemmules.
In addition Archaeocyathids, whose fossils are common in rocks from , are now regarded as a type of sponge.
24-isopropylcholestane is a stable derivative of 24-isopropylcholesterol, which is said to be produced by demosponges but not by eumetazoans ("true animals", i.e.
A few species reproduce by budding.
One such class is the oxidized fatty acid derivatives called oxylipins.
Many sponges shed Sponge spicules, forming a dense carpet several meters deep that keeps away echinoderms which would otherwise prey on the sponges.
The behavior, known as ''sponging'', has only been observed in this bay, and is almost exclusively shown by females.
The syncytium's cytoplasm, the soupy fluid that fills the interiors of cells, is organized into "rivers" that transport nuclei, organelles ("organs" within cells) and other substances.
Many sponges have internal skeletons of spongin and/or spicules of calcium carbonate or silicon dioxide.
Analyses since 2001 have concluded that Eumetazoa (more complex than sponges) are more closely related to particular groups of sponges than to the rest of the sponges.
Gemmules from the same species but different individuals can join forces to form one sponge.
Earliest sponge symbionts are known from the early Silurian.
Many marine species host other photosynthesizing organisms, most commonly cyanobacteria but in some cases dinoflagellates.
Sponges may remove up to  per year from reefs, creating visible notches just below low-tide level.
The fertilized eggs form larvae which swim off in search of places to settle.
Sponges are worldwide in their distribution, living in a wide range of ocean habitats, from the polar regions to the tropics.
*Most Demospongiae have silicate spicules or spongin fibers or both within their soft tissues.
A sponge fragment can only regenerate if it contains both collencytes to produce mesohyl and archeocytes to produce all the other cell types.
Pinacocytes, plate-like cells, form a single-layered external skin over all other parts of the mesohyl that are not covered by choanocytes, and the pinacocytes also digest food particles that are too large to enter the ostia, while those at the base of the animal are responsible for anchoring it.
The study recommended further analyses using a wider range of sponges and other simple Metazoa such as Placozoa.
Myocytes are thought to be responsible for closing the osculum and for transmitting signals between different parts of the body.
The mesohyl is absent or minimal.
Spicules are produced by sclerocyte cells, and may be separate, connected by joints, or fused.
All the water is expelled through a single osculum at about 8.5&nbsp;cm per ''second'', fast enough to carry waste products some distance away.
However some types of habitat, vertical rock and cave walls and galleries in rock and coral boulders, have been investigated very little, even in shallow seas.
'Family trees' constructed using a combination of all available data – morphological, developmental and molecular – concluded that the sponges are in fact a monophyletic group, and with the cnidarians form the sister group to the bilaterians.
For example, sclerosponges ("hard sponges") have massive calcium carbonate exoskeletons over which the organic matter forms a thin layer with choanocyte chambers in pits in the mineral.
*In addition to or instead of sclerocytes, demosponges have spongocytes that secrete a form of collagen that polymerizes into spongin, a thick fibrous material that stiffens the mesohyl.
Spicules may be made of silica or calcium carbonate, and vary in shape from simple rods to three-dimensional "stars" with up to six rays.
This causes ''Aplysina'' to develop one or more rust-colored bands, sometimes with adjacent bands of necrotic tissue.
In 2008 a detailed analysis of chancelloriids' sclerites concluded that they were very similar to those of halkieriids, mobile bilaterian animals that looked like slugs in chain mail and whose fossils are found in rocks from the very Early Cambrian to the Mid Cambrian.
Sponges are similar to other animals in that they are multicellular, heterotrophic, lack cell walls and produce sperm cells.
The mesohyl functions as an endoskeleton in most sponges, and is the only skeleton in soft sponges that encrust hard surfaces such as rocks.
The bridges are controlled by "plugged junctions" that apparently permit some substances to pass while blocking others.
This increase in the number of choanocytes and hence in pumping capacity enables syconoid sponges to grow up to a few centimeters in diameter.
Most sponges are hermaphrodites (function as both sexes simultaneously), although sponges have no gonads (reproductive organs).
However, because ''Leuconia'' has more than 2&nbsp;million flagellated chambers whose combined diameter is much greater than that of the canals, water flow through chambers slows to 3.6&nbsp;cm per ''hour'', making it easy for choanocytes to capture food.
Caribbean sponges of the genus ''Aplysina'' suffer from Aplysina red band syndrome.
The single-celled choanoflagellates resemble the choanocyte cells of sponges which are used to drive their water flow systems and capture most of their food.
A study in 2001 based on comparisons of ribosome DNA concluded that the most fundamental division within sponges was between glass sponges and the rest, and that Eumetazoa are more closely related to calcareous sponges, those with calcium carbonate spicules, than to other types of sponge.
After swimming for a few days the larvae sink and crawl until they find a place to settle.
Although about 90% of modern sponges are demosponges, fossilized remains of this type are less common than those of other types because their skeletons are composed of relatively soft spongin that does not fossilize well.
A study in 2005 concluded that mothers teach the behavior to their daughters, and that all the sponge-users are closely related, suggesting that it is a fairly recent innovation.
Archeocytes remove mineral particles that threaten to block the ostia, transport them through the mesohyl and generally dump them into the outgoing water current, although some species incorporate them into their skeletons.
Fragments of sponges may be detached by currents or waves.
Shrimps of the genus ''Synalpheus'' form colonies in sponges, and each shrimp species inhabits a different sponge species, making ''Synalpheus'' one of the most diverse crustacean genera.
*Myocytes ("muscle cells") conduct signals and cause parts of the animal to contract.
Early Europeans used soft sponges for many purposes, including padding for helmets, portable drinking utensils and municipal water filters.
They concluded that this species could not produce 24-isopropylcholesterol but that investigation of a wider range of choanoflagellates would be necessary in order to prove that the fossil 24-isopropylcholestane could only have been produced by demosponges.
Number of cells in middle "jelly" layer
Sperm are produced by choanocytes or entire choanocyte chambers that sink into the mesohyl and form spermatic cysts while eggs are formed by transformation of archeocytes, or of choanocytes in some species.
Since choanoflagellates are thought to be animals' closest single-celled relatives, a team of scientists examined the biochemistry and genes of one choanoflagellate species.
This along with phylogenetic studies of ribosomal molecules have been used as morphological evidence to suggest sponges are the sister group to the rest of animals.
Most sponges work rather like chimneys: they take in water at the bottom and eject it from the osculum ("little mouth") at the top.
However one species has been found in Mediterranean caves at depths of , alongside the more usual filter feeding sponges.
Leuconid sponges grow to over  in diameter, and the fact that growth in any direction increases the number of choanocyte chambers enables them to take a wider range of forms, for example "encrusting" sponges whose shapes follow those of the surfaces to which they attach.
In a few marine species, gray cells play the leading role in rejection of foreign material.
The shapes of their bodies are adapted for maximal efficiency of water flow through the central cavity, where it deposits nutrients, and leaves through a hole called the osculum.
Collar bodies digest food and distribute it wrapped in vesicles that are transported by dynein "motor" molecules along bundles of microtubules that run throughout the syncytium.
Most belong to the family Cladorhizidae, but a few members of the Guitarridae and Esperiopsidae are also carnivores.
Others, especially in the family Clionaidae, use corrosive substances secreted by their archeocytes to tunnel into rocks, corals and the shells of dead mollusks.
An analysis in 1996 concluded that they were closely related to sponges on the grounds that the detailed structure of chancellorid sclerites ("armor plates") is similar to that of fibers of spongin, a collagen protein, in  modern keratose (horny) demosponges such as ''Darwinella''.
They are now classified as a paraphyletic phylum, from which the higher animals have evolved.
Sponges are known for regenerating from fragments that are broken off, although this only works if the fragments include the right types of cells.
All sponges have '''ostia''', channels leading to the interior through the mesohyl, and in most sponges these are controlled by tube-like porocytes that form closable inlet valves.
When a gemmule germinates, the archeocytes round the outside of the cluster transform into pinacocytes, a membrane over a pore in the shell bursts, the cluster of cells slowly emerges, and most of the remaining archeocytes transform into other cell types needed to make a functioning sponge.
In zoology a skeleton is any fairly rigid structure of an animal, irrespective of whether it has joints and irrespective of whether it is biomineralized.
Particles from 0.5&nbsp;μm to 50&nbsp;μm are trapped in the ostia, which taper from the outer to inner ends.
The sclerocytes that build spicules have multiple nuclei, and in glass sponge larvae they are connected to other tissues by cytoplasm bridges; such connections between sclerocytes have not so far been found in adults, but this may simply reflect the difficulty of investigating such small-scale features.
If this is correct, it would create a dilemma, as it is extremely unlikely that totally unrelated organisms could have developed such similar sclerites independently, but the huge difference in the structures of their bodies makes it hard to see how they could be closely related.
See also sponge diving.
However another analysis in 2002 concluded that chancelloriids are not sponges and may be intermediate between sponges and more complex animals, among other reasons because their skins were thicker and more tightly connected than those of sponges.
The larvae hatch and drop into the water where they seek out sponges to feed on.
The larvae of some species cling to the surface of the sponge while others take refuge in the sponge's internal cavities.
They also have important roles in feeding and in clearing debris that block the ostia.
Sponges have medicinal potential due to the presence in  sponges themselves or their microbial symbionts of chemicals that may be used to control viruses, bacteria, tumors and fungi.
This raises questions about whether flask cells represent the predecessors of true neurons or are evidence that sponges' ancestors had true neurons but lost them as they adapted to a sessile lifestyle.
Sponges may also contract in order to reduce the area that is vulnerable to attack by predators.
When conditions deteriorate, for example as temperatures drop, many freshwater species and a few marine ones produce gemmules, "survival pods" of unspecialized cells that remain dormant until conditions improve and then either form completely new sponges or recolonize the skeletons of their parents.
Like cnidarians (jellyfish, etc.)
Sponges that host photosynthesizing organisms are most common in waters with relatively poor supplies of food particles, and often have leafy shapes that maximize the amount of sunlight they collect.
Sponges do not have nervous, digestive or circulatory systems.
There are four types of larvae, but all are balls of cells with an outer layer of cells whose flagellae or cilia enable the larvae to move.
Most of the cells transform into archeocytes and then into the types appropriate for their locations in a miniature adult sponge.
Some sponges overcome this limitation by adopting the "syconoid" structure, in which the body wall is pleated.
However, another comparison in 2008 of 150 genes in each of 21 genera, ranging from fungi to humans but including only two species of sponge, suggested that comb jellies (ctenophora) are the most basal lineage of the Metazoa included in the sample.
Symbiotic cyanobacteria may form a third of  the total mass of living tissue in some sponges, and some sponges gain 48% to 80% of their energy supply from these micro-organisms.
If they contact another sponge of the same species, the water flow carries them to choanocytes that engulf them but, instead of digesting them, metamorphose to an ameboid form and carry the sperm through the mesohyl to eggs, which in most cases engulf the carrier and its cargo.
The simplest body structure in sponges is a tube or vase shape known as "asconoid", but this severely limits the size of the animal.
Although molecular clocks and biomarkers suggest sponges existed well before the Cambrian explosion of life, silica spicules like those of demosponges are absent from the fossil record until the Cambrian, although one unsubstantiated report exists of spicules in rocks dated around , although this appears unlikely based on the above reference.
Sponges constitute the phylum Porifera, and have been defined as sessile metazoans (multicelled immobile animals) that have water intake and outlet openings connected by chambers lined with choanocytes, cells with whip-like flagella.
A recently discovered carnivorous sponge that lives near hydrothermal vents hosts methane-eating bacteria, and digests some of them.
The inner pockets of the pleats are lined with choanocytes, which connect to the outer pockets of the pleats by ostia.
Typical materials used are cellulose foam, polyurethane foam, and less frequently, silicone foam.
Freshwater sponges often host green algae as endosymbionts within archaeocytes and other cells, and benefit from nutrients produced by the algae.
Demosponges use spongin, and in many species, silica spicules and in some species, calcium carbonate exoskeletons.
Spongocytes make gemmules by wrapping shells of spongin, often reinforced with spicules, round clusters of archeocytes that are full of nutrients.
All known living sponges can remold their bodies, as most types of their cells can move within their bodies and a few can change from one type to another.
However a few also have massive external skeletons made of aragonite, another form of calcium carbonate.
A very few species reproduce by budding.
However, in the 1980s it was found that these were all members of either the Calcarea or the Demospongiae.
Most species use sexual reproduction, releasing sperm cells into the water to fertilize ova that in some species are released and in others are retained by the "mother".
The wave-like motion of the whip-like flagella drives water through the sponge's body.
A few species release fertilized eggs into the water, but most retain the eggs until they hatch.
Early Cambrian sponges from Mexico belonging to the genus ''Kiwetinokia'' show evidence of fusion of several smaller spicules to form a single large spicule.
Freshwater gemmules often do not revive until the temperature drops, stays cold for a few months and then reaches a near-"normal" level.
The analyses described above concluded that sponges are closest to the ancestors of all Metazoa, of all multi-celled animals including both sponges and more complex groups.
So far only 137 species have been discovered.
The inner surface is covered with choanocytes, cells with cylindrical or conical collars surrounding one flagellum per choanocyte.
While most of the approximately 5,000–10,000&nbsp;known species feed on bacteria and other food particles in the water, some host photosynthesizing micro-organisms as endosymbionts and these alliances often produce more food and oxygen than they consume.
Cnidarians and ctenophores have simple nervous systems, and their cell layers are bound by internal connections and by being mounted on a basement membrane (thin fibrous mat, also known as "basal lamina").
Linnaeus, who classified most kinds of sessile animals as belonging to the order Zoophyta in the class Vermes, mistakenly identified the genus ''Spongia'' as plants in the order Algae.
These particles are consumed by pinacocytes or by archaeocytes which partially extrude themselves through the walls of the ostia.
It is often said that sponges produce chemical defenses against such predators.
Well-preserved fossil sponges from about  in the Ediacaran period have been found in the Doushantuo Formation.
Other anatomical and biochemical evidence links the Eumetazoa with Homoscleromorpha, a sub-group of demosponges.
A few species of sponge that live in food-poor environments have become carnivores that prey mainly  on small crustaceans.
However they reject grafts from other species but accept them from other members of their own species.
Cells in outer layers can move inwards and change functions
Such conclusions imply that sponges are not monophyletic, because the last common ancestor of all sponges would also be a direct ancestor of the Eumetazoa, which are not sponges.
During spawning, sperm burst out of their cysts and are expelled via the osculum.
The mesohyl functions as an endoskeleton in most sponges, and is the only skeleton in soft sponges that encrust hard surfaces such as rocks.
Although a previous publication reported traces of the chemical 24-isopropylcholestane in ancient rocks dating to , recent research using a much more accurately dated rock series has revealed that these biomarkers only appear before the end of the Marinoan glaciation approximately , and that "Biomarker analysis has yet to reveal any convincing evidence for ancient sponges pre-dating the first globally extensive Neoproterozoic glacial episode (the Sturtian, ~ in Oman)".
In both Homoscleromorpha and Eumetazoa layers of cells are bound together by attachment to a carpet-like basal membrane composed mainly of "type IV" collagen, a form of collagen not found in other sponges – although the spongin fibers that reinforce the mesohyl of all demosponges is similar to "type IV" collagen.
Although adult sponges are fundamentally sessile animals, some marine and freshwater species can move across the sea bed at speeds of  per day, as a result of amoeba-like movements of pinacocytes and other cells.
*Calcarea have skeletons made of calcite, a form of calcium carbonate, which may form separate spicules or large masses.
Some gemmules are retained within the parent sponge, and in spring it can be difficult to tell whether an old sponge has revived or been "recolonized" by its own gemmules.
If the intrusion persists, the grey cells concentrate in the area and release toxins that kill all cells in the area.
Since the 1990s archaeocyathids have been regarded as a distinctive group of sponges.
The sperm of Homoscleromorpha share with those of Eumetazoa features that those of other sponges lack.
The rust-colored bands are caused by a cyanobacterium, but it is unknown whether this organism actually causes the disease.
The networks of water passages in glass sponges are similar to the leuconid structure.
The insides of these chambers are lined with "collar bodies", each consisting of a collar and flagellum but without a nucleus of its own.
However, a few carnivorous sponges have lost these water flow systems and the choanocytes.
They use their elongated mouthparts to pierce the sponge and suck the fluids within.
When invaded, they produce a chemical that stops movement of other cells in the affected area, thus preventing the intruder from using the sponge's internal transport systems.
One example isolated from the Okinawan ''plakortis'' sponges, plakoridine A, has shown potential as a cytotoxin to murine lymphoma cells.
In all three types of structure the cross-section area of the choanocyte-lined regions is much greater than that of the intake and outlet channels.
The larvae then leave their parents' bodies.
Glass sponges are the most common in polar waters and in the depths of temperate and tropical seas, as their very porous construction enables them to extract food from these resource-poor waters with the minimum of effort.
Asconoid sponges seldom exceed  in diameter.
The fully grown larvae leave the water and spin a cocoon in which to pupate.
The motion of the flagella sucks water through passages in the "cobweb" and expels it via the open ends of the bell-shaped chambers.
They filter food particles out of the water flowing through them.
Yes: inter-cell connections; basement membranes
The few species of demosponge that have entirely soft fibrous skeletons with no hard elements have been used by humans over thousands of years for several purposes, including as padding and as cleaning tools.
All sponges are sessile aquatic animals.
Soft or firm sediment
Archaeocyathids, which some classify as a type of coralline sponge, are common in the Cambrian period from about , but apparently died out by the end of the Cambrian .
This tissue is a syncytium that in some ways behaves like many cells that share a single external membrane, and in others like a single cell with multiple nuclei.
Turtles and some fish feed mainly on sponges.
These exoskeletons are secreted by the pinacocytes that form the animals' skins.
However glass sponges rapidly transmit electrical impulses through all parts of the syncytium, and use this to halt the motion of their flagella if the incoming water contains toxins or excessive sediment.
In cases where two sponges are fused, for example if there is a large but still unseparated bud, these contraction waves slowly become coordinated in both of the "Siamese twins".
Marine, brackish; and about 150 freshwater species
Sponges' cells absorb oxygen by diffusion from water into cells as water flows through body, into which carbon dioxide and other soluble waste products such as ammonia also diffuse.
The "immune" system can stay in this activated state for up to three weeks.
*Lophocytes are amoeba-like cells that move slowly through the mesohyl and secrete collagen fibres.
No, except that Homoscleromorpha have basement membranes.
In 2008 a University of Stuttgart team reported that spicules made of silica conduct light into the mesohyl, where the photosynthesizing endosymbionts live.
Sponge flies, also known as spongilla-flies (Neuroptera, Sisyridae), are specialist predators of freshwater sponges.
The cave-dwelling predators capture crustaceans under  long by entangling them with fine threads, digest them by enveloping them with further threads over the course of  a few days, and then return to their normal shape; there is no evidence that they use venom.
This makes the flow slower near the choanocytes and thus makes it easier for them to trap food particles.
The main components of their bodies are syncytia in which large numbers of cell share a single external membrane.
*Sclerocytes secrete the mineralized spicules ("little spines") that form the skeletons of many sponges and in some species provide some defense against predators.
*Rhabdiferous cells secrete polysaccharides that also form part of the mesohyl.
Some studies have shown that sponges do not form a monophyletic group, in other words do not include ''all and only'' the descendants of a common ancestor.
Sponges have unspecialized cells that can transform into other types and that often migrate between the main cell layers and the mesohyl in the process.
Each egg generally acquires a yolk by consuming "nurse cells".
Glass sponge embryos start by dividing into separate cells, but once 32&nbsp;cells have formed they rapidly transform into larvae that externally are ovoid with a band of cilia round the middle that they use for movement, but internally have the typical glass sponge structure of spicules with a cobweb-like main syncitium draped around and between them and choanosyncytia with multiple collar bodies in  the center.
*Archaeocytes (or amoebocytes) are amoeba-like cells that are totipotent, in other words each is capable of transformation into any other type of cell.
Lacking any protective shell or means of escape, sponges have evolved to synthesize a variety of unusual compounds.
If it is simply scaled up, the ratio of its volume to surface area increases, because surface increases as the square of length or width while volume increases proportionally to the cube.
Other types of cell live and move within the mesohyl:
However most species have the ability to perform movements that are coordinated all over their bodies, mainly contractions of the pinacocytes, squeezing the water channels and thus expelling excess sediment and other substances that may cause blockages.
The "leuconoid" pattern boosts pumping capacity further by filling the interior almost completely with mesohyl that contains a network of chambers lined with choanocytes and connected to each other and to the water intakes and outlet by tubes.
They also produce toxins that prevent other sessile organisms such as bryozoans or sea squirts from growing on or near them, making sponges very effective competitors for living space.
Sponges can control the water flow by various combinations of wholly or partially closing the osculum and ostia (the intake pores) and varying the beat of the flagella, and may shut it down if there is a lot of sand or silt in the water.
At least one species of sponge has internal fibers that function as tracks for use by nutrient-carrying archaeocytes, and these tracks also move inert objects.
Juveniles drift or swim freely, while adults are stationary.
A sponge's body is hollow and is held in shape by the mesohyl, a jelly-like substance made mainly of collagen and reinforced by a dense network of fibers also made of collagen.
Recent phylogenetic analyses suggest that comb jellies rather than sponges are the sister group to the rest of animals.
Archaeocytes transport food packaged in vesicles from cells that directly digest food to those that do not.
A few species that live in waters where the supply of food particles is very poor prey on crustaceans and other small animals.
Adult sponges lack neurons or any other kind of nervous tissue.
All the cells have a single nucleus and membrane.
Although the layers of pinacocytes and choanocytes resemble the epithelia of more complex animals, they are not bound tightly by cell-to-cell connections or a basal lamina (thin fibrous sheet underneath).
More commonly, the mesohyl is stiffened by mineral spicules, by spongin fibers or both.
In the 1970s, sponges with massive calcium carbonate skeletons were assigned to a separate class, Sclerospongiae, otherwise known as "coralline sponges".
A report in 1997 described use of sponges as a tool by bottlenose dolphins in Shark Bay in Western Australia.
Sponges in temperate regions live for at most a few years, but some tropical species and perhaps some deep-ocean ones may live for 200&nbsp;years or more.
and ctenophores (comb jellies), and unlike all other known metazoans, sponges' bodies consist of a non-living jelly-like mass sandwiched between two main layers of cells.
Predation by fish may even help to spread sponges by detaching fragments.
Glass sponges produce no toxic chemicals, and live in very deep water where predators are rare.
Sponges with photosynthesizing endosymbionts produce up to three times more oxygen than they consume, as well as more organic matter than they consume.
For a long time thereafter sponges were assigned to a separate subkingdom, Parazoa ("beside the animals"), separate from the Eumetazoa which formed the rest of the kingdom Animalia.
Cells in each layer bound together
Specifically, Synalpheus regalis utilizes the sponge not only as a food source, but also as a defense against other shrimp and predators.
