The spotted hyena's scientific name ''Crocuta'', was once widely thought to be derived from the Latin loanword ''crocutus'', which translates as "saffron-coloured one", in reference to the animal's fur colour.
Cases of dogs scavenging from spotted hyenas are rare.
The now extinct Eurasian populations were distinguished from the modern African populations by their shorter distal extremities and longer humerus and femur.
Spotted hyenas, under these circumstances, would have been outcompeted by wolves and humans which were as much at home in forests as in open lands, and in highlands as in lowlands.
The structure of the den, consisting of small underground channels, is likely an effective anti-predator device which protects cubs from predation during the absence of the mother.
The species may have originated in Asia, and once ranged throughout Europe for at least one million years until the end of the Late Pleistocene.
Zambia's hyenas are increasing in the Luangwa Valley, but declining elsewhere.
During the canine distemper outbreak of 1993–94, molecular studies indicated that the viruses isolated from hyenas and lions were more closely related to each other than to the closest canine distemper virus in dogs.
There is also a case of two spotted hyenas killing and eating a young leopard in Timbavati Game Reserve, after a young hyena was killed by the leopard.
Dens have large bare patches around their entrances, where hyenas move or lie down on.
The spotted hyena is a non-seasonal breeder, though a birth peak does occur during the wet season.
Unique among carnivorous mammals, spotted hyenas are also born with their eyes open and with 6–7&nbsp;mm long canine teeth and 4&nbsp;mm long incisors.
The average litter consists of two cubs, with three occasionally being reported.
Hyenas habituated to scavenging on human corpses may develop bold behaviours towards living people; hyena attacks on people in southern Sudan increased during the Second Sudanese Civil War, when human corpses were readily available to them.
Bushbuck, suni and buffalo are the dominant prey items in the Aberdare Mountains, while Grant's gazelle, gerenuk, sheep, goats and cattle are likely preyed upon in northern Kenya.
The genitalia of the female closely resembles that of the male; the clitoris is shaped and positioned like a penis, and is capable of erection.
Lions are quick to follow the calls of hyenas feeding, a fact demonstrated by field experiments, during which lions repeatedly approached whenever the tape-recorded calls of hyenas feeding were played.
In Chobe, the spotted hyena's primary prey consists of migratory zebra and resident impala.
Cape: 80–100Transvaal: 50–100Kruger: 1,300–3,900Natal: 250-1,000
From Classical antiquity until the Renaissance, the spotted and striped hyena were either assumed to be the same species, or distinguished purely on geographical, rather than physical grounds.
Both sexes have a pair of anal glands which open into the rectum just inside the anal opening.
In 1939, biologist L. Harrison Matthews demonstrated through comparisons between a large selection of spotted hyena skulls from Tanzania that all the variation seen in the then recognised subspecies could also be found in a single population, with the only set of characters standing out being pelage (which is subject to a high degree of individual variation) and size (which is subject to Bergmann's Rule).
Studies on the phylogeographic distribution of mtDNA haplotypes indicates three migration events from Africa to Eurasia, though neither the topology of the phylogenetic tree or the fossil record exclude the possibility of an Asian origin.
Males will show submissive behaviour when approaching females in heat, even if the male outweighs his partner.
During the research leading to the composition of his monograph ''The Spotted Hyena: A Study of Predation and Social Behavior,'' Hans Kruuk kept a tame hyena he named Solomon.
Five deaths were recorded in 1956, five in 1957 and six in 1958.
Traditional Western beliefs about the spotted hyena can be traced back to Aristotle's ''Historia Animalium'', which described the species as a necrophagous, cowardly and potentially dangerous animal.
In modern times, the species faces spatial competition from more popular animals, especially large canids.
In Kenya's Masai Mara, 80% of the spotted hyena's prey consists of topi and Thomson's gazelle, save for during the four-month period when zebra and wildebeest herds migrate to the area.
A similar myth occurs in Mansôa, Guinea-Bissau.
Kruuk found Solomon's company so congenial, he would have kept him, but Solomon had an insatiable taste for "cheese in the bar of the tourist lounge and bacon off the Chief Park Warden's breakfast table", and no door could hold him back, so Solomon was obliged to live out his days in the Edinburgh Zoo.
Lactating female spotted hyenas are said to be milked by their owners every night to make hyena butter, and are further used as mounts.
This pattern continued until 1961 when eight people were killed.
During the 20th century, Western and African stereotypes of the spotted hyena converged; in both Ernest Hemingway's ''Green Hills of Africa'' and Disney's ''The Lion King'', the traits of gluttony and comical stupidity, common in African depictions of hyenas, are added to the Western perception of hyenas being cowardly and ugly.
When targeting livestock, the spotted hyena primarily preys upon cattle, sheep and goats, though hyenas in the southern parts of Ethiopia's Tigray region preferentially target donkeys.
They began forming increasingly larger territories, necessitated by the fact that their prey was often migratory, and long chases in a small territory would have caused them to encroach into another clan's land.
Spotted hyenas are adept at eating their prey in water: they have been observed to dive under floating carcasses to take bites, then resurface to swallow.
It has a broad, line-like mouth that evokes a smile.
Also, many captive individuals have not been closely examined to confirm their sexes, thus resulting in non-breeding pairs often turning out to be same-sexed individuals.
In Uganda, it is thought that the species primarily preys on birds and reptiles, while in Zambia it is primarily a scavenger.
If not raised with adult members of their kind, captive spotted hyenas will exhibit scent marking behaviours much later in life than wild specimens.
Dr. Hans Kruuk compiled the following table on spotted hyena calls in 1972;
They may be hunted without licence outside of national parks for five Ethiopian Birr (US$2.50).
Once the female retracts her clitoris, the male enters the female by sliding beneath her, an operation facilitated by the penis's upward angle.
Same as above, but softer and without the staccato quality
It has been theorised that female dominance in spotted hyena clans could be an adaptation in order to successfully compete with males on kills, and thus ensure that enough milk is produced for their cubs.
Hyenas do not take to eating wolf flesh readily; four hyenas were reported to take half an hour in eating a golden wolf.
"Ooo" sound with a usually low pitch and lasts several seconds
In functional terms, the spotted hyena makes the most efficient use of animal matter of all African carnivores.
The pitch of the laugh indicates the hyena's age, while variations in the frequency of notes used when hyenas make noises convey information about the animal's social rank.
Members of both sexes may copulate with several mates over the course of several years.
The clan is a fission-fusion society, in which clan-members do not often remain together, but may forage alone or in small groups.
'''Soft grunt-laugh'''
When hunting medium to large sized prey, spotted hyenas tend to select certain categories of animal; young animals are frequently targeted, as are old ones, though the latter category is not so significant when hunting zebras, due to their aggressive anti-predator behaviours.
It is the only mammalian species to lack an external vaginal opening.
In the same area, hyena faeces are believed to enable a child to walk at an early age, thus it is not uncommon in that area to see children with hyena dung wrapped in their clothes.
Populations are concentrated in protected areas and surrounding land.
Brown hyenas encounter spotted hyenas in the Kalahari, where the brown species outnumbers the spotted.
In the Gelede cult of the Yoruba people of Benin and Southwest Nigeria, a spotted hyena mask is used at dawn to signal the end of the ''èfè'' ceremony.
The spotted hyena has a long history of interaction with humanity; depictions of the species exist from the Upper Paleolithic period, with carvings and paintings from the Lascaux and Chauvet Caves.
Although no longer regarded as pests, the population size and dynamics of spotted hyenas in Sierra Leone are unknown.
A feature of many frontier farms was the ''wolwehok'' (hyena trap), which was roughly constructed from stone or wood and baited with meat.
A loud, high pitched call lasting several seconds
Territory size is highly variable, ranging from less than 40&nbsp;km2 in the Ngorongoro Crater to over 1,000&nbsp;km2 in the Kalahari.
It has been estimated that adult members of the now extinct Eurasian populations weighed .
The mouth is slightly open with the head horizontal.
Cubs begin to lose the black coat and develop the spotted, lighter coloured pelage of the adults at 2–3 months.
The spotted hyena is very efficient at eating its prey; not only is it able to splinter and eat the largest ungulate bones, it is also able to digest them completely.
The Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa is estimated to have up to a thousand resident hyenas which survive by scavenging rubbish tips and preying on feral dogs and cats.
A loud, rattling, low pitched sound lasting several seconds, with an "aa" and "oh" quality
A soft, very low pitched growling sound which lasts several seconds
Although present in Rwanda, it is unlikely that many individuals have survived the destruction of conservation areas during the Rwandan Civil War.
Spotted hyena society is matriarchal; females are larger than males, and dominate them.
Unlike the striped hyena, for which a number of subspecies were proposed in light of its extensive modern range, the spotted hyena is a genuinely variable species, both temporally and spatially.
The paw-pads are broad and very flat, with the whole undersurface of the foot around them being naked.
According to Mbugwe folklore, every witch possesses one or more hyenas, which are referred to as "night cattle" and are branded with an invisible mark.
Because of their size, adult hyenas are incapable of using the full extent of their burrows, as most tunnels are dug by cubs or smaller animals.
Natural historians of the 18th and 19th centuries rejected stories of hermaphroditism in hyenas, and recognised the differences between the spotted and striped hyena.
'''Loud grunt-laugh'''
However, rank in spotted hyena cubs is greatly dependent on the presence of the mother; low-ranking adults may act aggressively toward higher-ranking cubs when the mother is absent.
However, this distance is reduced during the night, when hyenas are known to follow people closely.
The Mbugwe consider killing hyenas to be dangerous, as the bond between the hyena and its owner is very strong, and will likely result in the witch seeking retribution.
A single spotted hyena can eat at least 14.5&nbsp;kg of meat per meal.
It is present in all habitats save for the most extreme desert conditions, tropical rainforests and the top of alpine mountains.
Confusion still persisted over the exact taxonomic nature of the hyena family in general, with most European travelers in Ethiopia referring to hyenas as "wolves".
In Dorze tradition, the highest Demuṣa-priests have the ability to control hyenas, and will send them to punish defaulting debtors.
Unusually among hyaenids, and mammals in general, the female spotted hyena is considerably larger than the male.
Its range once encompassed almost all of Africa and Eurasia, and displayed a large degree of morphological geographic variation, which led to an equally extensive set of specific and subspecific epithets.
There is no active bounty on them, even though they are considered vermin.
Unlike other large African carnivores, spotted hyenas do not preferentially prey on any species, and only African buffalo and giraffe are significantly avoided.
Combined with large jaw muscles and a special vaulting to protect the skull against large forces, these characteristics give the spotted hyena a powerful bite which can exert a pressure of 80&nbsp;kgf/cm2 (1140 lbf/in²), which is 40% more force than a leopard can generate.
Clans mark their territories by either pasting or pawing in special latrines located on clan range boundaries.
Mostly used by cubs when following a female before suckling, or when thwarted from getting food
The author of the ''Physiologus'', who infused pagan tales with the spirit of Christian moral and mystical teaching, reactivated the myth that the hyena is a hermaphrodite.
Spotted hyenas will sometimes follow jackals and wolves during the gazelle fawning season, as jackals and wolves are effective at tracking and catching young animals.
Studies strongly suggest convergent evolution in spotted hyena and primate intelligence.
Erection is usually a sign of submission, rather than dominance, and is more common in males than in females.
Spotted hyenas may consume leather articles such as boots and belts around campsites.
The earliest migration of spotted hyenas from Africa to Eurasia began less than 3.5 million years ago, most probably from the area where the first spotted hyena fossils were discovered, reaching East Asia and most likely also Pakistan.
Another hunting method was to trap them in their dens and dazzle them with torchlight, before stabbing them in the heart with a long knife.
Spotted hyenas may contract brucellosis, rinderpest and anaplasmosis.
Female hyenas are more flexible than males in their social bonding preferences.
Hyenas will however ignore clan boundaries in times of food shortage.
The third spotted hyena migration took place 0.36 million years ago, starting from the northern African population and reaching both Europe and Asia.
When approaching wild dogs at a kill, solitary hyenas will approach cautiously and attempt to take off with a piece of meat unnoticed, though they may be mobbed by the dogs in the attempt.
They are occasionally killed in communal and commercial farming areas.
Springbok and kudu are the main prey in Namibia's Etosha National Park, and springbok in the Namib.
Burkina Faso's hyenas are depleted in number because of hunting, poaching and declining prey populations.
In contrast, chimps and other primates often require extensive training, and cooperation between individuals is not always as easy for them.
Because of the specimen's steeped profile, it is thought that the painting was originally meant to represent a cave bear, but was modified as a hyena.
Black-backed and side-striped jackals, and African golden wolves will feed alongside hyenas, though they will be chased if they approach too closely.
Both individuals raise their hind legs and lick each other's anogenital area.
The mouth is closed, and the posture aggressive.
Natal's spotted hyenas have been increasing in number within all game preserves and nature reserves, where they are protected.
Each foot has four digits, which are webbed and armed with short, stout and blunt claws.
It is scarce or absent in tropical rainforests and coastal areas.
They begin to exhibit hunting behaviours at the age of eight months, and will begin fully participating in group hunts after their first year.
Although spotted hyenas act aggressively toward each other when feeding, they compete with each other mostly through speed of eating, rather than by fighting as lions do.
It is typical for females to remain with their natal clan, thus large clans usually contain several matrilines, whereas males typically disperse from their natal clan at the age of 2½ years.
When a high tendency to flee an attacker is apparent, the tail is curled below the belly.
Spotted hyena societies are more complex than those of other carnivorous mammals, and are remarkably similar to those of cercopithecine primates in respect to group size, structure, competition and cooperation.
The clan's social life revolves around a communal den.
Victims of spotted hyenas tend to be women, children and sick or infirm men, and there are numerous cases of biologists in Africa being forced up trees in order to escape them.
In Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire and Senegal, the animals' whole body is harvested for bushmeat and medicine.
They are vulnerable to ''Trypanosoma congolense'', which is contracted by consuming already infected herbivores, rather than through direct infection from tsetse flies.
Spotted hyenas have a complex set of postures in communication.
Sir John Barrow described how spotted hyenas in Sneeuberge were trained to hunt game, writing that they were "as faithful and diligent as any of the common domestic dogs".
The higher ranking adult spotted hyenas tend to have higher telomere length, thus are healthier, naturally live longer, and reproduce more.
Several authors during the Scramble for Africa attested that, despite its physical strength, the spotted hyena poses no danger to hunters when captured or cornered.
Analyses of several hyena saliva samples showed that the species is unlikely to be a rabies vector, thus indicating that the species catches the disease from other animals rather than from intraspecifics.
An April 2004 BBC article described how a shepherd living in the small town of Qabri Bayah about 50 kilometres from Jigjiga, Ethiopia managed to use a male spotted hyena as a livestock guardian dog, suppressing its urge to leave and find a mate by feeding it special herbs.
He further states that "The sons of Israel are like this animal since in the beginning they served the living God but later, given over to pleasure and lust, they adored idols."
Spotted hyenas do not require much water, and typically only spend 30 seconds drinking.
The Beng people believe that upon finding a freshly killed hyena with its anus inverted, one must plug it back in, for fear of being struck down with perpetual laughter.
Both Björn Kurtén and Camille Arambourg promoted an Asiatic origin for the species; Kurtén focussed his arguments on the Plio-Pleistocene taxon ''Crocuta sivalensis'' from the Siwaliks, a view defended by Arambourg, who nonetheless allowed the possibility of an Indo-Ethiopian origin.
Experiments on captive spotted hyenas revealed that specimens with no prior experience with lions act indifferently to the sight of them, but will react fearfully to the scent.
Fur colour varies greatly and changes with age.
It was often the case that native skinners refused to even touch hyena carcasses, though this was not usually a problem, as hyena skins were not considered attractive.
Its social organisation is unlike that of any other carnivore, bearing closer resemblance to that of cercopithecine primates (baboons and macaques) with respect to group-size, hierarchical structure, and frequency of social interaction among both kin and unrelated group-mates.
Kujamaat hunters traditionally treat the spotted hyenas they kill with the same respect due to deceased tribal elders, in order to avoid retribution from hyena spirits acting on behalf of the dead animal.
An image on a cave in Ariège shows an incompletely outlined and deeply engraved figure, representing a part of an elongated neck, smoothly passing into part of the animal’s forelimb on the proximal side.
This neonatal siblicide kills an estimated 25% of all hyenas in their first month.
Lower riskThreatened
In 1551, Swiss naturalist Conrad Gesner rejected the belief of the hyena's hermaphroditism, and theorised that it originated from confusion over an androgynous fish bearing the same name.
Unlike the fur of the striped and brown hyena, that of the spotted hyena consists of spots rather than stripes and is much shorter, lacking the well defined spinal mane of the former two species.
The average lifespan in zoos is 12 years, with a maximum of 25 years.
Usually done standing, with the mouth opened slightly and the head bent down
It further embodies physical power, excessivity, ugliness, stupidity, as well as sacredness.
These bestiaries almost invariably depict hyenas feeding on human corpses.
As the spotted hyena usually finishes the meals of other carnivores, the animal is associated with the conclusion of all things.
Spotted hyena populations began to shrink roughly 20,000 years ago, completely disappearing from Western Europe between 14–11,000 years ago, and earlier in some areas.
Spotted hyenas feature prominently in the rituals of certain African cultures.
Although generally tolerated, spotted hyenas in Benin are declining due to persecution and prey depletion.
References to the spotted hyena's vocalisations are referenced in numerous contemporary examples of English literature, including Shakespeare's ''As You Like It'' and George Chapman's ''Eastward Ho''.
The skull of the spotted hyena differs from that of the striped hyena by its much greater size and narrower sagittal crest.
A less distinct spot pattern is present on the legs and belly but not on the throat and chest.
An intruder can be accepted into another clan after a long period of time if it persists in wandering into the clan's territory, dens or kills.
Hyenas travelling in another clan's home range typically exhibit bodily postures associated with fear, particularly when meeting other hyenas.
The spotted hyena tracks live prey by sight, hearing and smell.
Man-eating spotted hyenas tend to be very large specimens; a pair of man-eating hyenas, responsible for killing 27 people in Mlanje, Malawi, in 1962, were weighed at  after being shot.
Spotted hyenas are not protected and are considered problem animals in the 8th Schedule of the Parks and Wildlife.
During the 1960s, Flying Doctors received over two dozen cases of hyena attacks on humans in Kenya.
Spotted hyenas seem to plan on hunting specific species in advance; hyenas have been observed to indulge in activities such as scent marking before setting off to hunt zebras, a behaviour which does not occur when they target other prey species.
Namibian hyena populations are classed as lower risk in protected areas and threatened elsewhere.
''Crocuta'' was finally recognised as a separate genus from ''Hyaena'' in 1828.
The species is known to carry at least three cestode species of the genus ''Taenia'', none of which are harmful to humans.
Although considered useful scavengers and are afforded legal protection in national parks, spotted hyenas are not tolerated elsewhere.
Although spotted hyenas do prey on humans in modern times, such incidences are rare.
Like the fast whoop, but with less tendency to attack
Once the muscles have been eaten, the carcass is disassembled and the hyenas carry off pieces to eat in peace.
The spotted hyena (cave hyena subspecies) is depicted in a few examples of Upper Palaeolithic rock art in France.
Cubs will nurse from their mother for 12–16 months, though they can process solid food as early as three months.
Running in a fleeing posture with the mouth slightly open
The two species may act aggressively toward one another even when there is no food at stake.
When fleeing in surprise from a lion, man or when attacking large prey
The mouth is slightly open with the head and tail hanging low
Adults measure  in body length, and have a shoulder height of .
Similar to the whoop, but higher pitched and with shorter intervals
Historically, the spotted hyena was widespread throughout Sub-Saharan Africa.
There have also been attacks on humans who are homeless.
The spotted hyena is the largest extant member of the Hyaenidae.
A series of loud, very high pitched "hee-hee-hee" sounds usually lasting less than 5 seconds.
In Malawi and Tanzania, the genitalia, nose tips and tails are used for traditional medicine.
The loud "who-oop" call, along with the maniacal laughter, are among the most recognisable sounds of Africa.
However, attacks on humans by spotted hyenas are likely to be underreported.
In East Africa, Tabwa mythology portrays the spotted hyena as a solar animal that first brought the sun to warm the cold earth.
The description given by Pennant was precise enough to be included by Johann Erxleben in his ''Systema regni animalis'' by simply translating Pennant's text into Latin.
There is fossil evidence of humans in Middle Pleistocene Europe butchering and presumably consuming spotted hyenas.
The relative scarcity of hyena depictions in Paleolithic rock art has been theorised to be due to the animal's lower rank in the animal worship hierarchy; the spotted hyena's appearance was likely unappealing to Ice Age hunters, and it was not sought after as prey.
Cubs are born with soft, brownish black hair, and weigh 1.5&nbsp;kg on average.
The spots, which are of variable distinction, may be reddish, deep brown or almost blackish.
During these greeting ceremonies, the penis or pseudo-penis often becomes erect, in both males and females.
The mating process is complicated, as the male's penis enters and exits the female's reproductive tract through her pseudo-penis rather than directly through the vagina, which is blocked by the false scrotum and testes.
The author compared the species to "double-minded men" who are neither "man nor woman, that is, neither faithful nor unfaithful".
Louder than the soft grunt-laugh, though still not very loud, and often lasts more than 5 minutes
Surplus killing has been recorded in South Africa's eastern Cape Province.
Cape buffalo are rarely attacked due to differences in habitat preference, though adult bulls have been recorded to be taken on occasion.
Spotted hyena milk has the highest protein content of any terrestrial carnivore, and its fat content is second only to that of the polar bear and sea otter.
Wildebeest are the most commonly taken medium-sized ungulate prey item in both Ngorongoro and the Serengeti, with zebra and Thomson's gazelles coming close behind.
In both males and females, the base of the glans is covered with penile spines.
