During the 1980s, a house was occupied by squatters in virtually every town, with the booming Basque punk rock thriving on the squatting movement, as it provided the badly needed premises for concerts, exhibitions, and other events.
Experts predicted that squatting will continue to increase in Wales as a result of the recession, claiming; ''"the majority of squatters are forced into the lifestyle by financial pressures."''
# Political — e.g., activists squatting buildings as protests or to make social centres
This squat, a large warehouse with several unusual spaces able to be used as theatres or other venues (thanks to its former use by the Navy) became a critical site for the development of arts and music in Sydney in the mid to late 1980s, with independent musical and art events being held there regularly.
An example of a more modern squat is Prapopoulou squat, which is well known internationally.
Also during the 1970s and 1980s, extensive parts of Woolloomooloo and Darlinghurst were also squatted, along corridors of houses bought to make way for new road works.
Social centers are often a combination of many things that happen in one space with the aim of creating a space for people to meet in a non-commercial setting, whether it be for a party, political workshop, to see a film, have a drink or have breakfast.
This is as true of the Queen of the United Kingdom with her  as it is of the 54 percent of householders in Britain who are owner-occupiers.
The police checked whether the place was indeed lived in by the squatter.
Squatting in Moldova is pretty new, as it started with Centro 73 in Chişinău in September 2010.
Besides being residences, some squats are used as social centres or host give-away shops, pirate radio stations or cafés.
These were squats organised by anti-poverty groups which tended to have a short life expectancy.
The squatters then re-squatted the fort on November 26 and have since made a deal with the local council which owns the fort.
During this time period, 529 people have been arrested for the act of occupying derelict buildings in 213 separate incidents.
Cafés, bars, libraries, free shops, swaps shops and gyms have all been created, with many squats also holding parties and concerts.
Another famous place (:fr:Les Frigos) was legalized and integrated into the cultural politics of the town council.
Squatting gives you a chance to think about things other than how you are going to pay the rent and ways to contribute to the world."
Property owners or government authorities can usually evict squatters after following certain legal procedures including requesting a court order.
However, new gaztetxes are opening, such as Kortxoenea in Donostia-San Sebastian (occupied in 2010), Putzuzulo in Zarautz (occupied in 2005), Kontrakantxa in Hernani (occupied in 2006), or the gaztetxe of Zumaia.
There are at least 46 squats, or ''gaztetxes'' ("youth's houses" in Basque).
Influenced by the British Levellers, the movement's popularity rose again during the 1990s, once more due to a housing crisis, this time related to the 1992 Summer Olympics and the concomitant urban regeneration.
Iceland, on the other hand, does not have a long tradition of squatting, but homeless people have been occupying abandoned houses for the same reasons as in other countries.
In 2003 activists calling themselves ‘Autonomous Community Spaces’ entered ‘Disco Disco’ in Dublin's Parnell Square to turn the space in a social centre.
In Greece most squats are organized by Anarchists, the oldest one being Lelas Karagianni from late 1980s.
The militants of the Italian armed struggle (the New Red Brigades) were connected to these squats.
In Mexico, squatters are known as ''paracaidistas'' (that is, "paratroopers", because they "drop" themselves mostly at unoccupied lands), and it is a common practice in large cities.
Most anarchist or autonomist squats in Greece maintain a blog or website to post their news, and they often also have an internet forum and e-mail address.
In the barrio of Lavapiés in Madrid, the Eskalera Karakola was a feminist self-managed squat, which was active from 1996 to 2005 and participated in the nextGENDERation network.
Author Robert Neuwirth suggested in 2004 that there were one billion squatters globally.
There have been major housing movements and periods of squatting in Ireland, including the activities of the Dublin and Derry Housing Action Committees of the late 60's and early 70's.
There were several moves to ban squatting in the past.
(see Homeless Workers' Movement)
The third political squat was on Skólavörðustígur also squatted in July 2009.
They are equivalent to slums or shanty towns, and typically occupy unused land (instead of unused or abandoned buildings).
The artists squatting empty buildings on Broadway owned by South Sydney City Council were evicted in 2001, a few months after the 2000 Olympics.
In Spanish-speaking countries, squatters receive several names, such as ''okupas'' in Spain, Chile or Argentina (from the verb ''ocupar'' meaning "to occupy"), or ''paracaidistas'' in Mexico (meaning "parachuters", because they "parachute" themselves at unoccupied land).
The squatters live in a variety of ways.
Murazzi in Turin, Buridda, Pinelli, Terra Di Nessuno, Aut Aut 357 and Zapata in Genoa, Rivolta in Mestre, Gramigna and Pedro in Padua, La Chimica in Verona (evicted), Bruno in Trento, C.S.A.
From the 1820s they were part of the establishment, hence the term ''Squattocracy''.
In England and Wales, squatting in a residential building became illegal in September 2012, with a maximum penalty of six months in jail, a £5,000 fine, or both.
The deal states that the squatters will receive a large piece of land near the fort to start a community in the rural area in between the city of Nijmegen and Arnhem.
However certain 'squatters rights' do exist and can be invoked in the form of adverse possession.
Examples include Ernst-Kirchweger-Haus in Austria, the RampART Social Centre in England, OT301 in the Netherlands and Ungdomshuset in Denmark (evicted on March 1, 2007, and demolished four days later).
Greek Authorities have stated that they will continue the raids until all squats have been evicted, but they didn't manage to make their threat a reality, because of the strong resistance against squat evictions.
In Europe, it is common for buildings to be squatted to be used as social centres.
In Brazil, some of the squatter communities are called favelas, and a famous example is Rocinha in Rio de Janeiro, estimated to be home of 100,000 people.
Anarchist and autonomist squats in Greece and people visiting them often face state persecution, including arrests or police attacks, in addition to violent attacks by the far-right.
Squats can be run on anarchist or communist principles, for example, Fabrika Yfanet, Villa Amalia in Greece, Ernst-Kirchweger-Haus in Austria (has legal status) or Blitz in Norway (has legal status).
As of 2007, there were approximately 200 occupied houses in Barcelona.
The stores and factories situated there are mainly illegal and so are unregulated, but it is suggested that they do over $1 million in business every day.
The exact legal position of squatting in Ireland is ambiguous and the mechanisms for removing squatters from properties varies from case to case, sometimes going through the judicial process, other times not.
There are also a number of squatter buildings in the inner city, the most famous of which was a 22-story building called Prestes Maia, whose inhabitants were finally evicted by the police in 2007 after a long conflict with the city administration.
In 1978, the Council of Churches launched a protest which scotched the idea.
The public attitude toward squatting varies, depending on legal aspects, socioeconomic conditions, and the type of housing occupied by squatters.
Anarchist Colin Ward comments: "Squatting is the oldest mode of tenure in the world, and we are all descended from squatters.
Examples are the Lafontaine squat in Overdale, a district of Montréal (2001), the Woodward’s Squat in Vancouver (2002), the Infirmary Squat in Halifax (2002), the Pope Squat in Toronto (2002), the Seven Year Squat in Ottawa (2002), the Water Street Squat in Peterborough (2003) and the North Star hotel in Vancouver (2006).
In Mumbai, there are an estimated 10 to 12 million inhabitants, and six million of them are squatters.
The houses are rebuilt piece by piece with more durable materials.
The squats were mainly for residential and social use.
In recent years there have been a number of public squats which have brought together the two main contemporary reasons for squatting - homelessness and activism.
While these settlements may, in time, grow to become both legalised and indistinguishable from normal residential neighbourhoods, they start off as squats with minimal basic infrastructure.
In 2011, the 'Occupy Toronto squat team' squatted a basement at 238 Queen Street West and offered to take on a lease for 99 cents a year.
According to Dr. Kesia Reeve, who specialises in housing research, "in the context of adverse housing circumstances, limited housing opportunity and frustrated expectations, squatters effectively remove themselves from and defy the norms of traditional channels of housing consumption and tenure power relations, bypassing the 'rules' of welfare provision."
In 5 days the targeted house was shaped up, a free-store was opened, paper and music publishing had started, and there was support from the neighbours who were excited to get some "life in the street".
In the French Basque Country, there are at least five other squat houses.
In many of the world's poorer countries, there are extensive slums or shanty towns, typically built on the edges of major cities and consisting almost entirely of self-constructed housing built without the landowner's permission.
Boccaccio in Monza, Askatasuna, Gabrio and C.S.A.
The house was gutted by between 50-60 riot police officers 5 days later and arrested the 15 squatters after they had barricaded themselves inside and resisted for over 2 hours.
Thus, there is no sewage system, drinking water must be bought from vendors or carried from a nearby tap, and if there is electricity, it is stolen from a passing cable.
In the late 20th century, the squatter population largely grew but the Philippine government has made separate attempts over the years to transfer some squatters to low-cost housing projects, such as projects in Tondo (in the former Smokey Mountain landfill), Taguig (BLISS Housing Project), and Rodriguez, Rizal.
The RHINO organisation often faced legal troubles, and Geneva police evicted the inhabitants on July 23, 2007.
Squatters nationwide made banners and hung them on their squats in protest.
They built makeshift houses called "barong-barong" inside abandoned private land.
In 2010 activists from Occupy Cork squatted a Nama Building in Cork city with the intention of using it as a community resource centre.
Recently there have been increasing numbers of people squatting foreclosed homes.
A law was passed in 1994 which made it illegal to squat a building which was empty for less than one year.
A handful of mayors in France chose to experiment this form of support to living art (one of the best known is La Belle-de-Mai in Marseille), and Paris is coming to it, cautiously.
However, in many cases where squatters had ''de facto'' ownership, laws have been changed to legitimize their status.
Geeta Nagar is a squatter village based beside the Indian Navy compound at Colaba.
The best known gaztetxe currently is from Gasteiz.
During the period of global recession and increased housing foreclosures in the 2000s, squatting became far more prevalent in Western, developed nations.
Squatting gained notice right after World War II, when people's homes were destroyed by war and were left homeless.
Usually every squat's blog also lists links to the blogs of most other squats.
Until 2010, when squatting was criminalised, a building could be used legally by someone who needed to squat if it was empty and not in use for twelve months, and the owner had no pressing need to use it (such as a rental contract starting in the next month).
There are still many residential squats in Dutch cities.
Despite being illegal, squats exist in many of the larger cities.
The Midnight Star was a squatted theatre used as a social centre, hosting music events, a cafe, a library, a free internet space and a Food Not Bombs kitchen.
Before the reunification, squats in Berlin were mostly located in former West Berlin's borough of Kreuzberg.
There are also some squats in the countryside such as a squatted village called Ruigoord near Amsterdam.
The first instance of this was on 6 May 2009 in solidarity with the Rozbrat squat in Poland.
"temporary lease").
Other squatters live in shacks, situated literally on a pavement next to the road, with very few possessions.
During the last 10 years, at least 15 ''gaztetxes'' have closed down, often following protests and clashes with the police.
The squatted complex enjoyed widespread support in the area and was also publicly supported by the city's Lord Mayor, Christy Burke and by  Irish Times journalist Una Mullally.
From 1995 to 2009 in Brisbane the capital of Queensland, a number of old buildings and dilapidated back alleys were used as squats within the vicinity of Brisbane City's Queen Street Mall.
Large extensions of many Mexican cities were established originally as squats (for example, Nezahualcoyotl, in Mexico City).
A Squatter's Handbook was produced by activists in 1993, 2001 and 2010.
In Italy, there is Bussana Vecchia, a ghost town in Liguria which was abandoned in 1887 following an earthquake and subsequently squatted in the 1960s.
But squatting in a commercial building is still not a criminal offence.
Squatting can be related to political movements, such as anarchist, autonomist, or socialist.
In Amsterdam, where the squatting community is still large, there are four ''kraakspreekuur'' sessions in different areas of the city, and so-called "wild" squatting (squatting a building without the help of the local group) is not encouraged.
The North Star hotel was temporarily squatted as a protest against emptiness by the Vancouver Anti-Poverty Committee.
In Nijmegen (on 2 October), there was also a riot.
There was a big squatting movement in the newly formed state of Austria following the First World War.
Notable squats like Villa Amalias and "Patision & Skaramaga" in Athens, Parartima, Maragopoulio and Nikolaou Gkizi 33 in Patras, Antibiosi in Ioannina, Orfanotrofio in Thessaloniki and other squats have been evicted.
After the German reunification, many buildings were vacated due to the demise of former state-run enterprises and migration to the western parts of Germany, some of which were then occupied by squatters.
Effective 1 September 2012, under Section 144 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, squatting in residential property was criminalised by the Government.
As in the United Kingdom, there is the law of adverse possession, but it is seldom used.
and roll out their enterprise, and at closing time they fold it in and lock it up, thus avoiding the extra cost of having to rent more property.
They are all the ultimate recipients of stolen land, for to regard our planet as a commodity offends every conceivable principle of natural rights."
In Italy, squatting has no legal basis, but there are many squats used as social centres.
Community-oriented squats often organize music gigs (mostly Punk and hip hop ) or movie screenings, usually announced on Athens Indymedia or Kinimatorama.net in addition to the squat's blog.
Inspired by this movement and increasing property speculation and gentrification have also emerged various occupations in buildings and unoccupied areas in big cities.
One of the squatters said, "About 20 people have lived here over the years and it's been a place for band rehearsals, art projects, people practising dance routines, bike workshops.
Other ministers, such as Alexander Pechtold, were not in favor of this plan.
There are eight anarchist squatted buildings in Thessaloniki, notably Fabrika Yfanet, a 19.000 m2 area and over 100 years old textile factory, other squats are Terra Incognita, Sxolio, Libertatia, Mundo Nuevo, Orfanotrofeio, 111 etc.
Community organizations have helped the homeless to take over vacant buildings not only as a place to live but also a part of larger campaign to shine a light on inequity in housing and advocate change in housing and land issues.
The Frances Street Squats in Vancouver were a row of six buildings squatted for nine months in 1990.
Adverse possession is a method of acquiring title to property through possession for a statutory period under certain conditions.
A second project of squatting in Chişinău in the old Turkish embassy (57, Alexei Mateevici street), called Ada Kaleh, was evicted by police in November 2010.
The number has grown rapidly in the post-apartheid era.
In more recent times, there have been squats in the major cities.
Following legal challenges, on October 28, 2011, the Supreme Court of the Netherlands decided that the eviction of a squat can only occur after an intervention of a judge.
In France, there is Collectif la vieille Valette, a self-supporting squat village which has been active since 1991.
Examples are Au in Frankfurt and Hafenstraße and Rote Flora in Hamburg, though the last open squat of Berlin, Brunnenstraße183, was evicted in November 2009.
A number of popular rock groups have come out of this kind of venue, such as Sin Dios, Extremoduro, Kolumna Durruti, Refugio and Platero y Tu in Madrid and Ojos de Brujo and Gadjo in Barcelona.
Based on the internal database of UK Bailiff Company, there were 100 cases of squatting in 2009, the highest for 40 years, following trends estimated by the Advisory Service for Squatters that squatting has doubled in England and Wales since 1995.
Related to the anarchist movement, ''okupas'' support the ideal of Autogestion and create social centers, such as Patio Maravillas in Madrid, which carry out various grassroots activities.
In particular, while squatting of municipal buildings may be treated leniently, squatting of private property often leads to strong negative reaction on the part of the public and authorities.
A few years later, back in their own countries, and notably in France, they began to occupy all kinds of places, from state-owned sites ("Lycee Diderot", where 300 artists worked for 2 years in so-called "Pôle Pi", dismantled by police in 1998), to institutional properties (Galerie Matignon, almost next door to Prime Minister's Hotel Matignon, and wealthy art galleries).
The news of the eviction attempt and eventual successful resistance spread across social media and international news.
Firenze Sud and Next Emerson in Florence, Ex-Mattatoio in Perugia, Mezza Canaja in Senigallia, Kontatto in Ancona, TNT in Jesi, Godzilla in Livorno, Rebeldia and Spazio Antagonista Newroz in Pisa, Brancaleone, Corto Circuito, Forte Prenestino, La Strada, Acrobax, Spartaco, Horus, Macchia Rossa and Villaggio Globale in Rome, Officina 99, SKA, Insurgencia, Cinema Astra Occupato, Zer081, Lido Pola, Villa Medusa,  Scugnizzo Liberato and Mensa Occupata in Naples, Experia and Auro in Catania, Ex-Karcere in Palermo, Cartella in Reggio Calabria, Rialzo in Cosenza, Fiumara in Catanzaro, Cloro Rosso in Taranto and many others.
In Colombia they are called ''invasiones'' (as in "invading a property", as squatting can be related to a building or an empty lot), in Venezuela they are also known as ''invasiones'', in Argentina the term used is ''villa miseria'', in Chile they are called ''Tomas'', in Venezuela the term  "Ranchos" is used, and in Uruguay, ''cantegriles''.
Other squats are widespread across the country: Poznań (Magadan), ( Od:Zysk), Wrocław ( Era Kromera - evicted and closed,  Centrum Reanimacji Kultury,  Wagenburg Breslau), Warsaw ( Syrena,  Przychodnia), Kraków (Wielicka, Carandiru), Gdynia (Brovary Hills), Gliwice (Krzyk), Częstochowa (Elektromadonna), Białystok ( DeCentrum), Grudziądz (Szach), Sosnowiec (M9), Gdańsk (NKS 3-Jan) and Ruda Śląska ( Berza).
However, under the registry system, these rights have been preserved.
Trespass and occupation of a property is not illegal, but as a definitive process for dealing with squatters does not exist, unlawful evictions do occur, sometimes with the support of the Garda Síochána (Irish Police).
Though eviction has reduced their visibility or numbers in urban areas, many squatters still occupy land near railroad tracks, under overpasses, and waterways.
In exchange, the fort was handed over to local authorities, who will turn it into a museum, with help provided by the squatters that used to live in Fort Pannerden.
People associated with the independent media were also arrested.
"L'électron libre", a gorgeously ornamented building (in a raving psychedelic style) located in the core of the city (59 rue de Rivoli), and owned by a French Bank, was in 2001 the third most visited place for contemporary art (40,000 visitors a year, according to the French Ministry for Culture).
The oldest squat in Poland,  Rozbrat, was created in 1994 in Poznań.
Many of the families are now squatting on Symphony Way, a main road in the township of Delft.
It was revived in the mid-1980s during the La Movida Madrileña, under the name of the ''okupa'' (an unofficial spelling applied to ''ocupación'') movement, when thousands of illegal squatted buildings were legalized.
However, some non-common law jurisdictions have laws similar to adverse possession.
The group offered to repair the place and return it to its use as low-income housing.
U.K. police official Sue Williams, for example, has stated that "Squatting is linked to Anti-Social Behaviour and can cause a great deal of nuisance and distress to local residents.
In 2014, the attempts to evict the long-running social cente of Can Vies provoked major riots.
Other examples are the Escuela Popular de Prosperidad (La Prospe) o Minuesa.
Starting from December 2012, Greek Police initiated extensive raids in a number of squats, arresting and charging with offences all illegal occupants (mostly Anarchists).
In 2010, a representative of the UK Bailiff Company claimed that the number of people squatting in Wales was at its highest for 40 years.
In Peru, the name given to the squatter settlements is ''pueblos jóvenes''.
It was evicted in December 2002 following its use as a convergence centre for protests against the November World Trade Organisation talks.
In the 1980s, Art-Cloche (from "clochard", i.e., tramp –- founded by Jean Starck and Nicolas Pawlowski) promoted "artistic occupation", organising festivals and creating a museum.
Sometimes, the authorities tear the houses down, but often, the squatters simply rebuild again.
It can be a means to conserve buildings or to provide housing.
Christiania is an independent community of almost 900 people founded in 1971 on the site of an abandoned military zone.
There have been numerous complaints about the legality of the government's actions and, in particular, whether the ruling of the judge was unfair given his party affiliations and the highly politicized nature of the case.
These cases illustrate the quest of most of artist's squat for agreements with buildings owners, be it for a few years ("bail precaire" i.e.
Another flashpoint came in 2007 when Ungdomshuset was evicted.
In South Africa, squatters tend to live in informal settlements or squatter camps on the outskirts of the larger cities, often but not always near townships.
Of those convicted, 39 people were imprisoned for the new offence.
Dharavi is a community of one million squatters.
City officials agreed to the repairs and then the City Council voted to demolish the building.
Irregular intervals can bring 30-60+ short term displaced people.
Squatting is a criminal offence in Scotland, punishable by a fine or even imprisonment, see Trespass (Scotland) Act 1865.
In 2003, a legal squat was organised for ten people who moved onto the site of an old incinerator at Green Square.
They were evicted after eight hours.
The only illegal aspect was forcing an entry, if that was necessary.
One of the most high-profile cases was the brutal evictions of squatters in the N2 Gateway homes in the suburb of Delft, where over 20 residents were shot, including a three-year-old child.
Philippine law, and society more generally, distinguishes between squatters who squat because of poverty and "professional squatters" who squat in hopes of getting a payment to leave the property.
Kavarna in Cremona, C.S.A.
Out of the breakup of these two movements was born Autonomia Operaia, which was composed of a Marxist–Leninist and Maoist wing and also an anarchist and more libertarian one.
Property speculation and house price inflation continue to catalyze ''okupa'' activism.
To claim adverse possession the occupant must register an intent to claim the property with the land registry .
Squatting also became popularised by the successful neighbourhood resistance to an attempted eviction of a large community used squatted space in Grangegorman in Dublin city in 2015.
In protest, squatters in Amsterdam had occupied a former fire department the week before the law began (returning it to the owners control on 30 September) and a riot occurred on 1 October when the police blocked a protest and led a horse charge upon it.
The Squatfest film festival began in the Broadway squats in 2001.
In some cases, urban homesteading is an organic phenomenon that evolves as a grassroots strategy of residents for dealing with a lack of affordable housing, or a sizable existence of abandoned, depressed, neglected or foreclosed housing stock.
This type of squatting is covered in greater detail at Squatting (pastoral).
Melbourne squats are usually located in the inner suburbs, like Footscray, St. Kilda and Coburg.
Every year, a site is occupied and films screened.
Since the most valuable real property is located near the downtowns of the cities, the ''paracaidistas'' usually establish slums at unoccupied lands at the outskirts of the cities.
At least 45 of these, as Infousurpa, a collective event calendar, mentions, are used as social and cultural centers—so- called "open houses".
The second squat used as a social space was founded by a group of graffiti artists that put up an art-exhibition on 7 July 2009.
Representatives of the four largest Dutch cities wrote a letter stating that it would not be in their interest to ban squatting.
Fort Pannerden (a military fort built in 1869) was evicted on November 8, 2006, by a massive police operation which used military machinery and cost one million euros.
Since then, the owner of the building must take the squatters to court (or take illegal action) in order to evict them.
The council voted to allow the squatters to stay in the building, which they called Iceland, until the plans for demolition were in place.
Squatting has seen a recent surge in Dublin city with frequent occupations of spaces.
Squatting has also been used with political purposes, with more of one political parties promising existing squatters to legalize their situation if they support their candidates in the elections; or sometimes with the purpose to serve as human obstacles for another party, occupying the space that was going to be used for constructing public buildings or parks.
There is often a ''kraakspreekuur'' (squatters' consultation hour), at which people planning to squat could get advice from experienced squatters.
Anarchist and autonomist squats in Greece engage with the local community by hosting cultural events, political talks, printing posters and announcements, or going out to the local community's square and holding events there, such as movie screenings, music gigs, talks, or offering free food, books, clothes, or children's toys.
Squatting, when done in a positive and progressive manner, can be viewed as a way to reduce crime and vandalism to vacant properties, depending on the squatter's ability and willingness to conform to the surrounding socioeconomic class of the community, which they reside.
There are also rural squatter movements in Brazil, such as the Landless Workers' Movement, which has an estimated 1.5 million members.
There were estimated to be more than 120,000 unoccupied houses in Sydney in 2011.
However, its occupied area has been officially recognized as a regular neighborhood of the city.
In 1982, the inhabitants agreed to pay rent to the city council.
In 1994, when Nelson Mandela was elected President, it was estimated that of South Africa's 44 million inhabitants, 7.7 million lived in these settlements.
It would be possible for squatters to be charged with criminal trespass under the Enclosed Lands Protection Act, but mainly, squatters are simply evicted when they are discovered.
Squatters often claim rights over the spaces they have squatted by virtue of occupation, rather than ownership; in this sense, squatting is similar to (and potentially a necessary condition of) adverse possession, by which a possessor of real property without title may eventually gain legal title to the real property.
