The Sri Lanka national cricket team achieved considerable success beginning in the 1990s, rising from underdog status to winning the 1996 Cricket World Cup.
The legislative capital, Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, is a suburb of the commercial capital and largest city, Colombo.
The coastline and adjacent waters support highly productive marine ecosystems such as fringing coral reefs and shallow beds of coastal and estuarine seagrasses.
The assassination of Jaffna Mayor Alfred Duraiyappah in 1975 by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) marked a crisis point.
Islam is the third most dominant religion in the country, having first been brought to the island by Arab traders over the course of many centuries, starting around the 7th century AD.
The railway network, operated by the state-run national railway operator, Sri Lanka Railways, spans .
Nearly 50% of them were repatriated following independence in 1948.
Soon coffee became the primary commodity export of Sri Lanka.
He built Ruwanwelisaya, the second stupa in ancient Sri Lanka, and the Lovamahapaya.
Periodic squalls occur and sometimes tropical cyclones bring overcast skies and rains to the southwest, northeast, and eastern parts of the island.
Christians celebrate Christmas on 25 December to celebrate the birth of Jesus Christ and Easter to celebrate the resurrection of Jesus.
Sri Lanka was the first Asian country known to have a female ruler: Anula of Anuradhapura (r. 47–42 BCE).
The private sector accounts for 85% of the economy.
In a 2008 Gallup poll, Sri Lanka was ranked the third most religious country in the world, with 99% of Sri Lankans saying religion was an important part of their daily life.
In these caves, archaeologists have found the remains of anatomically modern humans which they have named Balangoda Man, and other evidence suggesting that they may have engaged in agriculture and kept domestic dogs for driving game.
King Vijayabâhu III, who led the resistance, brought the kingdom to Dambadeniya.
Ancient Sri Lankans excelled at building certain types of structures (constructions) such as tanks, dagobas and palaces.
An education system which dictates 9 years of compulsory schooling for every child is in place.
During the medieval period, Sri Lanka was divided into three sub-territories, namely Ruhunu, Pihiti and Maya.
Sri Lanka is the home to two main traditional cultures: the Sinhalese (centred in the ancient cities of Kandy and Anuradhapura) and the Tamil (centred in the city of Jaffna).
Sri Lanka has approximately 9675 government schools, 817 private schools and Pirivenas.
Paramilitary units include the Special Task Force, the Civil Security Force, and the Sri Lanka Coast Guard
Income inequality has also dropped in recent years, indicated by a gini coefficient of 0.36 in 2010.
For example, Bhatikabhaya (22 BCE – 7 CE) sent an envoy to Rome who brought back red coral, which was used to make an elaborate netlike adornment for the Ruwanwelisaya.
On 14 February 1815, Kandy was occupied by the British in the second Kandyan War, ending Sri Lanka's independence.
''Kala Wewa'' and the Avukana Buddha statue were built during the reign of Dhatusena.
S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike was elected prime minister in 1956.
The port at Trincomalee is the fifth largest natural harbour in the world: during World War II the British stated that they could place their entire navy in the harbour with room to spare.
The remaining Christians are evenly split between the Anglican Church of Ceylon and other Protestant denominations.
Large-scale rubber plantations began in the early 20th century.
The Buddhist majority observe Poya Days each month according to the Lunar calendar, and Hindus and Muslims also observe their own holidays.
In 1517, the Portuguese built a fort at the port city of Colombo and gradually extended their control over the coastal areas.
After his demise, Sri Lanka gradually decayed in power.
These Divisional Secretariats are currently administered by a 'Divisional Secretary'.
Christianity reached the country through Western colonists in the early 16th century.
According to the German philosopher Wilhelm Geiger, the chronicles are based on Sinhala Atthakatha (commentary), that dates few more centuries back.
Each provincial council is an autonomous body not under the authority of any Ministry.
During periods of decline, the Sri Lankan monastic lineage was revived through contact with Thailand and Burma.
It was also the leading exporter of cinnamon in the ancient world.
The bill, together with various government colonisation schemes, contributed much towards the political rancour between Sinhalese and Tamil political leaders.
The amendment of certain basic features such as the clauses on language, religion, and reference to Sri Lanka as a unitary state require both a two-thirds majority and approval in a nationwide referendum.
With the constitutional reforms of 1972, the All Ceylon Tamil Congress (ACTC) and Illankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi (ITAK) created a common front called the Tamil United Front (later Tamil United Liberation Front).
Between 1989 and 2006, the Northern and Eastern provinces were temporarily merged to form the North-East Province.
Middle Eastern influences and practices are found in traditional Moor dishes, while Dutch and Portuguese influences are found with the island's Burgher community preserving their culture through traditional dishes such as Lamprais (rice cooked in stock and baked in a banana leaf), Breudher (Dutch Holiday Biscuit), and Bolo Fiado (Portuguese-style layer cake).
The wet zone is a tropical evergreen forest with tall trees, broad foliage, and a dense undergrowth of vines and creepers.
The British Royal Navy remained stationed at Trincomalee until 1956.
The medieval period of Sri Lanka begins with the fall of Anuradhapura Kingdom.
In spite of on-going intermittent warfare with Europeans, the kingdom survived.
SLFP registered its first victory in 1956, defeating the ruling UNP in 1956 Parliamentary election.
Buddhists comprise 70 percent of the population, with the Theravada school being predominant.
A devastating leaf disease, ''Hemileia vastatrix'', struck the coffee plantations in 1869, destroying the entire industry within fifteen years.
Most provisions of the constitution can be amended by a two-thirds majority in parliament.
Because the Pāli Canon was at that time oral literature maintained in several recensions by ''dhammabhāṇaka''s (dharma reciters), the surviving monks recognized the danger of not writing it down so that even if some of the monks whose duty it was to study and remember parts of the Canon for later generations died, the teachings would not be lost.
Following the LTTE's defeat, the Tamil National Alliance, the largest Tamil political party in Sri Lanka, dropped its demand for a separate state in favour of a federal solution.
A diverse and multicultural country, Sri Lanka is home to many religions, ethnic groups, and languages.
Poetry including ''Kavsilumina'', ''Kavya-Sekharaya'' (diadem of poetry) and proses such as ''Saddharma-Ratnāvaliya'', ''Amāvatura'' (Flood of nectar) and ''Pujāvaliya'' are also notable works of this period, which is considered to be the golden age of Sri Lankan literature.
The earliest music in Sri Lanka came from theatrical performances such as ''Kolam'', ''Sokari'' and ''Nadagam''.
The infant mortality rate stands at 8.5 per 1,000 births and the maternal mortality rate at 0.39 per 1,000 births, which is on par with figures from the developed countries.
The untapped genetic potential of Sinharaja flora is enormous.
Ancient Sri Lanka was the first country in the world to establish a dedicated hospital, in Mihintale in the 4th century.
Thus the elite National Schools are controlled directly by the Ministry of Education and the provincial schools by the provincial government.
Over 90% of the households in Sri Lanka are electrified.
It is a sophisticated form of dance, that consists of five sub-categories: ''Ves dance'', ''Naiyandi dance'', ''Udekki dance'', ''Pantheru dance'' and ''18 Vannam''.
The next invasion came immediately in 205 BC by a Chola king named Elara, who overthrew Asela and ruled the country for 44 years.
The Districts are known in Sinhala as ''Disa'' and in Tamil as ''Māwaddam''.
While ensuring that it maintains its independence, Sri Lanka has cultivated relations with India.
Both LTTE and the government resumed fighting in 2006, and the government officially backed out of the ceasefire in 2008.
Most Buddhists are of the Sinhalese ethnic group.
Beginning in 1983, ethnic tensions were manifested in an on-and-off insurgency against the government by the LTTE.
Former Sri Lankan off-spinner Muttiah Muralitharan has been rated as the greatest Test match bowler ever by ''Wisden Cricketers' Almanack'', and four Sri Lankan cricketers ranked 2nd (Sangakkara), 4th (Jayasuriya), 5th (Jayawardene) and 11th (Dilshan) highest ODI run scorers of all time, which is the best by an team.
Sri Lanka has had a long history of international engagement, as a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), and a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the G77, and the Non-Aligned Movement.
The country's main economic sectors are tourism, tea export, clothing, rice production and other agricultural products.
Sri Vikrama Rajasinha, the last native monarch of Sri Lanka, was exiled to India.
Sri Lankan Bhikkhus studied in India's famous ancient Buddhist University of Nalanda, which was destroyed by Bakhtiyar Khilji.
However, this demand was not met by the Soulbury reforms of 1944–45.
The Sri Lankan Armed Forces have engaged in United Nations peacekeeping operations since the early 1960s, contributing forces to permanent contingents deployed in several UN peacekeeping missions in Chad, Lebanon, and Haiti.
The young king, now named Sri Vikrama Rajasinha, faced a British invasion in 1803 but successfully retaliated.
Some of its functions had been undertaken by central government ministries, departments, corporations, and statutory authorities, but authority over land and police is not as a rule given to provincial councils.
Most followers of Islam in Sri Lanka today are believed to be descendants of these Arab traders and the local women they married.
An Executive Council and a Legislative Council were established, later becoming the foundation of a representative legislature.
Traditional music instruments such as ''Béra'', ''Thammátama'', ''Daŭla'' and ''Răbān'' were performed at these dramas.
By the end of the 19th century, a new educated social class transcending race and caste arose through British attempts to staff the Ceylon Civil Service and the legal, educational, and medical professions.
Succeeding kingdoms of Sri Lanka would maintain a large number of Buddhist schools and monasteries and support the propagation of Buddhism into other countries in Southeast Asia.
Sri Lanka has claimed to be the first country in the modern world to eradicate terrorism on its own soil.
* '''Judicial''': Sri Lanka's judiciary consists of a Supreme Court – the highest and final superior court of record, a Court of Appeal, High Courts and a number of subordinate courts.
According to the Ministry of Resettlement, most of the displaced persons had been released or returned to their places of origin, leaving only 6,651 in the camps as of December 2011.
He built 1470 reservoirs – the highest number by any ruler in Sri Lanka's history – repaired 165 dams, 3910 canals, 163 major reservoirs, and 2376 mini-reservoirs.
In the present, Sri Lanka enjoys extensive relations with China, Russia, and Pakistan.
The greatest literary feats of medieval Sri Lanka include ''Sandesha Kāvya'' (poetic messages) such as ''Girā Sandeshaya'' (Parrot message), ''Hansa Sandeshaya'' (Swan message) and ''Salalihini Sandeshaya'' (Myna message).
Portions are still as shallow as , hindering navigation.
Sri Lankan literature spans at least two millennia, and is heir to the Aryan literary tradition as embodied in the hymns of the Rigveda.
Sri Lanka's forest cover, which was around 49% in 1920, had fallen to approximately 24% by 2009.
The 19th-century Irish historian James Emerson Tennent theorized that Galle, a city in southern Sri Lanka, was the ancient seaport of Tarshish from which King Solomon is said to have drawn ivory, peacocks, and other valuables.
G. G. Ponnambalam, the Tamil nationalist counterpart of S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike, founded the All Ceylon Tamil Congress (ACTC) in 1944.
The first two decades in the 20th century are noted by the unique harmony among Sinhalese and Tamil political leadership, which has since been lost.
* '''Executive''': The President of Sri Lanka is the head of state, the commander in chief of the armed forces; head of government, and is popularly elected for a five-year term.
In Hindu mythology, such as the Mahabharata, the island was referred to as ''Lankā'' ("Island").
In April, Sri Lankans celebrate the Buddhist and Hindu new year festival.
Chinese admiral Zheng He and his naval expeditionary force landed at Galle, Sri Lanka in 1409 and got into battle with the local king.
The parliament reserves the power to make all laws.
In 1942 a special education committee proposed extensive reforms to establish an efficient and quality education system for the people.
Ancient Sri Lanka is marked for its genius in hydraulic engineering and architecture.
Sri Lanka ranks 8th in the World Giving Index, registering high levels of contentment and charitable behaviour in its society.
Mahinda V was captured and taken to India, and the Cholas sacked the city of Anuradhapura.
Today, Hinduism is dominant in Northern, Eastern and Central Sri Lanka.
Since independence in 1948, the primary focus of the armed forces has been internal security, crushing three major insurgencies, two by Marxist militants of the JVP and a 30-year-long conflict with the LTTE which has been proscribed as a terrorist organisation by 32 countries.
In May 2010, President Rajapaksa appointed the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC) to assess the conflict between the time of the ceasefire agreement in 2002 and the defeat of the LTTE in 2009.
Buddhism is given special recognition in the Constitution which requires Sri Lankans to "protect and foster the Buddha Sasana".
His three-year rule had a profound impact through his self-proclaimed role of "defender of the besieged Sinhalese culture".
C and D grade roads are provincial roads coming under the purview of the Provincial Road Development Authority of the respective province.
Sri Lanka is a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Sri Lanka's documented history spans 3,000 years, with evidence of pre-historic human settlements dating back to at least 125,000 years.
He established the Kingdom of Tambapanni, near modern-day Mannar.
The beginning of the modern period of Sri Lanka is marked by the Colebrooke-Cameron reforms of 1833.
The proposed private university bill has been withdrawn by the Higher Education Ministry after university students' heavy demonstrations and resistance.
During its two and a half millennia of existence, the Kingdom of Sri Lanka was invaded at least eight times by neighbouring South Asian dynasties such as the Chola, Pandya, Chera, and Pallava.
Initially, all Television stations were state-controlled, but private television networks began broadcasts in 1992.
Sri Lanka claims an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) extending 200 nautical miles, which is approximately 6.7 times Sri Lanka's land area.
It was the first time a non-white country within the empires of Western Europe was given one man, one vote and the power to control domestic affairs.
Among the trees of the dry-land forests are valuable species such as satinwood, ebony, ironwood, mahogany and teak.
His mission won over the monarch, who embraced the faith and propagated it throughout the Sinhalese population.
There are two styles of martial arts native to Sri Lanka, Cheena di and Angampora.
In 1979, movie attendance rose to an all-time high, but has been in steady decline since then.
Sri Lanka's schools and colleges regularly organise sports and athletics teams, competing on provincial and national levels.
A judicial service commission, composed of the Chief Justice and two Supreme Court judges, appoints, transfers, and dismisses lower court judges.
Of these, the Lanka Sama Samaja Party (LSSP), established in 1935, is the oldest.
It was followed by a series of popular dramas like ''Sinhabāhu'', ''Pabāvatī'', ''Mahāsāra'', ''Muudu Puththu'' and ''Subha saha Yasa''.
It is in the Indian Ocean southwest of the Bay of Bengal, between latitudes 5° and 10°N, and longitudes 79° and 82°E.
His most famous construction is the Parakrama Samudra, the largest irrigation project of medieval Sri Lanka.
These invaders were all subsequently driven back.
There are also small ethnic groups such as the Burghers (of mixed European descent) and Malays from Southeast Asia.
The UN Human Rights Council has documented over 12,000 named individuals who have undergone disappearance after detention by security forces in Sri Lanka, the second highest figure in the world since the Working Group came into being in 1980.
A countrywide popular demonstration against withdrawal of the rice ration, known as Hartal 1953, resulted in the resignation of prime minister Dudley Senanayake.
The next three centuries starting from 1215 were marked by kaleidoscopically shifting collections of kingdoms in south and central Sri Lanka, including Dambadeniya, Yapahuwa, Gampola, Raigama, Kotte, Sitawaka, and finally, Kandy.
The station broadcasts services in Sinhalese, Tamil, English and Hindi.
This step was strongly criticised by the Tamil political leadership, who realised that they would be reduced to a minority in the newly created State Council of Ceylon, which succeeded the legislative council.
Subtropical evergreen forests resembling those of temperate climates flourish in the higher altitudes.
Of these, the Kandyan style, which flourished under kings of the Kingdom of Kandy, is more prominent.
As of July 2011, the number of registered political parties in the country is 67.
Economic disparities exist between the provinces, with the Western province contributing 45.1% of the GDP and the Southern province and the Central province contributing 10.7% and 10%, respectively.
Sri Lanka ranks well above other South Asian countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) with 0.750 points.
Now each province is administered by a directly elected provincial council:
A remarkably high proportion of the species among its flora and fauna, 27% of the 3,210 flowering plants and 22% of the mammals (''see List''), are endemic.
In 1919, major Sinhalese and Tamil political organisations united to form the Ceylon National Congress, under the leadership of Ponnambalam Arunachalam, pressing colonial masters for more constitutional reforms.
The relationship between Sri Lanka and India became tense under the government of J. R. Jayawardene.
During the Mahaweli Program of the 1970s and 1980s in northern Sri Lanka, the government set aside four areas of land totalling  as national parks.
Sri Lanka is the oldest democracy in Asia.
87.3% of the population have access to safe drinking water and 39% have access to pipe-borne water.
Prolonged minority grievances and the use of communal emotionalism as an election campaign weapon by both Sinhalese and Tamil leaders abetted a fledgling Tamil militancy in the north during the 1970s.
Bandaranaike was assassinated by an extremist Buddhist monk in 1959.
Although the country is relatively small in size, it has the highest biodiversity density in Asia.
The Persians and Arabs referred to it as ''Sarandīb'' (the origin of the word "serendipity") from the word ''Cerentivu''.
Zheng He captured the local king and later released him.
The 2004 Asian tsunami killed over 35,000 in Sri Lanka.
Sinhalese constitute the largest ethnic group in the country, with 74.8% of the total population.
Chelvanayakam broke away in 1949 and formed the Illankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi (ITAK), also known as the Federal Party, becoming the main Tamil political party in Sri Lanka for next two decades.
There are three main styles of Sri Lankan classical dance.
India is Sri Lanka's largest trading partner.
Average yearly temperatures range from  to nearly .
Rainfall pattern is influenced by monsoon winds from the Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal.
Sri Lankan Moors comprise 9.2%.
The per capita income of Sri Lanka has doubled since 2005.
With a grant of 20 million dollars from the US and help from China, a space academy has been set up for the purpose of developing an indigenous space sector to launch satellites of other nations as well as of Sri Lanka.
Humidity is typically higher in the southwest and mountainous areas and depends on the seasonal patterns of rainfall.
Zheng He erected the Galle Trilingual Inscription, a stone tablet at Galle written in three languages (Chinese, Tamil, and Persian), to commemorate his visit.
The first Tamil immigration was probably around the 3rd century BC.
Sinhalese and Tamil are the two official languages of Sri Lanka.
The oldest surviving prose work is the ''Dhampiya-Atuva-Getapadaya'', compiled in the 9th century.
Later, a crisis of succession emerged in Kandy upon king Vira Narendrasinha's death in 1739.
Sri Lanka is a democratic republic and a unitary state which is governed by a semi-presidential system, with a mixture of a presidential system and a parliamentary system.
Falling coffee prices as a result of the depression of 1847 stalled economic development and prompted the governor to introduce a series of taxes on firearms, dogs, shops, boats, etc., and to reintroduce a form of ''rajakariya'', requiring six days free labour on roads or payment of a cash equivalent.
According to the ''Mahāvamsa'', a chronicle written in Pāḷi, the original inhabitants of Sri Lanka are the Yakshas and Nagas.
In AD 993, the invasion of Chola emperor Rajaraja I forced the then Sri Lankan ruler Mahinda V to flee to the southern part of Sri Lanka.
Sri Lanka is a republic and a unitary state governed by a semi-presidential system.
Two years later, in 1798, Sri Rajadhi Rajasinha, third of the four Nayakkar kings of Sri Lanka, died of a fever.
Sri Lanka has won the Asia Cup in 1986, 1997, 2004, 2008 and 2014.
Marking a rare occurrence in modern military history, the Sri Lankan military was able to bring a decisive end to the Sri Lankan Civil War in May 2009.
In common with many democracies, the Sri Lankan government has three branches:
The government of J. R. Jayawardene swept to power in 1977, defeating the largely unpopular United Front government.
An influential filmmaker is Lester James Peiris, who has directed a number of movies which led to global acclaim, including ''Rekava'' (Line of destiny, 1956), ''Gamperaliya'' (The changing village, 1964), ''Nidhanaya'' (The treasure, 1970) and ''Golu Hadawatha'' (Cold heart, 1968).
Members are elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term.
The other roads are local roads falling under local government authorities.
Also, out of the 142 countries surveyed, Sri Lanka ranked 45th in health and primary education, 32nd in business sophistication, 42nd in innovation, and 41st in goods market efficiency.
The country is known in Sinhalese as '''' () and in Tamil as '''' (, ).
Sri Lanka has declared 24 wildlife reserves, which are home to a wide range of native species such as Asian elephants, leopards, sloth bears, the unique small loris, a variety of deer, the purple-faced langur, the endangered wild boar, porcupines and Indian pangolins.
Sri Lanka has 103 rivers.
The British quickly found a replacement: abandoning coffee, they began cultivating tea instead.
The era spans the Palaeolithic, Mesolithic and early Iron Ages.
Of the 211 woody trees and lianas within the reserve, 139 (66%) are endemic.
In 1937, Tamil leader G. G. Ponnambalam demanded a 50–50 representation (50% for the Sinhalese and 50% for other ethnic groups) in the State Council.
This period is considered as a time when Sri Lanka was at the height of its power.
Of these, Sinharaja forest reserve is home to 26 endemic birds and 20 rainforest species, including the elusive red-faced malkoha, the green-billed coucal and the Sri Lanka blue magpie.
Upon his request, ordained monks were sent from Burma to Sri Lanka to re-establish Buddhism, which had almost disappeared from the country during the Chola reign.
The president may summon, suspend, or end a legislative session and dissolve Parliament any time after four and a half years.
In 1987, the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord was signed and the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) was deployed in northern Sri Lanka to stabilise the region by neutralising the LTTE.
Following the parliamentary election in July 1960, Sirimavo Bandaranaike became the prime minister and the world's first elected female head of government.
''Ranmuthu Duwa'' (Island of treasures, 1962) marked the transition cinema from black-and-white to colour.
The upasampada for bhikkhunis (Buddhist nuns) first arrived in China when Devasāra and ten other bhikkhunis came from Sri Lanka at the request of Chinese women and established the order there in 429.
In addition to the majority Sinhalese, it is home to large groups of Sri Lankan and Indian Tamils, Moors, Burghers, Malays, Kaffirs and the aboriginal Vedda.
During her second term as prime minister, the government instituted socialist economic polices, strengthening ties with the Soviet Union and China, while promoting a policy of non-alignment.
