St. Louis also is the origin of the sport of corkball, a type of baseball in which there is no base running.
SLPS operates under provisional accreditation from the state of Missouri and is under the governance of a state-appointed school board called the Special Administrative Board, although a local board continues to exist without legal authority over the district.
However, this courthouse was replaced during renovation and expansion of the building in the 1850s.
The largest and most ornate of these is the Cathedral Basilica of St. Louis, designed by Thomas P. Barnett and constructed between 1907 and 1914 in the Neo-Byzantine style.
They have won 19 National League titles (the most pennants for the league franchise in one city) and 11 World Series titles, most recently in 2011.
Inter-city rail passenger train service in the city is provided by Amtrak.
Some St. Louis chefs have begun emphasizing use of local produce, meats and fish, and neighborhood farmers' markets have become increasingly popular, as well as one downtown.
Local bus service in the city of St. Louis is provided by the Bi-State Development Agency via MetroBus, with more than 75 routes connecting to MetroLink commuter rail transit and stops in the city and region.
St. Louis also boasts the largest Ethical Culture Society in the United States, and consistently ranks as one of the most generous cities in the United States, ranking ninth in 2013.
Trees are mainly oak, maple, and hickory, similar to the forests of the nearby Ozarks; common understory trees include eastern redbud, serviceberry, and flowering dogwood.
Now popular for its restaurants and nightclubs, the district is located north of Gateway Arch along the riverfront.
Before the founding of the city, the area was mostly prairie and open forest.
The Cardinals advanced to the playoffs just three times (1974, 1975 and 1982), never hosting or winning in any appearance.
According to the 2007 Economic Census, manufacturing in the city conducted nearly $11&nbsp;billion in business, followed by the health care and social service industry with $3.5&nbsp;billion, professional or technical services with $3.1&nbsp;billion, and the retail trade with $2.5&nbsp;billion.
Cyril and Methodius Church (1857) in the Romanesque Revival style and Christ Church Cathedral (completed in 1867, designed in 1859) in the Gothic Revival style.
The Gateway Arch marks downtown St. Louis and a historic center that includes the Federal courthouse where the Dred Scott case was first argued, a newly renovated and expanded public library, major churches and businesses, and retail.
Passengers can move between the terminals on complimentary buses that run continuously, or via MetroLink for a fee.
*Chouteau Yard – S. Vandeventer Ave & Tower Grove Ave., ''local industry and interchange with Union Pacific Railroad''
Chess Championship is held.
The most recent high-rise buildings in St. Louis include two residential towers: the Park East Tower in the Central West End and the Roberts Tower located in downtown.
The city is commonly identified with the  tall Gateway Arch in Downtown St. Louis.
They have never won a Stanley Cup.
Louis Beacon'', but that publication merged with KWMU in 2013.
St. Louis is the nation's third-largest freight rail hub, moving Missouri exports such as fertilizer, gravel, crushed stone, prepared foodstuffs, fats, oils, nonmetallic mineral products, grain, alcohol, tobacco products, automobiles, and automobile parts.
The reason for this lingering question is that all the documentation of the founding was loaned, and subsequently destroyed in a fire.
An increasing downtown residential population has taken to adapted office buildings and other historic structures.
This city has also become known for a growing medical, pharmaceutical and research city.
The Port Authority added 2 new small fire and rescue craft in 2012 and 2013.
The population density was 5,158.2 people per square mile (1,990.6/km²).
Other companies, such as LaunchCode and LockerDome, see the city's potential to become the next major tech hub.
St. Louis is an intermediate stop on the ''Texas Eagle'' route which provides long-distance passenger service between San Antonio, Texas, and Chicago.
Average annual precipitation is about , but annual precipitation has ranged from  in 1953 to  in 2015.
Greater St. Louis commands the 19th-largest media market in the United States, a position roughly unchanged for over a decade.
Students have been bussed mostly from the city to county school districts to have opportunities for integrated classes, although the city has created magnet schools to attract students.
As of April 27, 2013, he is the longest-serving mayor of St. Louis.
Although the area does not have a National Basketball Association team, it hosts an American Basketball Association team called the St. Louis Phoenix.
The Gateway Grizzlies and the River City Rascals of the Frontier League (which are not affiliated with Major League Baseball) play in the area.
High temperatures below freezing occur 25 days per year, on average.
Per capita income was $18,108.
Foster Townsend Rail Logistics – formerly Manufacturers Railway (St. Louis)
The highest concentration of Bosnians is in the neighborhood of Bevo Mill and in Affton, Mehlville, and Oakville of south St. Louis County.
Mosquitos, no-see-ums, and houseflies are common insect nuisances, especially in July and August; because of this, windows are nearly universally fitted with screens.
Given the city's location close to the free state of Illinois and others, some slaves escaped to freedom.
*Lindenwood Yard – Jamieson Ave. & Arsenal St., ''Cuba Subdivision'' (St. Louis – Springfield, Missouri), ''River Subdivision'' (St. Louis – Turrell, Arkansas), and ''Hannibal Subdivision'' (St. Louis – Burlington, Iowa)
The city is also served by Madison County Transit, which connects downtown St. Louis to Madison County, Illinois.
In 1969 they became the Atlanta Hawks.
In 2013 the US Census Bureau estimate that St. Louis had a population of 318,416.
The city is on the Mississippi Flyway, used by migrating birds, and has a large variety of small bird species, common to the eastern US.
Because much of the city's early commercial and industrial development was centered along the riverfront, many pre-Civil War buildings were demolished during construction of the Gateway Arch.
The second-longest serving mayor was Henry Kiel, who took office April 15, 1913 and left office April 21, 1925, a total of 12 years and 9 days over three terms in office.
''De jure'' educational segregation continued into the 1950s, and ''de facto'' segregation continued into the 1970s, leading to a court challenge and interdistrict desegregation agreement.
St. Louis grew slowly until the American Civil War, when industrialization and immigration sparked a boom.
Among the area's most popular radio stations are KMOX (AM sports and talk, notable as the longtime flagship station for St. Louis Cardinals broadcasts), KLOU (FM oldies), WIL-FM (FM country), WARH (FM adult hits), and KSLZ (FM Top 40 mainstream).
The Missouri River forms the northern line of St. Louis County, except for a few areas where the river has changed its course.
There were hopes of finding a water route to the Pacific Ocean, but the party had to go overland in the Upper West.
St. Louis was incorporated as a city in 1822, and continued to develop largely due to its busy port and trade connections.
The Garden features 79 acres of horticultural displays from around the world.
The early French families built the city's economy on the fur trade with the Osage, as well as with more distant tribes along the Missouri River.
An estimated 70,000 Bosnians live in the metro area, the largest population of Bosnians in the United States and the largest Bosnian population outside their homeland.
Another downtown sculpture park is the Serra Sculpture Park, with the 1982 Richard Serra sculpture ''Twain''.
The daily average temperature in July is .
Washington University
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis has been ranked among the top 10 medical schools in the country by US News & World Report for as long as the list has been published, and as high as second, in 2003 and 2004.
The St. Louis Zoo-Museum district collects property taxes from residents of both St. Louis City and County and the funds are used to support cultural institutions including the St. Louis Zoo, St. Louis Art Museum and the Missouri Botanical Gardens.
For this reason, he and his trading partner Gilbert Antoine de St. Maxent were offered monopolies for six years of the fur trading in that area.
Numerous native species of pollinator insects have recovered to fill their ecological niche, and armadillos have been regularly seen throughout the St. Louis area, especially since 2005.
The President of the Board of Aldermen and the aldermen from even-numbered wards are elected in the off-years.
Both Lewis and Clark lived in St. Louis after the expedition.
Programs such as Arch Grants are attracting new startups to the region.
Boeing employs nearly 15,000 people in its north St. Louis campus, headquarters to its defense unit.
The region hosts NHRA drag racing and NASCAR events at the Gateway International Raceway in Madison, Illinois.St.
As of 2006, 27 of the city's 28 Aldermen are Democrats.
Among them are Anheuser-Busch, purchased by Belgium-based InBev; Missouri Pacific Railroad, which was headquartered in St. Louis, merged with the Omaha, Nebraska-based Union Pacific Railroad in 1982; McDonnell Douglas, whose operations are now part of Boeing Defense, Space & Security; Mallinckrodt, purchased by Tyco International; and Ralston Purina, now a wholly owned subsidiary of Nestlé.
The bridge crosses the St. Louis riverfront between Laclede's Landing, to the north, and the grounds of the Gateway Arch, to the south.
Louis District'' (St. Louis – Moberly, Missouri)
Located 17 miles east of the city downtown core, the airport serves domestic passengers.
St. Louis also was the headquarters for postwar modernist bank designer Wenceslaus Sarmiento, whose major work in St. Louis is the Chancery Building (1965) on the grounds of the Cathedral Basilica of St. Louis.
The St. Louis Arsenal constructed ironclads for the Union Navy.
Detroit, Flint, Memphis,  Oakland, and some smaller cities with fewer than 100,000 population (ex, Camden, New Jersey) have higher overall violent crime rates than St. Louis, when you include rape, robbery, and aggravated assault.
Historic Native American tribes in the area included the Siouan-speaking Osage people, whose territory extended west, and the Illiniwek.
In 1780 during the American Revolutionary War, St. Louis was attacked by British forces, mostly Native American allies, in the Battle of St. Louis.
Four interstate highways connect the city to a larger regional highway system.
Gulls are common along the Mississippi River; these species typically follow barge traffic.
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.5% of the population.
Some of these were poorly designed and resulted in problems, of which Pruitt-Igoe became a symbol of failure.
The 563-mile Avenue of the Saints links St. Louis with St. Paul, Minnesota.
Other religious buildings from the period include SS.
Ted Drewes owns and operates a pair of frozen custard shops in St. Louis, which have been highlighted in the national media on several occasions.
That year, the Census Bureau reported St. Louis' population as 82% White and 17.9% African American.
Their major regional center was at Cahokia Mounds, active from 900 AD to 1500 AD.
Louis Slam play at the Harlen C. Hunter Stadium
This includes a Japanese strolling garden, Henry Shaw's original 1850 estate home and a geodesic dome called the Climatron.
*Fall (Mid September through November) is mild and sunny, with lower humidity.
Both lines enter the city north of Forest Park on the western edge of the city or on the Eads Bridge in downtown St. Louis to Illinois.
Louis American'', and the ''St.
Among the earliest is the Basilica of St. Louis, King of France (locally referred to as the ''Old Cathedral'').
Its territory east of the Mississippi was ceded to the Kingdom of Great Britain, the victor.
Architectural influences reflected in the area include French Colonial, German, early American, and modern architectural styles.
The McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington University played a major role in the Human Genome Project.
The city operates more than 100 parks, with amenities that include sports facilities, playgrounds, concert areas, picnic areas, and lakes.
All-sports stations, such as KFNS 590 AM "The Fan", WXOS "101.1 ESPN", and KSLG are also popular.
Since 2000, charter schools have operated in the city of St. Louis using authorization from Missouri state law.
The Meramec River forms most of its southern line.
Two others—Raymond Tucker, and Vincent C. Schoemehl—also served three terms as mayor, but served seven fewer days.
The original St. Louis courthouse was built in 1826 and featured a Federal style stone facade with a rounded portico.
Industrial developments on both banks of the river were linked by the bridge, the first in the mid-west over the Mississippi River.
Large mammals found in the city include urbanized coyotes and white-tailed deer.
The area has an extensive history of damaging tornadoes but they seldom touch down in the city.
The area that would become St. Louis was a center of the Native American Mississippian culture, which built numerous temple and residential earthwork mounds on both sides of the Mississippi River.
Its architectural legacy is somewhat scattered.
According to the 2010 United States Census, St. Louis had 319,294 people living in 142,057 households, of which 67,488 households were families.
Every year, usually in the month of April, the annual FIRST Robotics Competition world festival is held in St. Louis.
The city's remaining architectural heritage of the era includes a multi-block district of cobblestone streets and brick and cast-iron warehouses called Laclede's Landing.
Amtrak trains terminating in the city include the ''Lincoln Service'' to Chicago and the ''Missouri River Runner'' to Kansas City, Missouri.
National bus service in the city is offered by Greyhound Lines and Amtrak Thruway Motorcoach, with a station at the Gateway Multimodal Transportation Center, and Megabus, with a stop at St. Louis Union Station.
An estimated 8,500 vehicles pass through it daily.
Migrants from the French villages on the opposite side of the Mississippi River (e.g.
*Lesperance Yard – Carroll Street & South 1st St., ''Desoto Subdivision'' (St. Louis – Poplar Bluff, Missouri) and ''Jefferson City Subdivision'' (St. Louis – Jefferson City, Missouri)
There have also been countless number of books
St. Louis is known for the Gateway Arch, the tallest monument constructed in the United States at .
In 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $29,156, and the median income for a family was $32,585.
Taxicab service in the city is provided by private companies regulated by the Metropolitan Taxicab Commission.
The city is home to two national research universities, Washington University in St. Louis and Saint Louis University, as classified under the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education.
After World War II, St. Louis began losing population to the suburbs, first because of increased demand for new housing, unhappiness with city services, ease of commuting by subsidized highways, and later, white flight.
Near the southern boundary of the city of St. Louis (separating it from St. Louis County) is the River des Peres, practically the only river or stream within the city limits that is not entirely underground.
Freight rail service in St. Louis is provided on tracks owned by Union Pacific Railroad, Norfolk Southern Railway, Foster Townsend Rail Logistics – formerly Manufacturers Railway (St. Louis), Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis, Affton Trucking, and the BNSF Railway.
The Basilica was built between 1831 and 1834 in the Federal style.
About half the slaves achieved freedom in hundreds of suits before the American Civil War.
The war hurt St. Louis economically, due to the Union blockade of river traffic to the south on the Mississippi River.
As of 2013, the St. Louis Metropolitan Area is home to nine Fortune 500 companies, the third-highest in the Midwestern United States.
Others in the region include the ''Suburban Journals'', which serve parts of St. Louis County, while the primary alternative newspaper is the ''Riverfront Times''.
In 1964 civil rights activists protested at the construction of the Gateway Arch to publicize their effort to gain entry for African Americans into the skilled trade unions, where they were underrepresented.
The Old St. Louis County Courthouse (locally known as the ''Old Courthouse'') was completed in 1864 and was notable for having an early cast iron dome and for being the tallest structure in Missouri until 1894.
St. Louis saw a vast expansion in variety and number of religious buildings during the late 19th century and early 20th century.
After the Bosnian War started in 1992, more Bosnian refugees began arriving and by 2000, tens of thousands of Bosnian refugees settled in St. Louis with the help of Catholic aid societies.
Many came from Mississippi and Arkansas.
Unique city and regional cuisine reflecting various immigrant groups include toasted ravioli, gooey butter cake, provel cheese, the slinger, the Gerber sandwich, the St. Paul sandwich, and St. Louis-style pizza, featuring thin crust and provel cheese.
By the 1900 census, St. Louis was the fourth largest city in the country.
In 1904, the city hosted a world's fair at Forest Park called the Louisiana Purchase Exposition.
The neighborhood features the Holy Corners Historic District, which is a concentration of several historic religious structures, such as the First Church of Christ, Scientist (1904).
Many of them were professionals and skilled workers who had to take any job opportunity to be able to support their families.
In addition to Catholic theological institutions such as Kenrick-Glennon Seminary, St. Louis is home to three Protestant seminaries: Eden Theological Seminary of the United Church of Christ, Covenant Theological Seminary of the Presbyterian Church in America, and Concordia Seminary of the St. Louis-based Lutheran Church Missouri Synod.
However, by 1765, the city began receiving notifications and visits from representatives and military actives from members of the English, French, and Spanish governments.
But 1904 left other assets to the city, like Theodore Link's 1894 St. Louis Union Station, and an improved Forest Park.
The Vietnamese community has concentrated in the Dutchtown neighborhood of south St. Louis; Chinese are concentrated in the Central West End.
Lambert St. Louis International Airport, owned and operated by the City of St. Louis, is 11 miles northwest of downtown along highway I-70 between I-170 and I-270 in St. Louis County.
St. Louis has thunderstorms 48 days a year on average.
The effects of suburbanization were exacerbated by the relatively small geographical size of St. Louis due to its earlier decision to become an independent city, and it lost much of its tax base.
The Chouteau brothers gained a monopoly from Spain on the fur trade with Santa Fe.
The Washington University School of Medicine is affiliated with Barnes-Jewish Hospital, the fifth-largest hospital in the world.
Some years have outbreaks of cicadas or ladybugs.
Settled by many Southerners in a slave state, the city was split in political sympathies and became polarized during the American Civil War.
The St. Louis Hawks of the NBA played at Kiel Auditorium from 1955 to 1968.
St. Louis, like many Midwestern cities, expanded in the early 20th century due to industrialization, which provided jobs to new generations of immigrants and migrants from the South.
All stations are independent entry, while all platforms are flush-level with trains.
In 1923 the city passed a $87 million bond issue for re-development of the Civic Plaza along the lines of the City Beautiful movement.
MidAmerica St. Louis Airport is the secondary passenger airport serving the metropolitan area.
The Department of Justice filed the first suit against the unions under the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Solicitation by a driver is prohibited, although a taxicab may be hailed on the street or at a stand.
St. Louis is home to two major league sports teams.
Several once-independent pillars of the local economy have been purchased by other corporations.
People of Mexican descent are the largest Latino group, and make up 2.2% of St. Louis' population.
Native Americans maintained this environment, good for hunting, by burning underbrush.
The 25th of that month also tied the all-time record warm daily minimum of , first set July 24, 1901.
In 2013, the company said it would move about 600 jobs from Seattle, where labor costs have risen, to a new IT center in St. Louis.
The Missouri History Museum was built afterward, with the profit from the fair.
As the state gained settlers, the first capital of Missouri was St. Louis before eventually moving to the more central location of Jefferson City in 1826.
St. Louis also supports public radio's KWMU, an NPR affiliate, and community radio's KDHX.
The May Department Stores Company (which owned Famous-Barr and Marshall Field's stores) was purchased by Federated Department Stores, which has its regional headquarters in the area.
Some historians believe that Laclede's determination to create this settlement was the result of his affair with a married woman Marie-Thérèse Bourgeois Chouteau, and so they wanted to get out of New Orleans.
The record high temperature is  on July 14, 1954.
In the early 20th century, African American and white migrants came from the South; the former as part of the Great Migration out of rural areas of the Deep South.
St. Louis was founded in 1764 by fur traders Pierre Laclède and Auguste Chouteau, and named after Louis IX of France.
The city is built primarily on bluffs and terraces that rise 100–200 feet above the western banks of the Mississippi River, in the Midwestern United States just south of the Missouri-Mississippi confluence.
Limestone and dolomite of the Mississippian epoch underlie the area, and parts of the city are karst in nature.
The bridge connects St. Louis, Missouri to East St. Louis, Illinois.
Lying near the hotbed of the Tornado Alley, St. Louis is one of the metropolitan areas with most frequent tornadoes.
*Spring (March through May) is typically the wettest season, with  of precipitation, although dry spells lasting one to two weeks are possible during the growing seasons.
The airport has two terminals with a total of five concourses.
Primary train classification yards in St. Louis, their approximate location in the city, and the ''main rail lines or major customers served'':
The Democratic Party has dominated St. Louis city politics for decades.
Additionally, as St. Louis was a prime location for immigrants to move to, many of the early social work depicting what an immigrant's life was like was based on St. Louis, such as seen in The Immigrant of St. Louis.
St. Louis is home to the St. Louis Symphony, the second-oldest symphony orchestra in the United States, which has toured nationally and internationally to strong reviews.
St. Louis also supports a public transportation network that includes bus and light rail service.
Bosnian-Americans are well integrated into the city, developing many businesses and ethnic/cultural organizations.
It was possible to walk between the terminals until Concourse D was closed in 2008.
The neighborhood divisions have no legal standing, although some neighborhood associations administer grants or hold veto power over historic-district development.
The city is divided into 79 government-designated neighborhoods.
St. Louis' population decline has resulted in a significant increase of abandoned residential housing units and vacant lots throughout the city proper; this blight has attracted much wildlife (such as deer and coyotes) to the many abandoned overgrown lots.
Other notable corporations headquartered in the region include Arch Coal, Scottrade, Wells Fargo Advisors (formerly A.G. Edwards), Energizer Holdings, Patriot Coal, Post Foods, United Van Lines, and Mayflower Transit, Ralcorp, Hardee's, Olin, and Enterprise Holdings (a parent company of several car rental companies).
Rates vary by vehicle type, size, passengers and distance, and by regulation all taxicab fares must be calculated using a taximeter and be payable in cash or credit card.
This development resulted in some of St. Louis's major civic architecture: the Soldiers' Memorial, the Civil Courts Building, and Kiel Auditorium.
Louis Sullivan designed Charlotte Dickson Wainwright's tomb on the north side of Bellefontaine Cemetery, surrounded by a collection of similar tombs for the great old St. Louis families, interesting for their late-Gilded Age artwork.
The Military Personnel Records Center (NPRC-MPR) located at 9700 Page Avenue in St. Louis, Missouri, USA, is a branch of the National Personnel Records Center and is the repository of over 56 million military personnel records and medical records pertaining to retired, discharged, and deceased veterans of the U.S. armed forces.
Though originally thought to be under the control of the Spanish government, no one asserted any authority over the settlement, and thus St. Louis had no local government.
Louis''' ( or ) is an independent city and inland port in the U.S. state of Missouri.
Others, especially women with children, sued in court in freedom suits, and several prominent local attorneys aided slaves in these suits.
After the war, St. Louis profited via trade with the West, aided by the 1874 completion of the Eads Bridge, named for its architect.
Pierre Laclede led an expedition to set up a fur-trading post farther up the Mississippi River.
They reached the Pacific Ocean via the Columbia River in summer 1805.
