In contrast, American eels (''Anguilla rostrata'') live in the St. Johns and Ocklawaha and spawn in the Sargasso Sea in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean.
Rain in central and north Florida occurs seasonally during summer and winter, but farther south rain in winter is rare.
Michaux was followed by William Baldwin between 1811 and 1817.
Florida was portrayed as an exotic wonderland able to cure failing health with its water and citrus, and the region began to be highlighted in travel writings.
The Timucua, who had initially befriended the French, were not encouraged to make the Spanish allies because of colonial governor Pedro Menéndez de Avilés' abhorrence of French Protestantism and his view that the Timucuan beliefs were "Satanic".
In 1864, near Palatka, Confederate forces under the command of Capt.
Typically, however, the St. Johns basin receives between  of rain annually, half of it in summer months.
A woman living in a winter home near Palatka introduced water hyacinths (''Eichhornia crassipes'') to the St. Johns in an attempt to beautify her backyard.
The campaign was controversial as the Republican mayor defended asking for federal government assistance, writing "Other rivers have relied heavily on federal help for massive environmental clean-ups.
These forms may derive from the Creek ''wi-láko'', "big water", a compound usually applied to large rivers that run through lakes; the St. Johns forms and borders numerous lakes.
All plants in these basins must tolerate water fluctuation, both flooding and drought.
In the upper basin, she remarked on the difficulty of determining direction due to the river's ambiguous flow, and wrote in a chapter titled "Hyacinth Drift" in her memoir ''Cross Creek'' that she had the best luck in watching the way the hyacinths floated.
The river veers west, touching on Lake Jesup before it empties into Lake Monroe, passing the city of Sanford.
Lying underneath the visible rock formations is a basement of igneous granite and volcanic composition under a sedimentary layer formed during the Paleozoic era 542 to 251 million years ago.
This drained the St. Johns' headwaters eastward to the Indian River through canals dug across the Ten-Mile Ridge near Palm Bay.
An Englishman named Nelson Fell, persuaded by Disston's advertisements to make his fortunes in Florida, arrived in the 1880s.
Although the upper basin projects are positive insofar as they will return land to the basin (and water to the river), the same cannot be said about increased urban runoff, the poor quality of which is well known.
Typical mammals that live in these ecosystems, such as raccoons (''Procyon lotor''), opossums (''Didelphis virginiana''), bobcats (''Lynx rufus''), and white tailed-deer (''Odocoileus virginianus''), are ones that prefer dry, flat areas with good ground cover and available nesting sites.
In the southernmost points of the river, ''Cladium'', or sawgrass, grows in vast swaths of wet prairie that at one time extended into the Everglades.
The narrowest point is in the headwaters, an unnavigable marsh in Indian River County.
The result of Jackson's offensive was the transfer of Florida to the U.S.
Flatwoods pine forests stay relatively dry, but can withstand short periods of flooding.
The report also noted concerns about the District's conclusion that the water withdrawals will have few deleterious ecological effects.
Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings used the St. Johns as a backdrop in her books ''South Moon Under'' and ''The Yearling'', and several short stories.
Many parts of the St. Johns and its tributaries are no-wake zones to protect manatees from being critically or fatally injured by boat propellers.
Although the Spanish had colonized Florida for two centuries, the state remained the last part of the east coast of the United States to be developed and explored.
The St. Johns drainage basin of  includes some of Florida's major wetlands.
Optimally an  deep channel about  wide after leaving Lake Monroe, the St. Johns meets its most significant tributary in the middle basin, the spring-fed Wekiva River, discharging approximately  a day into the St. Johns.
The figure may signify that its creators were part of the owl clan.
There are four first magnitude springs that feed the St. Johns River: Silver Springs in Marion County, emitting between /second; Silver Glen Spring straddling Marion and Lake Counties, emitting between /second; Alexander Springs in Lake County, emitting between /second; and Blue Spring in Volusia County, emitting between /second.
Further climate change between 5,000 and 3,000 years ago led to the Middle Archaic period; evidence suggests that human habitation near the St. Johns River first occurred during this era.
Following the Seminole Wars, a gradual increase in commerce and population occurred on the St. Johns, made possible by steamship travel.
Slightly north of the Wekiva River is Blue Spring, the largest spring on the St. Johns, producing over  a day.
The Florida Peninsula was created primarily by forces and minerals from the ocean.
What covers the peninsula is the result of simultaneous processes of deposits of sands, shells, and coral, and erosion from water and weather.
The large trees that line the river from its source to south of Jacksonville begin to transition into salt marshes east of the city.
The designation by the Environmental Protection Agency is intended to coordinate efforts among federal agencies to improve natural resource and environmental protection, economic revitalization, and historic and cultural preservation.
More attention was paid to the St. Johns with the increasing population.
They wove fibers from plants such as cabbage palms and saw palmettos.
Exports include paper, phosphate, fertilizers, and citrus, while major imports include oil, coffee, limestone, cars, and lumber.
The French and Spanish continued to spar over who would control the natural resources and native peoples of the colony, foreshadowing a history during which eight different countries would control the river.
Using an unofficial nickname of "The River City", Jacksonville has a culture centered on the St. Johns.
The same year and farther downriver, Confederates again sank a Union boat, the ''Maple Leaf'', which struck a floating keg filled with explosives and settled into the muck near Julington Creek, south of Jacksonville.
An artist named Jacques LeMoyne documented what he saw among the Timucuan people in 1564, portraying them as physically powerful and not lacking for provisions.
River otters (''Lutra canadensis'') can be found through the length of the St. Johns and its tributaries, living in burrows or in the roots of trees bordering waterways.
Without wetlands to filter the pollutants, the chemicals stayed in the river and flushed into the Atlantic Ocean.
Uniquely, it shares the same regional terrain as the parallel Kissimmee River, although the Kissimmee flows south.
Sanford has adapted to the lake by building some of its downtown area on the waterfront; citizens use boat transportation and Sanford's public dock to commute into town.
Occasionally the confining layer is fractured to allow breaches of water to percolate down to recharge the layer below.
The Seminoles employed a variety of languages from the peoples the Creeks had assimilated: Hitchiti, Muskogee, as well as Timucua.
There are two headwaters for the Ocklawaha: a chain of lakes, the largest of which is Lake Apopka in Lake County, and the Green Swamp near Haines City in Polk County, drained by the Palatlakaha River.
The home stadium for the Jacksonville Jaguars faces the river, as does most of the commercial center of downtown.
The government of Florida found the plants to be so vexing that it spent almost $600,000 between 1890 and 1930 in an unsuccessful bid to rid the creeks and rivers of north Florida of them.
However, a significant amount of fresh water is held underground but close to the surface in aquifers.
The first years following Florida's annexation to the United States in 1821 were marked with violent conflicts between white settlers and Seminoles, whose bands often included runaway African slaves.
Tropical Storm Fay in 2008 deposited  of rain in a 5-day period, most of it located near Melbourne.
Where the limestone or sand/clay overlay dissolves over the aquifer and the pressure of the water pushes out, springs form.
Near the center of Jacksonville, average measures have been collected at 11.40&nbsp;ppt.
Wading and water birds like the white ibis (''Eudocimus albus''), wood stork (''Mycteria americana''), and purple gallinule (''Porphyrio martinicus'') depend on the water for raising their young: they prey upon small fish and tadpoles in shallow water and puddles in the dry season.
Of vertebrates, numerous species of frog, salamander, snake, turtle, and alligator (''Alligator mississippiensis'') proliferate in marsh waters.
It suffered severe pollution and human interference that has diminished the natural order of life in and around the river.
Populations of indigenous people increased significantly at this time, and numerous settlements near the St. Johns have been recorded from this era; the banks of the St. Johns and its arteries are dotted with middens filled with thousands of shells, primarily those of ''Viviparus georgianus''—a freshwater snail—and oysters.
Archeologists and anthropologists date this agricultural advancement to coincide with a spread of archeological sites, suggesting that a population increase followed.
An engineer by trade, Fell purchased  near Lake Tohopekaliga to create a town named Narcoossee, which had a population of more than 200 English immigrants by 1888.
The upper basin of the St. Johns was significantly lowered in the 1920s with the establishment of the Melbourne Tillman drainage project.
Fay caused severe flooding in the middle basin due not only to the deluge but the flat slopes of the river.
Like all blackwater streams in Florida, the color of most of the St. Johns is black, owing to the tannins in leaf litter and decaying aquatic plants.
These earliest people are called Paleo-Indians.
Approximately 3,500 lakes lie within the overall St. Johns watershed; all are shallow, with maximum depths between .
Sweetbay (''Magnolia virginiana''), cypress (''Taxodium''), and swamp tupelo (''Nyssa biflora'') trees often find great success in this region on raised land called hammocks.
The St. Johns is home to 183 species of fish, 55 of which appear in the main stem of the river.
Ocean worms, snails, and white-fingered mud crabs (''Rhithropanopeus harrisii'') have also been found far upriver where tidal influences are rare.
The clashes between American and Seminole forces during the establishment of the Florida territory are reflected in the towns and landmarks along the St. Johns named for those who were directly involved.
As ocean water retreated, lagoons formed in the swales, which were further eroded by acidic water.
Rain occurs more frequently in late summer and early fall.
Where the river widens between Palatka and Jacksonville, wind becomes a significant factor in navigation, and both whitecap waves and calm surface waters are common.
Lakes Washington, Winder, and Poinsett— named for Joel Roberts Poinsett, a diplomat who brought the poinsettia to the United States— are located further along this stretch of the river.
Humans arrived on the Florida Peninsula about 12,000 years ago when the ocean was about  lower than today, and the peninsula was double its current size.
Some fracturing and faulting may also be responsible for the offset.
Her memoir ''Palmetto Leaves'', published in 1873 as a series of her letters home, was very influential in luring northern residents to the state.
In 1564, René Goulaine de Laudonnière arrived to build Fort Caroline at the mouth of the St. Johns River; they called the river ''Rivière de Mai'' because they settled it on May 1.
One action in Florida's role in the Civil War was the sinking of the ''USS Columbine'', a Union paddle steamer used for patrolling the St. Johns to keep materials from reaching the Confederate Army.
Fish such as mullet (''Mullidae''), flounder (''Paralichthys lethostigma''), shad (''Alosa sapidissima''), and blue crabs (''Callinectes sapidus'') migrate from the ocean to freshwater springs upriver to spawn.
The river touches on the borders of Osceola and Orange Counties, and flows through the southeast tip of Seminole County, transitioning into its middle basin a dozen miles (19&nbsp;km) or so north of Titusville.
They also afforded the citizens of Jacksonville a pastime to watch competing races.
Broken septic systems and seepage from cattle grazing lands create pollution that also finds its way into the river.
Much of the land was reclaimed for urban use, but agricultural needs took their toll as fertilizers and runoff from cattle ranching washed into the St. Johns.
The first known European reference to Florida is in a 1502 map by Cantino, which maps Florida and aptly describes the unique vegetation rafts in the St. Johns Rivers by originally naming the river the Rio de las Almadias (River of Rafts).
The company then found itself short of funds due to mismanagement.
They were primarily hunter–gatherers who followed large game, such as mastodons, horses, camels, and bison.
From its origins to approximately the area of Sanford, the St. Johns flows north.
This basin, spreading throughout Orange, Lake, Volusia, and Seminole Counties, is home to the greater Orlando metropolitan area, where two million people live and major tourist attractions are located.
The advent of regional types of pottery and stone tools made of flint or limestone marked further advancements around 500 BCE.
Disston was ultimately unsuccessful in his drainage attempts, but his investment sparked the tourist industry and made possible the efforts of railroad magnates Henry Morrison Flagler and Henry Bradley Plant to construct rail lines down the east coast of Florida, including a rail link between Sanford and Tampa.
A tribe located in modern-day Georgia and Alabama called the Creeks assisted with this; in 1702, they joined with the Yamasee and attacked some of the Timucua, forcing them to seek protection from the Spanish who forced them into slavery.
Restoration efforts are under way for the basins around the St. Johns as Florida continues to deal with population increases in the river's vicinity.
Johns River''' () is the longest river in the U.S. state of Florida and its most significant for commercial and recreational use.
Much of the land was far from water—most fresh water was contained in glaciers and polar ice caps.
The drop in elevation from headwaters to mouth is less than ; like most Florida waterways, the St. Johns has a very low flow rate  and is often described as "lazy".
What could have been the most serious human impact on nature in central Florida was the Cross Florida Barge Canal, an attempt to connect the Gulf and Atlantic coasts of the state by channeling the Ocklawaha River, first authorized in 1933.
By the 1860s, weekly trips between Jacksonville, Charleston, and Savannah were made to transport tourists, lumber, cotton, and citrus.
The animals and plants in these systems can tolerate both fresh and salt water, and the fluctuations in saline content and temperatures associated with tidal surges and heavy rainfall discharge.
Because the river flows in a northerly direction, the upper basin is located in the headwaters of the river at its southernmost point.
What ranges in between is characterized as brackish water.
Some are marine species that either migrate upriver to spawn or have found spring-fed habitats that are high in salinity, such as a colony of Atlantic stingrays (''Dasyatis sabina'') that live in Lake Washington in the upper basin.
Steamboats heralded a heyday for the river, and before the advent of local railroads, they were the only way to reach interior portions of the state.
A separate canal, the St. Johns-Indian River Barge Canal, was planned to link the river with the Intracoastal Waterway; the project never broke ground, and was canceled soon after the Cross Florida Barge Canal was suspended.
The St. Johns River became the first place colonized in the region and its first battleground: when French explorer Jean Ribault erected a monument south of the river's mouth to make the French presence known, it alarmed the Spanish who had been exploring the southern and western coast of the peninsula for decades.
After the civil war, Pearson's Orange Springs resort declined in popularity due to the increasing attention to nearby Silver Springs—the source of the Silver River—at the turn of the 20th century, popularizing the Ocklawaha.
The Creeks began assimilating other people and spread farther south until they were known by 1765 as Seminoles by the British, a term adapted from ''cimarrones'' that meant "runaways" or "wild ones".
The plantation grew citrus and sea island cotton (''Gossypium barbadense'').
The St. Johns River is a blackwater stream, meaning that it is fed primarily by swamps and marshes lying beneath it; water seeps through the sandy soil and collects in a slight valley.
The greatest discharge is from first magnitude springs that emit at least  of water per second.
Flatwoods forests dominate the Lake George watershed, with slash pines (''Pinus elliottii''), saw palmetto (''Serenoa repens''), and over 100 species of groundcover or herbal plants that grow in poor, sandy soil.
Confederate Captain John William Pearson named his milita after the Ocklawaha River called the Ocklawaha Rangers in the American Civil War.
Although seismic activity in Florida is mostly insignificant, several minor earthquakes have occurred near the St. Johns River, caused by the trough created by Pangaean rifting.
The St. Johns River lies within a humid subtropical zone.
From the intersection of the Ocklawaha River,  to the Atlantic Ocean, the St. Johns lies within the lower basin, draining a total area of  in Putnam, St. Johns, Clay, and Duval Counties.
Johns River offset'', but shortly changes direction to flow north again.
The St. Johns River is separated into three basins and two associated watersheds managed by the St. Johns River Water Management District.
Amphibious invertebrates such as apple snails (''Pomacea paludosa''), crayfish, and grass shrimp consume plant material, hastening its decomposition and acting as a food source for fish and birds.
Numerous lakes are formed by the river or flow into it, but as a river its widest point is nearly  across.
In 1933 she took a boat trip along the St. Johns with a friend.
The rate of evapotranspiration corresponds to rainfall, ranging between  a year, most of it occurring in the summer.
The first step in restoration, particularly in the upper basin, is the purchase of public lands bordering the river; ten different reserves and conservation areas have been implemented for such use around the St. Johns headwaters.
More than  have been purchased along Lake Apopka to restore its wetlands, and the SJRWMD has removed nearly  of gizzard shad (''Dorosoma cepedianum''), a fish species that stores phosphorus and adds to algae problems.
As a result of tidal effects, discharge measurements in the lower basin are often inaccurate.
The National Research Council found that, overall, the District performed a competent job in relating predicted environmental responses, including their magnitude and general degree of uncertainty, to the proposed range of water withdrawals.
Following the Civil War, the State of Florida was too far in debt to build roads and rail lines to further its progress.
Mayport is home to approximately 20 shrimping vessels that use the mouth of the St. Johns to access the Atlantic Ocean.
Both Palatka and Green Cove Springs have been popular tourist destinations in the past.
Insect larvae use water for breeding, feeding upon smaller copepods and amphipods that live in microscopic algae and periphyton formations.
The Silver River, fed by one of Florida's most productive springs expelling  daily, is located about midway along the  Ocklawaha.
In 1910 Fell purchased  of land for $1.35 an acre and started the Fellsmere Farms Company to drain the St. Johns Marsh in 1911 and send water into the Indian River Lagoon, promoting the engineered canals and other structures as wondrously efficient in providing land to build a massive metropolis.
Because of this low elevation drop, the river has a long backwater.
Near this confluence are the towns of DeBary and Deltona.
Part of the shipwreck was recovered in 1994, when it was discovered that many Civil War-era artifacts, including daguerreotypes and wooden matches, had been preserved in the river muck.
Twelve tributaries empty into the river in the lower basin.
The most efficient way to travel on this part of the river is by airboat.
William's visit took him as far south as Blue Spring, where he remarked on the crystal clear views offered by the spring water: "The water is perfectly diaphanous, and here are continually a prodigious number and variety of fish; they appear as plain as though lying on a table before your eyes, although many feet deep in the water."
John Jackson Dickison captured, burned, and sank the ''USS Columbine'', making her perhaps the only ship commandeered by the Confederacy.
Of most vital importance to marshes are invertebrate animals, the foundation of food webs.
The St. Johns, named one of 14 American Heritage Rivers in 1998, was included on a list of America's Ten Most Endangered Rivers in 2008.
The influx of immigrants to Florida settled primarily south of Orlando, adversely affecting the natural order of wetlands there.
It is an oxygen- and nutrient-poor environment; what grows usually does so in peat which is created by centuries of decaying plant material.
Eight larger lakes and five smaller ones lie in the upper basin; one of the first is named Lake Hell 'n Blazes (sometimes polished to read as Lake Helen or Hellen Blazes), referencing oaths yelled by boatmen and fishermen in the early 19th century, frustrated when trying to navigate through floating islands of macrophytes, or muck and weeds, as the islands changed location with the creeping flow.
The canal was intended to be  long,  wide, and  deep.
Subsequent explorers, including John James Audubon, have carried William's ''Travels Through North & South Carolina, Georgia, East & West Florida'' with them as a guide.
Oysters and other mollusks serve as the primary food source of shorebirds.
It is separated into three major basins and two associated watersheds for Lake George and the Ocklawaha River, all managed by the St. Johns River Water Management District.
The upper and middle basins of the St. Johns River are located in a portion of the peninsula where the aquifer system is thinly confined, meaning springs and sinkholes are abundant.
Despite this, Clinton designated the St. Johns as one of only 14 American Heritage Rivers out of 126 nominated in 1998 for its ecological, historic, economic and cultural significance.
They were charged by King George III to find the source of the river they called the Picolata or San Juan, and measured its widths and depths, taking soil samples as they traveled southward.
Florida was once part of the supercontinent Gondwana.
The towns and cities along the lower basin of the river are some of the oldest in Florida, and their histories have centered on the river.
Later, in 1513 Juan Ponce de León arrived near Cape Canaveral, and not until 1562 did Europeans settle the north Atlantic coast of the peninsula.
Some progress was made initially, including the establishment of the town of Fellsmere in which land was sold for $100 an acre, but sales lagged because of a scandal regarding land sale fraud and faulty draining reports from the Everglades.
The U.S. Navy has two bases in the Jacksonville area: Naval Station Mayport, at the mouth of the river, serves as the second largest Atlantic Fleet operation and home port in the country.
Marine animals such as dolphins and sharks can be spotted at times in the St. Johns at Jacksonville as can manatees.
Starting in Indian River County and meeting the Atlantic Ocean at Duval County, the St. Johns is Florida's primary commercial and recreational waterway.
After Florida came under the Kingdom of Great Britain's jurisdiction in 1763, Quaker father and son naturalists John and William Bartram explored the length of the river while visiting the southeastern United States from 1765 to 1766.
When European explorers arrived in north Florida, they met the Timucua, numbering about 14,000, the largest group of indigenous people in the region.
The success of these journals inspired other naturalists such as André Michaux to further explore the St. Johns, as he did in 1788, sailing from Palatka south to Lake Monroe, and gave names to some of the plants described by the Bartrams' journals.
Undeveloped land sold well and draining to reclaim wetlands has often gone unchecked, and often encouraged by government.
Early Spanish explorers named the river ''Rio de Corientes'' (River of Currents).
North-south axis rivers, such as the St. Johns, were created by past beach ridges which were often divided by swales.
The St. Johns River is under consideration as an additional water source to meet growing public water needs.
In successful seasons, their colonies can number in the thousands, creating a cacophony of calls and fertilizing trees with their droppings.
The marshes around the St. Johns River upper basin teem with birds.
In 1969 the Environmental Defense Fund filed suit in federal court to stop construction on the canal, citing irreparable harm that would be done to Florida waterways and the Floridan Aquifer, central and north Florida's fresh water source.
Its proximity to the ocean in the lower basin affects its rise and fall with tides and salinity.
Geologists hypothesize that the west-flowing offset may have formed earlier than the north flowing portions, possibly during the late Tertiary or early Pleistocene era 66 to 12 million years ago.
In 1955 an extremely rare Timucua totem representing an owl was found buried and preserved in the St. Johns muck off of Hontoon Island.
The soil along the St. Johns was considered especially successful for producing sweeter oranges.
To assist with river cleanup and the associated funds for improving water quality in the St. Johns, Mayor John Delaney of Jacksonville waged a campaign to get it named as an American Heritage River, beginning in 1997.
Several smaller locations along the river sprang up around ferry landings, but when rail lines and then Interstate highways were constructed closer to the Atlantic Coast, many of the towns experienced significant economic decline, and ferry landings were forgotten.
William returned to Florida from 1773 to 1777 and wrote another journal about his travels, while he collected plants and befriended the Seminoles who called him "Puc Puggy" (flower hunter).
They published journals describing their experiences and the plants and animals they observed.
The SJRWMD has also set minimum levels for the lakes and tributaries in the St. Johns watersheds to monitor permitted water withdrawals and declare water shortages when necessary.
In 2008, the river's Water Management District undertook a Water Supply Impact Study of the proposed water withdrawals and asked the National Research Council to review science aspects of the study as it progressed.
Disston was responsible for creating the towns of Kissimmee, St.
Dissolved oxygen in fresh water is measured to indicate the health of plant and animal life.
Manatees are large, slow-moving herbivorous aquatic mammals whose primary threats are human development and collisions with swiftly moving watercraft.
Around Lake Griffin in the Ocklawaha Chain of Lakes, the SJRWMD has purchased  of land that was previously used for muck farming.
When the overlay of these caverns is particularly thin—less than —sinkholes can form.
Lying within a coastal plain, the St. Johns River passes through an area that was at one time barrier islands, coastal dunes, and estuary marshes.
These wetland flora are remarkably successful in filtering pollutants that otherwise find their way into the river.
Alternately, the Seminole name may derive from ''walaka'' (from ''wi-alaka'', "water" and "coming"), perhaps a reference to the river's slow discharge and the tidal effects on it.
As ocean water has retreated and progressed, the peninsula has been covered with sea water at least seven times.
This portion of the river is the most navigable and shipping is its primary use.
For  the river passes through a  basin fed primarily by springs and stormwater runoff.
The confluence of numerous springs, the Econlockhatchee River, and the Wekiva River causes the average discharge to increase by  per second between Lake Harney and DeLand, representing the greatest annual average increase of streamflow along the St. Johns.
It flows north from its headwaters, originating in the direction of the Lake Wales Ridge, which is only slightly elevated at  above sea level.
These animals are water hardy and adaptable to dry conditions when water levels fluctuate from one season to the next or through drought and flood cycles.
A ''New York Times'' story reporting on Disston's progress in 1883 stated that before Disston's purchase and the subsequent development, the only places worth seeing in Florida were Jacksonville and St. Augustine, with perhaps an overnight trip on the St. Johns River to Palatka; by 1883 tourist attractions had extended  south.
The Army Corps of Engineers was also constructing hundreds of miles of canals in the Everglades at the same time and by the 1960s was being accused of wasting tax money through its unnecessary construction projects.
Florida's involvement in the U.S. Civil War was limited compared to other Confederate states because it had a fraction of the populations of states that had been developed.
The Archaic people made tools from bone, animal teeth, and antlers.
From the central part of the state north, along the Atlantic Coast lived people in the St. Johns culture, named for the most significant nearby natural formation.
The St. Johns creeps into the southern tip of Lake George, the second largest lake in Florida at ,  wide and  long.
