Examples include the Glass House in London set up by Mary Lowndes and Alfred J. Drury and An Túr Gloine in Dublin, which was run by Sarah Purser and included artists such as Harry Clarke.
File:HungarianroomWindows.jpg|Windows of the Hungarian Room, University of Pittsburgh
File:Canterbury Cathedral window crop.JPG|South Transept window at Canterbury Cathedral, 13th century
File:Vitrail Chartres 210209 07.jpg|Detail of a 13th-century window from Chartres Cathedral
File:Graz_Leechkirche_20061105_adjusted.JPG|''Crucifixion with Ss Catherine, George and Margaret'', Leechkirche, Graz, Austria
A full sized cartoon is drawn for every "light" (opening) of the window.
File:Tudeley church window.jpg|Expressionist window by Marc Chagall, at All Saints' Church, Tudeley, Kent, UK
* The houses of Frank Lloyd Wright
The British Museum holds two of the finest Roman pieces, the Lycurgus Cup, which is a murky mustard colour but glows purple-red to transmitted light, and the Portland vase which is midnight blue, with a carved white overlay.
This 58-panel window has brilliant red, orange, and yellow etched glass for the sunrise, with textured glass used to create the effect of moving water.
In the late 19th and 20th centuries there have been many innovations in techniques and in the types of glass used.
Other manufacturers included William Wailes, Ward and Hughes, Clayton and Bell, Heaton, Butler and Bayne and Charles Eamer Kempe.
Glass made this way is never fully transparent, but doesn't necessarily have much texture.
**St. Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney, Australia, early complete cycle of 19th-century glass, Hardman of Birmingham.
In Britain it appears in the refined and formal leadlight designs of Charles Rennie Macintosh.
A scaled model maquette may also be provided.
Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney has a cycle of 19th-century windows by Hardman of Birmingham
Each major ocular window contains a single picture drawn from the Life of Christ or the Life of the Virgin Mary, surrounded by a wide floral border, with two smaller facade windows by Ghiberti showing the martyred deacons, St Stephen and St Lawrence.
The current president is B. Gunar Gruenke of the Conrad Schmitt Studios.
Original designs often imitate this style.
Rolled glass was first commercially produced around the mid-1830s and is widely used today.
File:Portland Vase BM Gem4036 n5.jpg|The Portland Vase, a rare example of Roman flashed glass
Stained glass window of right transept of Santi Giovanni e Paolo (Venice).jpg|Renaissance window in the church of SS Giovanni and Paolo, Venice 16th century
Important 20th-century stained glass artists include John Hayward, Douglas Strachan, Ervin Bossanyi, Louis Davis, Wilhelmina Geddes, Karl Parsons, John Piper, Patrick Reyntiens,  Johannes Shreiter,  Judith Schaechter, Paul Woodroffe, Jean René Bazaine at Saint Séverin, Sergio de Castro at Couvrechef- La Folie (Caen), Hamburg-Dulsberg and Romont (Switzerland), and the Loire Studio of Gabriel Loire at Chartres.
van Crimpen, of Leiden.
File:Fairford st mary 011.jpg|''The Last Judgement'', St Mary's Church, Fairford, (1500–17) by Barnard Flower
The way the glass is heated and cooled can significantly affect the colours produced by these compounds.
File:Vitro_buckfast.jpg|''Christ of the Eucharist'' designed by the monks of Buckfast Abbey, Devon, England, slab glass.
Stained glass, as an art and a craft, requires the artistic skill to conceive an appropriate and workable design, and the engineering skills to assemble the piece.
Ultimately, the French Revolution brought about the neglect or destruction of many windows in France.
Glass can be "double rolled", which means it is passed through two cylinders at once (similar to the clothes wringers on older washing machines) to yield glass of a specified thickness (typically approximately 1/8").
This yellow was particularly useful for enhancing borders, canopies and haloes, and turning blue glass into green glass.
The colours were then annealed to the glass before the pieces were assembled.
Tattershall Castle, UK
A great advantage is that the double-layered glass can be engraved or abraded to reveal the clear or tinted glass below.
As it cools, it is reheated so the manipulation can continue.
As a material ''stained glass'' is glass that has been coloured by adding metallic salts during its manufacture.
When used with lead glass with a very high proportion of lead, it produces a deep red colour.
Coloured glass has been produced since ancient times.
A small design called a ''Vidimus'' (from Latin "we saw it") is prepared which can be shown to the patron.
de Vrije (Gouda); design Joachim Wtewael (Utrecht) (1595-1600)
It is prevalent in luxury homes, commercial buildings, and places of worship.
Other glass was designed in a more Classical manner, and characterised by the brilliant cerulean colour of the blue backgrounds (as against the purple-blue of the glass of Chartres) and the use of pink and mauve glass.
Architectural glass must be at least 1/8 of an inch thick to survive the push and pull of typical wind loads.
By about 1450 a stain known as ''Cousin's rose'' was used to enhance flesh tones.
In the 16th century a range of glass stains were introduced, most of them coloured by ground glass particles.
File:Vitrail Saint-Urbain Troyes 110208 05.jpg|West window from Saint-Urbain, Troyes, (about 1900)
File:Theo van Doesburg - Composition with window with coloured glass III.JPG|De Stijl abstraction by Theo van Doesburg, Netherlands (1917)
There are a number of glass factories, notably in Germany, USA, England, France, Poland and Russia, which produce high-quality glass, both hand-blown (cylinder, muff, crown) and rolled (cathedral and opalescent).
*The addition of Manganese gives an amethyst colour.
The scheme includes three ocular windows for the dome and three for the facade which were designed from 1405-1445 by several of the most renowned artists of this period: Ghiberti, Donatello, Uccello and Andrea del Castagno.
File:Fenster im Staatsrat 3.jpg|Socialist Realism by Walter Womacka, Berlin, (c. 1965) demonstrating the use of overlaid and laminated glass
Throughout its thousand-year history, the term has been applied almost exclusively to the windows of churches, mosques and other significant buildings.
File:Poitiers, Cathédrale Saint-Pierre -PM 34985 lighter.JPG|The Crucifixion window of Poitiers Cathedral
File:Leonard French La Trobe 05.jpg|''The Four Seasons'' (1978) by Leonard French at La Trobe University Sculpture Park in Melbourne.
File:Canterbury Cathedral 012 window showing leading and support.JPG|Thomas Becket window from Canterbury showing the ''pot metal'' and painted glass, lead H-sectioned ''cames'', modern steel rods and copper wire attachments
File:Federalpalace-dome.jpg|The Federal Palace, Switzerland
In modern windows, copper foil is now sometimes used instead of lead.
A small church window might typically have two lights, with some simple ''tracery'' lights above.
The chemistry involved is complex and not well understood.
File:Stained Glass Window, Church of Our Lady, Koblenz - Germany..jpg|The chancel windows of the Church of Our Lady, Koblenz, Germany
The coloured glass is crafted into ''stained glass windows'' in which small pieces of glass are arranged to form patterns or pictures, held together (traditionally) by strips of lead and supported by a rigid frame.
File:Thouars église St Médard (10).JPG|''St Louis administering Justice'' by Lobin in the painterly style.
Paolo uccello, vetrata della resurrezione.jpg| ''The Resurrection'', Paolo Uccello, (1443–45) one of a series in the dome of Florence Cathedral designed by renowned Renaissance artists.
Hundreds of pieces of coloured glass and lead, dating back to the late 7th century, have been discovered here and at Jarrow.
The addition of Chromium yields dark green glass, suitable for flashed glass.
The west windows of England's Manchester Cathedral, by Tony Hollaway, are some of the most notable examples of symbolic work.
Among the earliest 19th-century English manufacturers and designers were William Warrington and John Hardman of Birmingham, whose nephew, John Hardman Powell, had a commercial eye and exhibited works at the Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876, influencing stained glass in the United States of America.
File:Chartres - Vitrail de la Vie de Joseph.JPG|13th-century window from Chartres showing extensive use of the ubiquitous cobalt blue with green and purple-brown glass, details of amber and borders of flashed red glass.
Manganese is one of the oldest glass additives, and purple manganese glass has been used since early Egyptian history.
With calcium it yields a deep yellow colour.
The term '''stained glass''' can refer to coloured glass as a material or to works created from it.
Traditionally, when the windows were inserted into the window spaces, iron rods were put across it at various points to support its weight.
Among the early well-known 20th-century artists who experimented with stained glass as an Abstract art form were Theo van Doesburg and Piet Mondrian.
Probably the earliest scheme of stained glass windows that was created during the Renaissance was that for Florence Cathedral, devised by Lorenzo Ghiberti.
In the Romanesque and Early Gothic period, from about 950 AD to 1240 AD, the untraceried windows demanded large expanses of glass which of necessity were supported by robust iron frames, such as may be seen at Chartres Cathedral and at the eastern end of Canterbury Cathedral.
File:Liberec, radnice 03.jpg|Stained glass in the Town Hall, Liberec, Czech Republic
The designs for many windows were based directly on the work of famous engravers such as Albrecht Dürer.
This brought about a great demand for the revival of the art of stained glass window making.
*Cadmium together with sulphur results in deep yellow colour, often used in glazes.
All the joints are then soldered together and the glass pieces are prevented from rattling and the window made weatherproof by forcing a soft oily cement or ''mastic'' between the glass and the cames.
It can be pushed and tugged while molten for certain effects.
This allows for the use of techniques such as Angel gilding and Eglomise to produce an effect visible from both sides but not exposing the decorated surface to the atmosphere or mechanical damage.
This window has the bright pastel colour, wealth of inventive ornament, and stereotypical gestures of windows by this firm.
File:Stained glass in Saint Maurice churche, Olomouc.jpg|A window in the Late Gothic style, St Maurice's Church, Olomouc, Czech Republic, early 20th century
Beauvais (60), église Saint-Étienne, baie n° 5 a.jpg|''Tree of Jesse'' window, Church of Saint-Étienne, Beauvais, France,  Engrand Le Prince, (1522-1524)
**Cathedral of Chartres, in France, 11th- to 13th-century glass
In France many churches and cathedrals suffered despoliation during the French Revolution.
File:Lincoln Cathedral East window.jpg|One of England's largest windows, the east window of Lincoln Cathedral, Ward and Nixon (1855), is a formal arrangement of small narrative scenes in roundels
A lightly coloured molten gather is dipped into a pot of molten red glass, that is then blown into a sheet of laminated glass using either the cylinder (muff) or the crown technique described above.
File:Heaton, Butler and Bayne01.png|Maquette by Heaton, Butler and Bayne, 19th-century English manufacturers
File:Chilham StMarys EastWindow19thC.JPG|William Wailes.
The Royal Bavarian Glass Painting Studio was founded by Ludwig I in 1827.
File:Ghent Cathedral stained glass.jpg|Ghent Cathedral, Belgium
Artists and companies are contracted to create beautiful art glass ranging from domes, windows, backsplashes, etc.
File:Eyneburg_7.jpg|Detail from a 19th or 20th-century window in Eyneburg, Belgium, showing detailed polychrome painting of face.
File:John-the-baptist-by-tiffany.jpg|A window by Tiffany illustrating the development and use of multi-coloured flashed, opalised and streaky glasses at the end of the 19th century
However, in the creation of red glass, the colouring ingredients must be of a certain concentration, or the colour will not develop.
Other artists sought to transform an ancient art form into a contemporary one, sometimes using traditional techniques while exploiting the medium of glass in innovative ways and in combination with different materials.
*In medieval times, blue glass was made by adding cobalt, which at a concentration of  0.025 to 0.1% in soda-lime glass achieves the brilliant blue characteristic of Chartres Cathedral.
One side of the cylinder is opened.
File:Cassagnes vitrail 1.JPG|A brilliantly-coloured window at Cassagnes-Bégonhès, Aveyron
(1543) The windows show scenes from the lives of the Prophet Samuel and the Apostle Paul.
During the mid- to late 19th century, many of Germany's ancient buildings were restored, and some, such as Cologne Cathedral, were completed in the medieval style.
In Germany, stained glass development continued with the inter-war work of Johan Thorn Prikker and Josef Albers, and the postwar achievements of Joachim Klos, Johannes Schreiter and Ludwig Shaffrath.
It also has the distinctive lump of glass left by the "pontil" rod, which holds the glass as it is spun out.
Zürich - Mordnacht 1350 Wappenscheibe.jpg|Glass painting depicting Mordnacht (murder's night) on 23/24 February 1350 and heraldry of the first Meisen guild's Zunfthaus.
File:Sergio_de_Castro,_7e_jour_de_la_Création,_Le_Repos_Divin,_1956-59.jpg| Sergio de Castro, ''7th Day of Creation'', Church of the Benedictines, Caen (France).
In France there was a greater continuity of stained glass production than in England.
German stained glass found a market across Europe, in America and Australia.
Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris.
File:Temple Ohev Sholom Stained Glass, Ascalon Studios, David Ascalon.jpg|Late 20th-century stained glass from Temple Ohev Sholom, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania by Ascalon Studios.
The SGAA also sees its role as defending and protecting its craft against regulations that might restrict its freedom as an architectural art form.
Ordinary soda-lime glass appears colourless to the naked eye when it is thin, although iron oxide impurities produce a green tint which becomes evident in thick pieces or can be seen with the aid of scientific instruments.
*Uranium (0.1 to 2%) can be added to give glass a fluorescent yellow or green colour.
Other substances, such as lime, are added to rebuild the weakened network and make the glass more stable.
File:Koeln-Hohe Domkirche St Peter und Maria-Zentrum des Chorobergadens mit Koenigsfenstern.jpg|The windows of the choir of Cologne Cathedral, (early 14th century)
A narrative window with elegant forms and colour which is both brilliant and subtle in its combinations.
**Canterbury Cathedral, in England, 12th to 15th century plus 19th- and 20th-century glass
A revival occurred in the middle of the century because of a desire to restore thousands of church windows throughout Europe destroyed as a result of World War II bombing.
Crown glass is still made today, but not on a large scale.
Much 19th-century German glass has large sections of painted detail rather than outlines and details dependent on the lead.
Public houses in some countries make extensive use of stained glass and leaded lights to create a comfortable atmosphere and retain privacy.
File:SML-Stained-Glass-5.jpg|A small panel by G. Owen Bonawit at Yale University, c. 1930, demonstrates grisaille glass painting enlivened with silver stain.
File:Musee-de-l-Oeuvre-Notre-Dame-Strasbourg-IMG 1465 crop.JPG|''Charlemagne'' from a Romanesque window in Strasbourg Cathedral
One of the cupola windows has since been lost, and that by Donatello has lost nearly all of its painted details.
*Tin oxide with antimony and arsenic oxides produce an opaque white glass, first used in Venice to produce an imitation porcelain.
File:St Andrews window 08 6 west John and Paul.jpg|Detail, ''Apostles John and Paul'', Hardman of Birmingham, 1861–67, typical of Hardman in its elegant arrangement of figures and purity of colour.
This hand-blown glass is created by blowing a bubble of air into a gather of molten glass and then spinning it, either by hand or on a table that revolves rapidly like a potter's wheel.
File:Pt-coimbra-sevelha3.jpg|Exterior of a window at Sé Velha de Coimbra, Portugal, showing a modern steel armature
**York Minster, in England, 11th- to 15th-century glass
File:Palette with tools1.jpg|A palette and tools to prepare colours for painting on glass
From 1300 onwards, artists started using ''silver stain'' which was made with silver nitrate.
File:Henry G. Marquand House Conservatory Stained Glass Window.jpg|A trompe l'oeil glass c. 1884, Eugène Stanislas Oudinot, design Richard Morris Hunt, for home of Henry Gurdon Marquand, New York City.
The glass is then annealed.
There was a great demand for stained glass.
Phoenicia was important in glass manufacture with its chief centres Sidon, Tyre and Antioch.
Many large windows have withstood the test of time and remained substantially intact since the late Middle Ages.
Titanium is rarely used on its own and is more often employed to intensify and brighten other additives.
The method allows rich detailing and patterns to be achieved without needing to add more lead-lines, giving artists greater freedom in their designs.
Together with tin oxide and arsenic it yields emerald green glass.
In Western Europe they constitute the major form of pictorial art to have survived.
**Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church, extensive collection of windows by Louis Comfort Tiffany
Stained glass is still popular today, but often referred to as art glass.
White glass was used extensively by Louis Comfort Tiffany to create a range of opalescent, mottled and streaky glasses.
In Medieval times the cartoon was drawn directly on the surface of a whitewashed table, which was then used as a pattern for cutting, painting and assembling the window.
Although traditionally made in flat panels and used as windows, the creations of modern stained glass artists also include three-dimensional structures and sculpture.
The rolling can be done by hand or machine.
A Scottish designer, Daniel Cottier, opened firms in Australia and the US.
The design of a window may be
**Sainte-Chapelle, in Paris, 13th- and 14th-century glass
The colour is caused by the size and dispersion of gold particles.
File:Kapellenfenster Köln um 1340 KGM paste.JPG|''The Crucifixion'' and ''Virgin and Child in Majesty'', Cologne Cathedral, (1340)
It gave a yellow effect ranging from pale lemon to deep orange.
By the 17th century a style of stained glass had evolved that was no longer dependent upon the skilful cutting of coloured glass into sections.
In the 1960s and 1970s the Expressionist painter Marc Chagall produced designs for many stained glass windows that are intensely coloured and crammed with symbolic details.
File:South rose window of Chartres Cathedral01.jpg|The South Transept windows from Chartres Cathedral
Glass is coloured by adding metallic oxide powders or finely divided metals while it is in a molten state.
It was usually painted onto the outside of a piece of glass, then fired to make it permanent.
During the process, the bottom of the cylinder is removed.
File:Alabastron Italy Louvre S2375.jpg|A perfume flask from 100 BC-200 AD
The gather is formed to the correct shape and a bubble of air blown into it.
Art Nouveau or Belle Epoch stained glass design flourished in France, and Eastern Europe, where it can be identified by the use of curving, sinuous lines in the lead, and swirling motifs.
* Important examples
Integrated with the '''lofty verticals''' of Gothic cathedrals and parish churches, glass designs became more daring.
File:0702246987 bodenstein.jpg|A painted memorial window, Castle Bodenstein, Germany, early 19th century
Windows within a building may be thematic, for example: within a church - episodes from the life of Christ; within a parliament building - shields of the constituencies; within a college hall - figures representing the arts and sciences; or within a home - flora, fauna, or landscape.
Many new churches were planted in large towns and many old churches were restored.
Some very large early Gothic windows are divided into sections by heavy metal frames called ''ferramenta''.
This elaboration of form reached its height of complexity in the Flamboyant style in Europe, and windows grew still larger with the development of the Perpendicular style in England.
In this context, the purpose of a stained glass window is not to allow those within a building to see the world outside or even primarily to admit light but rather to control it.
File:Stained Glass Windows - Coventry Cathedral.jpg|Coventry Cathedral England, has a series of windows by different designers.
A major exponent of this technique is the German artist Walter Womacka.
One of these is Florida State University's Master Craftsman Program, which recently completed a  high stained-glass windows installed in Bobby Bowden Field at Doak Campbell Stadium.
Together with chromium it gives glass of a richer green colour, typical of the glass used to make wine bottles.
Using metal tools, molds of wood that have been soaking in water, and gravity, the gather is manipulated to form a long, cylindrical shape.
Stained glass windows in houses were particularly popular in the Victorian era and many domestic examples survive.
Peterborough Cathedral
File:Peterborough Cathedral glass 02 b.JPG|Clayton and Bell.
One of the oldest examples in situ.
In the Middle East, the glass industry of Syria continued during the Islamic period with major centres of manufacture at Ar-Raqqah, Aleppo and Damascus and the most important products being highly transparent colourless glass and gilded glass, rather than coloured glass.
While very pale green is the typical colour of transparent glass, deeper greens can be achieved by the addition of Iron(II) oxide which results in a bluish-green glass.
A window must fit snugly into the space for which it is made, must resist wind and rain, and also, especially in the larger windows, must support its own weight.
File:Glazier tools.JPG|A set of glaziers' tools
Additives that reduce the green tint include manganese dioxide which produces sodium permanganate, and may result in a slightly mauve tint, characteristic of the glass in older houses in New England, US.
Today there are academic establishments that teach the traditional skills.
The windows, some of which are 18 metres (60&nbsp;feet) high date from 1555 to the early 1600s, with the earliest being the work of Dirck Crabeth and his brother Wouter.
'''Flashed glass'''
* The addition of sulphur, together with carbon and iron salts, is used to form iron polysulphides and produce amber glass ranging from yellowish to almost black.
Much work of the period is mundane and often was not made by its designers, but industrially produced.
They were a form of enamel.
* Prairie style homes
Glass formed this way can be both coloured and used for stained-glass windows, or uncoloured as seen in small paned windows in 16th- and 17th-century houses.
In the Austrian Empire and later Austria-Hungary, one of the leading stained glass artists was Carl Geyling, who founded his studio in 1841.
File:Kraków - Church of St. Francis - Stained glass 01.jpg|''God the Creator'' by Stanisław Wyspiański, this window has no glass painting, but relies entirely on leadlines and skilful placement of colour and tone.
File:Sculpture en verre.jpg| Fused glass sculpture (2012) by Carlo Roccella Glass Sculpture in Paris.
From 1839 onwards much stained glass was produced that very closely imitated medieval glass, both in the artwork and in the nature of the glass itself.
File:Stained glass colours.jpg|Colours and mediums for painting on glass
File:Religion Enthroned 1900.jpg|''Religion Enthroned'', J&R Lamb Studios, designer Frederick Stymetz Lamb, c. 1900.
In the Netherlands a rare scheme of glass has remained intact at Grote Sint-Jan Church, Gouda.
