On 22 May 1935, the day after Hitler had made a speech claiming that German rearmament offered no threat to peace, Attlee asserted that Hitler's speech gave "a chance to call a halt in the armaments race".
With a succession of British military failures in 1940, Baldwin started to receive critical letters: "insidious to begin with, then increasingly violent and abusive; then the newspapers; finally the polemicists who, with time and wit at their disposal, could debate at leisure how to wound the deepest."
''Now is the time to go''".
Churchill firmly believed that Baldwin's conciliatory stance toward Hitler gave the German dictator the impression that Britain would not fight if attacked.
After the coronation of George VI, Baldwin announced on 27 May 1937 that he would resign the premiership the next day.
On 8 March 1934 Baldwin defended the creation of four new squadrons for the Royal Air Force against Labour criticisms and said of international disarmament:
His time at university was blighted by the presence, as Master of Trinity, of Montagu Butler, his former headmaster who had punished him at Harrow for writing a piece of schoolboy smut.
He inherited £200,000  and a directorship of the Great Western Railway on the death of his father in 1908.
Nicolson said it was superb, to which Baldwin replied: "Yes...it was a success.
He expected to unite his party but he divided it, for protectionism proved a divisive issue.
His father Alfred Baldwin had held the seat since 1892, but died in office in 1908, and the younger Baldwin was first selected as a candidate by the local Conservative association, and then acclaimed, holding the seat until his political retirement in 1937.
On 30 July 1934 Labour moved a motion of censure against the government because of its planned expansion of the RAF.
You will remember at that time the Disarmament Conference was sitting in Geneva.
In December 1944, strongly advised by friends, Baldwin decided to respond to criticisms of him through a biographer.
At a meeting of Conservative MPs at the Carlton Club in October, Baldwin announced that he would no longer support the coalition, and famously condemned Lloyd George for being a "dynamic force" that was bringing destruction across politics.
Baldwin retired in 1937 and was succeeded by Neville Chamberlain.
I think it is well also for the man in the street to realise that there is no power on earth that can protect him from being bombed.
His biographers Middlemas and Barnes claim that "the men" almost certainly meant the authors of ''Guilty Men''.
Williamson admits that there was a clear postwar consensus that repudiated and denigrated all inter-war governments: Baldwin was targeted with the accusation that he had failed to rearm Britain in the 1930s despite Hitler's threat.
I have no Cabinet papers by me and do not want to trust my memory.
The King proposed to marry Wallis Simpson, an American woman who was twice divorced.
Williamson asserted that Baldwin had helped create "a moral basis for rearmament in the mid 1930s" that contributed greatly to "the national spirit of defiance after Munich".
Baldwin made a rare speech in the House of Lords on 4 October where he said he could not have gone to Munich but praised Chamberlain's courage and said the responsibility of a Prime Minister was not to commit the country to war until he was sure that it was ready to fight.
Attlee also denounced the Defence White Paper of 1937: "I do not believe the Government are going to get any safety through these armaments".
In the November 1922 general election the Conservatives were returned with a majority in their own right.
However he accepted the criticism of Baldwin; that he failed to re-arm early enough and that he put party before country.
The election was inconclusive: the Conservatives elected 258 MPs, Labour 191 and the reunited Liberals 159.
The Cabinet decided on 23 October that Britain should still attempt to cooperate with other states, including Germany, in international disarmament.
However, Baldwin did not make rearmament the central issue in the election.
In the debate in the Commons on 12 November 1936, Churchill attacked the government on rearmament as being "decided only to be undecided, resolved to be irresolute, adamant for drift, solid for fluidity, all-powerful to be impotent.
This speech was often used against Baldwin as allegedly demonstrating the futility of rearmament or disarmament, depending on the critic.
This period included the General Strike of 1926, a crisis that the government managed to weather, despite the havoc it caused throughout the UK.
The meeting chose to leave the coalition, against the wishes of most of the party leadership.
One of his legislative reforms was a paradigm shift in his party.
Baldwin's schools were St Michael's School, at the time located in Slough, Berkshire, followed by Harrow School, a boarding school in north west London, and finally Brighton College, a boarding school in Brighton, Sussex.
As Lord President of the Council, and one of four Conservatives among the small ten-member Cabinet, Baldwin took over many of the Prime Minister's duties due to MacDonald's failing health.
On 31 July 1934, the Cabinet approved a report that called for expansion of the Royal Air Force to the 1923 standard by creating 40 new squadrons over the following five years.
Baldwin narrowly lost the 1929 General Election and his continued leadership of the party was subject to extensive criticism by the press barons Lord Rothermere and Lord Beaverbrook.
If all our efforts for an agreement fail, and if it is not possible to obtain this equality in such matters as I have indicated, then any Government of this country—a National Government more than any, and ''this'' Government—will see to it that in air strength and air power this country shall no longer be in a position inferior to any country within striking distance of our shores.
Neville Chamberlain advised Baldwin to make rearmament the leading issue in the election campaign against Labour, saying that, if a rearmament programme were not announced until after the election, his government would be seen as having deceived the people.
When this failed he appointed Neville Chamberlain to that position.
On 15 September 1933 the German delegate at the Disarmament Conference refused to return to the Conference and Germany left altogether in October.
On 26 November 1934, six days after receiving the news that the German air force would be as large as the RAF within one year, the Cabinet decided to speed up air rearmament from four years to two.
This crisis assumed a political dimension when Beaverbrook and Churchill tried to rally support for the marriage in the Parliament.
And suddenly for what must have been a couple of minutes I seemed to see with extraordinary and vivid clarity and to hear someone speaking to me.
Baldwin himself by now suffered from arthritis and needed a stick to walk.
The choice formally fell to King George V acting on the advice of senior ministers and officials.
In a speech during the campaign Baldwin said:
Less equivocal was his rediscovery as a moderate and inclusive Conservative for the modern age, part of a 'one nation tradition'."
Churchill also believed that Baldwin, rather than Chamberlain, would be most blamed by subsequent generations for the policies that led to "the most unnecessary war in history".
With MacDonald's physical powers failing him, he and Baldwin changed places in June 1935; Baldwin was now Prime Minister, MacDonald Lord President of the Council.
On 22 May 1935 Baldwin confessed in the Commons: "I was wrong in my estimate of the future.
I had a success, my dear Nicolson, at the moment I most needed it.
There is no moment when he overstates emotion or indulges in oratory.
I thought much, and when I went to bed I lay for a long time vividly awake.
It was learnt that Germany was easily able to outbuild this revised programme as well.
The Labour government was negotiating with the Soviet government over intended commercial treaties -- 'the Russian Treaties' -- to provide most favoured nation privileges and diplomatic status for the UK trade delegation; and a treaty that would settle the claims of pre-revolutionary British bondholders and holders of confiscated property, after which the British government would guarantee a loan to the Soviet Union.
As party leader, Baldwin made many striking innovations, such as clever use of radio and film, that made him highly visible to the public and strengthened Conservative appeal.
In May 1923 Bonar Law was diagnosed with terminal cancer and retired immediately; he died five months later.
On 29 March 1934 Germany published its defence estimates' which showed a total increase of one-third and an increase of 250% in its air force.
On 6 October Baldwin, in a speech to the Conservative Party Conference in Birmingham, pleaded for a Disarmament Convention and then said:
Hitler might do the same".
You will remember the election at Fulham in the autumn of 1933...That was the feeling of the country in 1933.
Two of Beaverbrook's friends after the war claimed that this was Beaverbrook's decision despite Churchill saying, "Lay off Baldwin's gates".
The Labour leader, Clement Attlee, told Baldwin "that while Labour people had no objection to an American becoming Queen, he was certain they would not approve of Mrs. Simpson for that position," especially in the provinces and in the Commonwealth countries.
In an article written to commemorate the centenary of Baldwin's birth, in ''The Spectator'' ("Don't Let's Be Beastly to Baldwin", 14 July 1967) Rab Butler defended Baldwin's moderate policies which, he claimed, helped heal social divisions.
In July 1940, a bestseller ''Guilty Men'' appeared, which blamed Baldwin for failing to re-arm enough.
‘You cannot see the plan’; then ‘Have you not thought there is a purpose in stripping you one by one of all the human props on which you depend, that you are being left alone in the world?
By 2004 Ball could report that among historians, "The pendulum has swung almost completely towards a positive view."
There was no question of applause.
It published its report on 14 May 1925 and in it Weir recommended the setting up of a Central Electricity Board, a state monopoly half-financed by the Government and half by local undertakings.
As a young man he served briefly as a Second Lieutenant in the Artillery Volunteers at Malvern, and in 1897 became a JP for the county of Worcestershire.
Baldwin decided to vote against the government over the Russian Treaties, which brought the government down on 8 October.
When the Cabinet refused the morganatic marriage, King Edward decided on his own volition to abdicate.
I think it would have been much better if Earl Baldwin had said that two and a half years ago when everyone demanded a Ministry of Supply".
Working with Winston Churchill as his Chancellor of the Exchequer,  and Neville Chamberlain as Minister of health, he strengthened the Conservative appeal by adopting numerous formerly Liberal reforms.
During October through November 1936, Baldwin joined the royal family in trying to dissuade the King from that marriage, arguing that the idea of having a twice-divorced woman as the Queen would be rejected by the government, by the country, and by the Empire; and that "the voice of the people must be heard."
Mrs. Simpson was also distrusted by the government for her known pro-German sympathies, and she was believed to be in "close contact with German monarchist circles".
When he made his final public appearance in London in October 1947 at the unveiling of a statue of George V, a crowd of people recognised and cheered him, but by this time he was deaf and asked: "Are they booing me?"
My position as a leader of a great party was not altogether a comfortable one.
Baldwin's new Cabinet now included many former political associates of Lloyd George: former Coalition Conservatives: Austen Chamberlain (as Foreign Secretary), Lord Birkenhead (Secretary for India) and Arthur Balfour (Lord President after 1925), and the former Liberal Winston Churchill as Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Supposing I had gone to the country and said that Germany was rearming and we must rearm, does anybody think that this pacific democracy would have rallied to that cry at that moment!
Churchill and Beaverbrook threatened to sue if certain passages in the biography were not removed or altered.
In private, Baldwin defended his conduct in the 1930s:
It is not entirely clear what factors proved most crucial, but some Conservative politicians felt that Curzon was unsuitable for the role of Prime Minister because he was a member of the House of Lords.
I think I brought Ramsay and Simon to meet Ribbentrop.
In 1941, A. L. Rowse criticised Baldwin for lulling the people into a false sense of security; as a practitioner in "the art of taking the people in":
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Lang, held that the King, as the head of the Church of England, should not marry a divorcée, while ''The Times'' argued that the monarchy’s prestige would be destroyed if "private inclination were to come into open conflict with public duty and be allowed to prevail."
His defenders counter that the moderate Baldwin felt he could not start a programme of aggressive re-armament without a national consensus on the matter.
Could G. M. Young go on my behalf?
He said he would support the League of Nations, modernise Britain's defences and remedy deficiencies but also said: "I give you my word that there will be no great armaments".
It has been written that his son "evidently could not decide whether he was answering the charge of inanition and deceit which grew out of the war, or the radical "dissenters" of the early 1930s who thought the Conservatives were warmongers and denounced them for rearming at all".
On 13 March 1924, the Labour government was defeated for the first time in the Commons, although the Conservatives decided to vote with Labour later that day against the Liberals.
I mean the limitation of armaments as a real limitation...and if we find ourselves on some lower rating and that some other country has higher figures, that country has to come down and we have to go up until we meet.
His father sent him to Mason College (the future University of Birmingham) for one session of technical training in metallurgy as preparation.
The high-minded Baldwin felt that he could tolerate her as "a respectable whore," so long as she stayed behind the throne, but not as "Queen Wally".
Here was Old England half smothered in a shroud crying for steel to cut her way out, and right in the heart of beautiful Worcestershire was a one-time Prime Minister, refusing to give up the gates of his estate to make guns for our defence – and his.
This government saw an Act delivering increased self-government for India, a measure opposed by Churchill and by many rank-and-file Conservatives.
On 21 May 1935, the Cabinet agreed to expanding the home defence force of the RAF to 1,512 aircraft (840 bombers and 420 fighters).
He served jointly with Sir Hardman Lever, who had been appointed in 1916, but after 1919 Baldwin carried out the duties largely alone.
The words at the time were clear, but the recollection of them had passed when I seemed to come to, as it were, but the sense remained, and the sense was this.
Young contends that Baldwin should have retired in 1935.
Harold Nicolson, an MP who witnessed Baldwin's speech, wrote in his diary:
Having been made Chancellor of the University of Cambridge in 1930, he continued in this capacity until his death in his sleep at Astley Hall near Stourport-on-Severn, Worcestershire, on 14 December 1947.
If there was a 95% chance of war in the future, he would still choose peace.
However, the King's party could only muster 40 Members of Parliament in support, and the majority opinion sided with Baldwin and his conservative government.
After the speech, the House was adjourned and Nicolson bumped into Baldwin as he was leaving, who asked him what he thought of the speech.
Attlee spoke for it: "We deny the need for increased air arms...and we reject altogether the claim of parity".
I asked myself what chance was there...within the next year or two of that feeling being so changed that the country would give a mandate for rearmament?
Baldwin supported the Munich Agreement and said to Chamberlain on 26 September 1938: "If you can secure peace, you may be cursed by a lot of hotheads but my word you will be blessed in Europe and by future generations".
At that time, he was regarded as a popular and successful prime minister, but for the final decade of his life, and for many years afterwards, he was vilified for having presided over high unemployment in the 1930s and as one of the "Guilty Men" who had tried to appease Adolf Hitler and who had – supposedly – not rearmed sufficiently to prepare for the Second World War.
A few months after this visit to Churchill, Baldwin told Harold Nicolson, "I went into Downing Street... a happy man.
In February 1937 the Chiefs of Staff reported that by May 1937 the Luftwaffe would have 800 bombers compared to the RAF's 48.
There were fears that if the gates were not taken by the proper authorities, "others without authority might".
The couple had six children.
With the help of lawyer Arnold Goodman an agreement was reached to replace the offending sentences, and the publisher Rupert Hart-Davis had the ''hideously expensive'' job of removing and replacing seven leaves from 7,580 copies.
Clement Attlee said on 21 December 1933: "For our part, we are unalterably opposed to anything in the nature of rearmament".
This attempted to defend Baldwin against the charges made by Young.
The Labour and Liberal parties, the Trades Union Congress, and the Dominions of Australia and Canada, all joined the British cabinet in rejecting the King's compromise, originally made on 16 November, for a morganatic marriage.
Baldwin announced the King's abdication in the Commons on 10 December.
Churchill wrote to a friend: "I have never heard such a squalid confession from a public man as Baldwin offered us yesterday".
On 25 February 1936, the Cabinet approved a report calling for expansion of the Royal Navy and the re-equipment of the British Army (though not its expansion), along with the creation of "shadow factories" built by public money and managed by industrial companies.
He had lost his nerve in the House in the last year.
I am speaking of 1933 and 1934.
Baldwin saw the draft of Churchill's speech and advised against it, which advice Churchill followed.
During the First World War he became Parliamentary Private Secretary to the party leader Andrew Bonar Law, and in 1917 he was appointed to the junior ministerial post of Financial Secretary to the Treasury where he sought to encourage voluntary donations by the rich to repay the United Kingdom's war debt, writing letters to ''The Times'' under the pseudonym 'FST', much of which were published.
And we prayed for France and the next day she surrendered.
Much weight at the time was given to the intervention of Arthur Balfour.
On 14 October Germany left the League of Nations.
It makes my blood boil to read of the way which Mr. Zinoviev is speaking of the Prime Minister today.
In late 1922 dissatisfaction was steadily growing within the Conservative Party over its coalition with the Liberal David Lloyd George.
"I wish Stanley Baldwin no ill," Churchill said when declining to send him 80th birthday greetings in 1947, "but it would have been much better had he never lived."
I put before the whole House my own views with an appalling frankness.
He was appointed to the Privy Council in the 1920 Birthday Honours.
His government then secured with great difficulty the passage of the landmark Government of India Act 1935, in the teeth of opposition from Winston Churchill, spokesman for of the die-hard imperialists who filled the Conservative ranks.
In 1952, G. M. Young published a biography of Baldwin, which Baldwin had asked him to write.
At Question Time in the House of Commons the Conservative MP Captain Alan Graham said: "Is the honourable Member aware that it is very necessary to leave Lord Baldwin his gates in order to protect him from the just indignation of the mob?"
In late 1933 and early 1934 he rejected an invitation from Hitler to meet him, believing that visits to foreign capitals were the job of Foreign Secretaries.
I had to take all the important speeches.
Here was an old stupid politician who had tricked the nation into complacency about rearmament for fear of losing an election....
In 1999, Philip Williamson published a collection of essays on Baldwin which attempted to explain his beliefs and defended his policies as Prime Minister.
His discreet resolution met with general approval and restored his popularity.
Peter Howard, writing in the ''Sunday Express'' (3 September 1939), accused Baldwin of deceiving the country of the dangers that faced it in order not to re-arm and so win the 1935 general election.
The election gave 430 seats to National government supporters (386 of these Conservative) and 154 seats to Labour.
Nevertheless, at his final audience with King Edward on 7 December, Baldwin offered to strive all night with the King's conscience, but he found him to be determined to go.
In response to Young's biography, D. C. Somervell published ''Stanley Baldwin: An examination of some features of Mr. G. M. Young's biography'' in 1953 with a foreword by Ernest Brown.
By 2004, however, historians generally painted a positive portrait of his governments.
Here is the very shrine of stupidity....
The ''Daily Mirror'' columnist ''Cassandra'' denounced Baldwin:
Though known for his magnanimity toward political rivals such as Chamberlain, Churchill had none to spare for Baldwin.
During this time, he oversaw the beginning of the re-armament process of the British military, as well as the very difficult abdication of King Edward VIII.
In June 1945, Baldwin's wife Lucy died.
That government also saw the General Strike in 1926 and the 1927 Trades Disputes Act to curb the powers of trade unions, although Baldwin was supportive of Labour politicians forming minority governments at Westminster.
He was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium and his ashes buried in Worcester Cathedral.
After a bitterly critical letter was sent to him by a member of the public, Baldwin wrote: "I can understand his bitterness.
On 10 November 1932 Baldwin said:
In April 1935 the Air Secretary reported that although Britain's strength in the air would be ahead of Germany for at least three years, air rearmament needed to be increased so the Cabinet agreed to the creation of an extra 39 squadrons for home defence by 1937.
The general election held in October 1924 brought a landslide majority of 223 for the Conservative party, primarily at the expense of an unpopular Liberal Party.
News of the affair was broken in the papers on 2 December.
The accession of King Edward VIII, and the ensuing abdication crisis, brought Baldwin's last major test in office.
Baldwin married Lucy Ridsdale on 12 September 1892.
From 1933, I and my friends were all very worried about what was happening in Europe.
Baldwin responded by denying that the Luftwaffe was approaching equality and that it was "not 50 per cent" of the RAF.
Baldwin proved to be adept as a businessman, and acquired a reputation as a modernising industrialist.
When I first heard of Hitler, when Ribbentrop came to see me, I thought they were all crazy.
Baldwin then went on to the University of Cambridge, where he studied history at Trinity College.
With the second part of the Disarmament Conference starting in January 1933, Baldwin attempted to see through his hope of air disarmament.
Churchill said in a speech: "He says he would mobilise tomorrow.
Though one time there went up a cry, "Hands off Russia", I think it's time somebody said to Russia, "Hands off England".
This more positive outlook on Baldwin's time as Prime Minister is reflected in evaluations by scholars, where he generally ranked in the upper half of British Prime Ministers.
Baldwin was a member of the Oddfellows and Foresters Friendly Society.
No power on earth could have got rearmament without a general election except by a big split.
There I was completely wrong."
Owners of such materials could appeal for an exemption on grounds of artistic or historic merit, which would be decided by a panel set up by local authorities.
After Baldwin said the government would ensure the RAF had parity with the future German air force Churchill withdrew his amendment.
In 1948, Reginald Bassett published an essay disputing the claim that Baldwin "confessed" to putting party before country, and claimed that Baldwin was referring to 1933/34 when a general election on rearmament would have been lost.
what can this man think in the still watches of the night, when he contemplates the ordeal his country is going through as the result of the years, the locust years, in which he held power?
After winning the 1924 General Election Baldwin formed his second government, which saw important tenures of office by Sir Austen Chamberlain (Foreign Secretary), Winston Churchill (at the Exchequer) and Neville Chamberlain (Health).
If he is in the Cabinet now we shan't be able to engage in that war as a united nation".
Simon was inefficient.
The new monarch was "an ardent exponent of the cause of Anglo-German understanding", and had "strong views on his right to intervene in affairs of state," but the "Government's main fears ... were of indiscretion."
After Chamberlain's death in 1940, Baldwin's perceived part in pre-war appeasement made him an unpopular figure during and after World War II.
In September 1941, Baldwin's old enemy, Lord Beaverbrook, asked all local authorities to survey their area's iron and steel railings and gates that could be used for the war effort.
Baldwin still hoped that the King would choose the throne over Mrs. Simpson.
At Baldwin's instigation Lord Weir headed a committee to "review the national problem of electrical energy".
During a debate on the naval estimates the Conservatives opposed Labour but supported them on 18 March in a vote on cutting expenditure on the Singapore military base.
Whilst the Conservatives retained a plurality in the House of Commons, they had been clearly defeated on the central issue: tariffs.
He wants a scapegoat and the men provided him with one".
In 1921 he was promoted to the Cabinet as President of the Board of Trade.
The crisis threatened the unity of the British Empire, since the King's personal relationship with the Dominions was their "only remaining constitutional link."
Napoleon broke himself against the Russians.
I pray he is spared to see us through".
But when the next war comes, and European civilisation is wiped out, as it will be, and by no force more than that force, then do not let them lay blame on the old men.
As the public standing of the King would be gravely compromised, the Prime Minister gave him time to reconsider the notion of this marriage.
Upon his retirement in 1937, he had received a great deal of praise; the onset of World War II would change his public image for the worse.
The Statute of Westminster 1931 gave Dominion status to Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, while establishing the first step towards the Commonwealth of Nations.
But it was also pure patriotic joy that my country at such a time should have found such a leader.
Baldwin had defused a political crisis by turning it into a constitutional question.
You will remember at that time there was probably a stronger pacifist feeling running through the country than at any time since the War.
A newspaper campaign hounded him for not donating the gates to war production.
