As of August 2015, it has as 96% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 52 reviews.
On April 2, 1949, he published a photo essay, named "Chicago-City of Extremes" in ''Look'', which displayed his talent early on for creating atmosphere with imagery, including a photograph taken above a congested Chicago street at night.
Jack Nicholson likewise observed his attention to music for his films, stating that Kubrick "listened constantly to music until he discovered something he felt was right or that excited him."
John Calley of Warner Bros. agreed in 1972 to invest $2.5 million into the film, on condition that Kubrick approach major Hollywood stars, to ensure it of success.
His decision to drop the sound in favor of imagery was a costly one; after 12–14 weeks shooting the picture, he spent some seven months and $35,000 working on the sound.
Elias Kubrick followed in 1902.
According to Paul Duncan the film was "remarkably accomplished for a first film", and was notable for using the reverse tracking shot to film a scene in which the brothers walk towards the camera, a device later to become one of Kubrick's characteristic camera movements.
line and scene in which he's sitting at the typewriter and unleashes his anger upon his wife.
All of the film was shot at a cost of $17 million within a 30-mile radius of his house between August 1985 and September 1986, later than scheduled as Kubrick shut down production for five months following a near-fatal accident with a jeep involving Lee Ermey.
Harris purchased the rights to Lionel White's novel ''Clean Break'' for $10,000 and Kubrick wrote the script, but upon Kubrick's suggestion, they hired film noir novelist Jim Thompson to write the dialog for the film—which later became ''The Killing'' (1956)—about a meticulously planned racetrack robbery gone wrong.
''Eyes Wide Shut'', like ''Lolita'' and ''A Clockwork Orange'' before it, faced censorship before release.
Among those who gave eulogies were Terry Semel, Jan Harlan, Steven Spielberg, Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise.
The film stars Jack Nicholson as a writer who takes a job as a winter caretaker of a large and isolated hotel in the Rocky Mountains.
When the Director's Guild of Great Britain gave Kubrick a lifetime achievement award, they included a cut-together sequence of all the homages from the show.
Film critic Robert Kolker sees the influence of Welles' moving camera shots on Kubrick's style.
''Paths of Glory'', set during World War I, is based on Humphrey Cobb's 1935 antiwar novel, which Kubrick had read while waiting in his father's office.
He digests what he learns and brings to a new project an original point of view and a reserved passion".
The following year she was art director for his film, ''The Killing'' (1956).
Kubrick married Harlan in 1958, and the couple remained together 40 years, until his death in 1999.
Kubrick approached Spielberg in 1995 with the AI script with the possibility of Steven Spielberg directing it and Kubrick producing it.
It has been said retrospectively that this project demonstrated an early interest of Kubrick in capturing individuals and their feelings in mundane environments.
According to his co-producer Jan Harlan, Kubrick mostly "wanted to make films about things that mattered, that not only had form, but substance".
One depicts transitions between various stages of man, from ape to "star child", as man is reborn into a new existence, each step shepherded by an enigmatic alien intelligence seen only in its artifacts: a series of seemingly indestructible eons-old black monoliths.
During earlier screening he played music by Mendelssohn and Vaughan Williams, and Kubrick and writer Clarke had listened to Carl Orff's transcription of ''Carmina Burana'', consisting of 13th century sacred and secular songs.
Stanley brought out aspects of my personality and acting instincts that had been dormant&nbsp;... My strong suspicion was that I was involved in something great".
He further points out that films like ''A Clockwork Orange'' are "powerfully homoerotic", from Alex walking about his parents' flat in his Y-fronts, one eye being "made up with doll-like false eyelashes", to his innocent acceptance of the sexual advances of his post-corrective adviser Deltroid (Aubrey Morris).
Kubrick described Steadicam as being like a "magic carpet", allowing "fast, flowing, camera movements" in the maze in ''The Shining'' which would otherwise would have been impossible to accomplish.
Kubrick likened the understanding of his films to popular music, in that whatever the background or intellect of the individual, a Beatles record, for instance, can both be appreciated by the Alabama truck driver and the young Cambridge intellectual in the way that his films can because their "emotions and subconscious are far more similar than their intellects".
He stated that he was given the confidence during this period to become a filmmaker because of the number of bad films he had seen, remarking, "I don't know a goddamn thing about movies, but I know I can make a better film than that".
As with most of Kubrick's films, ''Barry Lyndon'''s reputation has grown through the years and it is now considered to be one of his best, particularly among filmmakers and critics.
Cinematographer Allen Daviau states that the method gives the audience a way of seeing the characters and scenes as they would have been seen by people at the time.
He eventually found Hasford's novel to be "brutally honest" and decided to shoot a film which closely follows the novel.
During the production of ''Paths of Glory'' in Munich in early 1957, Kubrick met and romanced the German actress Christiane Harlan, who played a small though memorable role in the film.
As a teenager, Kubrick was also interested in jazz, and briefly attempted a career as a drummer.
One of his classmates was Edith Gormezano, later known as the singer Eydie Gorme.
Kubrick's great-grandfather, Hersh Kubrick (also spelled Kubrik or Kubrike), arrived at Ellis Island via Liverpool by ship on December 27, 1899, at the age of 47, leaving behind his wife and two grown children, one of whom was Stanley's grandfather Elias, to start a new life with a younger woman.
Sets, costumes, and art direction were based on the works of conceptual artist Chris Baker, who had also done much of his work under Kubrick's supervision.
I've worked with few directors who are that good".
Kubrick spent a great deal of time researching the film, paying particular attention to accuracy and detail in what the future may look like.
In a later scene where United States Marines patrol the ruins of an abandoned and totally destroyed city, the theme song to the Mickey Mouse Club is heard as a sardonic counterpoint.
He rented a camera and produced a 16-minute black-and-white documentary, ''Day of the Fight''.
Kubrick was also intrigued by Gustav Hasford's Vietnam War novel ''The Short-Timers.''
The film was well into preproduction and ready to begin filming in 1969 when MGM cancelled the project.
Vincent Cartier, Walter's brother and manager, later reflected on his observations of Kubrick during the filming.
Geoffrey Cocks believes that Kubrick was also influenced by Ophüls' stories of thwarted love and a preoccupation with predatory men, while Herr notes that Kubrick was deeply inspired by G. W. Pabst, who earlier tried, but was unable to adapt Schnitzler's ''Traumnovelle'', the basis of ''Eyes Wide Shut''.
Kubrick had originally received a copy of Anthony Burgess's novel of the same name from Terry Southern while they were working on ''Dr.
''2001: A Space Odyssey'' was conceived as a Cinerama spectacle and was photographed in Super Panavision 70, giving the viewer a "dazzling mix of imagination and science" through ground-breaking effects, which earned Kubrick his only personal Oscar, an Academy Award for Visual Effects.
Creative differences arising from his work with Douglas and the film studios, a dislike of Hollywood, and a growing concern about crime in America prompted Kubrick to move to the United Kingdom in 1961, where he spent most of the remainder of his life and career.
Once Kubrick was confident in the overall staging of a scene, and felt the actors were prepared, he would then develop the visual aspects, including camera and lighting placement.
''Paths of Glory'' became Kubrick's first significant commercial success, and established him as an up-and-coming young filmmaker.
Kubrick quickly became known, however, for his story-telling in photographs.
Strangelove'', rather than ''Lolita''.
According to film historian John Wakeman, Ophüls himself learned the technique from director Anatole Litvak in the 1930s, when he was his assistant, and whose work was "replete with the camera trackings, pans and swoops which later became the trademark of Max Ophüls".
After completing ''2001: A Space Odyssey'', Kubrick searched for a project that he could film quickly on a small budget.
The story is based on Arthur Schnitzler's 1926 Freudian novella ''Traumnovelle'' (''Dream Story'' in English), which Kubrick relocated from turn-of-the-century Vienna to New York City in the 1990s.
G. Warren Schloat, Jr., another new photographer for the magazine at the time, recalled that he thought Kubrick lacked the personality to make it as a director in Hollywood, remarking, "Stanley was a quiet fellow.
They lived together in a small apartment at 36 West 16th Street, off 6th Avenue just north of Greenwich Village.
His sister, Barbara Mary Kubrick, was born in May 1934.
Kubrick recommended this work to others for many years.
Alfred Hitchcock's ''Blackmail'' (1929) directly influenced the film with the painting laughing at a character, and Martin Scorsese has, in turn, cited Kubrick's innovative shooting angles and atmospheric shots in  ''Killer's Kiss''  as an influence on ''Raging Bull'' (1980).
In February 1959, Kubrick received a phone call from Kirk Douglas asking him to direct ''Spartacus'' (1960), based on the true life story of the historical figure Spartacus and the events of the Third Servile War.
He displayed an interest in literature from a young age, and began reading Greek and Roman myths and the fables of the Grimm brothers which "instilled in him a lifelong affinity with Europe".
On the DVD of ''Eyes Wide Shut'', Steven Spielberg comments that the way Kubrick "tells a story is antithetical to the way we are accustomed to receiving stories" and that "nobody could shoot a picture better in history".
Taub had his own darkroom, where the young Kubrick and he would spend many hours perusing photographs and watching the chemicals "magically make images on photographic paper".
This was followed by two collaborations with Kirk Douglas, the war picture ''Paths of Glory'' (1957) and the historical epic ''Spartacus'' (1960).
In 2000, BAFTA renamed their Britannia lifetime achievement award the "Stanley Kubrick Britannia Award", joining the likes of D. W. Griffith, Laurence Olivier, Cecil B. DeMille, and Irving Thalberg, all of whom have annual awards named after them.
Kubrick won this award in 1999, and subsequent recipients have included George Lucas, Warren Beatty, Tom Cruise, Robert De Niro, Clint Eastwood, and Daniel Day-Lewis.
He commenced a script with Frederic Raphael, and worked 18 hours a day, all the while maintaining complete confidentiality about the film.
Exhibits include a wide collection of documents, photographs and on-set material assembled from 800 boxes of personal archives that were stored in Kubrick's home-workplace in the UK.
Ignoring the negative media hype over the film, ''A Clockwork Orange'' received four Academy Award nominations, for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Screenplay and Best Editing, and was named by the New York Film Critics Circle as the Best Film of 1971.
It has shots of ships, machinery, a canteen, and a union meeting.
British screenwriter Frederic Raphael, who worked closely with Kubrick in his final years, believes that the originality of Kubrick's films was partly because he "had a (Jewish?)
Kubrick later collaborated with Carlos on ''The Shining'' (1980).
On March 7, 1999, six days after screening a final cut of ''Eyes Wide Shut'' for his family and the stars, Kubrick died in his sleep at the age of 70, after suffering a massive heart attack.
At the age of 13, Kubrick's father bought him a Graflex camera, triggering a fascination with still photography.
Although ''Barry Lyndon'' found a great audience in France, it was a box office failure, grossing just $9.5 million in the American market, not even close to the $30 million Warner Bros. needed to generate a profit.
Inevitably, you're going to end up doing something that he's probably already done before.
The film was released in June 2001.
His daughter noted that he wanted to make a film about the Holocaust, the ''Aryan Papers'', having spent years researching the subject.
All of Schnitzler's work is psychologically brilliant".
Kubrick approached numerous stars to play leading roles, including Audrey Hepburn for Empress Josephine, a part which she could not accept due to semiretirement.
And when the picture is shot, it's only partially finished.
Instead, they signed a $1 million deal with Eliot Hyman's Associated Artists Productions, and a clause which gave them the artistic freedom that they desired.
''The Shining'' was not the only horror film to which Kubrick had been linked; he had turned down the directing of both ''The Exorcist'' (1973) and ''Exorcist II: The Heretic'' (1977), despite once claiming in 1966 to a friend that he had long desired to "make the world's scariest movie, involving a series of episodes that would play upon the nightmare fears of the audience".
The technique relies on creating a complex visual symmetry using parallel lines in a scene which all converge on that single point, leading away from the viewer.
In 2011, Taschen published the book, ''Stanley Kubrick's Napoleon: The Greatest Movie Never Made'', a large volume compilation of literature and source documents from Kubrick, such as scene photo ideas and copies of letters Kubrick wrote and received.
According to biographer John Baxter, Kubrick had shown an interest in directing a pornographic film based on a satirical novel written by Terry Southern, entitled ''Blue Movie'', about a director who makes Hollywood's first big-budget porn film.
Fantasy may deal best with themes which lie primarily in the unconscious".
He was granted permission by NASA to observe the spacecraft being used in the Ranger 9 mission for accuracy.
In 1971, Carlos composed and recorded music for the soundtrack of ''A Clockwork Orange''.
Often considered to be his most authentic-looking picture,  the cinematography and lighting techniques that Kubrick and cinematographer John Alcott used in ''Barry Lyndon'' were highly innovative.
Kubrick reportedly held long telephone discussions with Spielberg regarding the film, and, according to Spielberg, at one point stated that the subject matter was closer to Spielberg's sensibilities than his.
It was shot in 15 weeks, ending in April 1963, after which Kubrick spent eight months editing it.
And without being thought too presumptuous for using this analogy, I like to remember what T. S. Eliot said to someone who had asked him—I believe it was ''The Waste Land''—what he meant by the poem.
It was a futuristic fairy tale about a robot that resembles and behaves as a child, and his efforts to become a 'real boy' in a manner similar to Pinocchio.
In fact, not just this year, but the best, period".
''The Shining'' is now considered to be a horror cult classic, and the American Film Institute has ranked it as the 27th greatest thriller film of all time.
The film was not a major critical or commercial success upon release, earning $3.7 million at the box office on its opening run.
He met his second wife, the Austrian-born dancer and theatrical designer Ruth Sobotka, in 1952.
A number of people who worked with Kubrick on his films created the 2001 documentary ''Stanley Kubrick: A Life in Pictures'', produced and directed by Kubrick's brother-in-law, Jan Harlan, who had executive produced Kubrick's last four films.
Spielberg, who once referred to Kubrick as "the greatest master I ever served," now with production underway, admitted, "I felt like I was being coached by a ghost."
In space, the enemy is a supercomputer known as HAL who runs the spaceship, a character which novelist Clancy Sigal described as being "far, far more human, more humorous and conceivably decent than anything else that may emerge from this far-seeing enterprise".
As a person, Kubrick was described by Norman Lloyd as "a very dark, sort of a glowering type who was very serious".
LoBrutto notes that Kubrick's technical knowledge about lenses "dazzled the manufacturer's engineers, who found him to be unprecedented among contemporary filmmakers."
With the vision in mind to shoot what would become ''Full Metal Jacket'' (1987), Kubrick began working with both Herr and Hasford separately on a script.
Biographer Vincent LoBrutto notes that Kubrick's confined way of living and desire for privacy has led to spurious stories about his reclusiveness, similar to those of Greta Garbo, Howard Hughes, and J. D. Salinger.
He often asked for several dozen retakes of the same scene in a movie, which resulted in many conflicts with his casts.
He was bailed out by producer Richard de Rochemont on the condition that he help in de Rochemont's production of a five-part television series about Abraham Lincoln on location in Hodgenville, Kentucky.
On October 30, 2012, an exhibition devoted to Kubrick opened at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) and concluded in June 2013.
Following ''Fear and Desire'', Kubrick began working on ideas for a new boxing film.
Stanley saw a lot of people&nbsp;... he was one of the most gregarious men I ever knew, and it didn't change anything that most of this conviviality went on over the phone."
He has an adroit intellect, and is a creative thinker—not a repeater, not a fact-gatherer.
Kubrick was deeply impressed by the chameleon-like range of actor Peter Sellers and gave him one of his first opportunities to improvize wildly during shooting, while filming him with three cameras.
The film revolves around this metaphysical conception, and the realistic hardware and the documentary feelings about everything were necessary in order to undermine your built-in resistance to the poetical concept".
The couple moved to the United Kingdom in 1961 to make ''Lolita'', and Kubrick hired Peter Sellers to star in his next film, ''Dr.
Kubrick assembled several actors and a small crew totaling 14 people (five actors, five crewmen, and four Mexicans to help transport the equipment) and flew to the San Gabriel Mountains in California for a five-week, low-budget shoot.
For the battle scene, Kubrick meticulously lined up six cameras one after the other along the boundary of no-man's land, with each camera capturing a specific field and numbered, and gave each of the hundreds of extras a number for the zone in which they would die.
Kubrick began shooting footage in Times Square, and frequently explored during the filming process, experimenting with cinematography and considering the use of unconventional angles and imagery.
The film appeared to defy genre convention, much unlike any science-fiction movie before it, and clearly different from any of Kubrick's earlier films or stories.
However brutal that joke might be".
They lived together in New York's East Village beginning in 1952, got married in January 1955 and moved to Hollywood in July 1955, where she played a brief part as a ballet dancer in Kubrick's film, ''Killer's Kiss'' (1955).
Upon release, the film stirred up much controversy and mixed opinions.
Dore Schary of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was highly impressed as well, and offered Kubrick and Harris $75,000 to write, direct, and produce a film, which ultimately became ''Paths of Glory'' (1957).
He also said "Realism is probably the best way to dramatize argument and ideas.
Many disputes broke out over the project, and in the end, Kubrick distanced himself from what would become ''One-Eyed Jacks'' (1961).
The scientific realism and innovative special effects of ''2001: A Space Odyssey'' (1968) were without precedent in the history of cinema, and the film earned him his only personal Oscar, for Best Visual Effects.
For LoBrutto it "positioned Stanley Kubrick as a pure artist ranked among the masters of cinema".
The film was shot on location in Ardmore, County Waterford, Ireland, beginning in the autumn of 1973, at a cost of $11 million with a cast and crew of 170.
Baxter notes that ''Barry Lyndon'' was the film which made Kubrick notorious for paying scrupulous attention to detail, often demanding twenty or thirty retakes of the same scene to perfect his art.
It feels creaky, ancient, hopelessly out of touch, infatuated with the hot taboos of his youth and unable to connect with that twisty thing contemporary sexuality has become."
He also felt that building scenes from great music often created the "most memorable scenes" in the best films.
Lo Brutto states that Napoleon was an ideal subject for Kubrick, embracing the director's "passion for control, power, obsession, strategy, and the military", while Napoleon's psychological intensity and depth, logistical genius and war, sex, and the evil nature of man were all ingredients which deeply appealed to Kubrick.
Stylistically, ''Lolita'', starring Peter Sellers, James Mason, Shelley Winters, and Sue Lyon, was a transitional film for Kubrick, "marking the turning point from a naturalistic cinema&nbsp;... to the surrealism of the later films", according to film critic Gene Youngblood.
Kubrick had intended for ''Fear and Desire'' to be a silent picture in order to ensure low production costs; the added sounds, effects, and music ultimately brought production costs to around $53,000, exceeding the budget.
Kubrick credited the ease with which he photographed scenes to his early years as a photographer.
Strangelove'', a $2 million production which employed what became the "first important visual effects crew in the world", would be impossible to make in the U.S. for various technical and political reasons, forcing him to move production to England.
So determined to produce perfection was Kubrick, he often demanded up to 70 or 80 retakes of the same scene.
Kubrick and Harris made a decision to film Kubrick's next movie ''Lolita'' (1962) in England, due to clauses placed on the contract by producers Warner Bros. that gave them complete control over every aspect of the film, and the fact that the Eady plan permitted producers to write off the costs if 80% of the crew were English.
Kubrick drafted a screenplay in 1961, and envisaged making a "grandiose" epic, with up to 40,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry.
It can all seem like we're falling behind whatever he came up with."
Once you're accustomed to them, the presence of even one other person on set is discordant and tends to produce self-consciousness in the actors, and certainly in itself".
His last film, ''Eyes Wide Shut'', was completed shortly before his death in 1999.
The pace and length of ''Barry Lyndon'' at three hours put off many American critics and audiences, but the film was nominated for seven Academy Awards and won four, including Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, Best Costume Design, and Best Musical Score, more than any other Kubrick film.
The lenses allowed many scenes to be lit only with candlelight, creating two-dimensional, diffused-light images reminiscent of 18th-century paintings.
Inspired by Pudovkin's treatise on film editing, Kubrick realized that one could create a performance in the editing room and often "re-direct" a film, and he remarked: "I love editing.
While many of Kubrick's films were controversial and initially received mixed reviews upon release—particularly ''A Clockwork Orange'' (1971), which Kubrick pulled from circulation in the UK following a mass media frenzy—most of his films were nominated for Oscars, Golden Globes, or BAFTA Awards.
Numerous polls, such as ''Village Voice'' (1999), ''Sight & Sound'' (2002), and ''Time'' (2005), have rated it as one of the greatest films ever made.
Kubrick often clashed with Shelley Winters, whom he found "very difficult" and demanding, and nearly fired at one point.
He was the first of two children of Jacob Leonard Kubrick (May 21, 1902&nbsp;– October 19, 1985), known as Jack or Jacques, and his wife Sadie Gertrude Kubrick (née Perveler; October 28, 1903&nbsp;– April 23, 1985), known as Gert, both of whom were Jewish.
Baxter believes that although American, Kubrick was heavily influenced by his ancestry and always possessed a European perspective to filmmaking, particularly the Austro-Hungarian empire and his admiration for Johann Ophuls and Richard Strauss.
Steven Spielberg has referred to the film as his generation's "big bang", and it is often included in polls of the greatest films ever made.
There are, occasionally, scenes which benefit from extra takes, but even then, I'm not sure that the early takes aren't just glorified rehearsals with the adding adrenaline of film running through the camera."
Kubrick's high take ratio was considered by some critics as "irrational," although he firmly believed that actors were at their best during the actual filming, as opposed to rehearsals, due to the sense of intense excitement that it generates.
During their stay, they confront both Jack's descent into madness and apparent supernatural horrors lurking in the hotel.
His first, published on April 16, 1946, was entitled "A Short Story from a Movie Balcony" and staged a fracas between a man and a woman, during which the man is slapped in the face, caught genuinely by surprise.
Having it in place during the filming of ''2001'', he was able to view a video of a take immediately after it was filmed.
Kubrick and Harris moved to Los Angeles from New York and signed with the Jaffe Agency to shoot the picture, which became Kubrick's first full-length feature film shot with a professional cast and crew.
After Kubrick received death threats from the IRA in the New Year of 1974 due to the shooting scenes with English soldiers, he fled Ireland with his family on a ferry from Dún Laoghaire under an assumed identity, and filming resumed in England.
In association with what remained of Kubrick's production unit, he directed the movie ''A.I.
Whatever he wanted, you complied, he just captivated you.
The game remained a lifelong interest of Kubrick's, appearing in many scenes of his films.
While playing chess in Washington Square, Kubrick met producer James B. Harris, who considered Kubrick to be "the most intelligent, most creative person I have ever come in contact with", and the two formed the Harris-Kubrick Pictures Corporation in 1955.
Like previous films, Kubrick and his art department conducted an enormous amount of research, and he went from knowing very little about the 18th century at the start of the production to becoming an expert on it.
Later renamed ''The Shape of Fear'' before finally being named ''Fear and Desire'', it is a fictional allegory about a team of soldiers who survive a plane crash and are caught behind enemy lines in a war.
Most of Kubrick's friends and early photography and film collaborators were Jewish, and his first two marriages were to daughters of recent Jewish immigrants from Europe.
Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, Kubrick collaborated with Brian Aldiss on an expansion of his short story "Super-Toys Last All Summer Long" into a three-act film.
Kubrick abandoned his use of CinemaScope in the filming, deciding that the 1.66:1 widescreen format was, in the words of Baxter, an "acceptable compromise between spectacle and intimacy", and favored his "rigorously symmetrical framing", which "increased the beauty of his compositions".
I think the cutting is just a continuation of directing a movie.
Kubrick was among the first directors to use video assist during filming.
Biographer John Baxter stated that "Instead of finding the intellectual spine of a film in the script before starting work, Kubrick felt his way towards the final version of a film by shooting each scene from many angles and demanding scores of takes on each line.
He concluded: "Stanley Kubrick's ''Full Metal Jacket'' is more like a book of short stories than a novel", a "strangely shapeless film from the man whose work usually imposes a ferociously consistent vision on his material".
Tom Cruise portrays a doctor who witnesses a bizarre masked quasireligious orgiastic ritual at a country mansion, a discovery which later threatens his life.
Following Kubrick's death in 1999, Spielberg took the various drafts and notes left by Kubrick and his writers and composed a new screenplay based on an earlier 90-page story treatment by Ian Watson written under Kubrick's supervision and according to Kubrick's specifications.
Kubrick's next project was ''Dr.
''Lolita'' has since become acclaimed by film critics.
Director Peter Jackson has reported that Tolkien was against the involvement of the Beatles.
While still in high school, Kubrick was chosen as an official school photographer for a year.
He commanded respect in a quiet, shy way.
Kubrick's uncle, Martin Perveler, a Los Angeles businessman, invested a further $9000 on condition that he be credited as executive producer of the film.
Marlon Brando contacted Kubrick, asking him to direct a film adaption of the Charles Neider western novel, ''The Authentic Death of Hendry Jones'', featuring Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid.
Filming commenced on December 29, 1965, with the excavation of the monolith on the moon, and footage was shot in Namib Desert in early 1967, with the ape scenes completed in the summer of that year.
Kubrick told Robert Emmett Ginna: "I think you have to view the entire problem of putting the story you want to tell up there on that light square.
He was inspired by the complex, fluid camerawork of the director Max Ophüls, whose films influenced Kubrick's later visual style, and by the director Elia Kazan, whom he described as America's "best director" at that time, with his ability of "performing miracles" with his actors.
He also tried to see every film ever made about Napoleon and found none of them appealing, including Abel Gance's 1927 film which is generally considered to be a masterpiece, but for Kubrick, a "really terrible" movie.
Kubrick is widely referenced in popular culture, and the TV series ''The Simpsons'' is said to contain more references to Kubrick films than any other pop culture phenomenon.
Baxter describes the film as "one of the most admired and discussed creations in the history of cinema", and Steven Spielberg has referred to it as "the big bang of his film making generation".
Kubrick grew up in the Bronx in New York City, and attended William Howard Taft High School from 1941 to 1945.
Many of the fight scenes were shot with a hand-held camera to produce a "sense of documentary realism and immediacy".
Just before filming began, Kubrick hired noted journalist and satirical author Terry Southern to transform the script into its final form, a black-comedy, loaded with sexual innuendo, becoming a film which showed Kubrick's talents as "unique kind of absurdist" according to the film scholar Abrams.
Kubrick shared a love of film with his school friend Alexander Singer, who after graduating from high school had the intention of directing a film version of Homer's ''The Iliad''.
He was a very shy person and self-protective, but he was filled with the thing that drove him twenty-four hours of the day."
He clashed with Ballard during the shooting, and on one occasion Kubrick threatened to fire Ballard following a camera dispute, despite being only 27 years old at the time and 20 years Ballard's junior.
The film was originally going to be called "Sky Pilot", a pun on the slang term for a priest.
Louise Sweeney of the ''Christian Science Monitor'' called the film the "ultimate trip" while praising one of the scenes where the viewer moves through space while witnessing a vibrant mix of lighting, color, and patterns.
His films, which are typically adaptations of novels or short stories, cover a wide range of genres, and are noted for their realism, dark humor, unique cinematography, extensive set designs, and evocative use of music.
Leading directors, including Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, George Lucas, James Cameron, Woody Allen, Terry Gilliam, the Coen brothers, Ridley Scott, and George A. Romero,  have cited Kubrick as a source of inspiration, and in the case of Spielberg, collaboration.
I think I like it more than any other phase of filmmaking&nbsp;...
Kubrick continues to be cited as a major influence by many directors, including Christopher Nolan, Jack Thomas Smith, Todd Field, David Fincher, Guillermo del Toro, David Lynch, Lars von Trier, Tim Burton, Michael Mann, and Gaspar Noé.
He was very careful not to present his own views of the meaning of his films and leave them open to interpretation.
The film established Kubrick as a major director, receiving six Academy Award nominations and winning four; it ultimately convinced him that if so much could be made of such a problematic production, he could achieve anything.
