Some are reserved for freshman, sophomores, or upperclass students and some are open to all four classes.
The co-ops on campus are 576 Alvarado Row (formerly Chi Theta Chi), Columbae, Enchanted Broccoli Forest (EBF), Hammarskjöld, Kairos, Terra (the unofficial LGBT house), and Synergy.
Stanford athletes won 16 medals at the 2012 Summer Games—12 gold, 2 silver and 2 bronze.
According to the survey, 85% of perpetrators of misconduct were Stanford students and 80% were men.
Despite being impacted by earthquakes in both 1906 and 1989, the campus was rebuilt each time.
Stanford also has land and facilities elsewhere.
Funds supported 366 new fellowships for graduate students, 139 new endowed chairs for faculty, and 38 new or renovated buildings.
Focus Houses include Freshman-Sophomore College (Academic Focus), Branner Hall (Community Service), Kimball (Arts & Performing Arts), Crothers (Global Citizenship), and Toyon (Sophomore Priority).
The ''Stanford Daily'' is the daily newspaper and has been published since the University was founded in 1892.
Previous landmarks included Meyer Library, which had been built in 1966; as of October 2014, the university intended to demolish it rather than invest money to bring it up to then-current codes and convert the space into a park.
The department is also responsible for publishing an annual crime report covering the previous three years as required by the Clery Act.
Stanford University is home to the Cantor Center for Visual Arts museum with 24 galleries, sculpture gardens, terraces, and a courtyard first established in 1891 by Jane and Leland Stanford as a memorial to their only child.
In the 2008 Summer Olympics, Stanford won more Olympic medals than any other university in the United States.
The Stanford Spoken Word Collective, an extracurricular writing and performance group, also serves as the school's poetry slam team.
Following World War II, Provost Frederick Terman supported faculty and graduates' entrepreneurialism to build self-sufficient local industry in what would later be known as Silicon Valley.
Perpetrators of sexual misconduct were frequently aided by alcohol or drugs, according to the survey: "Nearly three-fourths of the students whose responses were categorized as sexual assault indicated that the act was accomplished by a person or person taking advantage of them when they were drunk or high, according to the survey.
The new funding also enabled the construction of a facility for stem cell research; a new campus for the business school; an expansion of the law school; a new Engineering Quad; a new art and art history building; an on-campus concert hall; a new art museum; and a planned expansion of the medical school, among other things.
Its goal is to support the next generation of entrepreneurs.
The Stanford Professional Publishing Course, which was offered on campus since the late 1970s, brought together international publishing professionals to discuss changing business models in magazine and book publishing.
In addition to the church, the Office for Religious Life has a Center for Inter-Religious Community, Learning and Experiences (CIRCLE) on the third floor of Old Union.
The Indian symbol and name were later dropped by President Richard Lyman in 1972, after objections from Native American students and a vote by the student senate.
Undergraduates live in 80 different houses, including dormitories, co-ops, row houses, and fraternities and sororities.
Stanford admitted its first students on October 1, 1891 as a coeducational and non-denominational institution.
Students compete in 36 varsity sports, and the university is one of two private institutions in the Division I FBS Pac-12 Conference.
The sports teams are now officially referred to as the "Stanford Cardinal", referring to the deep red color, not the cardinal bird.
The schools of Humanities and Sciences (27 departments), Engineering (9 departments), and Earth, Energy & Environmental Sciences (4 departments) have both graduate and undergraduate programs while the Schools of Law, Medicine, Education and Business have graduate programs only.
However, it remains an expensive area in which to own property, and the average price of single-family homes on campus is actually higher than in Palo Alto.
Contemporary campus landmarks include the Main Quad and Memorial Church, the Cantor Center for Visual Arts and art gallery, the Stanford Mausoleum and the Angel of Grief, Hoover Tower, the Rodin sculpture garden, the Papua New Guinea Sculpture Garden, the Arizona Cactus Garden, the Stanford University Arboretum, Green Library and the Dish.
These fraternities and sororities operate under the AAFSA (African American Fraternal Sororal Association) at Stanford.
First-year undergraduates are required to live on campus, and all undergraduates are guaranteed housing for all four undergraduate years.
Stanford Quad at night.jpg|Stanford Main Quad at night
University Entrepreneurship
Stanford Women In Business (SWIB) is an on-campus business organization consisting of over a board of 40 and 100 active members.
Each year, SWIB organizes over 25 events and workshops, hosts a winter and spring conference, and provides mentorship and spring quarter internships.
* The Stanford Improvisors (SIMPS for short) teach and perform improvisational theatre on campus and in the surrounding community.
NACDA Directors' Cup
* The Stanford Axe Committee is the official guardian of the Stanford Axe and the rest of the time assists the Stanford Band as a supplementary spirit group.
* The Pilipino American Student Union (PASU), a culture-oriented community service and social activism group.
Stanford's main campus includes a census-designated place within unincorporated Santa Clara County, although some of the university land (such as the Stanford Shopping Center and the Stanford Research Park) is within the city limits of Palo Alto.
Students run ''SUpost.com'', an online marketplace for Stanford students and alumni, in partnership with Stanford Student Enterprises (SSE) and the Stanford Pre-Business Association.
The four-year graduation rate in the class of 2011 was 76%, and the six-year rate was 96%.
First-year graduate students are guaranteed on-campus housing.
In 2013 and 2014 it raised $932 million and $928 million.
* The Stanford solar car project, in which students build a solar-powered car every 2 years and race it in either the North American Solar Challenge or the World Solar Challenge.
Co-ops are another housing option.
Stanford also subsidizes off-campus apartments in nearby Palo Alto, Menlo Park, and Mountain View for graduate students who are guaranteed on-campus housing but are unable to live on campus due to a lack of space.
It offers a common room, an interfaith sanctuary, a seminar room, a student lounge area and a reading room, as well as offices housing a number of Stanford Associated Religions (SAR) member groups and the Senior Associate Dean and Associate Dean for Religious Life.
The Associated Students of Stanford University (ASSU) is the student government for Stanford University and all registered students are members.
In February 2015, Elise Clougherty filed a sexual assault and harassment lawsuit against venture capitalist Joe Lonsdale.
Students are not permitted to join a fraternity or sorority until Spring quarter of their freshman year.
As of 2016 Stanford had 16 male varsity sports and 20 female varsity sports, 19 club sports and  about 27 intramural sports  In 1930, following a unanimous vote by the Executive Committee for the Associated Students, the athletic department adopted the mascot "Indian."
These sororities operate under the Stanford Inter-sorority Council (ISC).
Stanford University Hoover Tower.JPG|Hoover Tower, at , the tallest building on campus
It has gained 109 NCAA team championships, the second-most for a university, 476 individual championships, the most in Division I, and has won the NACDA Directors' Cup, recognizing the university with the best overall athletic team achievement, for 22 consecutive years, beginning in 1994–1995.
Similar to a condominium, the houses can be bought and sold but the land under the houses is rented on a 99-year lease.
There are three academic schools that have both undergraduate and graduate students and another four professional schools.
Senator from California and railroad tycoon, and his wife, Jane Lathrop Stanford, in memory of their only child, Leland Stanford Jr., who had died of typhoid fever at age 15 the previous year.
In 2014 the group finished second in the Golden Gate Regional College Improv tournament  and they've since been invited twice to perform at the annual San Francisco Improv Festival.
Sixty Nobel laureates and seven Fields Medalists have been affiliated with Stanford as students, alumni, faculty or staff.
The Academic, Language and Culture Houses include EAST (Education And Society Themed House), Hammarskjöld (International Themed House), Haus Mitteleuropa (Central European Themed House), La Casa Italiana (Italian Language and Culture), La Maison Française (French Language and Culture House), Slavianskii Dom (Slavic/East European Themed House), Storey (Human Biology Themed House), and Yost (Spanish Language and Culture).
In Stanford University's 2015 Campus Climate Survey, 4.7 percent of female undergraduates reported experiencing sexual assault as defined by the university and 32.9 percent reported experiencing sexual misconduct.
Stanford is the beneficiary of a special clause in the California Constitution, which explicitly exempts Stanford property from taxation so long as the property is used for educational purposes.
Stanford has had at least one NCAA team champion every year since the 1976–77 school year and has earned 109 NCAA national team titles since its establishment, second most behind the UCLA Bruins, and 467 individual National championships, the most by any university.
17% of students receive Pell Grants, a common measure of low-income students at a college.
The campus also includes much land in unincorporated San Mateo County (including the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory and the Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve), as well as in the city limits of Menlo Park (Stanford Hills neighborhood), Woodside, and Portola Valley.
Eighty percent of students receive some form of financial aid.
The Stanford Medical Center, completed in 1959, is a teaching hospital with over 800 beds.
Some of the land is managed to provide revenue for the university such as the Stanford Shopping Center and the Stanford Research Park.
The United States Postal Service has assigned it two ZIP codes: 94305 for campus mail and 94309 for P.O.
Princeton Review Dream College
Several residences are considered theme houses.
The winner of the annual "Big Game" between the Cal and Cardinal football teams gains custody of the Stanford Axe.
In 2008, 60% of this land remained undeveloped.
As of 2010, fifteen percent of undergraduates were first-generation students.
Admitted Student Preference
Lonsdale challenged Stanford's finding that he had had sexually assaulted and harassed her and Stanford rescinded that finding and the campus ban in the fall of 2015.
It is staffed primarily by students.
Stanford Marketing is a student group that provides students hands on training through research and strategy consulting projects with Fortune 500 clients, as well as workshops led by people from industry and professors in the Stanford Graduate School of Business.
Tuition was free until 1920.
Extracurricular activities include theater groups such as Ram's Head Theatrical Society, the Stanford Improvisors, the Stanford Shakespeare Society, and the Stanford Savoyards, a group dedicated to performing the works of Gilbert and Sullivan.
The-Golden-Spike-7Oct2012.jpg|The original Golden spike on display at the Cantor Arts Museum at Stanford University
Close to 70 percent of students who reported an experience of sexual misconduct involving nonconsensual penetration and/or oral sex indicated the same."
Stanford immediately referred the case to prosecutors and offered the woman counseling, and within two weeks had barred Turner from campus after conducting an investigation.
* Stanford is home to three unhoused historically NPHC (National Pan-Hellenic Council or "Divine Nine") sororities (Alpha Kappa Alpha, Delta Sigma Theta, and Sigma Gamma Rho) and three unhoused NPHC fraternities (Alpha Phi Alpha, Kappa Alpha Psi, and Phi Beta Sigma).
Other groups include:
Lathrop Library (previously Meyer Library, demolished in 2015), holds various student-accessible media resources and houses one of the largest East Asia collections with 540,000 volumes.
Knight Journalism Fellows are invited to spend a year at the campus taking seminars and courses of their choice.
As of 2013, 89% of undergraduate students lived in on-campus university housing.
However, following Title IX, the Board of Trustees lifted the 33-year ban on sororities in 1977.
Stanford has a no-loan policy.
As of late 2014, Stanford had 2,118 tenure-line faculty, senior fellows, center fellows, and medical center faculty.
It concluded on December 31, 2011, having raised a total of $6.23 billion and breaking the previous campaign fundraising record of $3.88 billion held by Yale.
Stanford faculty and alumni have founded many companies  and companies founded by Stanford alumni generate more than $2.7 trillion in annual revenue, equivalent to the 10th-largest economy in the world.
John Etchemendy was named the 12th Provost in September 2000.
Nine of the Greek organizations are housed (eight in University owned houses and one, Sigma Chi, in their own house though the land is the University).
The SAR directory includes organizations that serve atheist, Baha'i, Buddhist, Christian, Hindu, Islam, Jewish, and Sikh groups, though these groups vary year by year.
Payouts from the Stanford endowment covered approximately 23% of University expenses in the 2014 fiscal year, compared to Princeton at 55% and Harvard at 35%.
In 1919, The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace was started by Herbert Hoover to preserve artifacts related to World War I.
Annual NCAA Athletic Achievement
Besides the central campus described below, the university also operates at several more remote locations, some elsewhere on the main campus, some further afield (see below).
Also integral to PASU is a traditional performing arts arm called Kayumanggi.
It is the alma mater of 30 living billionaires, 17 astronauts, and 20 Turing Award laureates.
As of 2013 the university was organized into seven academic schools.
* There are also four unhoused MGC (Multicultural Greek Council) sororities on campus (Alpha Kappa Delta Phi, Lambda Theta Nu, Sigma Psi Zeta, and Sigma Theta Psi), as well as two unhoused MGC fraternities (Gamma Zeta Alpha and Lambda Phi Epsilon).
Groups span from Athletic/Recreational (see section on Athletics), Careers/Pre-professional, Community Service, Ethnic/Cultural, Fraternities/Sororities, Health/Counseling, Media/Publications, Music/Dance/Creative Arts (see section on Arts), Political/Social Awareness to Religious/Philosophical.
These houses have unique themes around which their community is centered.
Some religions have a larger and more formal presence on campus in addition to the student groups; these include the Catholic Community at Stanford and  Hillel at Stanford.
Videos from the Stanford Professional Publishing Courses were available on their website as of 2014.
The Dish, Stanford University.jpg|The Dish, a  diameter radio telescope on the Stanford foothills overlooking the main campus
These fraternities operate under the Stanford Inter-fraternity Council (IFC).
In 1944, University President Donald Tresidder banned all Stanford sororities due to extreme competition.
Lambda Phi Epsilon is recognized by the National Interfraternity Conference (NIC).
Many co-ops are hubs of music, art and philosophy.
As of 2014 Stanford had 650 student organizations.
Stanford University was founded in 1885 by Leland and Jane Stanford, dedicated to Leland Stanford Jr, their only child.
It is also one of the leading producers of members of the United States Congress.
The Papua New Guinea Sculpture Garden near Roble Hall features includes wood carvings and "totem poles."
The institution opened in 1891 on Stanford's previous Palo Alto farm.
UPW sometimes has multifaith services.
The Business Association of Stanford Entrepreneurial Students (BASES), is one of the largest professional organizations in Silicon Valley, with over 5,000 members.
Clougherty withdrew her suit that fall as well.
The relatively low four-year graduation rate is a function of the university's coterminal degree (or "coterm") program, which allows students to earn a master's degree as an extension of their undergraduate program.
Fraternities and sororities have been active on the Stanford campus since 1891, when the university first opened.
It is also affiliated with 4 Gödel Prize winners, 4 Knuth Prize recipients, 10 IJCAI Computers and Thought Award winners, and about 15 Grace Murray Hopper Award winners for their work in the foundations of computer science.
Stanford follows a quarter system with Autumn quarter usually starting in late September and Spring Quarter ending in early June.
The rape was interrupted by two Swedish graduate students.
It has existed since 1982.
Fire protection has been provided by contract with the Palo Alto Fire Department since 1976.
As of 2014, 114 Stanford students have been named Rhodes Scholars.
A new trustee is chosen by the current trustees by ballot.
The main campus is in northern Santa Clara Valley adjacent to Palo Alto and between San Jose and San Francisco.
It also runs the John S. Knight Fellowship for Professional Journalists and the Center for Ocean Solutions, which brings together marine science and policy to address challenges facing the ocean.
The judge in the case, a Stanford graduate, faced a recall effort in the aftermath.
Council for Aid to Education
The student-run radio station, KZSU Stanford 90.1 FM, features freeform music programming, sports commentary, and news segments; it started in 1947 as an AM radio station.
Stanford Finance provides mentoring and internships for students who want to enter a career in finance.
Houses in the "Ghetto" appreciate and depreciate, but not as rapidly as overall Silicon Valley values.
Stanford is a member of the Pac-12 Conference in most sports, the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation in several other sports, and the America East Conference in field hockey with the participation in the inter-collegiate NCAA's Division I FBS.
Stanford's faculty and former faculty includes 31 Nobel laureates, as well as 19 recipients (22 if visiting professors and consulting professors included) of the Turing Award, the so-called "Nobel Prize in computer science", comprising one third of the awards given in its 44-year history.
* Seven historically NPC (National Panhellenic Conference) sororities, four of which are unhoused (Alpha Phi, Alpha Epsilon Phi, Chi Omega, and Kappa Kappa Gamma) and three of which are housed (Delta Delta Delta, Kappa Alpha Theta, and Pi Beta Phi) call Stanford home.
Cross-Cultural Themed Houses include Casa Zapata (Chicano/Latino Theme in Stern Hall), Muwekma-tah-ruk (American Indian/Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian Themed House), Okada (Asian-American Themed House in Wilbur Hall), and Ujamaa (Black/African-American Themed House in Lagunita Court).
These funds include "special fees", which are decided by a Spring Quarter vote by the student body.
By the spring of 2013 Clougherty had broken off the relationship and filed charges at Stanford that Lonsdale had broken the Stanford policy against consensual relationships between students and faculty and that he had sexually assaulted and harassed her, which resulted in Lonsdale being banned from Stanford for 10 years.
At Manzanita Park, 118 mobile homes were installed as "temporary" housing from 1969 to 1991, but as of 2015 was the site of newer dorms Castano, Kimball, Lantana, and the Humanities House, completed in 2015.
It lies within area code 650.
'''Stanford University''', officially '''Leland Stanford Junior University''', is a private research university in Stanford, California.
The latter is intended to build connections among industry, alumni, and student communities.
The main library in the SU library system is Green Library, which also contains various meeting and conference rooms, study spaces, and reading rooms.
Its elected leadership consists of the Undergraduate Senate elected by the undergraduate students, the Graduate Student Council elected by the graduate students, and the President and Vice President elected as a ticket by the entire student body.
Students and staff at Stanford are of many different religions.
The full-time, four-year undergraduate program has an arts and sciences focus with high graduate student coexistence.
The Board appoints a President to serve as the chief executive officer of the university and prescribe the duties of professors and course of study, manage financial and business affairs, and appoint nine vice presidents.
Eight Stanford alumni have won the Nobel Prize.
Most of Stanford University is on an  campus on the San Francisco Peninsula, in the northwest part of the Santa Clara Valley (Silicon Valley) approximately  southeast of San Francisco and approximately  northwest of San Jose; this is the founding grant.
Stanford land is also leased for a token rent by the Palo Alto Unified School District for several schools including Palo Alto High School and Gunn High School.
In most residences, men and women live on the same floor, but a few dorms are configured for men and women to live on separate floors (single-gender floors), including all Wilbur dorms except for Arroyo and Okada.
Weddings happen most Saturdays and the university has for over 20 years allowed blessings of same-gender relationships and now legal weddings.
The Stanford music department sponsors many ensembles including five choirs, the Stanford Symphony Orchestra, Stanford Taiko, and the Stanford Wind Ensemble.
The university struggled financially after Leland Stanford's 1893 death and again after much of the campus was damaged by the 1906 San Francisco earthquake.
In addition the church is used by the Catholic community and by some of the other Christian denominations at Stanford.
The creative writing program brings young writers to campus via the Stegner Fellowships and other graduate scholarship programs.
Its traditional sports rival is Berkeley, the neighbor to the north in the East Bay.
Parents' Dream College
Venture Capital Investment in Alumni Startups
Stanford is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges.
Frank Lloyd Wright's 1937 Hanna–Honeycomb House and the 1919 Lou Henry Hoover House are both listed on the National Historic Register.
Stanford Memorial Church Interior 2.jpg|Interior of the Stanford Memorial Church at the center of the Main Quad
The Center's collection of works by Rodin is among the largest in the world The Thomas Welton Stanford Gallery, built in 1917, serves as a teaching resource for the Department of Art & Art History as well as an exhibition venue.
The powers and authority of the faculty are vested in the Academic Council, which is made up of tenure and non-tenure line faculty, research faculty, senior fellows in some policy centers and institutes, the president of the university, and some other academic administrators, but most matters are handled by the Faculty Senate, made up of 55 elected representatives of the faculty.
The Stanford Review is a conservative student newspaper founded in 1987.
In 2006, President John L. Hennessy launched a five-year campaign called the Stanford Challenge, which reached its $4.3 billion fundraising goal in 2009, two years ahead of time, but continued fundraising for the duration of the campaign.
The Stanford trustees also oversee the Stanford Research Park, the Stanford Shopping Center, the Cantor Center for Visual Arts, Stanford University Medical Center, and many associated medical facilities (including the Lucile Packard Children's Hospital).
Murder is rare on the campus though a few of the cases have been notorious including Theodore Streleski's murder of his professor in 1978 and the unsolved 1974 murder of Arlis Perry in Stanford Memorial Church.
The Faculty Ghetto is composed of land owned entirely by Stanford.
Full-time undergraduate tuition was $42,690 for 2013–2014.
Its   campus is one of the largest in the United States.
Associated Students of Stanford University and student and alumni activists with the anti-rape group Stand with Leah criticized the survey methodology for downgrading incidents involving alcohol if students did not check two separate boxes indicating they were both intoxicated and incapacity while sexually assaulted.
Six chapters were members of the African American Fraternal and Sororal Association, 11 chapters were members of the Interfraternity Council, 7 chapters belonged to the Intersorority Council, and 6 chapters belonged to the Multicultural Greek Council.
Many Stanford faculty members live in the "Faculty Ghetto", within walking or biking distance of campus.
The university has 27 ACM fellows.
Stanford athletes have won medals in every Olympic Games since 1912, winning 270 Olympic medals total, 139 of them gold.
Stanford also hosts various publishing courses for professionals.
The SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory (originally named the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center), which was established in 1962, performs research in particle physics.
Professionals' Assessment
* Eleven historically NIC (National Interfraternity Conference) fraternities are also represented at Stanford, including five unhoused fraternities (Alpha Epsilon Pi, Delta Kappa Epsilon, Delta Tau Delta, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, and Sigma Phi Epsilon), and six housed fraternities (Kappa Alpha Order, Kappa Sigma, Phi Kappa Psi, Sigma Chi, Sigma Nu, and Theta Delta Chi).
It is headed by a dean with the assistance of a senior associate dean and an associate dean.
Specifically, the campaign raised $253.7 million for undergraduate financial aid, as well as $2.33 billion for its initiative in "Seeking Solutions" to global problems, $1.61 billion for "Educating Leaders" by improving K-12 education, and $2.11 billion for "Foundation of Excellence" aimed at providing academic support for Stanford students and faculty.
Stanford awarded 1,715 undergraduate degrees, 2,278 Master's degrees, 764 doctoral degrees, and 366 professional degrees in the 2011–2012 school year.
Trustees serve five-year terms (not more than two consecutive terms) and meet five times annually.
Reporting on the Brock Turner rape case, a reporter from ''The Washington Post'' analyzed campus rape reports submitted by universities to the U.S. Department of Education, and found that Stanford was one of the top ten universities in campus rapes in 2014, with 26 reported that year, but when analyzed by rapes per 1000 students, Stanford was not among the top ten.
In 2012–13, the university awarded $126 million in need-based financial aid to 3,485 students, with an average aid package of $40,460.
Princeton Review Dream College
Turner was convicted on three felony charges in March 2016 and in June 2016 he received a jail sentence of six months and was declared a sex offender, requiring him to register as such for the rest of his life; prosecutors had sought a six-year prison sentence out of the maximum 14 years that was possible.
The university was founded in 1885 by Leland Stanford, former Governor of and U.S.
These houses feature cooperative living, where residents and eating associates each contribute work to keep the house running, such as cooking meals or cleaning shared spaces.
The  academic central campus is adjacent to Palo Alto, bounded by El Camino Real, Stanford Avenue, Junipero Serra Boulevard, and Sand Hill Road.
MONEY's Best Colleges
El Camino Park, the oldest Palo Alto city park (established 1914), is also on Stanford land.
Stanford's Department of Public Safety is responsible for law enforcement and safety on the main campus.
Lou Henry Hoover House from NW.jpg|Lou Henry Hoover House, official residence of the University President
