Since Musial's retirement in 1963, the only player to finish his career with a higher lifetime batting average has been Tony Gwynn.
He also held NL career marks in categories such as hits (3,630), games played (3,026), doubles (725), and RBI (1,951).
On June 30, 1959, Musial was the batter in one of baseball history's oddest plays.
Musial's statue is inscribed with a quote attributed to former baseball commissioner Ford Frick: "Here stands baseball's perfect warrior.
Noted for his unique batting stance, he quickly established himself as a consistent and productive hitter.
On August 4, 1968, a statue of Musial was erected outside of Busch Memorial Stadium on the northeast grounds of the St. Louis stadium.
A game-winning home run on May 7 made him the first major league player ever with 400 home runs and 3,000 hits.
He set a new major league record for career extra-base hits on May 8 and improved his batting average to .277 by the end of the month.
In 2007, Musial received the Navy Memorial's Lone Sailor Award, which honors Navy veterans who have excelled in civilian life.
The Cardinals finished the season tied with the Dodgers, prompting a three-game playoff for the pennant.
He ultimately reached the mark with a pinch-hit, sixth inning RBI double at Chicago's Wrigley Field on May 13.
His lowest full season RBI output before the war was 72 (in 1942) and as he needed only 49 RBI to reach 2,000 for his full career, he certainly would have exceeded 2,000 RBI by playing without injury in 1945.
Instead, Lane dealt Musial's close friend Schoendienst to the New York Giants; an upset Musial made no immediate comment to the press.
Anticipating life after his baseball career, Musial began the first of several business partnerships with Julius "Biggie" Garagnani in January 1949, opening "Stan Musial & Biggie's" restaurant.
From February 1964 to January 1967, he also served as President Lyndon Johnson's physical fitness adviser, a part-time position created to promote better fitness among American citizens.
Musial was the last living member of the Cardinals team that won the 1942 World Series.
He ranks first on Baseball-Reference's Hall of Fame Monitor Test, and is tied for second in the Hall of Fame Career Standards Test.
Musial's last game, on September 29, 1963, was preceded by an hour-long retirement ceremony.
Making his 20th All-Star appearance and 24th All-Star Game appearance on July 9, 1963, he pinch-hit in the fifth inning.
Manager Eddie Stanky had a reluctant Musial pitch to Frank Baumholtz, the runner-up to Musial for the best batting average in the NL that season.
Musial won his second World Series championship in 1944, then missed the entire 1945 season while serving with the Navy.
His mother was of Carpatho-Rusyn descent and his father was a Polish immigrant who chose the name Stanisław Franciszek for his first son, though his father always referred to Musial using the Polish nickname Stasiu, pronounced "Stashu".
He finished the season with a .315 batting average and 72 runs batted in (RBI) in 140 games.
In June 1946, Dyer began to use Musial as a first baseman.
Musial received national publicity when he was named by ''St.
Bob Anderson's next pitch was errant, evading catcher Sammy Taylor and rolling all the way to the backstop.
Based on his 1959 performance, Musial accepted a pay cut in 1960 from his previous $100,000 salary to $80,000.
Despite ballot stuffing by Cincinnati Reds fans, he was selected and played in the All-Star Game held at Sportsman's Park.
The only major league pitching appearance of Musial's career occurred as a publicity stunt during the last Cardinals home game of the 1952 season.
United States involvement in World War II began to impinge on Musial's baseball career in 1944, as he underwent a physical examination in prelude to possible service in the armed forces.
The Cardinals did not win another game in the Series, but the loser's bonus share paid to each Cardinals player ($4,321.99) still amounted to nearly two-thirds of Musial's regular season salary.
Seeking more revenue for the players' pension fund, Major League Baseball held two All-Star games in a season for the first time through 1962.
To repay the debt Musial bought Kerr a $20,000 home in Houston in 1958.
Just as he had recorded two base hits in his major league debut, Musial finished his last game with two hits, as well.
Despite his health woes, he finished the year with a batting average of .312.
After struggling offensively in 1959, Musial used a personal trainer to help maintain his productivity until he decided to retire in 1963.
Known for his modesty and sportsmanship, Musial was selected for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team in 1999.
Upon hearing the news of his death, fans gathered and began an impromptu memorial by his statue outside Busch Stadium; the Cardinals issued a release saying the memorial would be left in place for some time.
Musial finished 1948 leading the major leagues in batting average (.376), hits (230), doubles (46), triples (18), total bases (429), and slugging percentage (.702).
That same year, on July 8, the 41-year-old Musial became the oldest player ever to hit three home runs in one game.
His hit total in his last season at age 43 was only 86; even if he could have had 103 hits a season (the average of his last 5 seasons) he would have had to play to age 47 to attain the hits record.
The Cardinals went on to defeat the Browns in six games, and Musial posted a .304 batting average for the Series.
Musial stopped at both dugouts and greeted San Francisco Giants manager Bruce Bochy and Cardinals manager Mike Matheny.
Musial campaigned for Kennedy later that year and became a supporter of the Democrat.
In his first full season, 1942, the Cardinals won the World Series.
Also in 2010, the Cardinals launched a campaign to build support for awarding Musial the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his lifetime of achievement and service.
Musial soon stopped focusing on hitting home runs and resumed his consistent offensive production by the end of May.
When he overextended his swing while batting during a game on August 23, Musial fractured a bone in his left shoulder socket and tore muscles over his collarbone.
At age 15 Musial joined the Donora Zincs, a semi-professional team managed by Barbao.
The Cardinals would go on to win Game 4 by a score of 8-3, but lost the pennant to the eventual World Series champion Giants.
In addition to his five home runs, he also hit a single in the first game, setting a new record of 21 total bases for a doubleheader.
He came to realize that the detail-oriented desk job was not his forte.
During 87 games with Springfield, Musial hit a league-leading .379 before being promoted to the Rochester Red Wings of the International League.
The following year, he led the NL in six different offensive categories and earned his first MVP award.
Musial finished with the all-time National League record and second to only Ty Cobb on the all-time Major League list.
On June 11, 1957, Musial tied the NL record for consecutive games played with his 822nd, a streak that began on the last day of the 1951 season.
He was also one of the 30 players selected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team, added by a special committee after he finished 11th in fan voting among outfielders.
Speakers at the event included baseball commissioner Ford Frick, Cardinals broadcaster Harry Caray, and Cardinals owner Gussie Busch, who announced that Musial's uniform number "6" would be retired by the team.
The statue was moved from its original location to the west side of the new Busch Stadium for its first season in 2006, where it became a popular meeting place for generations of Cardinals fans.
Musial was born in Donora, Pennsylvania, where he frequently played baseball, whether informally or in organized settings, eventually playing on the baseball team at Donora High School.
Speaking about his quiet reputation within the sport's history, sportscaster Bob Costas said, "He didn't hit a homer in his last at-bat; he hit a single.
Absentmindedly, however, Delmore pulled out a new ball and gave it to Taylor.
As a pinch-hitter, he had 14 base hits in 19 at-bats (.615).
At the time of his death, no living players had played on an earlier World Series-winning team.
With the Cardinals falling 14 games out of first place by September, manager Dyer used him at first base and all three outfield positions.
Musial's last hit in his career was hit past the Cincinnati Reds second baseman at the time, Pete Rose, who later broke Cobb's record to become the all-time hit king.
Musial began the 1947 season by hitting .146 in April.
The world is emptier today without him, but far better to have known him.
His longtime business partner Biggie Garagnani died in June 1967, prompting Musial to devote more time to managing his restaurant and other business interests.
'''Stanley Frank "Stan" Musial''' ( or ; born '''Stanisław Franciszek Musiał'''; November 21, 1920&nbsp;– January 19, 2013), nicknamed "'''Stan the Man'''", was an American Major League Baseball (MLB) outfielder and first baseman.
Musial died at age 92 of natural causes on January 19, 2013, at his home in Ladue, Missouri, on the same day as fellow MLB Hall of Fame inductee Earl Weaver.
Seeing that Musial was trying for second, Alvin Dark ran to the backstop to retrieve the ball.
He began gaining more in-depth knowledge about baseball strategy while posting a 6–6 win–loss record and a 4.66 earned run average (ERA), to go along with a .258 batting average.
Musial had a single in the Cardinals' Game 1 loss, and scored a run in a Game 2 win.
At the time of his retirement, he held or shared 17 major league records, 29 National League records, and nine All-Star Game records.
As he continued to hit at a relatively low pace, his playing time was limited by Cardinals manager Solly Hemus at various points during the season.
According to Baseball-Reference.com, he ranks fifth all-time among hitters on the Black Ink Test, and third all-time on the Gray Ink Test—measures designed to compare players of different eras.
When he returned to baseball in 1946, Musial resumed his consistent hitting.
In response, Musial displayed his characteristic modesty, saying, "Cobb is baseball's greatest.
A "Stan the Man" day was held in his honor by the Cardinals on May 18, 2008.
Asked by general manager Bing Devine on July 26 what his plans were, Musial decided to retire at season's end.
"'That man,' you mean", Broeg said.
During late August, Musial suffered a shoulder injury while playing in the outfield, and later made an early exit as the starting pitcher in a 12–5 playoff game loss.
During the 1959 season, John F. Kennedy approached Musial about supporting Kennedy's campaign for President, citing their close ages.
He quickly demonstrated a return on the investment by sharing with Willie Mays the inaugural (and for the only time in Musial's career) NL Player of the Month in May (no such award was given in April until 1969) batting .374, with 4 HR, and 16 RBI.
The Cardinals were in the midst of a pennant race with the Brooklyn Dodgers; in 12 games, Musial collected 20 hits for a .426 batting average.
(According to Baseball Almanac, Hank Greenberg was the first with Pittsburgh in 1947.)
Cobb went on to refer to Musial as "a better player than Joe DiMaggio was in his prime."
In his final years, Musial suffered from Alzheimer's disease.
"Major League Baseball has lost one of its true legends in Stan Musial, a Hall of Famer in every sense and a man who led a great American life", Commissioner Bud Selig said.
Musial's 1943 season started with a brief contract holdout in spring training.
He also shares the major league record for the most All-Star Games played (24) with Hank Aaron and Willie Mays.
Musial was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility in , named on 93.2&nbsp;percent of the ballots.
He waited until the Cardinals team picnic on August 12 to publicly announce his decision, hopeful he could retire on a winning note.
Before the 1967 season began, the Cardinals named Musial the team's general manager, and he oversaw the club's World Series championship that year.
When Cardinals owner Gussie Busch learned of the possible move, he made it clear that Musial was not available for any trade.
Musial also had the benefit of learning about baseball from his neighbor Joe Barbao, a former minor league pitcher.
He was noted for his unique batting stance, a crouch in which his back was seemingly square to the pitcher.
The Cardinals played the American League champion New York Yankees in the 1942 World Series.
His new focus on hitting for power backfired, as pitchers began using the outside part of the plate to induce him to ground out to the first or second baseman.
In 2001, James ranked Musial the tenth-greatest baseball player in history, and the second-best left fielder of all time.
Through the 1990s, he frequently played the harmonica at public gatherings, such as the annual Baseball Hall of Fame induction ceremony and various charity events.
Musial threw out the first pitch in the fifth game of the 2006 World Series and delivered the ceremonial first pitch ball to President Barack Obama at the 2009 Major League Baseball All-Star Game.
Musial frequently played baseball with his brother Ed and other friends during his childhood, and considered Lefty Grove his favorite ballplayer.
New Cardinals manager Marty Marion led the team to a third-place finish in 1951, while Musial was named ''The Sporting News'' Major League Player of the Year.
Despite Musial's late contributions, the Cardinals finished two and one-half games behind the 100-game-winning Dodgers.
He was unable to play again until September 8, ending his consecutive games-played streak at 895.
In July 2013, the new Interstate 70 bridge over the Mississippi River between Illinois and Missouri at St. Louis received the official name of "Stan Musial Veterans Memorial Bridge"
New York's Cardinal Timothy Dolan, who in his first episcopal post served as an auxiliary bishop of the Archdiocese of Saint Louis, was the principal celebrant, and Knoxville's Bishop Richard F. Stika, Musial's former parish priest, was the homilist.
He declined the offer, and after manager Dyer spoke to club owner Sam Breadon, Musial was given a $5,000 raise later in 1946.
In addition to overseeing businesses, such as a restaurant both before and after his playing career, Musial served as the Cardinals' general manager in 1967, winning the pennant and World Series, then quitting that position.
Signed to a professional contract by the St. Louis Cardinals as a pitcher in 1938, Musial was converted into an outfielder prior to his major league debut in 1941.
Musial spent the 1940 season with the Cardinals' other Class D team, the Daytona Beach Islanders, where he developed a lifelong friendship with manager Dickie Kerr.
Musial also gave free meals at the restaurant he owned in St. Louis to any customers who presented valid ID proving they were Donora residents.
In January, 2014, the Cardinals announced Musial among 22 former players and personnel to be inducted into the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame Museum for the inaugural class of 2014.
"They never...had the need to sit in the dugout and call a black guy a bunch of names", Newcombe said, "because he was trying to change the game and make it what it should have been in the first place, a game for all people."
Ironically, in 1964, the season following his retirement, the Cardinals went on to defeat the New York Yankees in an epic 7-game clash, for St. Louis' first World Series championship in nearly two decades (a team which included future Hall of Famer Lou Brock performing what would have likely been Musial's left field duties).
In June 1960, newspaper articles began speculating that Musial would soon retire, yet he finished the season with a .275 batting average.
After romping to another NL pennant by 18 games, the Cardinals again faced the Yankees in the 1943 World Series.
This preserved Musial's amateur eligibility, and he was still able to participate in high school sports, leading Donora High School's basketball team to a playoff appearance.
In 113 games in 1940 he hit .311, while compiling an 18–5 pitching record that included 176 strikeouts and 145 walks.
He didn't hit in 56 straight games.
He reported to spring training approximately  overweight and in substandard physical condition.
Among those records, he ranked as the major league career leader in extra-base hits (1,377) and total bases (6,134).
The campaign realized its goal, and on February 15, 2011, Musial was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Barack Obama who called him "an icon untarnished, a beloved pillar of the community, a gentleman you'd want your kids to emulate."
In 1989, he was inducted into the St. Louis Walk of Fame.
Cardinals owner Bill DeWitt, Jr. released the following statement:
Baseball statistician Bill James described the younger Griffey, in comparison to Musial, as "the second-best left-handed hitting, left-handed throwing outfielder ever born in Donora, Pennsylvania, on November 21."
Cardinals manager Billy Southworth used Musial as a left fielder to begin 1942, sometimes lifting him for a pinch-hitter against left-handed pitching.
During the season, Musial (who was under contract to the Cardinals for $13,500 in 1946) was offered a five-year, $125,000 contract, plus a $50,000 bonus, to join the Mexican League.
He batted .365 for the season and won his second NL MVP Award, receiving 22 out of a possible 24 first-place votes, finishing ahead of Brooklyn's Dixie Walker (.319 batting average).
Louis Post-Dispatch'' sports editor J. Roy Stockton as his choice for Rookie of the Year in a ''Saturday Evening Post'' article.
On May 25, 1940, Musial married fellow Donora resident, Lillian "Lil" Labash, in Daytona Beach, and the couple's first child followed in August.
He was initially assigned to noncombat duty at the Naval Training Station in Bainbridge, Maryland.
Fully recovered from his ailments, Musial recorded his 1,000th career hit on April 25, 1948.
Ward said, "Every time Stan came up they chanted, 'Here comes the man!'"
Musial did not see Dark's throw and only noticed Anderson's ball fly over the second baseman's head, so he tried to go to third base.
Musial continued to play well in Rochester—in one three-game stretch, he had 11 hits.
The Cardinals took sole possession of first place on September 13, and when Musial caught a fly ball to end the first game of a doubleheader on September 27 they clinched the pennant with their 105th win.
He then reported to the Cardinals' Class D affiliate in West Virginia, the Williamson Red Birds.
Later that day over dinner, Broeg asked Cardinals traveling secretary Leo Ward if he had understood what the Dodger fans had been chanting.
Thousands of fans braved cold temperatures on January 24 for a public visitation at the Cathedral Basilica of Saint Louis, where Musial lay in state, dressed in his trademark cardinal-red blazer and with a harmonica in his lapel pocket, flanked by a Navy honor guard.
He performed on the television show ''Hee Haw'' and in 1994 recorded 18 songs that were sold in tandem with a harmonica-playing instruction booklet.
A seven-time batting champion with identical totals of 1,815 hits at home and on the road, he was named the National League's (NL) Most Valuable Player (MVP) three times and led St. Louis to three World Series championship titles.
Despite his early offensive struggles, he single-handedly spoiled potential no-hitters on April 16 and 19.
On his way there, he was tagged by Banks, and after a delay he was ruled out.
That salute was the fans singing "Take Me Out to the Ball Game" before Musial was taken to his final place of rest.
He began the season with one hit in 15 at-bats.
The Browns took a 2–1 lead, while Musial hit .250 with zero RBI.
After a May 7 ''St.
On October 17, 2012, Musial made his final appearance at Busch Stadium, riding in a golf cart around the warning track before Game 4 of the National League Championship Series.
"No, ''the'' man", replied Ward.
A recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2011, Stan's life embodies baseball's unparalleled history and why this game is the national pastime."
He finished 1957 as ''Sports Illustrated''s "Sportsman of the Year".
He also became close friends with new teammate Red Schoendienst, who had joined the Cardinals during Musial's absence in 1945.
His career hit total was evenly split between 1,815 hits at home and 1,815 hits on the road.
Musial also played one season on the newly revived Donora High School baseball team, where one of his teammates was Buddy Griffey, father of MLB player Ken Griffey, Sr. and grandfather to Ken Griffey, Jr.
Despite his statistical accomplishments, he is sometimes referred to as the most underrated or overlooked athlete in modern American sports history.
In his Zincs debut he pitched 6 innings and struck out 13 batters, all of them adults.
Musial batted .222 for the Series, with two runs scored.
National media attention inadvertently turned to Musial a month before the 1952 season began, after Ty Cobb wrote an article regarding modern baseball players that was published in ''Life'' magazine.
Missouri Governor Jay Nixon commented: "Stan Musial was a great American hero who—with the utmost humility—inspired us all to aim high and dream big.
Also that month, as he was approaching the 3,000-hit milestone in his major league career, he expressed a desire to record the hit in St. Louis.
He was the first major league player to appear in more than 1,000 games at two different positions, registering 1,896 games in the outfield and 1,016 at first base.
... All Musial represents is more than two decades of sustained excellence and complete decency as a human being."
After sweeping a doubleheader on September 15, the Cardinals had won 19 of their last 20 games, and were one game behind the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Cardinals manager Johnny Keane brought in Gary Kolb as a pinch-runner for Musial, bringing his major league career to an end.
He was ranked tenth on ''The Sporting News'' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players published in 1998.
His third MVP award came in 1948, when he finished one home run shy of winning baseball's Triple Crown.
In 1962, Musial posted a .330 batting average, good for third in the batting race, with 19 homers and 82&nbsp;RBI.
Broeg mentioned this story in his ''Post-Dispatch'' column, and Musial was thereafter known as Stan "The Man".
Leading off the bottom of the 12th, he hit a home run to give the NL a 6–5 victory.
Musial accomplished another historical feat on May 2, 1954, in a doubleheader in St. Louis against the New York Giants: he hit three home runs in the first contest, then added two more in the second to become the first major leaguer to hit five home runs in a doubleheader.
Musial's father initially resisted the idea of his son pursuing a baseball career, but reluctantly gave his consent after lobbying by both Musial and his mother.
Musial was assigned to the Class AA Columbus Red Birds to begin 1941, though manager, Burt Shotton, and Musial himself quickly realized that the previous year's injury had considerably weakened his arm.
A private funeral Mass was held on Saturday, January 26, 2013, at the New Cathedral in St. Louis, televised locally by KTVI and KPLR as well as Fox Sports Midwest on pay-television.
The 1956 season marked another milestone for Musial, when he broke Mel Ott's NL record for extra-base hits on August 12.
Eager to prove his mediocre performance was the result of improper physical conditioning, he enlisted the help of Walter Eberhardt, Saint Louis University's director of physical education.
This performance earned him his first NL Most Valuable Player Award, ahead of teammate and catcher Walker Cooper (.318 batting average).
His exploits as a rising player in Pennsylvania earned him the nickname "The Donora Greyhound".
Dark, at the same time that Anderson threw the new ball, threw the original ball to shortstop Ernie Banks.
However, the Cardinals, with 96 wins, finished one game behind the Dodgers.
In a game between the Cardinals and Chicago Cubs, he was at the plate with a count of 3–1.
When he enrolled in school, his name was formally changed to Stanley Frank Musial.
Kerr talked him out of it, and even took the Musials into his own home to relieve the financial burden.
He made the National League All-Star team for the first time as a starting left fielder and got a double in the All-Star Game on July 13.
Even if Musial had hit safely 207 times (the average of his hits in the 2 years before and the 2 years after his service in the navy) in 1945, he still would have been 354 hits short of tying Ty.
Even though Musial left Donora after high school, he retained close ties to the town throughout the rest of his life.
Anderson finally noticed that Musial was trying for second, took the new ball, and threw it to second baseman Tony Taylor.
Musial was surrounded by his family as he died peacefully.
In Musial's 3,026 major league appearances, he was never ejected from a game.
The Cardinals franchise was up for sale in early 1953, and Musial and Schoendienst advised their friend and fellow duck-hunter Gussie Busch to consider buying the team.
The Cardinals claimed the NL pennant for the third consecutive season, and faced St. Louis's other major league team, the Browns, in the 1944 World Series.
He had the longest hitting streak of his career during the 1950 season—a 30-game stretch that ended on July 27.
Once the wreath was placed and Musial's family began to walk back to their vehicles, the hundreds of Cardinal fans gathered for the wreath ceremony gave both Musial and his family one final salute.
In February 2011, President Barack Obama presented Musial with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, one of the highest civilian awards that can be bestowed on a person by the United States government.
He finished the season with 115 regular game appearances, a .255 batting average, 37 runs, and a slugging percentage of .428.
Finishing the season in sixth place, the Cardinals embarked on an exhibition tour of Japan, winning 14 of 16&nbsp;games against top players from the Central and Pacific Japanese Leagues.
He consequently decided to step down as general manager, before even completing a full year on the job.
Musial also played basketball, for which he was offered a scholarship by the University of Pittsburgh.
