Instead, for stars of more than 0.4 , fusion occurs in a slowly expanding shell around the degenerate helium core.
From the corona, a stellar wind of plasma particles expands outward from the star, until it interacts with the interstellar medium.
Stellar flares are bursts of high-energy particles that are emitted due to the same magnetic activity.
In June 2015, astronomers reported evidence for Population III stars in the Cosmos Redshift 7 galaxy at .
A star's metallicity can influence the time the star takes to burn its fuel, and controls the formation of its magnetic fields, which affects the strength of its stellar wind.
The more massive the star, the shorter its lifespan, primarily because massive stars have greater pressure on their cores, causing them to burn hydrogen more rapidly.
These interactions tend to split apart more widely separated (soft) binaries while causing hard binaries to become more tightly bound.
The only internationally recognized authority for naming celestial bodies is the International Astronomical Union (IAU).
In relatively old, very massive stars, a large core of inert iron will accumulate in the center of the star.
When stars form in the present Milky Way galaxy they are composed of about 71% hydrogen and 27% helium, as measured by mass, with a small fraction of heavier elements.
The stellar temperature will determine the rate of ionization of various elements, resulting in characteristic absorption lines in the spectrum.
Note that the effective temperature is only a representative of the surface, as the temperature increases toward the core.
Stars less massive than 0.25 , called red dwarfs, are able to fuse nearly all of their mass while stars of about 1  can only fuse about 10% of their mass.
These range from loose stellar associations with only a few stars, up to enormous globular clusters with hundreds of thousands of stars.
The temperature at the core of a main sequence or giant star is at least on the order of 107 K. The resulting temperature and pressure at the hydrogen-burning core of a main sequence star are sufficient for nuclear fusion to occur and for sufficient energy to be produced to prevent further collapse of the star.
The activity levels of slowly rotating stars tend to vary in a cyclical manner and can shut down altogether for periods of time.
This is particularly true for very massive O and B class stars, where 80% of the stars are believed to be part of multiple-star systems.
The main classifications in order of decreasing surface temperature are: ''O, B, A, F, G, K'', and ''M''.
Young stars can have a rotation greater than 100&nbsp;km/s at the equator.
They end their lives when their cores collapse and they explode as supernovae.
As a star's core shrinks, the intensity of radiation from that surface increases, creating such radiation pressure on the outer shell of gas that it will push those layers away, forming a planetary nebula.
This generation of supermassive population III stars is likely to have existed in the very early universe (i.e., they are observed to have a high redshift), and may have started the production of chemical elements heavier than hydrogen that are needed for the later formation of planets and life.
Small, ''dwarf'' stars such as our Sun generally have essentially featureless disks with only small starspots.
In spite of the apparent immutability of the heavens, Chinese astronomers were aware that new stars could appear.
they also exhibit strong stellar limb darkening.
Smaller stars such as the Sun are just the opposite, with the convective zone located in the outer layers.
Other than the Sun, the star with the largest apparent size is R Doradus, with an angular diameter of only 0.057 arcseconds.
The B-class star Achernar, for example, has an equatorial velocity of about 225&nbsp;km/s or greater, causing its equator to be slung outward and giving it an equatorial diameter that is more than 50% greater than between the poles.
dwarf flare stars such as UV Ceti may also possess prominent starspot features.
The explosion is created when the white dwarf accretes hydrogen from the companion star, building up mass until the hydrogen undergoes fusion.
Thus, older stars such as the Sun have a much slower rate of rotation and a lower level of surface activity.
Edmond Halley published the first measurements of the proper motion of a pair of nearby "fixed" stars, demonstrating that they had changed positions since the time of the ancient Greek astronomers Ptolemy and Hipparchus.
Likewise, since they are more tightly bound than all lighter nuclei, such energy cannot be released by fission.
The combination of their slow fuel-consumption and relatively large usable fuel supply allows low mass stars to last about one trillion (1012) years; the most extreme of 0.08 ) will last for about 12 trillion years.
However they have relatively low rates of rotation compared to what would be expected by conservation of angular momentum—the tendency of a rotating body to compensate for a contraction in size by increasing its rate of spin.
The Italian astronomer Geminiano Montanari recorded observing variations in luminosity of the star Algol in 1667.
Low mass stars consume their fuel very slowly.
By precisely measuring the drop in brightness of a star as it is occulted by the Moon (or the rise in brightness when it reappears), the star's angular diameter can be computed.
To the Ancient Greeks, some "stars", known as planets (Greek πλανήτης (planētēs), meaning "wanderer"), represented various important deities, from which the names of the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn were taken.
This is further sub-divided into the classes ''DA'', ''DB'', ''DC'', ''DO'', ''DZ'', and ''DQ'', depending on the types of prominent lines found in the spectrum.
A variety of nuclear fusion reactions take place in the cores of stars, that depend upon their mass and composition.
Most stars are observed to be members of binary star systems, and the properties of those binaries are the result of the conditions in which they formed.
These faint stars are so dim that their light is as bright as a birthday candle on the Moon when viewed from the Earth.
In the Local Supercluster it is possible to see star clusters, and current telescopes could in principle observe faint individual stars in the Local Group (see Cepheids).
In massive stars, heavier elements can also be burned in a contracting core through the neon burning process and oxygen burning process.
In the Sun, with a 10-million-kelvin core, hydrogen fuses to form helium in the proton-proton chain reaction:
The temperature in the core region of a star is several million&nbsp;kelvins.
Most stars form in groups of dozens to hundreds of thousands of stars.
However, the modern version of the stellar classification scheme was developed by Annie J. Cannon during the 1900s.
This process continues, with the successive stages being fueled by neon (see neon burning process), oxygen (see oxygen burning process), and silicon (see silicon burning process).
In comparison, the combustion of two hydrogen gas molecules with one oxygen gas molecule releases only 5.7 eV.
As the hydrogen shell burning produces more helium, the core increases in mass and temperature.
Despite Canopus being vastly more luminous than Sirius, however, Sirius appears brighter than Canopus.
Using the stellar spectrum, astronomers can also determine the surface temperature, surface gravity, metallicity and rotational velocity of a star.
Additional nomenclature, in the form of lower-case letters added to the end of the spectral type to indicate peculiar features of the spectrum.
Another technique for measuring the angular size of stars is through occultation.
A number of private companies sell names of stars, which the British Library calls an unregulated commercial enterprise.
+ Minimum stellar mass required for fusion
When the metallicity is very low, however, the minimum star size seems to be about 8.3% of the solar mass, or about 87 .
In the case of the largest stars, the remnant is a black hole greater than  4 )s. In a neutron star the matter is in a state known as neutron-degenerate matter, with a more exotic form of degenerate matter, QCD matter, possibly present in the core.
Many of the more prominent individual stars were also given names, particularly with Arabic or Latin designations.
Their names were assigned by later astronomers.)
The Sun has an apparent magnitude of −26.7, but its absolute magnitude is only +4.83.
After the star has fused the helium of its core, the carbon product fuses producing a hot core with an outer shell of fusing helium.
That is, the brightness decreases towards the edge of the stellar disk.
Travelling at the orbital speed of the Space Shuttle (8 kilometres per second—almost 30,000 kilometres per hour), it would take about 150,000 years to arrive.
A variety of rare spectral types are given special classifications.
When the protostellar cloud has approximately reached the stable condition of hydrostatic equilibrium, a protostar forms at the core.
visible light, stars also emit forms of electromagnetic radiation that are invisible to the human eye.
However, very massive stars can lose 10−7 to 10−5  each year, significantly affecting their evolution.
The fragmentation of the cloud into multiple stars distributes some of that angular momentum.
In a red giant of up to 2.25 , the mass of the helium core becomes degenerate prior to helium fusion.
The nearest star to the Earth, apart from the Sun, is Proxima Centauri, which is 39.9 trillion kilometres, or 4.2 light-years.
A binary star system that includes a nearby white dwarf can produce certain types of these spectacular stellar explosions, including the nova and a Type 1a supernova.
Stars are not spread uniformly across the universe, but are normally grouped into galaxies along with interstellar gas and dust.
The star then follows an evolutionary path called the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) that parallels the other described red giant phase, but with a higher luminosity.
Pulsating variable stars vary in radius and luminosity over time, expanding and contracting with periods ranging from minutes to years, depending on the size of the star.
Each letter has 10 sub-divisions, numbered from 0 to 9, in order of decreasing temperature.
with 100–150&nbsp;times as much mass as the Sun, will have a lifespan of only several million years.
Such feedback effects, from star formation, may ultimately disrupt the cloud and prevent further star formation.
Radial velocity is measured by the doppler shift of the star's spectral lines, and is given in units of km/s.
This group includes novae and supernovae.
Massive stars in these groups may powerfully illuminate those clouds, ionizing the hydrogen, and creating H II regions.
Patches of the star's surface with a lower temperature and luminosity than average are known as starspots.
The most massive stars last an average of a few million years, while stars of minimum mass (red dwarfs) burn their fuel very slowly and can last tens to hundreds of billions of years.
By the following century, the idea of the stars being the same as the Sun was reaching a consensus among astronomers.
The current stellar classification system originated in the early 20th century, when stars were classified from ''A'' to ''Q'' based on the strength of the hydrogen line.
This movement of conductive plasma functions like a dynamo, wherein the movement of electrical charges induce magnetic fields, as does a mechanical dynamo.
The faintest stars visible to the naked eye under good seeing conditions are about magnitude +6.
Stars can form part of a much larger gravitationally bound structure, such as a star cluster or a galaxy.
Edward Pickering discovered the first spectroscopic binary in 1899 when he observed the periodic splitting of the spectral lines of the star Mizar in a 104-day period.
When the Roche lobe is violated, a variety of phenomena can result, including contact binaries, common-envelope binaries, cataclysmic variables, and type Ia supernovae.
The strength of the magnetic field varies with the mass and composition of the star, and the amount of magnetic surface activity depends upon the star's rate of rotation.
Among these, the ''Book of Fixed Stars'' (964) was written by the Persian astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi, who observed a number of stars, star clusters (including the Omicron Velorum and Brocchi's Clusters) and galaxies (including the Andromeda Galaxy).
In more massive stars, helium is produced in a cycle of reactions catalyzed by carbon called the carbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycle.
represents an empirical value for the theoretical limit on the mass of forming stars due to increasing radiation pressure on the accreting gas cloud.
The star's internal pressure prevents it from collapsing further under its own gravity.
They have been part of religious practices and used for celestial navigation and orientation.
This lost mass is converted to electromagnetic energy, according to the mass-energy equivalence relationship ''E''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''mc''2.
For more massive stars, helium core fusion starts before the core becomes degenerate, and the star spends some time in the red clump, slowly burning helium, before the outer convective envelope collapses and the star then moves to the horizontal branch.
A notable example of an eclipsing binary is Algol, which regularly varies in magnitude from 2.3 to 3.5 over a period of 2.87 days.
When nuclei fuse, the mass of the fused product is less than the mass of the original parts.
When they occur within the Milky Way, supernovae have historically been observed by naked-eye observers as "new stars" where none seemingly existed before.
In this region the plasma will not be perturbed, and any mass motions will die out.
However, stars of different masses have markedly different properties at various stages of their development.
While it is often believed that stars only exist within galaxies, intergalactic stars have been discovered.
Astronomers have assembled star catalogues that identify the known stars and provide standardized stellar designations.
The photograph became a valuable astronomical tool.
The science of stellar spectroscopy was pioneered by Joseph von Fraunhofer and Angelo Secchi.
The star with the lowest iron content ever measured is the dwarf HE1327-2326, with only 1/200,000th the iron content of the Sun.
These regions - known as ''molecular clouds'' - consist mostly of hydrogen, with about 23 to 28 percent helium and a few percent heavier elements.
The shockwave formed by this sudden collapse causes the rest of the star to explode in a supernova.
The proportion of single star systems increases with decreasing star mass, so that only 25% of red dwarfs are known to have stellar companions.
By comparing the spectra of stars such as Sirius to the Sun, they found differences in the strength and number of their absorption lines—the dark lines in a stellar spectra caused by the atmosphere's absorption of specific frequencies.
:4He + 4He + 92 keV → 8*Be
The combination of the radius and the mass of a star determines its surface gravity.
A plot of the temperature of many stars against their luminosities produces a plot known as a Hertzsprung–Russell diagram (H–R diagram).
Cataclysmic or explosive variable stars are those that undergo a dramatic change in their properties.
For example, an "''e''" can indicate the presence of emission lines; "''m''" represents unusually strong levels of metals, and "''var''" can mean variations in the spectral type.
This star is at least 5,000,000 times more luminous than the Sun.
Most stars are between 1 billion and 10 billion years old.
It is within the photosphere that sun spots, regions of lower than average temperature, appear.
A star's life begins with the gravitational collapse of a gaseous nebula of material composed primarily of hydrogen, along with helium and trace amounts of heavier elements.
The IAU has disassociated itself from this commercial practice, and these names are neither recognized by the IAU nor used by them.
Near the end of its life, a star can also contain degenerate matter.
It has been a long-held assumption that the majority of stars occur in gravitationally bound, multiple-star systems.
Relative to both luminosity and distance from Earth, a star's absolute magnitude (''M'') and apparent magnitude (''m'') are not equivalent; for example, the bright star Sirius has an apparent magnitude of −1.44, but it has an absolute magnitude of +1.41.
When two such stars have a relatively close orbit, their gravitational interaction can have a significant impact on their evolution.
The period of gravitational contraction lasts about 10 to 15 million years.
However, since the lifespan of such stars is greater than the current age of the universe (13.8 billion years), no stars under about 0.85  are expected to have moved off the main sequence.
Stars can be much closer to each other in the centres of galaxies and in globular clusters, or much farther apart in galactic halos.
Due to their great distance from the Earth, all stars except the Sun appear to the unaided eye as shining points in the night sky that twinkle because of the effect of the Earth's atmosphere.
The spectra of stars were further understood through advances in quantum physics.
His son John Herschel repeated this study in the southern hemisphere and found a corresponding increase in the same direction.
Eventually the helium content becomes predominant, and energy production ceases at the core.
Besides mass, the elements heavier than helium can play a significant role in the evolution of stars.
Parallax measurements demonstrated the vast separation of the stars in the heavens.
This surface activity produces starspots, which are regions of strong magnetic fields and lower than normal surface temperatures.
With a mass only 80&nbsp;times that of Jupiter (), 2MASS J0523-1403 is the smallest known star undergoing nuclear fusion in its core.
Over time, such clouds become increasingly enriched in heavier elements as older stars die and shed portions of their atmospheres.
Observation of double stars gained increasing importance during the 19th century.
:41H → 4He + 2e+ + 2γ + 2νe (26.7 MeV)
Above this is the transition region, where the temperature rapidly increases within a distance of only .
The luminosity of a star is determined by its radius and surface temperature.
Supernovae become so bright that they may briefly outshine the star's entire home galaxy.
This produces the separation of binaries into their two observed populations distributions.
Accordingly, astronomers often group stars by their mass:
(Uranus and Neptune were also Greek and Roman gods, but neither planet was known in Antiquity because of their low brightness.
The mass, radius, surface gravity, and rotation period can then be estimated based on stellar models.
Studies of the most massive open clusters suggests  as an upper limit for stars in the current era of the universe.
Older, population II stars have substantially less metallicity than the younger, population I stars due to the composition of the molecular clouds from which they formed.
Stars are given a single-letter classification according to their spectra, ranging from type ''O'', which are very hot, to ''M'', which are so cool that molecules may form in their atmospheres.
According to Josep Puig, the Andalusian astronomer Ibn Bajjah proposed that the Milky Way was made up of many stars that almost touched one another and appeared to be a continuous image due to the effect of refraction from sublunary material, citing his observation of the conjunction of Jupiter and Mars on 500 AH (1106/1107 AD) as evidence.
The magnetic field of a star is generated within regions of the interior where convective circulation occurs.
Most stars belong to the main sequence, which consists of ordinary hydrogen-burning stars.
Stars with several times the mass of the Sun have a convection zone deep within the interior and a radiative zone in the outer layers.
Giant stars have a much lower surface gravity than do main sequence stars, while the opposite is the case for degenerate, compact stars such as white dwarfs.
Other characteristics of a star, including diameter and temperature, change over its life, while the star's environment affects its rotation and movement.
Many stars do not radiate uniformly across their entire surface.
Typically the portion of heavy elements is measured in terms of the iron content of the stellar atmosphere, as iron is a common element and its absorption lines are relatively easy to measure.
Beyond this is the corona, a volume of super-heated plasma that can extend outward to several million kilometres.
The surface temperature of a main sequence star is determined by the rate of energy production of its core and by its radius, and is often estimated from the star's color index.
The portion of heavier elements may be an indicator of the likelihood that the star has a planetary system.
A typical galaxy contains hundreds of billions of stars, and there are more than 100 billion (1011) galaxies in the observable universe.
When the classifications were reordered by temperature, it more closely resembled the modern scheme.
In addition to hydrostatic equilibrium, the interior of a stable star will also maintain an energy balance of thermal equilibrium.
However enormous numbers of these reactions occur constantly, producing all the energy necessary to sustain the star's radiation output.
Stars that begin with more than 50  can lose over half their total mass while on the main sequence.
Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin first proposed that stars were made primarily of hydrogen and helium in her 1925 PhD thesis.
The occurrence of convection in the outer envelope of a main sequence star depends on the star's mass.
This is because Sirius is merely 8.6 light-years from the Earth, while Canopus is much farther away at a distance of 310 light-years.
As stars of at least 0.4  exhaust their supply of hydrogen at their core, they start to fuse hydrogen in a shell outside the helium core.
The core contracts and the temperature and pressure rises enough to fuse carbon (see Carbon burning process).
*''Intermediate-mass stars'', between  and , pass through evolutionary stages similar to low mass stars, but after a relatively short period on the RGB they ignite helium without a flash and spend an extended period in the red clump before forming a degenerate carbon-oxygen core.
(Due to the uncertainty in the value, this age for the star does not conflict with the age of the Universe, determined by the Planck satellite as 13.799 ± 0.021).
One example of such a star-forming region is the Orion Nebula.
In addition, stars may be classified by the luminosity effects found in their spectral lines, which correspond to their spatial size and is determined by their surface gravity.
Massive stars consume their fuel very rapidly and are short-lived.
From here, the energy generated at the core becomes free to propagate into space.
Red dwarfs become hotter and more luminous as they accumulate helium.
:23He → 4He + 21H (12.9 MeV)
Later a numbering system based on the star's right ascension was invented and added to John Flamsteed's star catalogue in his book ''"Historia coelestis Britannica"'' (the 1712 edition), whereby this numbering system came to be called ''Flamsteed designation'' or ''Flamsteed numbering''.
However, outside the Local Supercluster of galaxies, neither individual stars nor clusters of stars have been observed.
Historically, stars have been important to civilizations throughout the world.
As of 2006, the star with the highest known absolute magnitude is LBV 1806-20, with a magnitude of −14.2.
The least luminous stars that are currently known are located in the NGC 6397 cluster.
The radiation zone is the region of the stellar interior where the flux of energy outward is dependent on radiative heat transfer, since convective heat transfer is inefficient in that zone.
There is a radial temperature gradient throughout the interior that results in a flux of energy flowing toward the exterior.
Less massive T Tauri stars follow this track to the main sequence, while more massive stars turn onto the Henyey track.
Smaller bodies called brown dwarfs, occupy a poorly defined grey area between stars and gas giants.
Those magnetic fields have a great range that extend throughout and beyond the star.
The simplest and most common multi-star system is a binary star, but systems of three or more stars are also found.
A main sequence star's magnetic field and the stellar wind serve to slow its rotation by a significant amount as it evolves on the main sequence.
In 1865 Secchi began classifying stars into spectral types.
The oldest accurately dated star chart was the result of ancient Egyptian astronomy in 1534 BC.
As well as certain constellations and the Sun itself, individual stars have their own myths.
Coronal loops are arching magnetic field flux lines that rise from a star's surface into the star's outer atmosphere, its corona.
It is a function of the star's luminosity, its distance from Earth, and the altering of the star's light as it passes through Earth's atmosphere.
This allowed the chemical composition of the stellar atmosphere to be determined.
Massive main sequence stars can have surface temperatures of 50,000&nbsp;K. Smaller stars such as the Sun have surface temperatures of a few thousand K. Red giants have relatively low surface temperatures of about 3,600&nbsp;K; but they also have a high luminosity due to their large exterior surface area.
