They tend to have robust bodies and have tube feet with flat-tipped suckers usually arranged in four rows.
* Notomyotida (1 family, 8 genera, 75 species)
There may also be papulae, thin-walled protrusions of the body cavity that reach through the body wall and extend into the surrounding water.
The tube feet latch on to surfaces and move in a wave, with one arm section attaching to the surface as another releases.
Whether they advance or retreat depends on the species.
The peripheral nerve system consists of two nerve nets: a sensory system in the epidermis and a motor system in the lining of the coelomic cavity.
These extend to contact the substrate.
A similar phenomenon exists in the Indo-Pacific for species such as ''Protoreaster nodosus''.
The loss of parts of the body is achieved by the rapid softening of a special type of connective tissue in response to nervous signals.
The Solasteridae are split from the Velatida, and the old Spinulosida is broken up.
Some species that prey on bivalve molluscs can transmit paralytic shellfish poisoning.
They mostly inhabit soft-bottomed areas of sand or mud.
The cardiac stomach is glandular and pouched, and is supported by ligaments attached to ossicles in the arms so it can be pulled back into position after it has been everted.
The sensory component receives input from the sensory organs while the motor nerves control the tube feet and musculature.
A 2009 study found that ''P.
They vary in form, with some bearing external granules, tubercles and spines, but most are tabular plates that fit neatly together in a tessellated manner and form the main covering of the aboral surface.
Starfish are deuterostomes, closely related, together with all other echinoderms, to chordates, and are used in reproductive and developmental studies.
Starfish, such as the ochre sea star (''Pisaster ochraceus'') and the reef sea star (''Stichaster australis''), have become widely known as examples of the keystone species concept in ecology.
With their appealing symmetrical shape, starfish have played a part in literature, legend, design and popular culture.
The original ball of cells develops a lateral pouch, the archenteron.
Starfish are infrequently found as fossils, possibly because their hard skeletal components separate as the animal decays.
In others, the eggs may be stuck to the undersides of rocks.
There may be good reason for this: the bodies of numerous species are dominated by bony ossicles, and the body wall of many species contains saponins, which have an unpleasant taste, and others contain tetrodotoxins which are poisonous.
The mouth is located in the centre of the oral surface, where it is surrounded by a tough peristomial membrane and closed with a sphincter.
In some species, the tube feet lack suckers.
Starfish sometimes have negative effects on ecosystems.
Starfish are in some cases taken from their habitat and sold to tourists as souvenirs, ornaments, curios or for display in aquariums.
Most starfish have five arms that radiate from a central disc, but the number varies with the group.
Sometimes at the full moon time, when the moon is really dazzling and hitting on the ocean, a starfish jumps out of the water and falls down.
Later work making use of molecular evidence, with or without the use of morphological evidence, had by 2000 failed to resolve the argument.
The scientific name Asteroidea was given to starfish by the French zoologist de Blainville in 1830.
Echinoderms first appeared in the fossil record in the Cambrian.
During the last 6,000 years, divergence in the larval development of ''Cryptasterina hystera'' and ''Cryptasterina pentagona'' has taken place, the former adopting internal fertilization and brooding and the latter remaining a broadcast spawner.
::Most species in this order lack pedicellariae and all have a delicate skeletal arrangement with small or no marginal plates on the disc and arms.
The developing young are called lecithotrophic because they obtain their nutrition from the yolk as opposed to "planktotrophic" larvae that feed in the water column.
The shape is pentagonal or star-shaped with five to fifteen arms.
The taxonomy of the group is relatively stable but there is ongoing debate about the status of the Paxillosida, and the deep-water sea daisies, though clearly Asteroidea and currently included in Velatida, do not fit easily in any accepted lineage.
Others are antifoulants and supplement the pedicellariae to prevent other organisms from settling on the starfish's aboral surface.
Some species of starfish have the ability to regenerate lost arms and can regrow an entire new limb given time.
Apart from their function in locomotion, the tube feet act as accessory gills.
A set of radial canals leads off this; one radial canal runs along the ambulacral groove in each arm.
Other chemicals and relaxation of the ampullae allow for release from the substrate.
The heart beats about six times a minute and is at the apex of a vertical channel (the axial vessel) that connects the three rings.
Organisms that dislike this disturbance are replaced by others better able to rapidly recolonise "clean" sediment.
::Most species in this order have five arms and two rows of tube feet with suckers.
At the base of each arm are paired gonads; a lateral vessel extends from the genital ring past the gonads to the tip of the arm.
In other species, a male and female may come together and form a pair.
In these brooding species, the eggs are relatively large, and supplied with yolk, and they generally develop directly into miniature starfish without an intervening larval stage.
Starfish may be preyed on by conspecifics, other starfish species, tritons, crabs, fish, gulls and sea otters.
Most species of starfish are gonochorous, there being separate male and female individuals.
Only the ossicles and spines of the animal are likely to be preserved, making remains hard to locate.
It reaches maturity in five years and has a maximum recorded lifespan of 34 years.
::Species in this order have distinctive pedicellariae, consisting of a short stalk with three skeletal ossicles.
The gap between the valves need only be a fraction of a millimetre wide for the stomach to gain entry.
Long-chain fatty acid amides of sphingosine occur frequently and some of them have known pharmacological activity.
Three ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name ''HMS Starfish'': an A-class destroyer launched in 1894; an R-class destroyer launched in 1916; and an S-class submarine launched in 1933 and lost in 1940.
''Pisaster ochraceus'' releases a large number of eggs into the sea each year and has an adult weight of .
They are sometimes collected as curios, used in design or as logos, and in some cultures, despite possible toxicity, they are eaten.
In 1900, the scholar Edward Tregear documented ''The Creation Song'', which he describes as "an ancient prayer for the dedication of a high chief" of Hawaii.
In the World War II, Starfish sites  were large-scale night-time decoys created during The Blitz to simulate burning British cities.
Research into the efficacy of these compounds for possible pharmacological or industrial use occurs worldwide.
The protozoan ''Orchitophrya stellarum'' is known to infect the gonads of starfish and damage tissue.
In some species such as ''Nepanthia belcheri'', a large female can split in half and the resulting offspring are males.
The tube feet, especially those at the tips of the rays, are also sensitive to chemicals, enabling the starfish to detect odour sources such as food.
''Luidia ciliaris'' has seven arms, members of the Solasteridae have ten to fifteen while the Antarctic ''Labidiaster annulatus'' can have up to fifty.
''Asterias amurensis'' is one of a few echinoderm invasive species.
Starfish of the order Paxillosida have no brachiolaria stage, with the bipinnaria larvae settling on the seabed and developing directly into juveniles.
Some species like ''Labidiaster annulatus'', ''Rathbunaster californicus'' and ''Novodinia antillensis'' use their large pedicellariae to capture small fish and crustaceans.
* Velatida (4 families, 16 genera, 138 species)
For example, ''Leptasterias hexactis'' broods a small number of large-yolked eggs.
In ''Parvulastra parvivipara'', an intragonadal brooder, the young starfish obtain nutrients by eating other eggs and embryos in the brood pouch.
These are usually not distinguishable externally as the gonads cannot be seen, but their sex is apparent when they spawn.
The body wall consists of a thin cuticle, an epidermis consisting of a single layer of cells, a thick dermis formed of connective tissue and a thin coelomic myoepithelial layer, which provides the longitudinal and circular musculature.
An autotomy-promoting factor has been identified which, when injected into another starfish, causes rapid shedding of arms.
This vessel has a blind end and there is no continuous circulation of the fluid within it.
In most species, the buoyant eggs and sperm are simply released into the water (free spawning) and the resulting embryos and larvae live as part of the plankton.
The first known asterozoans were the Somasteroidea, which exhibit characteristics of both groups.
Georg Eberhard Rumpf's 1705 ''The Ambonese Curiosity Cabinet'' describes the tropical varieties of ''Stella Marina'' or ''Bintang Laut'', "Sea Star", in Latin and Malay respectively, known in the waters around Ambon.
They mostly have poorly developed skeletons with papulae widely distributed on the aboral surface and often spiny pedicellariae.
Both bipinnaria and brachiolaria larvae are bilaterally symmetrical.
Starfish has repeatedly been chosen as a name in military history.
They typically have a central disc and five arms, though some species have a larger number of arms.
The water vascular system serves to transport oxygen from, and carbon dioxide to, the tube feet and also nutrients from the gut to the muscles involved in locomotion.
The subphylum includes the two classes of Asteroidea, the starfish, and Ophiuroidea, the brittle stars and basket stars.
When longitudinal muscles in the ampullae contract, valves in the lateral canals close and water is forced into the tube feet.
A 2012 study found that speciation in starfish can occur rapidly.
They do this by autotomising some parts of their bodies or by budding.
In more advanced species of starfish, the cardiac stomach can be everted from the organism's body to engulf and digest food.
The feeding activity of the omnivorous starfish ''Oreaster reticulatus'' on sandy and seagrass bottoms in the Virgin Islands appears to regulate the diversity, distribution and abundance of microorganisms.
The ring nerves and radial nerves have sensory and motor components and coordinate the starfish's balance and directional systems.
The mouth opens through a short oesophagus into a stomach divided by a constriction into a larger, eversible cardiac portion and a smaller pyloric portion.
Some species are simultaneous hermaphrodites, producing eggs and sperm at the same time and in a few of these, the same gonad, called an ovotestis, produces both eggs and sperm.
ochraceus'' reduce greatly when their body temperatures rise above  and that they die when their temperature rises to .
This group includes the slime star.
They vary between species and are typically formed from up to six sugar molecules (usually glucose and galactose) connected by up to three glycosidic chains.
This arrangement enables both easy flexion of the arms by the starfish and the rapid onset of stiffness and rigidity required for actions performed under stress.
The dermis contains an endoskeleton of calcium carbonate components known as ossicles.
Some starfish are not pure carnivores, supplementing their diets with algae or organic detritus.
They remove debris from the body surface and wave around on flexible stalks in response to physical or chemical stimuli while continually making biting movements.
Other than fragmentation carried out for the purpose of reproduction, the division of the body may happen inadvertently due to part being detached by a predator, or part may be actively shed by the starfish in an escape response.
Similar results were found in a 1971 study of ''Stichaster australis'' on the intertidal coast of the South Island of New Zealand.
They are found from the intertidal zone down to abyssal depths,  below the surface.
Because of this ability to digest food outside the body, starfish can hunt prey much larger than their mouths.
Female starfishs produce large numbers of oocytes that are easily isolated; these can be stored in a pre-meiosis phase and stimulated to complete division by the use of 1-methyladenine.
The semi-digested fluid is passed into their pyloric stomachs and caeca where digestion continues and absorption ensues.
They have numerous groups of short spines on the aboral surface.
Starfish are marine invertebrates.
The body cavity contains the circulatory or haemal system.
The cilia are used for locomotion and feeding, their rhythmic beat wafting phytoplankton towards the mouth.
These serve a respiratory function.
Protandrous individuals of species like ''Asterina gibbosa'' start life as males before changing sex into females as they grow older.
When the prey is a clam or other bivalve, the starfish pulls with its tube feet to separate the two valves slightly, and inserts a small section of its stomach, which releases enzymes to digest the prey.
'''Starfish''' or '''sea stars''' are star-shaped echinoderms belonging to the class '''Asteroidea'''.
The main nitrogenous waste product is ammonia.
Water enters the system through the madreporite, a porous, often conspicuous, sieve-like ossicle on the aboral surface.
In the two major extinction events that occurred during the late Devonian and late Permian, the blastoids were wiped out and only a few species of crinoids survived.
Brooding is especially common in polar and deep-sea species that live in environments unfavourable for larval development and in smaller species that produce just a few eggs.
Some are specialised structures such as the madreporite (the entrance to the water vascular system), pedicellariae and paxillae.
Researchers found that when ''P.
Modern starfish and brittle stars probably had a common somasteroid ancestor.
* Forcipulatida (6 families, 63 genera, 269 species)
Common usage frequently finds these names being also applied to ophiuroids, which are correctly referred to as brittle stars or "basket stars".
In the State of Florida, ''O.
Regrowth can take several months or years, and starfish are vulnerable to infections during the early stages after the loss of an arm.
However, although starfish fossils are uncommon, there are a few places where accumulations of complete skeletal structures occur, fossilized in place in Lagerstätten — so-called "starfish beds".
Some waste may also be excreted by the pyloric glands and voided with the faeces.
Several groups of starfish, including Valvatida and Forcipulatida, possess pedicellariae.
They have complex life cycles and can reproduce both sexually and asexually.
This had an unintended effect on reef-feeding fish and the whole benthic community.
There are eyespots at the ends of the arms, each one made of 80–200 simple ocelli.
* Spinulosida (1 family, 8 genera, 121 species)
Spawning takes place at any time of year, each species having its own characteristic breeding season.
Their first lines of defence are the saponins present in their body walls, which have unpleasant flavours.
Although starfish do not have many well-defined sense organs, they are sensitive to touch, light, temperature, orientation and the status of the water around them.
Some of the body cavities degenerate but others become the water vascular system and the visceral coelom.
Starfish are sometimes eaten in China, Japan and in Micronesia.
While a starfish lacks a centralized brain, it has a complex nervous system with a nerve ring around the mouth and a radial nerve running along the ambulacral region of each arm parallel to the radial canal.
Another invagination of the surface will fuse with the tip of the archenteron as the mouth while the interior section will become the gut.
There is no brachiolaria stage in their larval development.
Some are feeding deterrents used by the starfish to discourage predation.
If you can get that you can suck unbelievable cosmic energy.
It is derived from the Greek ''aster'', ἀστήρ (a star) and the Greek ''eidos'', εἶδος (form, likeness, appearance).
The first individual of a species to spawn may release a pheromone that serves to attract other starfish to aggregate and to release their gametes synchronously.
The division of the starfish, either across its disc or at the base of the arm, is usually accompanied by a weakness in the structure that provides a fracture zone.
A separated limb lives off stored nutrients until it regrows a disc and mouth and is able to feed again.
The term "keystone species" was in fact first used by Robert Paine in 1966 to describe a starfish, ''Pisaster ochraceus''.
In addition, foraging by these migratory starfish creates diverse patches of organic matter, which may play a role in the distribution and abundance of organisms such as fish, crabs and sea urchins that feed on the sediment.
''Pteraster militaris'' broods a few of its young and disperses the remaining eggs, that are too numerous to fit into its pouch.
Fluid movement is bidirectional and initiated by cilia.
An aboriginal Australian fable retold by the Welsh school headmaster William Jenkyn Thomas (1870–1959) tells how some animals needed a canoe to cross the ocean.
Living asteroids, the Neoasteroidea, are morphologically distinct from their forerunners in the Paleozoic.
Pedicellariae are compound ossicles with forceps-like jaws.
They often form clusters surrounding spines.
It has an adult weight of , reaches sexual maturity in two years and lives for about ten years.
Many starfish also possess individual photoreceptor cells in other parts of their bodies and respond to light even when their eyespots are covered.
The species has since grown in numbers to the point where they threaten commercially important bivalve populations.
When such a larva senses that food is plentiful, it takes the path of asexual reproduction rather than normal development.
As such, they are considered pests, and are on the Invasive Species Specialist Group's list of the world's 100 worst invasive species.
''S.&nbsp;australis'' was found to have removed most of a batch of transplanted mussels within two or three months of their placement, while in an area from which ''S.&nbsp;australis'' had been removed, the mussels increased in number dramatically, overwhelming the area and threatening biodiversity.
At the same time, a band of cilia develops on the exterior.
There are usually two rows of tube feet but in some species, the lateral canals are alternately long and short and there appear to be four rows.
Among the "uncreated gods" described early in the song are the male Kumilipo ("Creation") and the female Poele, both born in the night, a coral insect, the earthworm, and the starfish.
Here the food is passed on to the pyloric stomach, which always remains inside the disc.
These are composed of pigmented epithelial cells that respond to light and are covered by a thick, transparent cuticle that both protects the ocelli and acts to focus light.
The pyloric stomach has two extensions into each arm: the pyloric caeca.
Oxygen dissolved in the water is distributed through the body mainly by the fluid in the main body cavity; the circulatory system may also play a minor role.
Its larvae likely arrived in Tasmania from central Japan via water discharged from ships in the 1980s.
Grasping the shellfish, the starfish slowly pries open the prey's shell by wearing out its adductor muscle, and then inserts its everted stomach into the crack to digest the soft tissues.
Some species of starfish are able to reproduce asexually as adults either by fission of their central discs or by autotomy of one or more of their arms.
Starfish oocytes are well suited for this research as they are large and easy to handle, transparent, simple to maintain in sea water at room temperature, and they develop rapidly.
Starfish and other echinoderms are sensitive to marine pollution.
These are elongated, branched hollow tubes that are lined by a series of glands, which secrete digestive enzymes and absorb nutrients from the food.
Primitive starfish, such as ''Astropecten'' and ''Luidia'', swallow their prey whole, and start to digest it in their cardiac stomachs.
Some starfish such as ''Astropecten polyacanthus'' also include powerful toxins such as tetrodotoxin among their chemical armoury, and the slime star can ooze out large quantities of repellent mucus.
The mechanism for this is not fully understood.
In some species, mature females produce chemicals to attract sperm in the sea water.
Another area of research is the ability of starfish to regenerate lost body parts.
Gas exchange also takes place through other gills known as papulae, which are thin-walled bulges on the aboral surface of the disc and arms.
* Valvatida (16 families, 172 genera, 695 species)
The common starfish is considered to be a bioindicator for marine ecosystems.
ochraceus'' were exposed to  and 770&nbsp;ppm carbon dioxide (beyond rises expected in the next century), they were relatively unaffected.
In the tropics, a plentiful supply of phytoplankton is continuously available for starfish larvae to feed on.
Some species have paxillae and in some, the main pedicellariae are clamp-like and recessed into the skeletal plates.
Georg Eberhard Rumpf found few starfish being used for food in the Indonesian archipelago, other than as bait in fish traps, but on the island of "Huamobel"  the people cut them up, squeeze out the "black blood" and cook them with sour tamarind leaves; after resting the pieces for a day or two, they remove the outer skin and cook them in coconut milk.
Starfish are vulnerable to high temperatures.
These bulb-shaped organs are joined to tube feet (podia) on the exterior of the animal by short linking canals that pass through ossicles in the ambulacral groove.
When Whale realized the trick he beat Starfish ragged, which is how Starfish still is today.
When studying the low intertidal coasts of Washington state, Paine found that predation by ''P.&nbsp;ochraceus'' was a major factor in the diversity of species.
The gut of a starfish occupies most of the disc and extends into the arms.
In some species, the tube feet have rounded tips and lack suckers.
reticulatus'' is listed as endangered and its collection is illegal.
This group includes the red starfish ''Echinaster sepositus''.
He writes that the ''Histoire des Antilles'' reports that when the sea stars "see thunder storms approaching, they grab hold of many small stones with their little legs, looking to&nbsp;... hold themselves down as if with anchors".
The edges of adjacent paxillae meet to form a false cuticle with a water cavity beneath in which the madreporite and delicate gill structures are protected.
They live almost exclusively in deep-sea habitats, although a few live in shallow waters in the Antarctic.
Starfish produce a large number of secondary metabolites in the form of lipids, including steroidal derivatives of cholesterol, and fatty acid amides of sphingosine.
''The Starfish and the Spider'' is a 2006 business management book by Ori Brafman and Rod Beckstrom; its title alludes to the ability of the starfish to regenerate itself because of its decentralized nervous system, and the book suggests ways that a decentralized organisation may flourish.
The water vascular system of the starfish is a hydraulic system made up of a network of fluid-filled canals and is concerned with locomotion, adhesion, food manipulation and gas exchange.
Whale had one but refused to lend it, so Starfish kept him busy, telling him stories and grooming him to remove parasites, while the others stole the canoe.
The fossil record for starfish is ancient, dating back to the Ordovician around 450 million years ago, but it is rather poor, as starfish tend to disintegrate after death.
