In addition to the intermodal on-dock rail yard, the CSX Staten Island Rail line also connects to the Sanitation departments waste transfer station.
The X1, X10, and X17 are the only ones to run outside of rush hour.
In the southwest of the city, Staten Island is the southernmost part of both the city and state of New York, with Conference House Park at the southern tip of the island and the state.
By contrast, Kerry outpolled Bush in New York City's other four boroughs by a cumulative margin of 77% to 22%.
Visitors can explore the diversity of the American experience, especially that of Staten Island and its neighboring communities, from the colonial period to the present.
It then became a Baltimore and Ohio Railroad freight line until the 1980s, when freight service was stopped.
As part of this process, Staten Island, as well as several minor neighboring islands, were designated as ''Richmond County''.
The St. George ferry terminal built in 1950 recently underwent a $130-million renovation and now features floor-to-ceiling glass for panoramic views of the harbor and incoming ferries.
Completion had been expected to be in 2015, but this has been postponed several times.
In 2012, the NBC musical drama ''Smash'' filmed several scenes there.
Already, many of the landscapes of Fresh Kills possess a stark beauty, with 360 degree, wide horizon views from the hills, over  of salt marsh and a winding network of creeks.
Motor traffic can reach the borough from Brooklyn via the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and from New Jersey via the Outerbridge Crossing, Goethals Bridge, and Bayonne Bridge.
His grandson, Colonel Christopher Billopp, owned the house when it was taken over by Admiral Lord Richard Howe, head of the British Forces in the Americas.
Unlike the other four boroughs, but like many suburbs, Staten Island has no large, numbered grid system.
Evidence of their habitation can still be seen in shell middens along the shore in the Tottenville section, where oyster shells larger than 12 inches (305&nbsp;mm) are not uncommon.
The St. George Theatre serves as a cultural arts center, hosting educational programs, architectural tours, television and film shoots, concerts, comedy, Broadway touring companies, and small and large children's shows.
Staten Island was, at one point, concurrently home to the longest vertical lift bridge, steel arch bridge, and suspension bridge in the world; the Arthur Kill Vertical Lift Bridge, Bayonne Bridge, and Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, respectively.
Although in 2005 44.7% of the borough's registered voters were registered Democrats and 30.6% were registered Republicans, the Republican Party holds a small majority of local public offices.
In 2012, the borough flipped and was won by incumbent Democrat Barack Obama, who took 51% of the vote to Republican Mitt Romney's 48%.
Speeches, pageants, picnics, and fireworks marked the celebration, which lasted for two days.
Many French Huguenots, who were Protestant, had gone to the Netherlands as refugees from the religious wars in France; some joined the emigration to New Netherland.
'''Staten Island '''  is one of the five boroughs of New York City, in the state of New York, in the United States.
Each borough president had a powerful administrative role derived from having a vote on the New York City Board of Estimate, which was responsible for creating and approving the city's budget and proposals for land use.
Its creeks and wetlands have been designated a Significant Coastal Fish and Wildlife Habitat by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC).
According to the survey, the top ten European ancestries were the following:
First reported in June 2012 and announced by mayor Michael Bloomberg in September 2012, construction had been expected to begin early in 2014.
With a 2015 Census-estimated population of 474,558, Staten Island is the least populated of the boroughs but is the third-largest in area at .
It was repulsed in part by troops led by British Commander Francis Rawdon-Hastings, 1st Marquess of Hastings.
On March 17, 1776, the British forces under Lord Howe evacuated Boston and sailed for Halifax, Nova Scotia.
It lies dormant beneath Owl's Head Park in Brooklyn.
* Shooters Island (in Newark Bay; part of it belongs to New Jersey)
The region is considered vulnerable to sea-level rise.
It was opened on June 10, 1936, the first zoo in the U.S. specifically devoted to an educational mandate.
In national elections Staten Island is not the Republican stronghold it is in local elections, but it is also not the Democratic stronghold the rest of New York City is.
* Prall's Island (in the Arthur Kill)
The Lenape were later called the "Delaware" by the English colonists because they inhabited both shores of what the English named the Delaware River.
The National Lighthouse Museum recently undertook a major fundraising project and opened in 2012, and the Staten Island Museum (art, science, and history) plans to open a new branch in Snug Harbor by 2014.
Staten Island has voted for a Democratic presidential nominee only four times since 1952: in 1964, 1996, 2000, and 2012.
In the late 1960s the island was the site of important battles of open-space preservation, resulting in the largest area of parkland in New York City and an extensive Greenbelt that laces the island with woodland trails.
The Arthur Kill Vertical Lift Railroad Bridge carries freight between the northwest part of the island and Elizabeth, New Jersey.
Below is inscribed the words "Staten Island" in gold.
In August 1776, the British forces crossed the Narrows to Brooklyn and outflanked the American forces at the Battle of Long Island, resulting in the British control of the harbor and the capture of New York City shortly afterwards.
The island has voted for the Democratic presidential nominee only four times since 1952 — in 1964, 1996, 2000 and 2012.
The Staten Island Railway continued to have its own railway police, the Staten Island Rapid Transit Police until 2005 when the 25 officer police force was consolidated into the Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police.
Plans for the park include a bird-nesting island, public roads, boardwalks, soccer and baseball fields, bridle paths, and a 5,000-seat stadium.
Musicians who were born or reside on Staten Island and groups that formed on Staten Island are found at List of people from Staten Island.
* Hoffman Island (in Lower New York Bay)
Some neighborhoods, however, organize their street names alphabetically.
Concordantly, 78.2% of the population was born in the United States.
The East Shore is home to the  F.D.R.
It had two sections: a Strategic Homeport in Stapleton and a larger section near Fort Wadsworth, where the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge enters the island.
The Borough has three appointed Community Boards with advisory and limited administrative powers.
The Arthur Kill Bridge still holds the title for longest vertical lift bridge, while the Bayonne and Verrazano bridges are now the 4th and 8th longest, in their respective categories.
The towns of Staten Island were dissolved in 1898 with the consolidation of the City of Greater New York, as Richmond County became one of the five boroughs of the expanded city.
Staten Island representation in the state assembly has 2 Democrats and 2 Republicans.
The main political divide in the borough is demarcated by the Staten Island Expressway; areas north of the Expressway tend to be more liberal while the south tends to be more conservative.
It also has three administrative districts, each served by a local Community Board.
Staten Island Arts (formerly The Council on the Arts and Humanities for Staten Island) is Staten Island's local arts council and helps support local artists and cultural organizations with regrants, workshops, folklife and arts-in-education programs, and advocacy.
NYS Department of Transportation Peace Officers in conjunction with the New York City Police Department and U.S Coast Guard patrol the ferry terminal.
There is also a significant Polish community mainly in the South Beach and Midland Beach area and there is also a large Sri Lankan community on Staten Island, concentrated mainly on Victory Boulevard on the northeastern tip of Staten Island towards St. George.
Three lines (the ) provide service over the Verrazano Bridge to Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Oddo is the only Republican borough president in New York City.
Gold fringe outlines the flag.
Staten Island also has a local music scene.
The vast majority of the borough's African American and Hispanic residents live north of the Staten Island Expressway, or Interstate 278.
The jail system was not transferred until January 1, 1942.
There is also a proposal to build a West Shore Light Rail in the center of the Dr. Martin Luther King Expressway, Staten Island Expressway, and West Shore Expressway, continuing to Richmond Valley, Staten Island to connect with the main line of the Staten Island Railway.
In the late 1960s, the Zoo maintained the most complete rattlesnake collection in the world with 39 varieties.
The government granted land patents in rectangular blocks of eighty acres (320,000&nbsp;m2), with the most desirable lands along the coastline and inland waterways.
It was announced that the property would be converted into a mixed-use waterfront neighborhood with a projected completion date of 2009.
Many buildings and churches were destroyed for their materials, and the military's demand for resources resulted in an extensive deforestation by the end of the war.
In a 1993 referendum, 65% voted to secede, but implementation was blocked in the State Assembly.
In the 1980s, the United States Navy had a base on Staten Island called Naval Station New York.
Beginning September 4, 2007, the MTA began offering bus service from Staten Island to Bayonne, New Jersey, over the Bayonne Bridge via the  limited-stop bus, allowing passengers to connect to the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail's 34th Street Station, giving Staten Island residents a new route into Manhattan.
MTA Regional Bus Operations provides local and limited bus service with over 30 lines throughout Staten Island.
In early 1780, while the Kill Van Kull was frozen solid due to a brutal winter, Lord Stirling led an unsuccessful Patriot raid from New Jersey on the western shore of Staten Island.
The 60th district is represented by Republican Nicole Malliotakis, and the 62nd, which encompasses most of the south shore of the island, by Joseph Borelli.
In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain won 52% of the vote in the borough to Democrat Barack Obama's 48%.
In addition to the main island, the borough and county also include several small uninhabited islands:
British forces remained on Staten Island for the remainder of the war.
Approximately 28.6% of the population over five years of age spoke a language other than English at home, and 27.3% of the population over twenty-five years of age had a bachelor's degree or higher.
The Staten Island county sheriff operated a jail system on Staten Island until January 1, 1942, when the Staten Island jail system was transferred from the county sheriff's department to the New York City Department of Corrections and eventually closed.
The highest point on the island, the summit of Todt Hill, elevation 410&nbsp;ft (125&nbsp;m), is also the highest point in the five boroughs, as well as the highest point on the Atlantic Coastal Plain south of Great Blue Hill in Massachusetts and the highest point on the coast proper south of Maine's  Camden Hills.
From the New Jersey Turnpike, the Goethals Bridge using I-278 connects from Elizabeth, New Jersey to the Staten Island Expressway.
Burial Ridge, a Lenape burial ground on a bluff overlooking Raritan Bay in what is today the Tottenville section of Staten Island, is the largest pre-European burial ground in New York City.
The borough is also home to a Chinanteco-speaking Mexican American community.
Zoo construction commenced in 1933 as part of the Federal Government's works program on an eight-acre (three-hectare) estate willed to New York City.
Fresh Kills and its tributaries are part of the largest tidal wetland ecosystem in the region.
A great sight to see gorgeous points of Staten Island is Moses mountain which was a mountain where Robert Moses wanted to build a highway through but protests retracted this arrangement and now is a key point of Staten Island for tourists.
The SIParent website '' siparent.com'' debuted in 2005 as an interactive tool for parents, followed by social media and email marketing initiatives:  Staten Island Parent on Facebook;  Staten Island Parent on Twitter;  SI Parent digital issue;
After their departure, the largest Loyalist landowners fled to Canada and their estates were subdivided and sold.
They are named for the Rossville section of Staten Island, where they were first found near the old Rossville Post Office building.
From 1639 to 1655, Cornelis Melyn and David de Vries made three separate attempts to establish a permanent settlement on the island, but each time the settlement was destroyed in the conflicts between the Dutch and the local tribe.
Staten Island is the only borough without a New York City Department of Corrections major detention center.
The North Shore—especially the neighborhoods of St. George, Tompkinsville, Clifton, and Stapleton—is the most urban part of the island; it contains the designated St. George Historic District and the St. Paul's Avenue-Stapleton Heights Historic District, which feature large Victorian houses.
In 1989 the Supreme Court of the United States declared the Board of Estimate unconstitutional on the grounds that Brooklyn, the most populous borough, had no greater effective representation on the Board than Staten Island, the least populous borough, a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause pursuant to the high court's 1964 "one man, one vote" decision.
Three weeks later, on September 11, 1776, Lord Howe received a delegation of Americans consisting of Benjamin Franklin, Edward Rutledge, and John Adams at the Conference House on the southwestern tip of the island (known today as Tottenville) on the former estate of Christopher Billop.
The South Shore, site of the 17th-century Dutch and French Huguenot settlement, developed rapidly beginning in the 1960s and 1970s and is now mostly suburban in character.
Shellfish was a staple of their diet, including the Eastern oyster (''Crassostrea virginica'') abundant in the waterways throughout the present-day New York City region.
The burial ground today is unmarked and lies within Conference House Park.
Although consolidated into the City of Greater New York in 1898, the county sheriff of Staten Island maintained control of the jail system, unlike the other boroughs who had gradually transferred control of the jails to the NYC Department of Corrections.
Staten Island has three City Council members, two Republicans and one Democrat, the smallest number among the five boroughs.
According to one version of an oft-repeated but inaccurate tale, Capt.
Conceived by the Staten Island Economic Development Corporation to introduce independent and international films to a broad and diverse audience, the Staten Island Film Festival (SIFF) held its first four-day festival in 2006.
From Halifax, Howe prepared to attack New York City, which then consisted entirely of the southern end of Manhattan Island.
Artists who have performed there include The B-52s, The Jonas Brothers, Tony Bennett, and Don McLean.
It is notably, despite Staten Island's proximity to New Jersey, the only route directly into New Jersey from Staten Island via public transportation.
Staten Island is home to a large and diverse population of wildlife.
Most Patriots fled after the British occupation, and the sentiment of those who remained was predominantly Loyalist.
This evidence was first discovered in 1917 in the Charleston section of the island.
The South Beach Branch, which transported summer vacationers to South Beach, Staten Island, also ceased service on March 31, 1953.
Prior to reapportionment, it was in the 13th Congressional District.
The West Shore is the least populated and most industrial part of the island.
Staten Island lies entirely within New York's 11th congressional district, which also includes part of southwestern Brooklyn.
Staten Island's Borough President is James Oddo, a Republican elected in November 2013 with 69.1% of the vote.
Staten Island is separated from Long Island by the Narrows and from mainland New Jersey by the Arthur Kill and the Kill Van Kull.
The Dutch did not establish a permanent settlement on ''Staaten Eylandt'' for many decades.
Billopp's seamanship secured Staten Island to New York, rather than to New Jersey: the Island would belong to New York if the captain could circumnavigate it in one day, which he did.
The Staten Island Ferry had undergone ramp renovations which were completed in 2014.
In 2009, approximately 20.0% of the population was foreign born, and 1.8% of the populace was born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parents.
Filmmakers, most of whom work independently, also play an important part in Staten Island's art scene, which has been recognized by the local government.
The area was part of the Lenape homeland known as Lenapehoking.
Archaeologists have recovered tool evidence of Clovis culture activity dating from about 14,000 years ago.
The island is home to the Staten Island Zoo, which recently opened a newly refurbished reptile exhibit and is in the process of designing a new carousel and leopard enclosure.
It is to be converted into a park.
The Conference House was built by Captain Christopher Billopp in 1680.
The Staten Island Main Post Office is located at 550 Manor Road.
Citywide, the car ownership rate is 45%.
Hispanics or Latinos of any race made up 15.9% of the population.
CSX operates a class I short line freight rail service via the Travis Branch with a  intermodal on-dock rail facility on the southern end of Staten Island which connects to the National Rail System via the Arthur Kill Rail Bridge to New Jersey.
Historic Richmond Town (not to be confused with the town of Richmond, New York) is New York City's living history village and museum complex.
The Outerbridge Crossing to Perth Amboy, New Jersey is at the southern end of Route 440 and the Bayonne Bridge to Bayonne, New Jersey is at the northern end of Route 440, which continues into Jersey City, New Jersey.
Ed Murphy's combat veteran status deflected traditional right wing  attacks on liberals and the campaign facilitated the emergence of more liberal politics on Staten Island.
The island was probably abandoned later, possibly because of the extirpation of large mammals on the island.
CSX railroad police officers patrol and respond to emergencies along the freight line.
NYC Parks completed and released the Final Generic Environmental Impact Statement (FGEIS) for the Fresh Kills Park project, on the former landfill, in May 2009.
The flag is on a white background in the center of which is the design of a seal in the shape of an oval.
Martin based King's Landing on the view of Staten Island from his childhood home in Bayonne, New Jersey.
Staten Island is geographically a part of New Jersey first settled by New Netherland then by New York.
The name derives from the title of Charles Lennox, 1st Duke of Richmond, an illegitimate son of King Charles II.
A five-mile right of way exists along the north shore of Staten Island.
Michael McMahon, a Democrat, is the current District Attorney.
The Department of corrections only maintains court holding jails at the three court buildings on Staten Island for inmates attending court.
The last vestige of Oude Dorp is the name of the present-day neighborhood of Old Town, adjacent to Old Town Road.
The landfill is being redeveloped as Freshkills Park, an area devoted to restoring habitat; the park will become New York City's second largest public park when completed.
The borough is separated from New Jersey by the Arthur Kill and the Kill Van Kull, and from the rest of New York by New York Bay.
The village area occupies  of a  site with about 15 restored buildings, including homes, commercial and civic buildings, and a museum.
The rail line was built, owned, and operated by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, which utilized the line for passenger service until March 31, 1953.
The network of highways running between the bridges has effectively carved up many of Staten Island's old neighborhoods.
Ki Longfellow was born on the island.
According to the 2009 American Community Survey, the borough's population was 75.7% White (65.8% non-Hispanic White alone), 10.2% Black or African American (9.6% non-Hispanic Black or African American alone), 0.2% American Indian and Alaska Native, 7.4% Asian, 0.0% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 4.6% from Some other race, and 1.9% from Two or more races.
Her Sam Russo historical detective noir novels are based in and around Stapleton.
By 1708, the entire island had been divided up in this fashion, creating 166 small farms and two large manorial estates, the Dongan estate and a 1600-acre (6.5&nbsp;km2) parcel on the southwestern tip of the island belonging to Christopher Billop (Jackson, 1995).
Over 140 British ships arrived over the summer of 1776 and anchored off the shores of Staten Island at the entrance to New York Harbor.
The '''Little Sri Lanka''' in the Tompkinsville neighborhood of Staten Island is one of the largest Sri Lankan communities outside of the country of Sri Lanka itself.
In total, 29.61% (128,827) of Staten Island's population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English.
The island played a significant role in the American Revolutionary War.
Most lines feed into the St. George Ferry Terminal in the northeastern corner of the borough.
The borough is coextensive with '''Richmond County''', and until 1975 was the '''Borough of Richmond'''.
The Village of New Brighton in the town of Castleton was incorporated in 1866, and in 1872 the Village of New Brighton annexed all the remainder of the Town of Castleton and became coterminous with the town.
The ferry had its fare eliminated in 1997.
In the 2009 election for city offices, Staten Island elected its first black official, Debi Rose, who defeated the incumbent Democrat in the North Shore city council seat in a primary, and then went on to win the general election.
The bridge opened many areas of the borough to residential and commercial development, especially in the central and southern parts of the borough, which had been largely undeveloped.
Staten Island is the only borough in New York City that does not share a land border with another borough (Marble Hill in Manhattan is contiguous with the Bronx).
In the 2001 mayoral election, borough voters chose Republican Michael Bloomberg, with 75.87% of the vote, over Democrat Mark Green, with 21.15% of the vote.
Throughout the 1980s, a movement to secede from the city steadily grew in popularity, reaching its peak during the mayoral term of David Dinkins.
Staten Island is also home to horseshoe crabs, cotton tailed rabbits, opossums, raccoons, garter snakes, red-eared slider turtles, newts, spring peeper frogs, leopard frogs, fox, box turtles, northern snapping turtles and common snapping turtles.
It can be considered as a swing county with a slight Republican lean, though it seemed to become increasingly Democratic in the 1990s, like Long Island and Westchester County.
Most shows are at The Full Cup or the old Dock Street in Stapleton.
, 70.39% (306,310) of Staten Island residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 10.02% (43,587) spoke Spanish, 3.14% (13,665) Russian, 3.11% (13,542) Italian, 2.39% (10,412) Chinese, 1.81% (7,867) other Indo-European languages, 1.38% (5,990) Arabic, 1.01% (4,390) Polish, 0.88% (3,812) Korean, 0.80% (3,500) Tagalog, 0.76% (3,308) other Asian languages, 0.62% (2,717) Urdu, 0.57% (2,479) other Indic languages, and African languages were spoken as a main language by 0.56% (2,458) of the population over the age of five.
The Lenape did not live in fixed encampments, but moved seasonally, using slash and burn agriculture.
In terms of religion, the population is largely Roman Catholic.
In 1729, a county seat was established at the village of Richmond Town, located at the headwaters of the Fresh Kills near the center of the island.
The Americans finally withdrew.
Even so, the islanders found the demands of supporting the troops to be heavy.
The Staten Island Railway traverses the island 24/7 from its northeastern tip to its southwestern tip.
The green outline represents the countryside of the borough with white outline denoting the residential areas of Staten Island.
Staten Island is the base of New York City's Republican Party in citywide elections.
Two out of Staten Island's three New York City Council members are Republicans, including conservative commentator Joe Borelli.
New Dorp's grid has a few numbered streets but they do not intersect with any numbered avenues.
There have been proposals to revive the abandoned North Shore Branch of the Staten Island Railway for passenger service as a rail line or for use as Bus Rapid Transit.
In 1661, the first permanent Dutch settlement was established at ''Oude Dorp'' (Dutch for "Old Village"), just south of the Narrows near South Beach, by a small group of Dutch, Walloon, and French Huguenot families.
The United States Postal Service operates post offices in Staten Island.
In national elections, Staten Island is not the Republican stronghold it is in local elections.
The Staten Island Railway opened on April 23, 1860 and was owned and operated by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O) until July 1, 1971 when the line was bought by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
The  New York Wheel, which could become the world's tallest Ferris wheel, is to be constructed in the St. George neighborhood, alongside the planned Empire Outlets retail complex.
The island was laced with Native American foot trails, one of which followed the south side of the ridge near the course of present-day Richmond Road and Amboy Road.
General George Washington led the entire Continental Army to New York City in anticipation of the British attack.
The British army again used the island as a staging ground for its final evacuation of New York City on December 5, 1783.
The Zoo was also the first to exhibit all the 32 varieties of rattlesnakes known to occur in the United States.
Staten Island has more cars per capita than any other borough in New York City, with car ownership attained by 81.6% of all Staten Island households.
The borough is a Republican-leaning swing county.
In the 2004 presidential election Republican George W. Bush received 56% of the vote in Staten Island and Democrat John Kerry received 43%.
On October 29, 2012, the island experienced severe damage and loss of life along with the destruction of many homes during Hurricane Sandy.
About 7.9% of families and 10.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.2% of those under age 18 and 9.9% of those age 65 or over.
The British army kept headquarters in neighborhoods such as Bulls Head.
The borough has a land border with Elizabeth and Bayonne, New Jersey on uninhabited Shooters Island.
Once in Brooklyn, I-278 becomes the Gowanus Expressway and then the Brooklyn Queens Expressway, providing access to Manhattan through various tunnels and bridges.
The free Staten Island Ferry connects the borough to Manhattan and is a popular tourist attraction, providing views of the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, and Lower Manhattan.
There the representatives of the British government reportedly received their first notification of the Declaration of Independence.
