The restriction offended area suffragists, who chartered a boat and got as close as they could to the island.
The fortifications of the structure were in the shape of an eleven-point star.
Nevertheless, the arm proved popular in the exhibition's waning days, and visitors would climb up to the balcony of the torch to view the fairgrounds.
The pedestal reopened in August 2004, but the National Park Service announced that visitors could not safely be given access to the statue due to the difficulty of evacuation in an emergency.
Work began at the Gaget, Gauthier & Co. workshop.
A figure of Liberty was also depicted on the Great Seal of France.
The torch, found to have been leaking water since the 1916 alterations, was replaced with an exact replica of Bartholdi's unaltered torch.
The defiant lion,  long and half that in height, displays an emotional quality characteristic of Romanticism, which Bartholdi would later bring to the Statue of Liberty.
President Cleveland spoke next, stating that the statue's "stream of light shall pierce the darkness of ignorance and man's oppression until Liberty enlightens the world".
The statue was examined in great detail by French and American engineers as part of the planning for its centennial in 1986.
Joseph Pulitzer, publisher of the ''New York World'', a New York newspaper, announced a drive to raise $100,000—the equivalent of $2.3&nbsp;million today.
In 1946, the interior of the statue within reach of visitors was coated with a special plastic so that graffiti could be washed away.
The New York group eventually took on most of the responsibility for American fundraising and is often referred to as the "American Committee".
The Women's National Basketball Association's New York Liberty use both the statue's name and its image in their logo, in which the torch's flame doubles as a basketball.
The arm did not arrive in Philadelphia until August; because of its late arrival, it was not listed in the exhibition catalogue, and while some reports correctly identified the work, others called it the "Colossal Arm" or "Bartholdi Electric Light".
Eiffel's iron framework was anchored to steel I-beams within the concrete pedestal and assembled.
In 1937, the NPS gained jurisdiction over the rest of Bedloe's Island.
Due to the width of the pedestal, it was not possible to erect scaffolding, and workers dangled from ropes while installing the skin sections.
Construction on the  foundation began in 1883, and the pedestal's cornerstone was laid in 1884.
He gave it bold classical contours and applied simplified modeling, reflecting the huge scale of the project and its solemn purpose.
Liquid nitrogen was used to remove layers of paint that had been applied to the interior of the copper skin over decades, leaving two layers of coal tar, originally applied to plug leaks and prevent corrosion.
By exaggerating the forms, in order to render them more clearly visible, or by enriching them with details, we would destroy the proportion of the work.
In 1984, the Statue of Liberty was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Norwegian immigrant civil engineer Joachim Goschen Giæver designed the structural framework for the Statue of Liberty.
Bartholdi continued to develop the concept following his return to France.
As part of one such effort, an auction of art and manuscripts, poet Emma Lazarus was asked to donate an original work.
No members of the general public were permitted on the island during the ceremonies, which were reserved entirely for dignitaries.
By the end of 1879, about 250,000&nbsp;francs had been raised.
In order to honor these achievements, Laboulaye proposed that a gift be built for the United States on behalf of France.
With the announcement, the statue was given a name, ''Liberty Enlightening the World''.
Only it is necessary that this character should be the product of volition and study, and that the artist, concentrating his knowledge, should find the form and the line in its greatest simplicity.
In a labor-intensive process, each saddle had to be crafted individually.
New, powerful lighting was installed in 1944–1945, and beginning on V-E Day, the statue was once again illuminated after sunset.
This impressed upon the public the war's stated purpose—to secure liberty—and served as a reminder that embattled France had given the United States the statue.
She initially declined, stating she could not write a poem about a statue.
The statue was painted only on the inside.
After the skin was completed, renowned landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, co-designer of New York's Central Park and Brooklyn's Prospect Park, supervised a cleanup of Bedloe's Island in anticipation of the dedication.
According to sculptor Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, who later recounted the story, Laboulaye's comment was not intended as a proposal, but it inspired Bartholdi.
Eiffel's design made the statue one of the earliest examples of curtain wall construction, in which the exterior of the structure is not load bearing, but is instead supported by an interior framework.
However, Bartholdi and Laboulaye avoided an image of revolutionary liberty such as that depicted in Eugène Delacroix's famed ''Liberty Leading the People'' (1830).
In a patriotic tribute, the Boy Scouts of America, as part of their Strengthen the Arm of Liberty campaign in 1949–1952, donated about two hundred replicas of the statue, made of stamped copper and  in height, to states and municipalities across the United States.
The statue was the focal point for Operation Sail, a regatta of tall ships from all over the world that entered New York Harbor on July 4, 1976, and sailed around Liberty Island.
Laboulaye arranged events designed to appeal to the rich and powerful, including a special performance at the Paris Opera on April 25, 1876, that featured a new cantata by composer Charles Gounod.
Bartholdi considered having Liberty hold a broken chain, but decided this would be too divisive in the days after the Civil War.
Sketches and models were made of the proposed work, though it was never erected.
The four sides are identical in appearance.
In the years following the Civil War, most Americans preferred realistic artworks depicting heroes and events from the nation's history, rather than allegorical works like the Liberty statue.
A concession was granted in 2007 to Statue Cruises to operate the transportation and ticketing facilities, replacing Circle Line, which had operated the service since 1953.
The museum's backers never provided it with an endowment to secure its future and it closed in 1991 after the opening of an immigration museum on Ellis Island.
Columbia had supplanted the earlier figure of an Indian princess, which had come to be regarded as uncivilized and derogatory toward Americans.
The surfaces should be broad and simple, defined by a bold and clear design, accentuated in the important places.
The Liberty statue project was not the only such undertaking that had difficulty raising money: construction of the obelisk later known as the Washington Monument sometimes stalled for years; it would ultimately take over three-and-a-half decades to complete.
After five months of daily calls to donate to the statue fund, on August 11, 1885, the ''World'' announced that $102,000 had been raised from 120,000&nbsp;donors, and that 80 percent of the total had been received in sums of less than one dollar.
This statue is believed to have been over  high, and it similarly stood at a harbor entrance and carried a light to guide ships.
Despite its initial focus on the elites, the Union was successful in raising funds from across French society.
Above the door on each side, there are ten disks upon which Bartholdi proposed to place the coats of arms of the states (between 1876 and 1889, there were 38 U.S. states), although this was not done.
A kindergarten class in Davenport, Iowa, mailed the ''World'' a gift of $1.35.
They left December 28 following a Federal Court order.
President Cleveland headed the procession, then stood in the reviewing stand to see bands and marchers from across America.
In May 1876, Bartholdi traveled to the United States as a member of a French delegation to the Centennial Exhibition, and arranged for a huge painting of the statue to be shown in New York as part of the Centennial festivities.
Bartholdi's early models were all similar in concept: a female figure in neoclassical style representing liberty, wearing a ''stola'' and ''pella'' (gown and cloak, common in depictions of Roman goddesses) and holding a torch aloft.
With the project in jeopardy, groups from other American cities, including Boston and Philadelphia, offered to pay the full cost of erecting the statue in return for relocating it.
The ferries, which depart from Liberty State Park in Jersey City and Battery Park in Lower Manhattan, also stop at Ellis Island when it is open to the public, making a combined trip possible.
In music, it has been evoked to indicate support for American policies, as in Toby Keith's song "Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)", and in opposition, appearing on the cover of the Dead Kennedys' album ''Bedtime for Democracy'', which protested the Reagan administration.
Bartholdi's home province of Alsace was lost to the Prussians, and a more liberal republic was installed in France.
During World War II, the statue remained open to visitors, although it was not illuminated at night due to wartime blackouts.
Shortly after the dedication, ''The Cleveland Gazette'', an African American newspaper, suggested that the statue's torch not be lit until the United States became a free nation "in reality":
Bartholdi wrote of his technique:
The restorers' work was hampered by the asbestos-based substance that Bartholdi had used—ineffectively, as inspections showed—to prevent galvanic corrosion.
An emergency elevator was installed within the statue, reaching up to the level of the shoulder.
Eiffel and his structural engineer, Maurice Koechlin, decided to abandon the pier and instead build an iron truss tower.
The narrow ascent to the torch was closed for public safety reasons, and it has remained closed ever since.
In 1875, Laboulaye proposed that the French finance the statue and the Americans provide the site and build the pedestal.
In 1933, President Franklin Roosevelt ordered the statue transferred to the National Park Service (NPS).
During his second trip to the United States, Bartholdi addressed a number of groups about the project, and urged the formation of American committees of the Franco-American Union.
The exhibition grounds contained a number of monumental artworks to compete for fairgoers' interest, including an outsized fountain designed by Bartholdi.
The announcement provoked a generally favorable reaction in France, though many Frenchmen resented the United States for not coming to their aid during the war with Prussia.
His work involved design computations, detailed fabrication and construction drawings, and oversight of construction.
The island reopened at the end of 2001, while the pedestal and statue remained off-limits.
As the pylon tower arose, Eiffel and Bartholdi coordinated their work carefully so that completed segments of skin would fit exactly on the support structure.
He claimed over 80,000 contributors but failed to reach the goal.
Depictions of the statue have been used by many regional institutions.
Bartholdi and Laboulaye considered how best to express the idea of American liberty.
Given the repressive nature of the regime of Napoleon III, Bartholdi took no immediate action on the idea except to discuss it with Laboulaye.
When the torch was illuminated on the evening of the statue's dedication, it produced only a faint gleam, barely visible from Manhattan.
The New York Rangers of the National Hockey League depicted the statue's head on their third jersey, beginning in 1997.
Due to the post-war instability in France, work on the statue did not commence until the early 1870s.
By 1875, France was enjoying improved political stability and a recovering postwar economy.
The completed statue was formally presented to Ambassador Morton at a ceremony in Paris on July 4, 1884, and de Lesseps announced that the French government had agreed to pay for its transport to New York.
Climbers may bring only medication and cameras—lockers are provided for other items—and must undergo a second security screening.
There was a classical precedent for the Suez proposal, the Colossus of Rhodes: an ancient bronze statue of the Greek god of the sun, Helios.
In Reagan's dedication speech, he stated, "We are the keepers of the flame of liberty; we hold it high for the world to see."
As the parade passed the New York Stock Exchange, traders threw ticker tape from the windows, beginning the New York tradition of the ticker-tape parade.
Although the storm did not harm the statue, it destroyed some of the infrastructure on both Liberty Island and Ellis Island,  severely damaging the dock used by the ferries bearing visitors to the statue.
Bartholdi suggested gilding the statue to increase its ability to reflect light, but this proved too expensive.
The torch reflects the sun's rays in daytime and lighted by floodlights at night.
Many immigrants who entered through New York saw it as a welcoming sight.
The following year, Bartholdi was able to obtain the services of the innovative designer and builder Gustave Eiffel.
He included two interior spiral staircases, to make it easier for visitors to reach the observation point in the crown.
Orator Chauncey M. Depew concluded the speechmaking with a lengthy address.
A secondary skeleton was attached to the center pylon, then, to enable the statue to move slightly in the winds of New York Harbor and as the metal expanded on hot summer days, he loosely connected the support structure to the skin using flat iron bars which culminated in a mesh of metal straps, known as "saddles", that were riveted to the skin, providing firm support.
One of these was the ''Lion of Belfort'', a monumental sculpture carved in sandstone below the fortress of Belfort, which during the war had resisted a Prussian siege for over three months.
After the United States entered World War I in 1917, images of the statue were heavily used in both recruitment posters and the Liberty Bond drives that urged American citizens to support the war financially.
Since 1823, it had rarely been used, though during the Civil War, it had served as a recruiting station.
In 1972, the immigration museum, in the statue's base, was finally opened in a ceremony led by President Richard Nixon.
The drive captured the imagination of New Yorkers, especially when Pulitzer began publishing the notes he received from contributors.
Two hundred thousand people lined the docks and hundreds of boats put to sea to welcome the ''Isère''.
A group of statues stands at the western end of the island, honoring those closely associated with the Statue of Liberty.
Hunt's pedestal design contains elements of classical architecture, including Doric portals, as well as some elements influenced by Aztec architecture.
Even with these efforts, fundraising lagged.
Once this was done, the sections of skin were carefully attached.
Instead of the impression of violence in the Delacroix work, Bartholdi wished to give the statue a peaceful appearance and chose a torch, representing progress, for the figure to hold.
For decades it has towered or crumbled above the wastelands of deserted arth—giants have uprooted it, aliens have found it curious&nbsp;... the symbol of Liberty, of optimism, has become a symbol of science fiction's pessimistic view of the future."
It was originally to be crowned with a ''pileus'', the cap given to emancipated slaves in ancient Rome.
There was criticism both of Bartholdi's statue and of the fact that the gift required Americans to foot the bill for the pedestal.
The expression makes us sick.
According to popular accounts, the face was modeled after that of Charlotte Beysser Bartholdi, the sculptor's mother, but Regis Huber, the curator of the Bartholdi Museum is on record as saying that this, as well as other similar speculations, have no basis in fact.
Give me a chance to prove that I am worth it, to do something, to be someone in America."
Fundraising proved difficult, especially for the Americans, and by 1885 work on the pedestal was threatened due to lack of funds.
The original torch was removed and replaced in 1986 with the current one, whose flame is covered in 24-carat gold.
Bartholdi had planned to put floodlights on the torch's balcony to illuminate it; a week before the dedication, the Army Corps of Engineers vetoed the proposal, fearing that ships' pilots passing the statue would be blinded.
As Bartholdi had been planning a trip to the United States, he and Laboulaye decided the time was right to discuss the idea with influential Americans.
Publisher Joseph Pulitzer of the ''New York World'' started a drive for donations to complete the project that attracted more than 120,000&nbsp;contributors, most of whom gave less than a dollar.
An advantage of this choice was that the entire statue would be light for its volume, as the copper need be only  thick.
Between 1986 and 2000, New York State issued license plates featuring the statue.
A French flag draped across the statue's face was to be lowered to unveil the statue at the close of Evarts's speech, but Bartholdi mistook a pause as the conclusion and let the flag fall prematurely.
A replica  tall stood atop the Liberty Warehouse on West 64th&nbsp;Street in Manhattan for many years; it now resides at the Brooklyn Museum.
The concrete mass was the largest poured to that time.
Workers erected the world's largest free-standing scaffold, which obscured the statue from view.
The statue is situated in Upper New York Bay on Liberty Island south of Ellis Island,  which together comprise the Statue of Liberty National Monument.
When Bartholdi returned to the United States in 1893, he made additional suggestions, all of which proved ineffective.
The resulting sonnet, "The New Colossus", including the iconic lines "Give me your tired, your poor/Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free", is uniquely identified with the Statue of Liberty and is inscribed on a plaque in the museum in its base.
Due to lack of electricity on Liberty Island, a generator was installed to power temporary floodlights to illuminate the statue at night.
The statue's foundation and pedestal were aligned so that it would face southeast, greeting ships entering the harbor from the Atlantic Ocean.
Land created by reclamation added to the  original island at Ellis Island is New Jersey territory.
As an American icon, the Statue of Liberty has been depicted on the country's coinage and stamps.
But he remained concerned that popular opinion on both sides of the Atlantic was insufficiently supportive of the proposal, and he and Laboulaye decided to wait before mounting a public campaign.
In 1881, the New York committee commissioned Richard Morris Hunt to design the pedestal.
General Stone was the grand marshal of the parade.
It was thus, as he put it in a letter to Laboulaye: "land common to all the states."
He was succeeded as chairman of the French committee by Ferdinand de Lesseps, builder of the Suez Canal.
On June 17, 1885, the French steamer ''Isère'', laden with the Statue of Liberty, reached the New York port safely.
The route began at Madison Square, once the venue for the arm, and proceeded to Battery Park at the southern tip of Manhattan by way of Fifth Avenue and Broadway, with a slight detour so the parade could pass in front of the ''World'' building on Park Row.
He ordered that it be changed to a helmet.
The statue and Liberty Island reopened to the public on July 4, 2013.
Although plans for the statue had not been finalized, Bartholdi moved forward with fabrication of the right arm, bearing the torch, and the head.
The statue is a frequent subject in popular culture.
Tickets to view the construction activity at the Gaget, Gauthier & Co. workshop were also offered.
A powerful new lighting system was installed in advance of the American Bicentennial in 1976.
The Statue of Liberty was one of the earliest beneficiaries of a cause marketing campaign.
This Stony Creek granite came from the Beattie Quarry in Branford, Connecticut.
The other significant female icon in American culture was a representation of Liberty, derived from Libertas, the goddess of freedom widely worshipped in ancient Rome, especially among emancipated slaves.
After the exhibition closed, the arm was transported to New York, where it remained on display in Madison Square Park for several years before it was returned to France to join the rest of the statue.
The piece was titled ''La Liberté éclairant le monde'', the French version of the statue's announced name.
Bartholdi placed an observation platform near the top of the pedestal, above which the statue itself rises.
Carloads of dynamite and other explosives that were being sent to Britain and France for their war efforts were detonated, and seven people were killed.
The ensuing cheers put an end to Evarts's address.
One of its members was 19-year-old Theodore Roosevelt, the future governor of New York and president of the United States.
It was lit briefly on December 31, 1943, and on D-Day, June 6, 1944, when its lights flashed "dot-dot-dot-dash", the Morse code for V, for victory.
The statue remained intact in Paris pending sufficient progress on the pedestal; by January 1885, this had occurred and the statue was disassembled and crated for its ocean voyage.
The committee hired former army General Charles Pomeroy Stone to oversee the construction work.
One immigrant who arrived from Greece recalled,
The statue was also several times taken over briefly by demonstrators publicizing causes such as Puerto Rican independence, opposition to abortion, and opposition to US intervention in Grenada.
It was a gift to the United States from the people of France.
The statue, including the pedestal and base, closed on October 29, 2011 for installation of new elevators and staircases and to bring other facilities, such as restrooms, up to code.
The components of the pylon tower were built in the Eiffel factory in the nearby Parisian suburb of Levallois-Perret.
These refugees were forced to live in conditions that the wealthy Lazarus had never experienced.
The statue rapidly became a landmark.
New Yorkers displayed their new-found enthusiasm for the statue, as the French vessel arrived with the crates holding the disassembled statue on board.
Crawford's statue was designed in the early 1850s.
The National Park Service, in a 2000 report, however, deemed this a legend traced to an 1885 fundraising pamphlet, and that the statue was most likely conceived in 1870.
A broken chain lies at her feet.
French monarchists opposed the statue, if for no other reason than it was proposed by the liberal Laboulaye, who had recently been elected a senator for life.
Access to an observation platform surrounding the torch was also provided, but the narrowness of the arm allowed for only a single ladder,  long.
He also worked on a number of sculptures designed to bolster French patriotism after the defeat by the Prussians.
Nearby Ellis Island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument by proclamation of President Lyndon Johnson in 1965.
A Liberty figure adorned most American coins of the time, and representations of Liberty appeared in popular and civic art, including Thomas Crawford's ''Statue of Freedom'' (1863) atop the dome of the United States Capitol Building.
The change in structural material from masonry to iron allowed Bartholdi to change his plans for the statue's assembly.
A modern elevator was installed, allowing handicapped access to the observation area of the pedestal.
They are the work of Maryland sculptor Phillip Ratner.
Fundraising for the statue had begun in 1882.
The statue was closed to the public from May until December 1938.
Copper sheathing was installed to prevent further damage from rainwater that had been seeping into the pedestal.
The French government authorized a lottery; among the prizes were valuable silver plate and a terracotta model of the statue.
It appeared on commemorative coins issued to mark its 1986 centennial, and on New York's 2001 entry in the state quarters series.
He did successfully lobby for improved lighting within the statue, allowing visitors to better appreciate Eiffel's design.
Bartholdi was in any event busy with other possible projects; in the late 1860s, he approached Isma'il Pasha, Khedive of Egypt, with a plan to build a huge lighthouse in the form of an ancient Egyptian female ''fellah'' or peasant, robed and holding a torch aloft, at the northern entrance to the Suez Canal in Port Said.
The erected statue does rise over a broken chain, half-hidden by her robes and difficult to see from the ground.
A unit of the Army Signal Corps was stationed on Bedloe's Island until 1923, after which military police remained there while the island was under military jurisdiction.
Laboulaye's political allies supported the call, as did descendants of the French contingent in the American Revolutionary War.
The armature structure was badly corroded, and about two percent of the exterior plates needed to be replaced.
With the Army's departure, the NPS began to transform the island into a park.
He designed the figure with a strong, uncomplicated silhouette, which would be set off well by its dramatic harbor placement and allow passengers on vessels entering New York Bay to experience a changing perspective on the statue as they proceeded toward Manhattan.
The copper may have come from multiple sources and some of it is said to have come from a mine in Visnes, Norway, though this has not been conclusively determined after testing samples.
The French would finance the statue; Americans would be expected to pay for the pedestal.
He proposed a pedestal  in height; faced with money problems, the committee reduced that to .
New York Congressman Anthony Weiner made the statue's reopening a personal crusade.
In a symbolic act, the first rivet placed into the skin, fixing a copper plate onto the statue's big toe, was driven by United States Ambassador to France Levi P. Morton.
Bartholdi crossed the United States twice by rail, and met many Americans who he thought would be sympathetic to the project.
On May 17, 2009, President Barack Obama's Secretary of the Interior, Ken Salazar, announced that as a "special gift" to America, the statue would be reopened to the public as of July 4, but that only a limited number of people would be permitted to ascend to the crown each day.
