Domestic destinations are all the way up from Tromsø down to Kristiansand.
Which leaves and branch type that is depicted on the coat of arms has been hotly debated.
At the Sola airport, the concrete bunker held out longest, but was eventually put out of action with a hand grenade.
The reconstruction after the fire led to the cathedral's Western Front being replaced with a vestibule, as well as to the construction (or reconstruction) of St. Mary's  Church, Bishop's Chapel, the Gothic cathedral and the expansion of the stone cellar at Kongsberg.
The Centre for Intercultural Communication (SIK) is associated with the college's mission.
Solborgveien Folk annually welcomes over 140 students and is owned by the Lutheran.
NPD was created in 1972 by Ullandhaug and PSA was established on 1 January 2004 and co-located with the agency, as a regulatory body.
Express bus services are operated by NOR-WAY Bussekspress from Stavanger City Terminal to Kristiansand, Bergen and Haugesund, and by Lavprisekspressen to Oslo via Kristiansand.
The largest company in the Nordic region, Norwegian energy company Statoil is headquartered in Stavanger.
It is part of the Low-Jæren, a flat area of land consisting mostly of marsh, sand, and stone aur, that ranges from Ogna River in the south to Tungenes in the north; it is the northernmost part that includes Stavanger.
After much discussion, Stavanger was chosen to be the on-shore center for the oil industry on the Norwegian sector of the North Sea, and a period of hectic growth followed.
The Southern Railway goes from Oslo S to Drammen, to Kristiansand S, to, finally, Stavanger S. This route, 545 kilometers (339&nbsp;mi) between Oslo and Stavanger, is scheduled over four times every day and takes around seven hours.
Esso was the first oil company to start drilling for oil off the coast of Norway.
In recent times, the city has come to be called the "oil capital," and Norway's national and largest oil company, Statoil, is headquartered at Forus, in Stavanger.
The school is 92.5% owned by John Bauer Group.
Established in 1925, it is a museum of school history in Rogaland.
The city has a number of bus services and taxis.
Tourists typically visit places like Preikestolen (aka the Pulpit Rock), and Kjeragbolten.
It is also the 3rd largest airport in Norway and 7th in the Nordic countries.
At the south end is Mosvangen Camping, Stavanger Svømmestadion old man and Vålandskogen, and to the west is Rogaland Kunstmuseum.
The city centre itself is small and intimate, with narrow streets and open spaces protected from car traffic.
In 2008, Kristiansen received Stavanger's screenplay scholarship.
Stavanger is the home of the Stavanger Symphony Orchestra (SSO).
The coat of arms is based upon a seal which dated 1591.
The Jæren Line's only branch, the Ålgård Line from Ganddal to Ålgård, opened in 1924.
The airport was attacked by six German Messerschmitt Bf 110 fighters around 8 am.
It was finished around 1125, and the city of Stavanger counts 1125 as its year of foundation.
The region and its people is supposed to be even more open and inclusive towards art, ideas and opportunities.
Stavanger Museum, founded in 1877 and thus one of the oldest museums, includes several historic buildings and collections.
The railway was extended from Egersund to Flekkefjord as the Flekkefjord Line in 1904.
The buses are operated by Boreal Transport.
A number of historians have argued convincingly that North-Jæren was an economic and military centre as far back as the 9th and 10th centuries with the consolidation of the nation at the Battle of Hafrsfjord around 872.
For long periods of time its most important industries have been shipping, shipbuilding, the fish canning industry and associated subcontractors.
In the lake is a small island, Storeholmen.
ONS takes place in Stavanger during the last week of August every other year.
In the 1960s, the work of the Schei Committee pushed for many municipal mergers across Norway.
The lake supplied the city's drinking water from 1863 to 1931, and is now by far the most used recreation area in Stavanger.
Student newspaper ''SMiS'' (Studentmediene i Stavanger) comes out every other month.
His design is also used as the city's arms, flag, and seal.
Stavanger has one principal television station, TV Vest, that sends local news and reports.
Mosvatnet is  making it the third largest in Stavanger after Hålandsvatnet and Store Stokkavatn.
The city's history is a continuous alternation between economic booms and recessions.
The airport also provides intercontinental routes to Cancun and Phuket.
Norwegian Telecom Museum has an office in Stavanger, at Løkkeveien.
The hotels in the city have good occupancy year round due to a lot of commuters who travel to work and meetings in Stavanger.
In 1944, the Sørlandet Line was extended to Sira on the Flekkefjord Line, and the Jæren Line was integrated into the main railway network.
62 Germans were killed and 94 were injured during mine clearance in Rogaland.
Stora Stokkavatnet is  - the largest in Stavanger.
Not too far from Stavanger, alpine centers are available for skiers and snowboarders throughout the winter season.
Stavanger has a long history of education in Western Europe.
It emerged in the 12th century during a period of population growth and increasing urbanization throughout northern Europe.
There were 180 German minefields in Rogaland, with a total of 480,000 mines, all of which the German Wehrmacht were required to clear.
In 1940, the Germans had envisioned it to be completed no later than 1 November 1941.
The first element of the name is ''stafr'' meaning 'staff' or 'branch'.
Vestlandske School Museum (Western Norway School Museum), in Stavanger, is currently in the old 1920 Kvaleberg school building.
Stavanger and its region, along with Liverpool, United Kingdom, was selected as a European Capital of Culture for 2008.
To Böhme, in turn, he gave the task of how the capitulation of Festung Norwegen was to be implemented.
MHS was established in 1843 and accredited in 2008 as a research university.
Bjergstedparken, a park north of Old Stavanger, is the location of Bjergsted Music Center, including Stavanger Concert Hall, and its outdoor areas are often used for festivals and outdoor concerts.
The Art School in Rogaland was established in 1978, with a history back to 1957.
The building under construction at Ullandhaug will serve as a platform and innovative arena, not only for the region's R & D environment, but also for other expertise among both industry and the public.
There were around 15,000 German soldiers in Rogaland in 1945, and it was there where the commander of 274 Infantry Division, General Weckman, gave the formal German surrender.
After the Culinary Institute went bankrupt, partly due to activities in Oslo on 4 June 2008, a new culinary organization was established by the Foundation Rogaland knowledge park and Rogaland County Council.
Especially in the summertime, Stavanger's harbour is full of large cruiseships: in 2011 Stavanger hosted 130 cruiseships.
John B. Møst was employed as a university in 2011.
Competitor Rogalands Avis was first published in 1899 under the name ''1ste Mai'' ('1 May'), and published daily.
Kielland Park went through a major renovation in 2007 as part of the Millennium in Stavanger municipality.
The bombardment lasted for about an hour before ten slow Ju 52 transport aircraft arrived over the airport.
This was only the second ever wartime parachute assault; the first had occurred only three hours earlier, when a bridge south of Denmark had been captured in the same way.
The city includes many islands off the coast including: Bjørnøy, Buøy, Engøy, Grasholmen, Hellesøy, Hundvåg, Kalvøy, Lindøy, Sølyst, and Vassøy.
Kannikkbekken runs mostly underground, in pipes, before it reaches Kannik park.
The film, of the same title, had its theatrical release on 15 February 2008.
Structural changes in industry and the strong development of the service industry has radically changed the city's economic base, and the service industry now represents over 11 percent of employment.
The police station, telephone office, telegraph center, post office, port office, customs house and the gas company were the most important places, and now came under control of the Germans.
After sending the crew off in lifeboats, "Aeger" used 25 shots with  Bofors guns to sink "Roda".
The earliest Christian impulses in Norway came to Stavanger region through contact with the rich Christian, European culture.
Hallvard Trætteberg (1898–1987), a leading specialist in heraldry, was commissioned to design the official coat of arms of Stavanger, a work that lasted from the end of the 1920s until approved on 11 August 1939.
Telemarksforsking Bo worked with Ministry NM to rank the regions in Norway with regard to profitability, growth and new businesses.
In contrast, winter temperatures are much milder than those in Oslo and Stockholm for example.
Through the park runs Kannik creek, which comes to the surface at the statue of the Little Mermaid and runs into Breiavannet.
Additionally, Viking TV, the channel for the football team Viking FK, started on 2 March 2008, and is distributed via Lyse's broadband network, reaching 120,000 viewers in 45,000 households.
The Germans had placed a high priority to have a good railway connection between the air base at Sola - Stavanger district, and the rest of the country.
Armament consisted of three luftvernmitraljøser, three bakkemitraljøser, and some machine guns at the disposal of the approximately 80 soldiers who defended the airport.
An extension of Boknafjorden and Byfjorden intersects the harbor into the hollow from the northwest, while Hillevåg lake intrudes from Gandsfjorden in the southeast.
Stavanger has since 1997 had a grant for the support of local filmmaking.
Other important industries are publishing – especially high printing and the major daily newspapers in town, Stavanger and Rogaland Avis Aftenblad – and food and beverage, which includes the processing of local agricultural products from Jæren, including Gilde Vest with one of the largest slaughterhouses.
In 2009 it was relegated once more, and it is now legal to swim in the water.
On 1 January 1867, a small area of Hetland municipality (population: 200) was transferred to the city of Stavanger.
NRK Rogaland supplies local news broadcasts on radio and television.
Because of this, the line was converted to standard gauge.
The inscription on the cross shows a priest was responsible for the inscription, and he may have performed an early service at a church on site.
The city's largest daily newspaper, Stavanger Aftenblad came out with its first issue in 1893.
This was not an ordinary newspaper, but a so-called link newspaper with the privilege of bringing out announcements, small articles and ads.
In 2011, the unemployment rate was less than 2%.
Before repatriation, the Germans were required to remain and clean up after five years of occupation.
Stavanger is served by international airport Stavanger Airport, Sola, which offers flights to cities in most major European countries, as well as a limited number of intercontinental charter flights.
In summer 2007, mataktørene in the region were awarded the title "Norwegian Centres of Expertise in Culinology."
The charming city center is just a small walk from the quay.
The most important of the newer industrial areas are Forus in the south, on the border of Sandnes and Sola, and Dusavik (mainly petroleum-related activities) in the north, on the border of Randfontein.
The museum also conducts extensive outreach activities, and has facilities fairly close to Stavanger Museum.
With the Protestant Reformation in 1536, Stavanger's role as a religious center declined, and the establishment of Kristiansand in the early 17th century led to the relocation of the bishopric.
It also includes the eastern half of the island of Åmøy.
The first organized teaching in the city probably took place at a Benedictine monastery in the town, either Olav's Monastery or Monastery of people from the mid-12th century.
The airport was named most punctual European regional airport by  flightstats.com in 2010.
There are two tunnel projects planned: Ryfast (Ryfylke Tunnel and Hundvåg Tunnel) and Rogfast.
The city was conquered peacefully, but the first sparks of resistance had been ignited, and several men left the city and made their way to the Norwegian troops inside Gjesdal, there to join the armed struggle against the enemy.
Stavanger is one of Norway's oldest cities.
The festival originated in the network of Rogaland county so that they could impart culinary traditions of the region.
The Culinary Institute, headquartered in Ullandhaug, provided a very important focus on food in Stavanger.
Shipbuilding and shipping has also traditionally been of great importance to the city's economic growth, and Rosenberg Shipyard, established in 1896, is located on Hundvåg.
In the main museum are now a cultural department, a zoological collection, and a library.
The line opened as a 1,067&nbsp;mm (3&nbsp;ft 6 in) narrow gauge stand-alone line on 27 February 1878.
It is the only petroleum museum in Europe.
Ommundsen helped start the new Stavanger wave that came after Mongoland premiered, and several of the actors who were instrumental have since enjoyed great success.
The airport had been built in 1937, and in April 1940 fortifications round the airport were not yet complete.
The busiest route is Oslo-Gardermoen, with over 1,5 million passengers; the second most popular is Bergen Airport, Flesland, with over 700,000 passengers; Oslo-Torp is the third most popular, followed by Trondheim Airport, Værnes and Kristiansand Airport, Kjevik domestically.
The climate is maritime mild temperate (marine west coast - cfb) and rather windy, with all monthly temperature averages above freezing, and precipitation 1180&nbsp;mm/year.
Archaeological investigations in the current downtown and in the crypt of the Cathedral show that the great fire of 1272 probably left large parts of the city and the cathedral in ruins, including the Romanesque chancel of the cathedral.
In 2008, Norway was represented by Geir Skeie, who also won gold.
The terrain is low-lying: 49% of the area is less than  above sea level, While 7% of the land is at .
The hiking trail around the lakes is  long.
anchored by Ulsnes.
The city is also among those that frequent various lists of expensive cities in the world, and Stavanger has even been ranked as the world's most expensive city by certain indexes.
Canon park forms the border between Stavanger and the exit from the E39.
The Port of Stavanger is a popular stop on the route to the Norwegian Fjords.
The town was even called Norway "canned capital", and included Christian Bjelland, who founded Chr Bjelland & Co. A/S.
In the first half of the century it was known for canning, and in the 1950s there were over 50 canneries in town.
Stavanger region is often referred to as Norway's answer to the French food region of Lyon.
Stavanger grew into a center of church administration and an important south-west coast market town around 1100–1300.
Film Forum Southwest has received operating support from the City of Stavanger since 1995 and from the county since 1997.
Facing the North Sea, Stavanger has always been economically dependent on its access to the sea.
In 2009, 99 ships and 146,000 passengers passed through the town, and in 2010, a total of 111 cruise ships with about 175,000 passengers visited the city.
The city is also known for being one of the nation's premier culinary clusters.
In 2013 Sola airport had over 4 million passengers and was the largest airport in Rogaland county.
The path around the lake is  long, and much used by cyclist and joggers; sampling conducted in 1995 showed that an estimated 560,000 people used the walking trail around Mosvatnet.
Finally on 1 July 1953, a final portion of Hetland (population: 831) was moved to Stavanger.
In 1940 Stavanger Airport, Forus, opened, but closed in 1989.
The municipality of Stavanger is located in a coastal landscape, bordering the sea to the west and Boknafjorden in the northeast.
Establishing Statoil's headquarters in Stavanger naturally led to Stavanger becoming the center of the oil industry.
Breiavatnet is located between the two fjord arms.
Neighborhoods include Byhaugen, Old Stavanger, Bekkefaret, Bergjeland, Eiganes, Forus, Gausel, Godeset, Indre Tasta, Jåtten, Johannes, Kampen, Kvalaberg, Kvernevik, Madlamark, Nylund, Øyane, Paradis, Stokka, Sunde, Tjensvoll, Ullandhaug, Våland, Varden, Vaulen, and Ytre Tasta.
Stavanger was the host port of the Cutty Sark Tall Ships' Race in 1997 and 2004.
In 1987 an attempt was made to establish a new daily newspaper, The West Coast, but it was only released for two months and ended with a total loss of NOK 27 million.
Engineering is now the main industry with 59 percent of manufacturing employment.
Then again on 1 January 1906, the city again annexed another area of Hetland (population: 399).
By 2020, Stavanger region intends to be the region most Norwegians associate with food products and culinary experiences.
This is mostly related to the offshore petroleum industry, and production of oil platforms alone account for 40 percent.
The city has several museums and collections that are both local and national.
Its goal is to increase the skills of film workers in the region and encourage more filmmaking.
Employment by place of work by sector in 2007 to 24.4% in the public sector and 75.6% in the private sector and public enterprises.
Between the city park and the bay is located Kielland garden, which got its name because the poet Alexander Kielland's house at the time was here.
Stavanger Museum consists of a total of eight buildings: Stavanger Museum Muségata 16, Stavanger Maritime Museum, the Norwegian Canning Museum, Ledaal, Breidablikkveien museum, combined indretning, Norwegian Printing Museum and the Norwegian Children's Museum.
In a parachute assault, the transport planes first dropped yellow containers containing weapons and equipment, then between ten and twelve paratroopers from each plane.
Significant older industrial areas are Hillevåg, Buøy, the eastern districts, and in some places elsewhere along the coast.
After Hitler's death in 1945, Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz took over leadership of the German forces, and on 9 May 1945, gave the head of the German armed forces in Norway, General Franz Böhme, orders that "Reichskommissar" in Norway, Josef Terboven, was deposed and that all his duties were transferred to Böhme.
This can be understood both in its English sense – "an open harbour" – and in its Norwegian meaning of "an open gate", together implying openness towards the world.
By the bay lies the Norwegian Emigration Center on the west side and on the eastern side of the bay is Valbergtårnet with his vektermuseeum.
The city's oldest museum is Missjonmuseet, established in 1864, located on the ground floor of the faculty building at MHS.
Museum of Archaeology in Stavanger is the largest museum in Stavanger, measured by number of employees.
For the fourth consecutive year, Stavanger Region was in 2007 ranked best business region.
Offshore Northern Seas is the second largest exhibition of its kind in the oil and gas industry.
It may have been in 1163-1164, in connection with the King Magnus's coronation, but could also have been around 1181-1184, in connection with the support Stavanger Bishop Erik gave King Magnus at the end of the king's fight against the late King Sverre.
Fortifications consisted of a concrete bunker still under construction and several open shooting positions.
In North Jæren, rich archaeological material suggests that the chiefs held considerable power from the early Iron Age.
Today the oil industry is a key industry in the Stavanger region and the city is widely referred to as the Oil Capital of Norway.
There are plans to reestablish the ferry link to Newcastle in the United Kingdom, which was suspended in 2008.
Stavanger had a natural harbor and was, with Jæren in the south, strategically important to the county of the East as well as to the shipping route along the western coast and the fertile Ryfylke Islands in the north.
In all, 200 to 300 transport aircraft arrived in Sola during invasion day, and by evening several hundred soldiers and large quantities of materiel had been moved from Germany to Sola.
'''Stavanger'''  () is a city and municipality in Norway.
The airport opened in 1937.
Marit Boyesen was selected as the principal for the period 2011 to 2015, and started her tenure as rector 1 August 2011.
The film is about the NOKAS robbery in Stavanger on 5 April 2004, and was filmed on location, using many of the locations where the factual event took place, such as the King Street counting center, in the Norway Bank building, and the Cathedral Square, by Maria Church Ruins.
The open-air vegetable market is one of the very few in Norway where you can buy produce directly from local farmers every working day through the year.
Along the coast south of Stavanger there are a number of large, sandy beaches, including at Sola, within close reach from the city.
One of the most important events in Stavanger's city history was the gift letter that King Magnus Erlingsson gave to Stavanger Bishop Eirik Ivarsson in the second half of 1100.
There are several parks and green spots in Stavanger municipality, both in the city and beyond.
In its ten years of visitation records, from 1998 to 2008, almost 95,000 people visited the museum annually.
Again on 1 January 1879, another area of Hetland (population: 1,357) was transferred to Stavanger.
Central to the town is the city lake which is in turn surrounded by the city park, built as the city's first urban park in 1866-1868.
Among others, the Condeep jacket for the three Gullfaks platforms and Troll A were cast here by Norwegian Contractors.
The semi-submersible drilling vessel Ocean Traveler was towed from New Orleans to Norway, and the vessel began drilling on 19 July 1966, at block 8/3, about  southwest of Stavanger.
Jåttåvågen, on Gandsfjorden, was from the 1970s to the 1990s a large industrial area, particularly for the construction of large concrete Condeep platforms and oil platforms for the offshore industry.
Immigrants make up 11.3% of Stavanger's population.
Other notable acts from Stavanger include Kvelertak, Thomas Dybdahl & Sturle Dagsland.
Kjeragbolten is a rock wedged in the cliff approximately 1000 meters above the fjord.
Summers are pleasant and lowland areas in and around Stavanger have after Bergen the longest growing season in Norway.
The museum has about 5,000 exhibits consisting of several objects of ethnographic and historical interest from the various mission fields of study.
Stavanger was established as a municipality 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt).
The landscape has a distinctive appearance with rocks and hills where there is no settlement or agriculture.
It stands out as an important area from early times, as a desirable foothold for the monarchy and the church, as both needed a strong foothold in the South West coast area.
It was designed as a legal regime for oil exploration.
The university has about 9,000 students and 1,200 employees and is organized into three faculties: Faculty of Humanities, Social Sciences and the Faculty of Science.
The city's most visited museum is the Norwegian Petroleum Museum, opened in 1998.
The ship was placed under arrest and was ordered to move to Riska.
The German air attack increased in intensity, and the Norwegian aircraft were eventually destroyed.
Statoil was founded as a limited company owned by the Government of Norway on 14 July 1972 by a unanimous act passed by the Norwegian parliament Stortinget, to enable Norwegian participation in the oil industry on the continental shelf, to build up Norwegian competency within the petroleum industry, and to establish the foundations of a domestic petroleum industry.
In a prelude to the invasion, on 8 April, the German freighter "Roda" (6780 grt.)
In the mid 10th century, traditional Norse burial customs ceased in the Stavanger area, at the same time as the first Christian priests began their work.
While Norwegian soldiers were badly injured in the attempted defence, there were no fatalities; in contrast; the Germans lost several.
While there was continual construction work from Oslo westward as far as Moi, the Jæren Line, from Egersund to Stavanger in Western Norway, was opened in 1878.
