Most steam locomotives used in Western Australia were built in the United Kingdom, though some examples were designed and built locally at the Western Australian Government Railways' Midland Railway Workshops.
In some cases the third cylinder was added 'inside' simply to allow for smaller diameter outside cylinders, and hence reduce the width of the locomotive for use on lines with a restricted loading gauge, for example the SR K1 and U1 classes.
Different arrangements were given names which usually reflect the first usage of the arrangement; for instance the "Santa Fe" type (2-10-2) is so called because the first examples were built for the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway.
This is made more effective if a pair of driving wheels is able to make the most of its axle load, i.e.
Several heritage railways in the UK have built new steam locomotives in the 1990s and early 21st century.
If oil is used a door provides for adjusting the air flow, maintenance or for cleaning the oil jets.
Crank pin and crosshead bearings carry small cup-shaped reservoirs for oil.
* MS&LR/GCR 567, Ruddington Great Central Railway, Northern Section.
* Shikoku (April 1970)
After 1945, problems associated with post-war reconstruction and the availability of cheap domestic-produced coal kept steam in widespread use throughout the two following decades.
Wood-burners emit large quantities of flying sparks which necessitate an efficient spark arresting device generally housed in the smokestack.
Some locomotives have an additional pressure gauge in the steam chest.
Since then, a few specialised manufacturers have continued to produce small locomotives for narrow gauge and miniature railways, but as the prime market for these is the tourist and heritage railway sector, the demand for such locomotives is limited.
This type of valve is in almost universal use at present.
This success led to the company emerging as the pre-eminent builder of steam locomotives used on railways in the UK, US and much of Europe.
* Chugoku (Yamaguchi area) (December 1974)
The earliest railways employed horses to draw carts along railway tracks.
Built in June 1816 by Johann Friedrich Krigar in the Royal Berlin Iron Foundry (''Königliche Eisengießerei'' zu Berlin), the locomotive ran on a circular track in the factory yard.
Two years later, on 26 October 1977, the heavy freight engine 44 903 (computer-based new number 043 903-4) made her final run at the same railway yard.
The apparatus is usually fitted with sight-glasses to confirm the rate of supply.
Steam locomotives have also been "stars" in many television shows about trains, such as ''Thomas the Tank Engine and Friends'', based on characters from the books by Awdry.
* Tohoku (November 1974),
(In all cases, equivalent lamp irons were also provided on the rear of the locomotive or tender for when the locomotive was running tender- or bunker-first.)
On the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad two 2-10-2 locomotives were dismantled; the boilers were placed onto two new Class T 4-8-2 locomotives and the residue wheel machinery made a pair of Class U 0-10-0 switchers with new boilers.
Almost any part of the locomotive, including boilers, was replaced or upgraded.
New appliances were added, unsatisfactory features removed, cylinders improved or replaced.
The oldest continually working steam engine in the world also runs in Austria: the GKB 671 built in 1860, has never been taken out of service, and is still used for special excursions.
The steam then either travels directly along and down a steam pipe to the engine unit or may first pass into the wet header of a superheater, the role of the latter being to improve thermal efficiency and eliminate water droplets suspended in the "saturated steam", the state in which it leaves the boiler.
This booster engine was set to cut out automatically at a certain speed.
Steam traction in New Zealand ended in 1968 in the North Island when AB 832 (now stored at the Glenbrook Vintage Railway, Auckland, but owned by MOTAT) hauled a Farmer's 'Santa Special' from Frankton Junction to Claudelands.
Other British lines such as the LBSCR fitted a few locomotives with the top feed inside a separate dome forward of the main one.
Even though DB were very assertive in continuing the electrification on the main lines (in 1963 they reached 5000&nbsp;km of electrified routes) and dieselisation with new developed stock, they did not reach that goal.
In Canadian and American practice all of the forces between the locomotive and cars are handled through the coupler — particularly with types of the Janney coupler long standard on American railroad rolling stock — and its associated draft gear, which allows some limited slack movement.
Steam locomotives consume vast quantities of water because they operate on an open cycle, expelling their steam immediately after a single use rather than recycling it in a closed loop as stationary and marine steam engines do.
Such systems operated in the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
The exception to this was the Southern Railway and its constituents, who added an extra lamp iron each side of the smokebox, and the arrangement of lamps (or in daylight, white circular plates) told railway staff the origin and destination of the train.
it has the highest specific heat of any common substance; that is, more thermal energy is stored by heating water to a given temperature than would be stored by heating an equal mass of steel or copper to the same temperature.
They needed to renew the rolling stock, mostly with steam locomotives designed for accelerated passenger trains.
In Finland, the first diesels were introduced in the mid-1950s and they superseded steam locomotives during the early 1960s.
Churchward fitted this arrangement to the high end of his domeless coned boilers.
The UIC classification is used mostly in European countries apart from the United Kingdom.
Depending on the terrain the locomotive was being used in the whistle could be designed for long distance warning of impending arrival, or more for localised use.
Stephenson valve gear was generally placed within the frame and was difficult to access for maintenance; later patterns applied outside the frame, were readily visible and maintained.
142 (ex-#1647) is owned by the NYSW for tourist operations, re-painted and modified to represent a 1920s era U.S. locomotive; No.
The development of the fusible plug to release pressure in conditions of excessively high temperature and low water levels was designed to protect against this occurrence.
* GWR 1014 County of Glamorgan & GWR 2999 Lady of Legend, Both being built at Didcot Railway Centre.
The heat source, contained within the firebox, is the energy released by the combustion, typically of a solid or liquid fuel, with the by-product of hot combustion gases.
At the front of the boiler is the smokebox, into which used exhaust steam is injected to increase the draught of smoke and combustion gases through the fire tubes in the boiler and out through the chimney.
It has always had at least one operational steam locomotive, Union Pacific 844, on its roster.
Locomotives that were cheap and rugged and could go over large distances over cheaply built and maintained tracks were the early requirements.
This is expressed as:
The weight of the locomotive is roughly proportional to the power output; the number of axles required is determined by this weight divided by the axleload limit for the trackage where the locomotive is to be used.
From 1876, compound locomotives came on the scene, which expanded the steam twice, or more, through separate cylinders, reducing thermal losses caused by cylinder cooling.
Two broad-gauge locomotives continued in limited service until they were retired in 2000.
The first, a displacement lubricator, mounted in the cab, uses a controlled stream of steam condensing into a sealed container of oil.
With the booming post-war Japanese economy, steam locomotives were gradually withdrawn from main line service beginning in the early 1960s, and were replaced with diesel and electric locomotives.
In the latter days of steam, "mattresses" of stitched asbestos cloth were fixed stuffed with asbestos fibre (but on separators so as not quite to touch the boiler); however in most countries, asbestos is nowadays banned for health reasons.
* Kyushu (January 1975)
58 is operated by the Valley Railroad and modified to represent New Haven Railroad number 3025.
In 1837 the first steam railway started in Austria on the Emperor Ferdinand Northern Railway between Vienna-Floridsdorf and Deutsch-Wagram.
It is not known whether it was actually built.
The idea was formalised in 2001 by the formation of 5AT Project dedicated to developing and building the 5AT Advanced Technology Steam Locomotive, but it never received any major railway backing.
Steam locomotion continued to dominate on the Indian Railways through the early 1980s; in 1980-81, there were 7,469 steam locomotives in regular service, as opposed to 2,403 diesels and 1,036 electrics.
One of the most successful types was the class "B" (4-6-0), inspired by the Prussian class P8.
Adhesive weight is the portion of the locomotive's weight bearing on the driving wheels.
Water is an essential element in the operation of a steam locomotive; because as Swengel argued:
Compounding was an essential ingredient of the quantum leap in power achieved by André Chapelon's rebuilds from 1929.
It is then collected either in a perforated tube fitted above the water level or from a dome that often houses the regulator valve, or throttle, the purpose of which is to control the amount of steam leaving the boiler.
Porta, "exaggerated" insulation has been practised for all types of locomotive on all surfaces liable to dissipate heat, such as cylinder ends and facings between the cylinders and the mainframes.
Vertical glass tubes, known as water gauges or water glasses, show the level of water in the boiler and are carefully monitored at all times while the boiler is being fired.
More seriously, if the water level gets too low, the crown (top) and/or side sheets of the firebox may become exposed.
In the United States on the Southern Pacific Railroad a series of cab forward locomotives had the cab and the firebox at the front of the locomotive and the tender behind the smokebox, so that the engine appeared to run backwards.
its individual share of the adhesive weight.
Two lead axles were necessary to have good tracking at high speeds.
Both fuel and water supplies are carried with the locomotive, either on the locomotive itself or in wagons (tenders) pulled behind.
Freight 2-8-2s became 2-8-4s while 2-10-2s became 2-10-4s.
These broadly represented locomotives which could be substituted for each other in service, but most commonly a class represented a single design.
The danger of all these devices was that the driving crew could be tempted to add weight to the arm to increase pressure.
Examples include BR Class 6MT ''Hengist '', BR Class 3MT no.
In the past, fierce draught could lift the fire off the grate, or cause the ejection of unburnt particles of fuel, dirt and pollution for which steam locomotives had an unenviable reputation.
The group have received the last surviving (but non-running) ATSF 3460 class steam locomotive (#3463) via donation from its owner in Kansas, the Great Overland Station Museum, and intend to use it as a platform for developing "the world's cleanest, most powerful passenger locomotive" (''sic'') capable of speeds up to 130&nbsp;mph.
Before the 1923 Grouping Act, the picture in the UK was mixed.
* BR 82045, Severn Valley Railway.
Some British and American locomotives were equipped with scoops which collected water from "water troughs" (US: "track pans") while in motion, thus avoiding stops for water.
Many of the Swedish steam locomotives were preserved during the Cold War in case of war.
Standard practice evolved to use two independent systems for feeding water to the boiler.
Because the concept of the so-called "Einheitslokomotiven", the still widely used standard locomotives from the 1920s and 1930s, was already outdated in the pre-war era, a whole new design for the new steam locomotives was developed by DB and DR, called "Neubaudampflokomotiven" (new build steam locomotives).
In the late 1850s, John Ramsbottom introduced a safety valve that became popular in Britain during the latter part of the 19th century.
The most notable engines employing condensers (Class 25, the "puffers which never puff") worked across the Karoo desert of South Africa, from the 1950 until the 1980s.
The first US patent, US1, was obtained in 1836 by John Ruggles for a ''Locomotive steam-engine for rail and other roads''.
Southern Pacific selected this design to provide air free of smoke for the engine driver to breathe as they went through the SP's numerous mountain tunnels and snow sheds.
According to Van Allsburg, this specific locomotive inspired the story and it was used in the production of the movie.
In Britain these became mandatory in 1956.
In the UK and other parts of Europe, plentiful supplies of coal made this the obvious choice from the earliest days of the steam engine.
The DX class of the London and North Western Railway numbered 943 units, including 86 engines built for the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway.
Introducing cold water into a boiler reduces power, and from the 1920s a variety of heaters were incorporated.
For example, a yard engine with only 4 drive wheels would be shown as a "0-4-0" wheel arrangement.
Note that at the two "dead centres", when the connecting rod is on the same axis as the crankpin on the driving wheel, the connecting rod applies no torque to the wheel.
The first stroke is to the front of the piston and the second stroke to the rear of the piston; hence two working strokes.
In Australia and South Africa, locomotives in drier regions operated with large oversized tenders and some even had an additional water wagon, sometimes called a "canteen" or in Australia (particularly in New South Wales) a "water gin".
The Bourdon tube gauge, in which the pressure straightens an oval-section, coiled tube of brass or bronze connected to a pointer, was introduced in 1849 and quickly gained acceptance.
Consequently, only a minority of locomotives in the UK carried bells.
The London, Midland and Scottish Railway also built Turbomotive, a largely successful attempt to prove the efficiency of steam turbines.
The number of driving wheels is derived from the adhesive weight in the same manner, leaving the remaining axles to be accounted for by the leading and trailing bogies.
Swengel suggested that the problems around water contributed to the interest in electrification of railways.
On the European continent, some use was made of several variants of the ''Bissel bogie'' in which the swivelling movement of a single axle truck controls the lateral displacement of the front driving axle (and in one case the second axle too).
Another variation was the Camelback locomotive with the cab halfway along the boiler.
In places where water is available, it may be hard, which can cause "scale", composed mainly of calcium carbonate, magnesium hydroxide, and calcium sulfate.
No locomotive of the classes 25.10 and 83.10 was in service for more than 17 years.
Almost all of these compressors were of the Westinghouse single-stage or cross-compound variety.
Three such locomotives were built by the French engineer  in the 1890s.
A steam-electric locomotive is similar in concept to a diesel-electric locomotive, except that a steam engine instead of a diesel engine is used to drive a generator.
The reversing lever (US: Johnson bar), or screw-reverser (if so equipped), that controls the cut-off therefore performs a similar function to a gearshift in an automobile—maximum cut-off, providing maximum tractive effort at the expense of efficiency, is used to pull away from a standing start, whilst a cut-off as low as 10% is used when cruising, providing reduced tractive effort with lower fuel/water consumption.
Although a policy of "dieselisation" was adopted in 1955, BR continued to build new steam locomotives until 1960 (the last being named ''Evening Star'').
By 1994 almost all commercial steam locomotives were put out of service, although many of them are preserved in museums or at railway stations for public viewing.
Most were scrapped in 1980.
Careful use of cut-off provides economical use of steam and, in turn, reduces fuel and water consumption.
It was intended to work on the Wylam Colliery near Newcastle upon Tyne.
Later, during the early 1960s, the DR found a way to reconstruct older locomotives to conform with contemporary requirements.
The steam moves reciprocating pistons which are mechanically connected to the locomotive's main wheels (drivers).
Two surviving sections of the Denver and Rio Grande Western's Alamosa to Durango narrow gauge line mentioned above, now operating separately as the Cumbres and Toltec Scenic Railroad and the Durango and Silverton Narrow Gauge Railroad, continue to use steam locomotives and operate as tourist railroads.
The cut-off point determines the moment when the valve blocks a steam port, "cutting off" admission steam and thus determining the proportion of the stroke during which steam is admitted into the cylinder; for example a 50% cut-off admits steam for half the stroke of the piston.
This can be roughly calculated by multiplying the total piston area by 85% of the boiler pressure (a rule of thumb reflecting the slightly lower pressure in the steam chest above the cylinder) and dividing by the ratio of the driver diameter over the piston stroke.
In Sumatra Barat (West Sumatra) and Ambarawa one can find rack railways (with a maximum gradient of 6% in mountainous areas), now operated for tourism only.
On 7 December 1835 the ''Adler'' ran for the first time between Nuremberg and Fürth on the Bavarian Ludwig Railway.
Duplex locomotives with two engines in one rigid frame were also tried, but were not notably successful.
Thus low-intensity oil lamps continued to be used, positioned on the front of locomotives to indicate the class of each train.
As electric and diesel trains performed so well, the decline of steam started just after World War II and in 1958 steam traction ended.
One, the train driver, is responsible for controlling the locomotive's starting, stopping and speed, and the fireman is responsible maintaining the fire, regulating steam pressure, and monitoring boiler and tender water levels.
On leaving the superheater, the steam exits the dry header of the superheater and passes down a steam pipe entering the steam chests adjacent to the cylinders of a reciprocating engine.
A crew of at least two people is normally required to operate a steam locomotive.
In the U.S. "c" is usually set at 0.85, but lower on engines that have maximum cutoff limited to 50–75%.
Narrow gauge steam was used for freight service by the Denver and Rio Grande Western on the  run from Alamosa, Colorado to Farmington, New Mexico via Durango until service ceased December 5, 1968.
However the ready availability of cheap oil led to new dieselisation programmes from 1955 and these began to take full effect from around 1962.
This includes the brake gear, wheel sets, axleboxes, springing and the motion that includes connecting rods and valve gear.
When the locomotive is stopped, or coasting with the regulator closed, there is no exhaust steam to create a draught, so the draught is maintained by means of the ''blower''.
In boilers, the deposits impair the flow of heat into water, reducing the heating efficiency and allowing the metal boiler components to overheat.
Named ''Project 130'', it aims to break the world steam train speed record set by LNER Class A4 4468 Mallard in the UK at 126&nbsp;mph.
In the United States the Federal Railroad Administration mandated the use of certain appliances over the years in response to safety concerns.
During the late 1980s, six locomotives were restored to running condition.
The largest of these is the ''Harzer Schmalspurbahn'' (Harz Narrow Gauge Railways) network in the Harz Mountains, but the lines in Saxony and on the coast of the Baltic Sea are also notable.
Though unable to "catch" stray cattle these distinctive items remained on locomotives until the end of steam.
* Hokkaido (March 1976)
The last engines of the classes 23.10, 65.10 and 50.40 were retired in the late 1970s, various units become older than 25 years.
On the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad the new units delivered over  a year, compared with about 120,000–150,000 for a mainline steam locomotive.
The last one in service was the N&W's, retired in January 1958.
Without sufficient water to absorb the heat of combustion, the firebox sheets may soften and melt, with the possible result of high-pressure steam being ejected with tremendous force through the firebox and into the locomotive's cab.
These nozzles are fed with steam directly from the boiler, controlled by the ''blower valve''.
Oxygen generated by boiling water attacks the boiler and with increased steam pressures the rate of rust (iron oxide) generated inside the boiler increases.
During a full rotation of the driving wheel, steam provides four power strokes; each cylinder receives two injections of steam per revolution.
A standard gauge LNER Peppercorn Pacific "Tornado" was completed at Hopetown Works, Darlington, England and made its first run on 1 August 2008.
Inside each steam chest is a sliding valve that distributes the steam via ports that connect the steam chest to the ends of the cylinder space.
These numbers typically represented the number of un-powered leading wheels, followed by the number of driving wheels (sometimes in several groups), followed by the number of un-powered trailing wheels.
Experiments with steam turbines using direct-drive and electrical transmissions, in different countries, proved mostly unsuccessful.
However, at regular stops (such as a terminating station platform) oil finding its way onto the track can still be a problem.
So a Whyte 4-6-2 designation would be an equivalent to a 2-C-1 UIC designation.
Over time, freight locomotive size increased, and the overall number of axles increased accordingly; the leading bogie was usually a single axle, but a trailing truck was added to larger locomotives to support a larger firebox that could no longer fit between or above the driving wheels.
Steam had in its favour familiar technology, adapted well to local facilities.
The earliest locomotives did not show the pressure of steam in the boiler, but it was possible to estimate this by the position of the safety valve arm which often extended onto the firebox back plate; gradations marked on the spring column gave a rough indication of the actual pressure.
The ''DeWitt Clinton'' was also built in the 1830s.
Had it not been for the outbreak of World War II, more may have been built.
The last standard gauge regular freight service steam by a class 1 railroad was on the isolated Leadville branch of the Colorado and Southern (Burlington Lines) October 11, 1962 with 2-8-0 641.
In Germany the first working steam locomotive was a rack-and-pinion engine, similar to the ''Salamanca'', designed by the British locomotive pioneer John Blenkinsop.
When the service or upgrades got too expensive the locomotive was traded off or retired.
The Russian locomotive class O numbered 9,129 locomotives built between 1890 and 1928.
European locomotives usually use "plate frames", where two vertical flat plates form the main chassis, with a variety of spacers and a buffer beam at each end to keep them apart.
Under severely unusual conditions (lack of coal, plenty of hydroelectricity) some locomotives in Switzerland were modified to use electricity to heat the boiler, making them electric-steam locomotives.
Other, less common, variations included the Fairlie locomotive, which had two boilers back-to-back on a common frame, with two separate power bogies.
That same day, all steam main line service ended.
A secondary ejector or crosshead vacuum pump is used to maintain the vacuum in the system against the small leaks in the pipe connections between carriages and wagons.
Various designs of articulated locomotives were developed to overcome this problem.
Blowbacks were fairly common.
1'' for the Stockton and Darlington Railway, north-east England, which was the first public steam railway in the world.
As with the arrestor, a screen was incorporated to retain any large embers.
Steam locomotives required regular, and compared to a diesel-electric engine, frequent service and overhaul (often at government-regulated intervals in Europe and the U.S.) Many alterations and upgrades regularly occurred during overhauls.
Accompanied by Andrew Vivian, it ran with mixed success.
In Britain, the limited loading gauge precludes this, so the sandboxes are mounted just above, or just below, the running plate.
Diesel locomotives began to appear in mainline service in the United States in the mid-1930s.
for keeping control of your own railway.
André Chapelon developed a similar structure but of welded construction with around 30% saving in weight for the stillborn 2-10-4 locomotives, the construction of which was begun then abandoned in 1946.
There was no need for new freight train engines, however, because thousands of the Classes 50 and 52 had been built during the Second World War.
About 1960, the Bundesbahn in West Germany decided to phase out all steam-hauled trains in ten years, but still had about 5,000 of them in running condition.
Today only a few privately owned steam locomotives are still operating in South Africa, namely the ones being used by the 5-star luxury train Rovos Rail, and the tourist trains ''Outeniqua Tjoe Choo'', ''Apple Express'' and (until 2008) ''Banana Express''.
This locomotive is the oldest preserved, and is on static display in the Science Museum, London.
This is the device used today.
Water from the condensed steam displaces the oil into pipes.
These usually take the weight of the cylinders in front or of the firebox at the rear end when the width of this exceeds that of the mainframes.
In France, the three Heilmann locomotives were a cab forward design.
It is important that the blower be opened before the regulator is closed, since without draught on the fire, there may be backdraught—air from the atmosphere blows down the chimney, causing the flow of hot gases through the boiler tubes to be reversed, with the fire itself being blown through the firehole onto the footplate, with serious consequences for the crew.
As steam pressures increased, however, a problem of "foaming" or "priming" developed in the boiler, wherein dissolved solids in the water formed "tough-skinned bubbles" inside the boiler, which in turn were carried into the steam pipes and could blow off the cylinder heads.
The most typical appliances are as follows:
Small dimples called "poling pockets" at the front and rear corners of the locomotive allowed cars to be pushed on an adjacent track using a pole braced between the locomotive and the cars.
In 2002, a steam locomotive celebration run was organised between Thane and Mumbai to commemorate the 150th year of railways in India.
After this date, no regular steam service took place on the network of the DB until their privatisation in 1994.
The promoters of the Rainhill trials urged that each contender have a proper mechanism for reading the boiler pressure and Stephenson devised a nine-foot vertical tube of mercury with a sight-glass at the top, mounted alongside the chimney, for the Rocket.
* VR V499, Victoria, Australia.
The Polar Express children's book by Chris Van Allsburg, and the animated movie of the same name, have inspired numerous Christmas-themed trips among heritage railroads throughout the United States including the North Pole Express pulled by the Pere Marquette 1225 locomotive, which is operated by the Steam Railroading Institute out of Owosso, Michigan.
In essence, the size of grate and firebox increased without changes to the remainder of the locomotive, requiring the addition of a second axle to the trailing truck.
These locomotives are fueled by burning combustible material—usually coal/coke, wood, or oil—to produce steam in a boiler.
This locomotive was more successful but was scrapped with the dieselisation of the Irish railways.
