''Clermont'' was able to make the  trip in 32 hours.
Other steamships soon followed, and by late 1849, paddle wheel steamships like the SS ''McKim'' (1848) were carrying miners and their supplies the  trip from San Francisco up the extensive Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta to Stockton, California, Marysville, California, Sacramento, etc.
Falling out of favour later on, some of the original boats are still in operation in a few places, such as ''Hjejlen''.
In 1866 ''Mumford'' attempted to ascend the river, but it was only able to reach the Kitsumkalum River.
In October 1811 a ship designed by John Stevens, ''Little Juliana'', would operate as the first steam-powered ferry between Hoboken and New York City.
The first paddle-steamer to make a long ocean voyage was the 320-ton  , built in 1819 expressly for packet ship mail and passenger service to and from Liverpool, England.
In 1736, Jonathan Hulls was granted a patent in England for a Newcomen engine-powered steamboat (using a pulley instead of a beam, and a pawl and ratchet to obtain rotary motion), but it was the improvement in steam engines by James Watt that made the concept feasible.
Many derelict hulks can still be found along the Yukon River.
They were braced internally with a series of built-up longitudinal timbers called "keelsons".
The steamboat was destroyed, the cargo was lost, and the tiny Union escort was run off.
At its first demonstration on 15 July 1783, ''Pyroscaphe'' travelled upstream on the river Saône for some fifteen minutes before the engine failed.
Liberty ships were chosen for mass production because their somewhat obsolete design was relatively simple and their triple expansion piston steam engine components were simple enough that they could be made by several companies that were not highly needed to manufacture other parts.
The ''Clermont'' was nicknamed "Fulton's Folly" by doubters.
It is now moored on the Fraser River as a floating museum in its home port of New Westminster, near Vancouver, BC.
The ship hull design was often based on the clipper ship design with extra bracing to support the loads and strains imposed by the paddle wheels when they encountered rough water.
There are also five steamers as well as some old steamships converted to diesel-powered paddlewheelers on Lake Geneva, two steamers on Lake Zurich and single ones on other lakes.
His steamboat was not a financial success and was shut down after a few months service.
Early attempts at powering a boat by steam were made by the French inventor Denis Papin and the English inventor Thomas Newcomen.
Seeing the great potential of the steam powered-vessels, Vietnamese Emperor Minh Mạng attempted to reproduce a French-made steamboat.
The project was assigned again to Hoàng Văn Lịch and Võ Huy Trinh.
It was the first commercially successful steamboat, transporting passengers along the Hudson River.
In his book ''Life on the Mississippi'', river pilot and author Mark Twain described much of the operation of such vessels.
Steamboats sometimes use the prefix designation '''SS''', '''S.S.'''
These steamships typically concentrated on high value cargo, mail and passengers and only had moderate cargo capabilities because of their required loads of coal.
They were immortalised by the tales of Para Handy's boat ''Vital Spark'' by Neil Munro and by the film ''The Maggie'', and a small number are being conserved to continue in steam around the west highland sea lochs.
or '''S/S''' (for 'Screw Steamer') or '''PS''' (for 'Paddle Steamer'), however these designations are most often used for Steamships.
Robert Fulton and Robert Livingston, who owned extensive land on the Hudson River in New York, met in 1802 and drew up an agreement to construct a steamboat to ply a route between New York City and Albany, New York on the Hudson River.
In Canada, the city of Terrace, British Columbia (BC), celebrates "Riverboat Days" each summer.
Evans got so depressed with the poor protection that the US patent law gave inventors that he eventually took all his engineering drawings and invention ideas and destroyed them to prevent his children wasting their time in court fighting patent infringements.
Built in 1861, this steamboat is running second to the Norwegian Skibladner as the oldest steamship in operation and sails the lake of Julsø near Silkeborg.
Initially, nearly all seagoing steamboats were equipped with mast and sails to supplement the steam engine power and provide power for occasions when the steam engine needed repair or maintenance.
For modern craft operated on rivers, see the Riverboat article.
For fuel, the vessel carried  of coal and 25 cords of wood.
The only remaining overnight cruising steamboat is the 432 passenger ''American Queen'' which operates week-long cruises on the Mississippi, Ohio, Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers 11 months out of the year.
While working in France, he corresponded with and was helped by the Scottish engineer Henry Bell, who may have given him the first model of his working steamboat.
The boat sank, and while Henry made an improved model, he did not appear to have much success, though he may have inspired others.
Most steamboats were destroyed by boiler explosions or fires, and many sank in the river, some to be covered over by silt as the river changed course.
The replica was scrapped in 2008.
The superstructure was reconstructed to the original design and elegance, including the raised roof, wood panelled saloon and open top deck.
As using steam became more reliable, steam power became applied to larger, ocean-going vessels.
The sinking of the paddle steamer  (the ''Ship of Gold'')) in a hurricane on 12 September 1857 and the loss of about $2 million in California gold indirectly led to the Panic of 1857.
They were used on most of the navigable waterways of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, BC (British Columbia) and the Yukon at one time or another, generally being supplanted by the expansion of railroads and roads.
Between the 1849 and 1869 when the First Transcontinental Railroad was completed across the United States about 800,000 travelers had used the Panama route.
Miller sent King Gustav III of Sweden an actual small-scale version,  long, called ''Experiment''.
In addition to this travel time via the Panama route typically had a two- to four-week waiting period to find a ship going from Panama City, Panama to San Francisco before 1850.
Engineer Robert Fourness and his cousin, physician James Ashworth are said to have had a steamboat running between Hull and Beverley, after having been granted British Patent No.
Steamboats were held in such high esteem that they could become state symbols; the Steamboat ''Iowa'' (1838) is incorporated in the Seal of Iowa because it represented speed, power, and progress.
In Denmark, steamboats were a popular means of transportation in earlier times, mostly for recreational purposes.
They would also be involved in major political events, as when Louis Riel seized ''International'' at Fort Garry, or Gabriel Dumont was engaged by ''Northcote'' at Batoche.
The oldest operating steam driven vessel in North America is the .
In 1763 he put it in a boat.
Like their counterparts on the Mississippi and its tributaries, and the vessels on the rivers of California, Idaho, Oregon, Washington and Alaska, the Canadian sternwheelers tended to have fairly short life-spans.
Miller then abandoned the project.
The first commercially successful steamboat in Europe, Henry Bell's ''Comet'' of 1812, started a rapid expansion of steam services on the Firth of Clyde, and within four years a steamer service was in operation on the inland Loch Lomond, a forerunner of the lake steamers still gracing Swiss lakes.
De Jouffroy did not have the funds for this, and, following the events of the French revolution, work on the project was discontinued after he left the country.
Panama City was the Pacific terminus of the Isthmus of Panama trail across Panama.
By 1900 there were over 300 Clyde steamers.
Steam powered tugboats and towboats started working in the San Francisco Bay soon after this to expedite shipping in and out of the bay.
The use of steamboats on major US rivers soon followed Fulton's 1807 success.
River steam boats typically used rear-mounted paddles and had flat bottoms and shallow hulls designed to carry large loads on generally smooth and occasionally shallow rivers.
The simple, versatile, locomotive-style boilers fitted to most sternwheelers after about the 1860s could burn coal, when available in more populated areas like the lakes of the Kootenays and the Okanagan region in southern BC, or wood in the more remote areas, such as the Steamboats of the Yukon River or northern BC.
Further resilience was given to the hulls by a system of "hog rods" or "hog chains" that were fastened into the keelsons and led up and over vertical masts called "hog-posts", and back down again.
At the same time, the expanding steamboat traffic had severe adverse environmental effects, in the Middle Mississippi Valley especially, between St. Louis and the river's confluence with the Ohio.
Papin proposed applying this steam pump to the operation of a paddlewheel boat and tried to market his idea in Britain.
In Austria the paddle-wheeler '''' (250 passengers) of 1871 vintage continues in service on Traunsee.
The boat was successfully tried out on Dalswinton Loch in 1788 and was followed by a larger steamboat the next year.
As the 1800s progressed the timber and lumber needed to make wooden ships got ever more expensive and the iron plate needed for iron ship construction got much cheaper as the massive iron works at Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, for example, got ever more efficient.
They were used to haul supplies, track and other materials to construction camps.
The Civil War in the West was fought to control major rivers, especially the Mississippi and Tennessee Rivers using paddlewheelers.
The first sea-going steamboat was Richard Wright's first steamboat "Experiment", an ex-French lugger; she steamed from Leeds to Yarmouth, arriving Yarmouth 19 July 1813.
On Monday, August 17, 1807, the memorable first voyage of the ''Clermont'' up the Hudson River was begun.
It has been carefully restored and is on display in the village of Kaslo, where it acts as a tourist attraction right next to information centre in downtown Kaslo.
The former agreement had partitioned northern Hudson River traffic to Livingston and southern to Stevens, agreeing to use ships designed by Stevens for both operations.
The trip to and from California via Panama and paddle wheeled steamers could be done, if there were no waits for shipping, in about 40 days—over 100 days less than by wagon or 160 days less than a trip around Cape Horn.
Another 411 were damaged by fire, explosions or ice during that period.
This ship sails a full season of cruises every year from places around Britain, and has sailed across the English Channel for a visit to commemorate the sinking of her predecessor, built in 1899, at the Battle of Dunkirk in 1940.
Similar boats were made in 1785 by John Fitch in Philadelphia and William Symington in Dumfries, Scotland.
The SL (steam launch) ''Nuneham'' is a genuine Victorian steamer built in 1898, and operated on the non-tidal upper Thames by the Thames Steam Packet Boat Company.
The Allaire Iron Works of New York supplied ''Savannah's'' engine cylinder, while the rest of the engine components and running gear were manufactured by the Speedwell Ironworks of New Jersey.
In 1818, Ferdinando I, the first Italian steamboat, left the port of Naples, where it had been built.
It was 1850 before enough paddle wheel steamers were available in the Atlantic and Pacific routes to establish regularly scheduled journeys.
For most of the 19th century and part of the early 20th century, trade on the Mississippi River was dominated by paddle-wheel steamboats.
1640 of March 1788 for a "new invented machine for working, towing, expediting and facilitating the voyage of ships, sloops and barges and other vessels upon the water".
By 1848 steamboats built by both United States and British shipbuilders were already in use for mail and passenger service across the Atlantic Ocean—a  journey.
The first test in 1838 was a failure as the boiler was broken.
Encouraged by the success, Minh Mạng ordered the engineers to study and develop steam engines and steamers to equip his naval fleets.
to get about  closer to the gold fields.
The first steam-powered ship ''Pyroscaphe'' was a paddle steamer powered by a Newcomen steam engine; it was built in France in 1783 by Marquis Claude de Jouffroy and his colleagues as an improvement of an earlier attempt, the 1776 ''Palmipède''.
About 20-30% of the California Argonauts are thought to have returned to their homes, mostly on the East Coast of the United States via Panama—the fastest way home.
The American, Robert Fulton, was present at the trials of the ''Charlotte Dundas'' and was intrigued by the potential of the steamboat.
Only a few were going all the way to California.
The ''USS Cairo'' is a survivor of the Vicksburg battle.
She left New York well before confirmed word of the California Gold Rush had reached the East Coast.
Fitch later built a larger vessel that carried passengers and freight between Philadelphia and Burlington, New Jersey on the Delaware.
Most of the roughly $50,000,000 of gold found each year in California were shipped East via the Panama route on paddle steamers, mule trains and canoes and later the Panama Railroad across Panama.
He later obtained a Watt steam engine, shipped to America where his first proper steamship was built in 1807, ''North River Steamboat'' (later known as ''Clermont''), which carried passengers between New York City and Albany, New York.
The Philadelphia Board of Health was concerned with the problem of dredging and cleaning the city's dockyards, and in 1805 Evans convinced them to contract with him for a steam-powered dredge which he called the ''Oruktor Amphibolos''.
While the SS ''Sicamous'' and SS ''Naramata'' (steam tug & icebreaker) built by the CPR at Okanagan Landing on Okanagan Lake in 1914 have been preserved in Penticton at the south end of Okanagan Lake.
The SS California (1848), the first Pacific Mail Steamship Company paddle wheel steamship, left New York City on 6 October 1848 with only a partial load of her about 60 saloon (about $300 fare) and 150 steerage (about $150 fare) passenger capacity.
For more information, see Steamboats of the Skeena River.
The term ''steamboat'' is used to refer to smaller, insular, steam-powered boats working on lakes and rivers, particularly riverboats.
The  trip to or from San Francisco to Panama City could be done by paddle wheel steamer in about three weeks.
SL ''Nuneham'' was built at Port Brimscombe on the Thames and Severn Canal by Edwin Clarke.
He designed an improved high-pressure steam engine in 1801 but did not build it (patented 1804).
The paddle steamer ''Waverley'', built in 1947, is the last survivor of these fleets, and the last seagoing paddle steamer in the world.
Swiss lakes are home of a number of large steamships.
(See also: Maritime history of California for many more examples of steam ships.)
The task supervisor was chained and two officials Nguyễn Trung Mậu, Ngô Kim Lân from the Ministry of Construction were jailed for false report.
By 1849 the screw propeller had been invented and was slowly being introduced as iron increasingly was used in ship construction and the stress introduced by propellers could be compensated for.
Trade on the river was suspended for two years because of a Confederate's Mississippi blockade before the union victory at Vicksburg reopened the river on July 4, 1863.
Sternwheelers were an instrumental transportation technology in the development of Western Canada.
The loss did not affect the Union war effort, however.
The crowd were pleased with what they saw, but Symington wanted to make improvements and another more ambitious trial was made on March 28.
Built on the banks of the Skeena River, the city depended on the steamboat for transportation and trade into the 20th century.
Evans's high-pressure steam engine had a much higher power to weight ratio, making it practical to apply it in locomotives and steamboats.
Their success led to penetration deep into the continent, where ''Anson Northup'' in 1859 became first steamer to cross the Canada–US border on the Red River.
In the Yukon, two vessels are preserved: the  in Whitehorse and the  in Dawson City.
Ship building was given a high priority for steel and other needed components as the German U-boats till 1944 sunk more ships than could be built by all the shipyards in the United States.
The replacement, built ''in situ'' was not a steamboat.
From 1844 through 1857, luxurious palace steamers carried passengers and cargo around the North American Great Lakes.
There were basically three different types of ships being used: standard sailing ships of several different types, Clippers, and paddle steamers with paddles mounted on the side or rear.
Until the arrival of railways from 1838 onwards, steamers steadily took over the role of the many sail and rowed ferries, with at least 80 ferries by 1830 with routes from London to Gravesend and Margate, and upstream to Richmond.
Today the 1900 steamer  still sails on Loch Katrine, while on Loch Lomond PS ''Maid of the Loch'' is being restored, and in the English Lakes the oldest operating passenger yacht, SY ''Gondola'' (built 1859, rebuilt 1979), sails daily during the summer season on Coniston Water.
The Battle of Vicksburg involved monitors and ironclad riverboats.
She runs a Skinner Marine Unaflow 4-cylinder reciprocating steam engine as her power plant.
In the second test two months later, the engine performed greatly.
Five major commercial steamboats currently operate on the inland waterways of the United States.
The first sailing was on the canal in Glasgow on 4 January 1803, with Lord Dundas and a few of his relatives and friends on board.
In 1817 a consortium in Sackets Harbor, New York funded the construction of the first US steamboat, ''Ontario'', to run on Lake Ontario and the Great Lakes, beginning the growth of lake commercial and passenger traffic.
SL Nuneham was entered back into service by French Brothers Ltd, but trading as the Thames Steam Packet Boat Company.
As the passenger, mail and high value freight business to and from California boomed more and more paddle steamers were brought into service—eleven by the Pacific Mail Steamship Company alone.
Great Lakes passenger steamers reached their zenith during the century from 1850 to 1950.
The era of the steamboat began in Philadelphia in 1787 when John Fitch (1743-1798) made the first successful trial of a 45-foot (14-meter) steamboat on the Delaware River on August 22, 1787, in the presence of members of the United States Constitutional Convention.
Most used the Panama or Nicaragua route till 1855 when the completion of the Panama Railroad made the Panama Route much easier, faster and more reliable.
Presumably this was easily repaired as the boat is said to have made several such journeys.
A '''steamboat''' is a boat in which the primary method of marine propulsion is steam power, typically driving propellers or paddlewheels.
One of the few surviving Mississippi sternwheelers from this period, ''Julius C. Wilkie'', was operated as a museum ship at Winona, Minnesota until its destruction in a fire in 1981.
The battle was a part of the effort of the Confederate States of America to break the Union Naval blockade, which had cut off Virginia from all international trade.
The trips by paddle wheel steamship to Panama and Nicaragua from New York, Philadelphia, Boston, via New Orleans and Havana were about  long and took about two weeks.
However, his successor could not maintain the industry due to financial problems, worsened by many years of social unrest under his rule.
At the end of Minh Mạng 's reign there were 3 steamers produced named ''Yến Phi, Vân Phi and Vụ Phi''.
The ''Moyie'' is the world's oldest intact stern wheeler.
In 1811 the first in a continuous (still in commercial passenger operation ) line of river steamboats left the dock at Pittsburgh to steam down the Ohio River to the Mississippi and on to New Orleans.
The 1912 steamer TSS ''Earnslaw'' still makes regular sight-seeing trips across Lake Wakatipu, an alpine lake near Queenstown, New Zealand.
On Lake Lucerne, five paddle steamers are still in service: '''' (built in 1901, 800 passengers), '''' (1902, 800 passengers), '''' (1906, 900 passengers), '''' (1913, 900 passengers, fastest paddle-wheeler on European lakes) and '''' (1928, 1200 passengers, last steamship built for a Swiss lake).
The Emperor rewarded the two handsomely.
Kaiser had still other yards in Washington (state) and other states.
Since paddle steamers typically required from  of coal per day to keep their engines running, they were more expensive to run.
It was built in Scotland in 1887 to cruise the Muskoka Lakes, District of Muskoka, Ontario, Canada.
A number of other steamers were built around the turn of the 20th century, in part due to the growing fish industry and the gold rush.
The typical paddle wheel steamship was powered by a coal burning engine that required firemen to shovel the coal to the burners.
Meanwhile, Patrick Miller of Dalswinton, near Dumfries, Scotland, had developed double-hulled boats propelled by manually cranked paddle wheels placed between the hulls, even attempting to interest various European governments in a giant warship version,  long.
Fitch successfully trialled his boat in 1787, and in 1788, he began operating a regular commercial service along the Delaware River between Philadelphia and Burlington, New Jersey, carrying as many as 30 passengers.
By 1835, the Diamond Steam Packet Company, one of several popular companies, reported that it had carried over 250,000 passengers in the year.
The worst of all steamboat accidents occurred at the end of the Civil War in April 1865, when the steamboat ''Sultana'', carrying an over-capacity load of returning Union soldiers recently freed from a Confederate prison camp, blew up, causing more than 1,700 deaths.
On 22 May 1819, the watch on the ''Savannah'' sighted Ireland after 23&nbsp;days at sea.
In the more mountainous and remote areas of the Yukon and BC, working sternwheelers lived on well into the 20th century.
Following this, De Jouffroy attempted to get the government interested in his work, but for political reasons was instructed that he would have to build another version on the Seine in Paris.
This boat could typically make  and traveled more than  during its short length of service.
Starting in 1848 Congress subsidized the Pacific Mail Steamship Company with $199,999 to set up regular packet ship, mail, passenger and cargo routes in the Pacific Ocean.
The ''SS California '' had made the trip from Panama and Mexico after steaming around Cape Horn from New York—see SS California (1848).
Three similar iron steamers followed within a few years.
During World War II Kaiser Richmond Shipyards, Richmond, California (a Kaiser facility) had four Richmond Shipyards, located in the city of Richmond, California and another shipyard in Los Angeles.
Over a number of years French Brothers carefully restored the launch to its former specification.
Many of these fine craft were saved from destruction when steam went out of fashion and are now part of the collection at Windermere Steamboat Museum.
The fifth in a line of Fraser River snagpullers, the ''Samson V'' has engines, paddlewheel and other components that were passed down from the ''Samson II'' of 1914.
The ship's wrought-iron paddlewheels were 16 feet in diameter with eight buckets per wheel.
Steamboats also operated on the Red River to Shreveport, Louisiana, after Captain Henry Miller Shreve broke the previous log jam on the river.
The original Sissons triple-expansion steam engine was removed in the 1960s and replaced with a diesel engine.
A steamboat was described and patented by English physician John Allen in 1729.
During the US Civil War the Battle of Hampton Roads, often referred to as either the Battle of the ''Monitor'' and ''Merrimack'' or the ''Battle of Ironclads'', was fought over two days with steam powered ironclad warships, March 8–9, 1862.
He was unable to successfully convert the piston motion into rotary motion and the steam could not produce enough pressure.
The ''Margery'', launched in Dumbarton in 1814, was the first steamboat to be seen on the River Thames in January 1815, much to the amazement of Londoners, and operated a London to Gravesend river service until 1816 when she was bought by the French and became the first steamboat to cross the Channel, reaching Paris and inaugurating a Seine steamboat service under her new name Elise.
From 1811 to 1899, 156 steamboats were lost to snags or rocks between St. Louis and the Ohio River.
It was not until 1891 Hudson's Bay Company sternwheeler ''Caledonia'' successfully negotiated Kitselas Canyon and reached Hazelton.
The  picked up more passengers in Valparaiso, Chile and Panama City, Panama and showed up in San Francisco, loaded with about 400 passengers—twice the passengers it had been designed for—on 28 February 1849.
The design was a modification of Stevens' prior paddle steamer ''The Phoenix'', the first steamship to successfully navigate the open ocean in its route from Hoboken to Philadelphia.
Henry Bell's PS ''Comet'' of 1812 inaugurated a passenger service along the River Clyde in Scotland.
Because of their shallow, flat-bottomed construction (the Canadian examples of the western river sternwheeler generally needed less than three feet of water to float in), they could nose up almost anywhere along a riverbank to pick up or drop off passengers and freight.
The first steamer to enter the Skeena was ''Union'' in 1864.
Miller then engaged engineer William Symington to build his patent steam engine that drove a stern-mounted paddle wheel in a boat in 1785.
Steamboat traffic including passenger and freight business grew exponentially in the decades before the Civil War.
On the Clyde itself, within ten years of ''Comet's'' start in 1812 there were nearly fifty steamers, and services had started across the Irish Sea to Belfast and on many British estuaries.
Only the Union had them (the Confederacy captured a few, but were unable to use them.)
Their use generated rapid development of economies of port cities; the exploitation of agricultural and commodity products, which could be more easily transported to markets; and prosperity along the major rivers.
From 1850 to the early decades of the 20th century Windermere, in the English Lakes, was home to many elegant steam launches.
They were run by Kaiser-Permanente Metals and Kaiser Shipyards.
There are few genuine steamboats left on the River Thames; however, a handful remain.
Sternwheelers would also prove vital to the construction of the railroads that eventually replaced them.
They were used for private parties, watching the yacht races or, in one instance, commuting to work, via the rail connection to Barrow in Furness.
After 1855 when the Panama Railroad was completed the Panama Route was by far the quickest and easiest way to get to or from California from the East Coast of the U.S. or Europe.
The first steamboat to be constructed of iron, the ''Aaron Manby'' was laid down in the Horseley Ironworks in Staffordshire in 1821 and launched at the Surrey Docks in Rotherhithe.
Most California bound merchandise still used the slower but cheaper Cape Horn sailing ship route.
In the mid-1840s the acquisition of Oregon and California opened up the West Coast to American steamboat traffic.
He designed his own steamboat which sailed along the River Seine in 1803.
Ocean-going paddle steamers typically used side-wheeled paddles and used narrower, deeper hulls designed to travel in the often stormy weather encountered at sea.
It is berthed at Runnymede.
By the 1840s the ocean-going steam ship industry was well established as the Cunard Line and others demonstrated.
The Ambush of the steamboat J. R. Williams, which was carrying supplies from Fort Smith to Fort Gibson along the Arkansas River on July 16, 1863 demonstrated this.
William Henry of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, having learned of Watt's engine on a visit to England, made his own engine.
