The adoption of compounding was common for industrial units, for road engines and almost universal for marine engines after 1880; it was not universally popular in railway locomotives where it was often perceived as complicated.
Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont received patents in 1606 for fifty steam powered inventions, including a water pump for draining inundated mines.
The cycle is an arrangement of components as is typically used for simple power production, and utilizes the phase change of water (boiling water producing steam, condensing exhaust steam, producing liquid water)) to provide a practical heat/power conversion system.
The Quasiturbine is a new type of uniflow rotary steam engine.
These engines are mainly used in toys and models, because of their simplicity, but have also been used in full size working engines, mainly on ships where their compactness is valued.
Normally water is the fluid of choice due to its favourable properties, such as non-toxic and unreactive chemistry, abundance, low cost, and its thermodynamic properties.
In all cases, the steam plant water, which must be kept pure, is kept separate from the cooling water or air, and once the low pressure steam condenses into water, it is returned to the boiler.
They were eventually replaced in these niche applications by steam turbines.
A modern large electrical power station (producing several hundred megawatts of electrical output) with steam reheat, economizer etc.
Water that had passed over the wheel was pumped back up into a storage reservoir above the wheel.
Where CHP is not used, steam turbines in stationary power plants use surface condensers as a cold sink.
The efficiency of a Rankine cycle is usually limited by the working fluid.
The company Energiprojekt AB in Sweden has made progress in using modern materials for harnessing the power of steam.
The rotors have a propeller-like arrangement of blades at the outer edge.
Land-based steam engines could exhaust much of their steam, as feed water was usually readily available.
Virtually all nuclear power plants generate electricity by heating water to provide steam that drives a turbine connected to an electrical generator.
In the vast majority of large electric generating stations, turbines are directly connected to generators with no reduction gearing.
See: Mechanical stoker
In a simple engine, the charge of steam passes through only one cylinder.
The condensers are cooled by water flow from oceans, rivers, lakes, and often by cooling towers which evaporate water to provide cooling energy removal.
When the double expansion group is duplicated, producing a four-cylinder compound, the individual pistons within the group are usually balanced at 180°, the groups being set at 90° to each other.
Nuclear-powered ships and submarines either use a steam turbine directly for main propulsion, with generators providing auxiliary power, or else employ turbo-electric transmission, where the steam drives a turbo generator set with propulsion provided by electric motors.
Thus, they produce smoother rotational forces on the output shaft.
Instead of valves, the entire cylinder rocks, or oscillates, such that one or more holes in the cylinder line up with holes in a fixed port face or in the pivot mounting (trunnion).
Once turned to steam, many boilers raise the temperature of the steam further, turning 'wet steam' into 'superheated steam'.
It was found that steam turbines were not ideally suited to the railroad environment and these locomotives failed to oust the classic reciprocating steam unit in the way that modern diesel and electric traction has done.
It is a single-step, 5-cylinder engine (no compound) with superheated steam and consumes approx.
Today most electric power is provided by steam turbines.
In 1825 George Stephenson built the ''Locomotion'' for the Stockton and Darlington Railway.
The drop in pressure immediately boils some of the water and the steam leaves through a nozzle, creating a propulsive force.
Newcomen's and Watt's early engines were "atmospheric".
The image to the right shows an animation of a triple expansion engine.
will achieve efficiency in the mid 40% range, with the most efficient units approaching 50% thermal efficiency.
Shortly after Watt's patent expired in 1800, Richard Trevithick and, separately, Oliver Evans in 1801 introduced engines using high-pressure steam; Trevithick obtained his high-pressure engine patent in 1802, and Evans had made several working models before then.
The efficiency of Energiprojekt's steam engine reaches some 27-30% on high-pressure engines.
Most however have a reversing mechanism which additionally can provide means for saving steam as speed and momentum are gained by gradually "shortening the cutoff" or rather, shortening the admission event; this in turn proportionately lengthens the expansion period.
The acme of the horizontal engine was the Corliss steam engine, patented in 1849, which was a four-valve counter flow engine with separate steam admission and exhaust valves and automatic variable steam cutoff.
This expedient has since been generally considered satisfactory for most purposes and makes possible the use of the simpler Stephenson, Joy and Walschaerts motions.
It is also possible to capture the waste heat using cogeneration in which the waste heat is used for heating a lower boiling point working fluid or as a heat source for district heating via saturated low-pressure steam.
The Cornish engine had irregular motion and torque though the cycle, limiting it mainly to pumping.
No heat engine can be more efficient than the Carnot cycle, in which heat is moved from a high temperature reservoir to one at a low temperature, and the efficiency depends on the temperature difference.
Although the reciprocating steam engine is no longer in widespread commercial use, various companies are exploring or exploiting the potential of the engine as an alternative to internal combustion engines.
This progress was dampened by legislation which limited or prohibited the use of steam powered vehicles on roads.
See image of indicator diagram below (in ''Types of motor units'' section).
When Corliss was given the Rumford Medal, the committee said that "no one invention since Watt's time has so enhanced the efficiency of the steam engine".
Reciprocating piston type steam engines remained the dominant source of power until the early 20th century, when advances in the design of electric motors and internal combustion engines gradually resulted in the replacement of reciprocating (piston) steam engines in commercial usage, and the ascendancy of steam turbines in power generation.
Elsewhere, notably in the U.S.A., more advanced designs with electric transmission were built experimentally, but not reproduced.
Trevithick visited the Newcastle area later in 1804 and the colliery railways in north-east England became the leading centre for experimentation and development of steam locomotives.
Mercury is the working fluid in the mercury vapor turbine.
* '''James Watt''', in 1781, patented a steam engine that produced continued rotary motion with a power of about .
However, as one and the same valve usually controls both steam flows, a short cutoff at admission adversely affects the exhaust and compression periods which should ideally always be kept fairly constant; if the exhaust event is too brief, the totality of the exhaust steam cannot evacuate the cylinder, choking it and giving excessive compression (''"kick back"'').
Steam road vehicles were used for many applications.
Compound engines exhausted steam in to successively larger cylinders to accommodate the higher volumes at reduced pressures, giving improved efficiency.
As steam expands in passing through a high-pressure engine, its temperature drops because no heat is being added to the system; this is known as adiabatic expansion and results in steam entering the cylinder at high temperature and leaving at lower temperature.
Corliss, and later, poppet valve gears had separate admission and exhaust valves driven by trip mechanisms or cams profiled so as to give ideal events; most of these gears never succeeded outside of the stationary marketplace due to various other issues including leakage and more delicate mechanisms.
For the greatest efficiency, steam engines should be operated at the highest steam temperature possible (superheated steam), and release the waste heat at the lowest temperature possible.
Therefore, the bore, and often the stroke, are increased in low-pressure cylinders resulting in larger cylinders.
Recent concerns about fuel sources and pollution have incited a renewed interest in steam both as a component of cogeneration processes and as a prime mover.
Many of these vehicles were acquired by enthusiasts for preservation, and numerous examples are still in existence.
It was employed for draining mine workings at depths hitherto impossible, and also for providing a reusable water supply for driving waterwheels at factories sited away from a suitable "head".
These "motor units" are often called 'steam engines' in their own right.
The history of the steam engine stretches back as far as the first century AD; the first recorded rudimentary steam engine being the aeolipile described by Greek mathematician Hero of Alexandria.
* buildup of sediment and scale which cause local hot spots, especially in riverboats using dirty feed water
As with the double expansion engine, if space is at a premium, then two smaller cylinders may be used for the low-pressure stage.
In the cycle, water is heated and transforms into steam within a boiler operating at a high pressure.
This allowed the crankshaft to be better balanced, resulting in a smoother, faster-responding engine which ran with less vibration.
Pumping the working fluid in liquid form during the cycle requires a small fraction of the energy to transport it compared to the energy needed to compress the working fluid in gaseous form in a compressor (as in the Carnot cycle).
Steam turbines are generally more efficient than reciprocating piston type steam engines (for outputs above several hundred horsepower), have fewer moving parts, and provide rotary power directly instead of through a connecting rod system or similar means.
It was a ''fire engine'', a kind of thermic syphon, in which steam was admitted to an empty container and then condensed.
Thomas Newcomen's ''atmospheric engine'' was the first commercial true steam engine using a piston, and was used in 1712 for pumping in a mine.
The engine indicator can also be used on internal combustion engines.
Early Watt engines equipped with high-pressure steam improved this to 65 million.
The historical measure of a steam engine's energy efficiency was its "duty".
In addition to using 30% less steam, it provided more uniform speed due to variable steam cut off, making it well suited to manufacturing, especially cotton spinning.
Their use in agriculture led to an increase in the land available for cultivation.
Steam turbines provide direct rotational force and therefore do not require a linkage mechanism to convert reciprocating to rotary motion.
It was an improvement of Newcomen’s engine.
The final major evolution of the steam engine design was the use of steam turbines starting in the late part of the 19th century.
In more modern times there has been limited use of steam for rocketry – particularly for rocket cars.
Steam rocketry works by filling a pressure vessel with hot water at high pressure and opening a valve leading to a suitable nozzle.
Lead fusible plugs may be present in the crown of the boiler's firebox.
The cycle of a reciprocating steam engine differs from that of turbines because of condensation and re-evaporation occurring in the cylinder or in the steam inlet passages.
It is a logical extension of the compound engine (described above) to split the expansion into yet more stages to increase efficiency.
Watt's ten-horsepower engines enabled a wide range of manufacturing machinery to be powered.
Steam engines can be said to have been the moving force behind the Industrial Revolution and saw widespread commercial use driving machinery in factories, mills and mines; powering pumping stations; and propelling transport appliances such as railway locomotives, ships, steamboats and road vehicles.
Early versions were in use by 1851, but the most successful indicator was developed for the high speed engine inventor and manufacturer Charles Porter by Charles Richard and exhibited at London Exhibition in 1862.
The centrifugal governor was adopted by James Watt for use on a steam engine in 1788 after Watt’s partner Boulton saw one on the equipment of a flour mill Boulton & Watt were building.
Improvements in vehicle technology continued from the 1860s to the 1920s.
The Cornish engine was developed by Trevithick and others in the 1810s.
The stages of a steam turbine are typically arranged to extract the maximum potential work from a specific velocity and pressure of steam, giving rise to a series of variably sized high- and low-pressure stages.
The complete engine cycle occupies one rotation of the crank and two piston strokes; the cycle also comprises four ''events'' – admission, expansion, exhaust, compression.
At first it powered reciprocating pumps, but from the 1780s rotative engines (those converting reciprocating motion into rotary motion) began to appear, driving factory machinery such as spinning mules and power looms.
Steam acts upon these blades, producing rotary motion.
Injectors became popular in the 1850s but are no longer widely used, except in applications such as steam locomotives.
The Spanish inventor Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont obtained the first patent for a steam engine in 1606.
It is the pressurization of the water that circulates through the steam boiler that allows the water to be raised to temperatures well above 100 °C boiling point of water at one atmospheric pressure, and by that means to increase the efficiency of the steam cycle.
The vacuum thus created was used to suck water from the sump at the bottom of the mine.
In the compound engine, high-pressure steam from the boiler expands in a '''high-pressure (HP) cylinder''' and then enters one or more subsequent '''lower-pressure (LP) cylinders'''.
As the stroke of a single cylinder engine is increased in an effort to extract more work from the steam with each stroke, a greater amount of cylinder wall is exposed and more heat is lost, resulting in decreased efficiency of a long stroke engine.
Two-cylinder compounds can be arranged as:
Watt was also aware of the change in the boiling point of water with pressure.
When expanded through pistons or turbines, mechanical work is done.
The engine cylinders had to be large because the only usable force acting on them was due to atmospheric pressure.
The atmospheric engines of Newcomen and Watt were large compared to the amount of power they produced, but high pressure steam engines were light enough to be applied to vehicles such as traction engines and the railway locomotives.
The aim of the uniflow is to remedy this defect and improve efficiency by providing an additional port uncovered by the piston at the end of each stroke making the steam flow only in one direction.
It was the first type of steam engine to make use of steam at a pressure just above atmospheric to drive the piston helped by a partial vacuum.
Prior to and during World War I, the expansion engine dominated marine applications where high vessel speed was not essential.
Cornish engines were used in mines and for water supply until the late 19th century.
Another means of supplying lower-pressure boiler feed water is an injector, which uses a steam jet usually supplied from the boiler.
A steam turbine consists of one or more ''rotors'' (rotating discs) mounted on a drive shaft, alternating with a series of ''stators'' (static discs) fixed to the turbine casing.
Waste heat can also be ejected by evaporative (wet) cooling towers use pass the rejected to external water cycle that evaporates some of flow to the air.
The design incorporated a number of important innovations that included using high-pressure steam which reduced the weight of the engine and increased its efficiency.
The first half of the 19th century saw great progress in steam vehicle design, and by the 1850s it was becoming viable to produce them on a commercial basis.
Therefore, a reversing stage or gearbox is usually required where power is required in the opposite direction.
Denis Papin, a Huguenot refugee, did some useful work on the steam digester in 1679, and first used a piston to raise weights in 1690.
In one case (the first type of Vauclain compound), the pistons worked in the same phase driving a common crosshead and crank, again set at 90° as for a two-cylinder engine.
The experimental measurements made by Watt on a model steam engine led to the development of the separate condenser.
The engine used two heavy pistons to provide motion to a water pump.
Speed control was either automatic, using a governor, or by a manual valve.
One engine was still known to be operating in 1820.
The simplest valve gears give events of fixed length during the engine cycle and often make the engine rotate in only one direction.
This was the first public steam railway in the world and then in 1829, he built ''The Rocket'' which was entered in and won the Rainhill Trials.
It was routinely used by engineers, mechanics and insurance inspectors.
Steam turbines virtually replaced reciprocating engines in electricity generating stations early in the 20th century, where their efficiency, higher speed appropriate to generator service, and smooth rotation were advantages.
While variations in standards may exist in different countries, stringent legal, testing, training, care with manufacture, operation and certification is applied to ensure safety.
Boulton and Watt's early engines used half as much coal as John Smeaton's improved version of Newcomen's.
Steam escapes and boiler explosions (typically BLEVEs) can and have in the past caused great loss of life.
His steam locomotive used interior bladed wheels guided by rails or tracks.
The first commercially successful true engine, in that it could generate power and transmit it to a machine, was the atmospheric engine, invented by Thomas Newcomen around 1712.
The Liverpool and Manchester Railway opened in 1830 making exclusive use of steam power for both passenger and freight trains.
Turbines are only efficient if they rotate at relatively high speed, therefore they are usually connected to reduction gearing to drive lower speed applications, such as a ship's propeller.
These stages were called expansions, with double and triple expansion engines being common, especially in shipping where efficiency was important to reduce the weight of coal carried.
The Quasiturbine is a uniflow rotary steam engine where steam intakes in hot areas, while exhausting in cold areas.
The weight of boilers and condensers generally makes the power-to-weight ratio of a steam plant lower than for internal combustion engines.
This use of superheating avoids the steam condensing within the engine, and allows significantly greater efficiency.
This causes a cycle of heating and cooling of the cylinder with every stroke, which is a source of inefficiency.
Their engines were therefore arranged with the piston axis vertical.
Typical speeds are 3600 revolutions per minute (RPM) in the USA with 60 Hertz power, and 3000 RPM in Europe and other countries with 50 Hertz electric power systems.
In the United States 90% of the electric power is produced in this way using a variety of heat sources.
The governor was able to handle smaller variations such as those caused by fluctuating heat load to the boiler.
Such safety valves traditionally used a simple lever to restrain a plug valve in the top of a boiler.
However, the arrival of electricity on the scene, and the obvious advantages of driving a dynamo directly from a high-speed engine, led to something of a revival in interest in the 1880s and 1890s, and a few designs had some limited success..
With the three-cylinder compound arrangement, the LP cranks were either set at 90° with the HP one at 135° to the other two, or in some cases all three cranks were set at 120°.
Considering that the great majority of worldwide electric generation is produced by turbine type steam engines, the "steam age" is continuing with energy levels far beyond those of the turn of the 19th century.
* escape of steam from pipework/boiler causing scalding
* '''Tandem compounds''': The cylinders are end to end, driving a common connecting rod
By the 1840s, it was clear that the concept had inherent problems and rotary engines were treated with some derision in the technical press.
Evaporative cooling towers need less water flow than "once-through" cooling by river or lake water; a 700 megawatt coal-fired power plant may use about 3600 cubic metres of make-up water every hour for evaporative cooling, but would need about twenty times as much if cooled by river water.
The Rankine cycle is used in virtually all steam power production applications.
A steam turbine often exhausts into a surface condenser that provides a vacuum.
The "fire engine" was not very effective and could not work beyond a limited depth of around .
Of the few designs that were manufactured in quantity, those of the Hult Brothers Rotary Steam Engine Company of Stockholm, Sweden, and the spherical engine of Beauchamp Tower are notable.
The more recent type of safety valve uses an adjustable spring-loaded valve, which is locked such that operators may not tamper with its adjustment unless a seal illegally is broken.
However, the thermal expansion gradient uniflow engines produce along the cylinder wall gives practical difficulties..
Watt's original low-pressure designs were able to deliver duty as high as 25 million, but averaged about 17.
Uniflow engines attempt to remedy the difficulties arising from the usual counterflow cycle where, during each stroke, the port and the cylinder walls will be cooled by the passing exhaust steam, whilst the hotter incoming admission steam will waste some of its energy in restoring working temperature.
The two pistons shared a common four way rotary valve connected directly to a steam boiler.
Multiple expansion engines typically had the cylinders arranged inline, but various other formations were used.
One end of the lever carried a weight or spring that restrained the valve against steam pressure.
Early valves could be adjusted by engine drivers, leading to many accidents when a driver fastened the valve down to allow greater steam pressure and more power from the engine.
The usual compromise solution has been to provide ''lap'' by lengthening rubbing surfaces of the valve in such a way as to overlap the port on the admission side, with the effect that the exhaust side remains open for a longer period after cut-off on the admission side has occurred.
A rudimentary steam turbine device was described by Taqi al-Din in 1551 and by Giovanni Branca in 1629.
The benefit of this is lost somewhat due to the lower heat addition temperature.
Double expansion (usually known as '''compound''') engines expanded the steam in two stages.
The Rankine cycle is the fundamental thermodynamic underpinning of the steam engine.
Engines equipped with a condenser are a separate type than those that exhaust to the atmosphere.
Such engines use either three or four expansion stages and are known as ''triple'' and ''quadruple expansion engines'' respectively.
These were much more powerful for a given cylinder size than previous engines and could be made small enough for transport applications.
The major problem is the difficulty of sealing the rotors to make them steam-tight in the face of wear and thermal expansion; the resulting leakage made them very inefficient.
The above effects are further enhanced by providing ''lead'': as was later discovered with the internal combustion engine, it has been found advantageous since the late 1830s to advance the admission phase, giving the valve ''lead'' so that admission occurs a little before the end of the exhaust stroke in order to fill the ''clearance volume'' comprising the ports and the cylinder ends (not part of the piston-swept volume) before the steam begins to exert effort on the piston.
The valve chest for each of the cylinders is to the left of the corresponding cylinder.
It was an improvement over Savery's steam pump, using a piston as proposed by Papin.
In practice, a steam engine exhausting the steam to atmosphere will typically have an efficiency (including the boiler) in the range of 1-10%, but with the addition of a condenser and multiple expansion, and high steam pressure/temperature, it may be greatly improved, historically into the regime of 10-20%, and very rarely slightly higher.
The widely used reciprocating engine typically consisted of a cast iron cylinder, piston, connecting rod and beam or a crank and flywheel, and miscellaneous linkages.
* '''Richard Trevithick''', It was only after the invention of the lightweight, high pressure, steam engine by Richard Trevithick, in 1797-1799 that steam engines became small enough to be used in smaller businesses and for use in Steam locomotives.
This gives a theoretical Carnot efficiency of about 63% compared with an actual efficiency of 42% for a modern coal-fired power station.
At the turn of the 19th century, steam-powered transport on both sea and land began to make its appearance, becoming more dominant as the century progressed.
* '''Thomas Savery''', in 1698, patented the first practical, atmospheric pressure, steam engine of .
The plugs are also too small in area to lower steam pressure significantly, depressurizing the boiler.
Steam locomotives continued to be manufactured until the late twentieth century in places such as China and the former East Germany (where the DR Class 52.80 was produced).
The working fluid in a Rankine cycle can operate as a closed loop system, where the working fluid is recycled continuously, or may be an "open loop" system, where the exhaust steam is directly released to the atmosphere, and a separate source of water feeding the boiler is supplied.
With two-cylinder compounds used in railway work, the pistons are connected to the cranks as with a two-cylinder simple at 90° out of phase with each other (''quartered'').
The reduced-pressure steam is then condensed and pumped back into the boiler.
The steam engine indicator traces on paper the pressure in the cylinder throughout the cycle, which can be used to spot various problems and calculate developed horsepower.
Non-combustion heat sources such as solar power, nuclear power or geothermal energy may be used.
The complete expansion of the steam now occurs across multiple cylinders and as less cylinder wall is exposed, per unit volume of steam in each cylinder, less heat is lost by the steam in each.
By 1883, engines that could provide 10,000&nbsp;hp had become feasible.
The stationary steam engine was a key component of the Industrial Revolution, allowing factories to locate where water power was unavailable.
This low turbine entry temperature (compared with a gas turbine) is why the Rankine cycle is often used as a bottoming cycle in combined-cycle gas turbine power stations.
As the development of steam engines progressed through the 18th century, various attempts were made to apply them to road and railway use.
Early builders of stationary steam engines considered that horizontal cylinders would be subject to excessive wear.
In 1720 Jacob Leupold described a two-cylinder high-pressure steam engine.
such as railway steam locomotives and portable engines, or may refer to the piston or turbine machinery alone, as in the beam engine and stationary steam engine.
In the 1840s and 50s, there were attempts to overcome this problem by means of various patent valve gears with a separate, variable cutoff expansion valve riding on the back of the main slide valve; the latter usually had fixed or limited cutoff.
One of the principal advantages the Rankine cycle holds over others is that during the compression stage relatively little work is required to drive the pump, the working fluid being in its liquid phase at this point.
By this means, the simple-expansion uniflow engine gives efficiency equivalent to that of classic compound systems with the added advantage of superior part-load performance, and comparable efficiency to turbines for smaller engines below one thousand horsepower.
The engines could be sited anywhere that water and coal or wood fuel could be obtained.
Gas turbines, for instance, have turbine entry temperatures approaching 1500&nbsp;°C.
The first experimental road going steam powered vehicles were built in the late 18th century, but it was not until after Richard Trevithick had developed the use of high-pressure steam, around 1800, that mobile steam engines became a practical proposition.
Apart from interest by steam enthusiasts, the occasional replica vehicle, and experimental technology no steam vehicles are in production at present.
