She was elected as the German Sportsperson of the Year in 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989 and 1999.
After losing a fifth straight time to Sabatini in Amelia Island, Florida, Graf again defeated Seles in the Hamburg final.
A bout of rubella forced Graf to miss the first major event of 1992, the Australian Open.
She lost twice to Sabatini in the early spring at the Lipton International and the Bausch & Lomb Championships; however, the Bausch & Lomb loss would be Graf's final loss to Sabatini, winning her next, and last, 8 matches against Sabatini.
She was voted the WTA Player Of The Year in 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996.
Graf again lost to Monica Seles in the final of the French Open 7–6, 6–4.
"It was a lot of fun.
It was not as I expected it to be."
Graf became the first player in the open era to defeat the first, second, and third ranked players in the same Grand Slam tournament by defeating second ranked Davenport in the quarterfinals and third-ranked Monica Seles in the semifinals.
Her 6–3, 6–0 defeat of Argentina's Gabriela Sabatini in a semifinal was described by veteran observer Ted Tinling as "probably the best tennis I've seen".
Graf was trailing Martina Navratilova in the final 7–5, 2–0 before winning the match 5–7, 6–2, 6–1.
In the Boca Raton final, Graf lost the only set she conceded to Chris Evert in their final seven matches.
At Wimbledon, Graf lost in the semifinals to Zina Garrison, who with this victory broke Graf's string of 13 consecutive Major finals.
She did not win a tournament but consistently reached tournament finals and semifinals, with the highlight being her semifinal loss to Navratilova at the US Open.
In the French Open final, Graf defeated Martina, who was the World No.
1 during her career.
She started the year strongly, with six tournament victories heading into the French Open, the highlight being at the tournament in Miami, where she defeated Martina Navratilova in a semifinal and Chris Evert in the final and conceded only 20 games in the seven rounds of the tournament.
Graf had an injured right foot during this tournament (and for the next few months), finally resulting in surgery on 4 October.
He claimed that he committed the attack to help Graf reclaim the World No.
In an interview with ''Stern'' magazine in July 1990, Graf stated, "I could not fight as usual."
At Wimbledon, Graf defeated Jana Novotná to win her third consecutive, and fifth overall, ladies' title.
Graf then defeated Sabatini 6–3, 6–3 in the gold medal match at the Olympic Games in Seoul and achieved what the media had dubbed the "Golden Slam".
She lost the World No.
Graf was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 2004 and the German Sports Hall of Fame in 2008.
In February 2000, Graf played an exhibition match against Kimiko Date at Nagoya Rainbow Hall in Tokyo.
It was the first time in 14 years Graf had played Navratilova.
Graf, however, won the tournament in San Antonio, Texas and retained her title in Miami, where she once again defeated Evert in the final.
In 2001 Graf indicated that she preferred to be called Stefanie instead of Steffi.
Graf reached thirteen consecutive Grand Slam singles finals, from the 1987 French Open through to the 1990 French Open, winning nine of them.
Graf's 1988 Grand Slam remains the only one in history completed on three surfaces (grass, clay, hard court), as all other Grand Slams in tennis history were achieved prior to the introduction of hard court at the US Open in 1978.
At the first round of the season-ending Chase Championships, Graf defeated World No.
She lost her first round match 6–4, 6–0 to Tracy Austin, a two-time US Open champion and former World No.
Graf followed this with easy victories in her next four tournaments at Washington, D.C., San Antonio, Texas, Boca Raton, Florida, and Hilton Head, South Carolina.
She then won tournaments in Hamburg and Mahwah (where she lost only eight games all tournament).
Her .977 winning percentage is the second-highest in the open era behind Navratilova.
Monica Seles beat Graf in three sets in the final of the Australian Open 4–6, 6–3, 6–2.
At the French Open, Graf successfully defended her title by defeating Natasha Zvereva 6–0, 6–0 in a 32-minute final.
2 Hingis and World No.
It was their first head-to-head meeting since the 1996 Wimbledon Ladies Final, where Graf defeated Sánchez Vicario in straight sets.
After winning two more indoor tournaments at Zürich and Brighton, she failed once again in the Virginia Slims Championships, losing her quarterfinal to Novotná.
On 13 April 1986, Graf won her first WTA tournament and beat Evert for the first time in the final of the Family Circle Cup in Hilton Head, South Carolina.
While the Berlin tournament was being played, the largest-circulation German tabloid, ''Bild'', ran a story about an alleged scandal involving Graf's father.
In baseline rallies, she used the slice almost exclusively.
Graf served for the match at 5–3 in the third set but lost the game and won only three more points in the match.
She was ranked World No.
The Graf-Agassi family resides in Summerlin, a community in the Las Vegas Valley.
In 1984, she first gained international attention when she almost upset the tenth seed, Jo Durie of the United Kingdom, in a fourth round Centre Court match at Wimbledon.
Graf lost her singles match to Elena Likhovtseva 5–4.
She won 107 singles titles, which ranks her third on the WTA's all-time list after Martina Navratilova (167 titles) and Chris Evert (157 titles).
And the year began as expected, with Graf extending her Grand Slam tournament winning streak to five events at the Australian Open, defeating Helena Suková in the final.
Early in her career, she used Dunlop Max Competition and  Max 200G racquet before switching to Wilson from 1994 to 1999.
Graf was voted the ITF World Champion in 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1993, 1995 and 1996.
In her semifinal match at the US Open, Graf defeated Sabatini 3–6, 6–4, 6–2.
That year Graf lost in the fourth round of Australian Open in straight sets to Amanda Coetzer.
Graf's Grand Slam tournament winning streak ended at the French Open, where 17-year-old Spaniard Arantxa Sánchez Vicario beat Graf in three sets.
She had an adidas sneakers line known as the St. Graf Pro line.
At the year-ending Virginia Slims Championships, Graf was upset by Pam Shriver, only her third loss of the year.
Consequently, Graf's Grand Slam was achieved on grass, clay, and hard court while the previous five Grand Slams were decided on only grass and clay.
Her 22 singles titles, tied with Serena Williams,  marks the joint record for most Major wins by a tennis player (male or female) since the introduction of the Open Era in 1968  and is second all-time behind Margaret Court (24).
This time, Navratilova beat Graf 7–6, 6–3, 6–2.
She returned to win a small tournament at Mahwah just before the US Open where, in one of the most anticipated matches of the year, she encountered Navratilova in a semifinal.
Graf played a singles exhibition match against Kim Clijsters and a mixed doubles exhibition alongside husband Andre Agassi against Tim Henman and Clijsters as part of a test event and celebration for the newly installed roof over Wimbledon's Centre Court in 2009.
In 2015, she has been appointed as the brand ambassador of Kerala tourism, for promoting Ayurveda in North America and Europe.
1 ranking to Martina Hingis and failed to win a Grand Slam title for the first time in ten years in 1997.
In that timespan of 12 majors, Graf had won twice (1991 and 1992 Wimbledon) in comparison.
Illness caused her to miss Wimbledon, and an accident where she broke a toe several weeks later also curtailed her play.
Graf defeated Mary Joe Fernández in the final of the Australian Open, which was her eighth Grand Slam singles title in the last nine she contested.
At the start of her first full professional year in 1983, Graf was 13 years old and ranked World No.
The difficulty of answering questions about the matter came to a head at a Wimbledon press conference, where Graf broke down in tears.
Graf retired in 1999 while she was ranked World No.
The last few years of Graf's career were beset by injuries, particularly to her knees and back.
Graf also had a powerful backhand drive but over the course of her career tended to use this less frequently, opting more often for an effective backhand slice.
More than two years elapsed before Seles competed again.
Her career prize-money earnings totalled US$21,895,277 (a record until Lindsay Davenport surpassed this amount in January 2008).
Monica won the match on her 5th match point; Graf came within 2 points of winning the match a few games earlier.
He went on to add, "Then I saw what Steffi did to Sabatini at the Australian Open this year, and that was it.
1, 6–4, 4–6, 8–6 after beating Sabatini in a three-set semifinal.
She won 5 consecutive Majors (1988 Australian Open to 1989 Australian Open), and 7 Majors out of 8, in 2 calendar years (1988 Australian Open to 1989 US Open, except 1989 French Open).
Whether this scandal affected Graf's form is open to debate.
A mixture of injury problems, personal difficulties, and loss of form made 1991 a tough year for Graf.
22 in 1984, and No.
(Twelve years later, Graf defeated Austin 6–0, 6–0 during a second round match at the Evert Cup in Indian Wells, California, which was their second and last match against each other.)
Graf then capped the year by beating countrywoman Anke Huber in a five-set final at the season-ending WTA Tour Championships in 2 hours 46 minutes.
At Boca Raton, Florida, Graf reached her first final of the year, where she faced Conchita Martínez for the title.
She reached a total of 31 Grand Slam singles finals.
At the 1999 French Open, Graf reached her first Grand Slam final in three years and fought back from a set and twice from a break down in the second set to defeat the top ranked Hingis in three sets for a memorable victory.
It was held as part of her "Farewell World Tour", with Graf defeating Date in three sets.
After several months injury lay off, Graf returned to play in the German Open in Berlin in front of a home crowd and had the worst defeat of her career in the quarter final, when Amanda Coetzer beat her in just 56 minutes 6–0, 6–1.
In 2008 Graf lost an exhibition match against Kimiko Date at Ariake Colosseum in Tokyo.
At the US Open, Graf was upset in a quarterfinal by Sánchez Vicario 7–6, 6–3.
Graf started dating Andre Agassi after the 1999 French Open and they married on 22 October 2001, with only their mothers as witnesses.
Stefanie Graf was born on 14 June 1969, in Mannheim, Baden-Württemberg, West Germany, to Heidi Schalk and Peter Graf (18 June 1938 − 30 November 2013), a car and insurance salesman.
Working with her father and then-coach Pavel Složil, Graf typically practiced for up to four hours a day, often heading straight from airports to practice courts.
Graf had a win-loss record of 75-2 for a 97.4 winning percentage in 1987, both losses coming to Navratilova as they split the four matches they played during the year.
Graf lost twice to Sabatini during the spring, once on hardcourts in Boca Raton, Florida, and once on clay at Amelia Island, Florida.
I feel I have nothing left to accomplish.
Sabatini served for the match twice, and was two points away from her first Wimbledon title.
I was not having fun anymore.
She built her powerful and accurate serve up to , making it one of the fastest serves in women's tennis, and was a capable volleyer.
As part of her Farewell Tour, Graf defeated her former rival Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in an exhibition match played in Zaragoza, Spain in 1999.
In September 2004, Graf dispatched her former doubles partner Gabriela Sabatini in straight sets, in an exhibition match played in Berlin, Germany.
Graf also won her only Grand Slam doubles title that year—at Wimbledon partnering Sabatini—and picked up a women's doubles Olympic bronze medal.
Victories at Hamburg and Berlin (beating Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in the finals of both) prepared her for the French Open, where she defeated Sánchez Vicario in the semifinals after losing the first set 6–0.
Her accuracy with the slice, both cross-court and down the line, and her ability to skid the ball and keep it low, enabled her to use it as an offensive weapon to set the ball up for her forehand put-aways.
Proceeds from her match against Sabatini went to Graf's foundation, "Children for tomorrow".
Following her tournament victory in German Open in Berlin, Graf suffered one of the worst defeats of her career in a French Open semifinal where she won only two games against Arantxa Sánchez Vicario and lost her first 6–0 set since 1984.
Graf played in her first professional tournament in October 1982 at Stuttgart, Germany.
Graf then reached her ninth Wimbledon singles final, losing to third-seeded Davenport in straight sets.
Graf's Grand Slam tournament breakthrough came in 1987.
She soon began winning junior tournaments with regularity, and in 1982 she won the European Championships 12s and 18s.
She then lost to Sabatini in her next three tournaments before winning the U.S. Hardcourt Championships in San Antonio, beating Monica Seles in the final.
After Wimbledon, for the first time in my career, I didn't feel like going to a tournament.
Graf was introduced to tennis by her father, an aspiring tennis coach, who taught his three-year-old daughter how to swing a wooden racket in the family's living room.
In the French Open Graf was again beaten by Amanda Coetzer in straight sets 6–1, 6–4.
In a close French Open final, Graf again overcame Arantxa Sánchez Vicario, taking the third-set 10–8.
He was eventually released after serving 25 months.
She is better than them all."
3 Jana Novotná before losing in the semifinal to first-seeded Davenport.
Peter also kept a tight rein on Graf's personal life.
Graf warmed up for the US Open with easy tournament victories in San Diego and Mahwah.
She was beaten in two out of three matches, with each match being one set.
Graf then won three consecutive indoor titles at Tokyo, Zürich, and Brighton, before once again contending with Navratilova at the season-ending Virginia Slims Championships in New York City.
'''Stefanie Maria''' "'''Steffi'''" '''Graf''' (; born 14 June 1969) is a German former tennis player, who was ranked world No.
She came back to beat Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in the finals of both the French Open and Wimbledon.
The Washington, D.C. tournament was notable because Graf won the first twenty points of the final against Zina Garrison.
1 for 186 consecutive weeks (from August 1987 to March 1991, tied with Serena Williams, a record in the women's game) and a record total 377 weeks overall.
At Wimbledon, however, Graf captured her third women's crown, this time at Sabatini's expense.
Graf, however, recovered to defeat Martina Navratilova 6–2, 6–7, 6–1 in the Wimbledon final after defeating Monica Seles 6–0, 6–1 in a fourth round match, Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in a quarterfinal, and Chris Evert in a semifinal.
In their five previous head-to-head matches, Graf had defeated Martínez each time.
On August 17, after defeating Evert in a straight set final in the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles, Graf overtook Navratilova for the world number one ranking for the first time in her career, a ranking she would hold for the next 186 consecutive-weeks, a record that has not been broken.
At the US Open, Graf beat Sabatini in a three-set final to win the Grand Slam by 6–3, 3–6, 6–1, a feat previously performed by only two other women, Maureen Connolly Brinker in 1953 and Margaret Court in 1970.
Following the absence of Seles, Graf won 65 of 67 matches, three of four Grand Slam events and the year-end Virginia Slims championships.
Graf still managed to win San Diego the following month but aggravated a long-time back injury in beating Sánchez Vicario in the final.
She began practicing on a court at the age of four and played in her first tournament at five.
Graf was inducted into the Tennis Hall of Fame in 2004.
This cemented Seles as the dominant #1 player in the world, having won 5 of the previous 6, 7 of the previous 9, and 8 of the previous 12 major singles titles.
Graf then renewed her rivalry with Monica Seles in the final, which Monica Seles won 10–8 in the third set.
She won the tournament in Leipzig yet again the day before her foot operation, losing only two games to Jana Novotná in the final.
It was the longest French Open women's singles final in history, both in terms of time (3 hours and 3 minutes) and number of games played (40).
Graf has signed many endorsement deals throughout the years including a ten-year endorsement deal with car manufacturer Opel in 1985, and Rexona from 1994 to 1998.
Graf ended 1989 with an 86–2 match record and the loss of only twelve sets.
In 2010 Graf participated in the World Team Tennis Smash Hits exhibition in Washington, D.C., to support The Elton John AIDS Foundation.
In August as a 15-year-old (and youngest entrant) representing West Germany, she won the tennis demonstration event at the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles.
Some noted observers, such as Margaret Court, suggested that Graf could achieve the feat a couple more times.
In October, Graf played Sabatini in an exhibition match in Mannheim, Germany, beating Sabatini in two sets.
Zvereva, who had eliminated Martina Navratilova in the fourth round, won only thirteen points in the match.
The match was played over two days with Navratilova finally winning after saving three match points 6–1, 6–7, 7–6.
She used first the Wilson Pro Staff 7.0 lite and switched later to the Pro Staff 6,5 which she played till the end of her career 1999.
The treatment was for a fracture of the cartilage as well as a shortening and partial rupture of the patellar tendon of her left knee.
The US Open was Monica Seles's first Grand Slam event since the 1993 attack.
She was ranked World No.
My motivation wasn't what it was in the past."
In 1985 and early 1986, Graf emerged as the top challenger to the dominance of Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert.
She married former World No.
Shortly after the stabbing, Graf and 24 of the world's top 25 WTA members voted against preserving Seles' world #1 ranking while she was sidelined (only Sabatini abstained from this vote).
In 1988 Graf became only the second tennis player in history to win a Slam on hard court, clay, and grass all in the same season.
Tennis writer Steve Flink, in his book ''The Greatest Tennis Matches of the Twentieth Century'', named her as the best female player of the 20th century.
1 Lindsay Davenport en route to the Philadelphia title.
She then won her next four tournaments in Tokyo, Indian Wells, Delray Beach and Miami respectively.
Martina Navratilova then defeated Graf 7–6, 6–7, 6–4 in a US Open semifinal, the first time she had beaten Graf in four years.
Graf then won her next three tournaments at Amelia Island, Charleston, and Berlin, culminating in a 6–2, 6–3 defeat of Navratilova in the final of the latter.
In Indian Wells, 1999 Graf lost to Serena Williams in three sets.
No medals were awarded as this was not an official Olympic event.
Graf is regarded by many to be the greatest female tennis player of all time.
Graf wore Adidas apparel and sneakers during her tennis career.
Graf then went on to reach the quarterfinals of the Australian Open before losing to Monica Seles in two sets.
1 ranking for the first time in 22 months.
This narrow focus meant that Graf, already shy and retiring by nature, made few friends on the tour in her early years, but it led to a steady improvement in her play.
Graf also won her fifth and final WTA Tour Championships title with a five set win over Martina Hingis.
Wimbledon authorities then threatened to immediately shut down any subsequent press conferences where questions about the issue were asked.
Graf played in the celebrity doubles, women's doubles, and mixed doubles before straining her left calf muscle and being replaced by Anna Kournikova.
She was also in Berlin to host a charity gala, as well as inaugurating a tennis stadium renamed the "Steffi Graf Stadion".
The couple have two children – Jaden Gil and Jaz Elle.
She is the founder and chairperson of "Children for Tomorrow", a non-profit foundation established in 1998 for implementing and developing projects to support children who have been traumatized by war or other crises.
Graf also won 11 doubles titles.
As a result, Peter was sentenced to 45 months in jail.
She and Margaret Court are the only players, male or female, to win 3 grand slams in a calendar year 5 times (1988, 1989, 1993, 1995 and 1996).
Graf completely ruled out a return to professional tennis.
She is the only singles player (male or female) to have achieved a Grand Slam since hard court was introduced as a surface at the US Open in 1978.
She repeated the feat in 1993, 1995, and 1996.
In 1985, for instance, she played only 10 events leading up to the US Open, whereas another up-and-coming star, Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina, who was a year younger than Graf, played 21.
The weeks following Wimbledon in 1999 weren't easy for me.
Graf then won the tournament in Berlin, losing only twelve games in five matches.
Seles established herself as the new dominant player on the women's tour, winning the Australian Open, French Open, and US Open and, in March, ending Graf's record 186 consecutive-weeks hold on the World No.
The feat has only been achieved by Graf to date.
Seles was behind 2–6 in the first set tiebreaker, but then came back to win six points in a row and take the set.
Next came Wimbledon, where Martina Navratilova had won six straight titles.
1 men's tennis player Andre Agassi in October 2001.
Graf then won all five of her Fed Cup matches, helping Germany defeat Spain in the final by defeating Arantxa Sánchez Vicario 6–4, 6–2.
As the defending champion Graf lost in straight sets to Mary Pierce in the French Open semifinal.
After missing almost half of the tour in 1998, Graf defeated World No.
Graf was ranked World No.
Graf lost an Australian Open quarterfinal to Jana Novotná, the first time she did not reach the semifinals of a Grand Slam singles tournament since the 1986 French Open.
After breaking Novotná's serve, Graf won the next four games to take the match 7–6, 1–6, 6–4.
Like the exhibition match the previous year against Sabatini, proceeds went to Graf's foundation "Children for tomorrow".
Even though Conchita won the opening set, Graf went on to prevail 3–6, 6–2, 6–0.
Seemingly free of injury for the first time in years, Graf began the year by winning the Australian Open, where she defeated Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in the final with the loss of only two games.
She began to wear a back brace and was unsure about playing the US Open but elected to play while receiving treatment and stretching for two hours before each match.
In July 2005, Graf competed in one tie of World Team Tennis on the Houston Wranglers team.
Speculation was rife at the beginning of 1989 about the possibility of Graf winning another Grand Slam.
