Discoveries of articulated stegosaur armor show, at least in some species, these spikes protruded horizontally from the tail, not vertically as is often depicted.
Galton, for example, has stated that ''Wuerhosaurus'' differs enough from ''Stegosaurus'' to be retained as a distinct genus.
indicates Stegosaurus' bite strength was stronger than previously believed.
The stegosaurians were widely distributed geographically in the late Jurassic.
This has led to the influential idea that dinosaurs like ''Stegosaurus'' had a "second brain" in the tail, which may have been responsible for controlling reflexes in the rear portion of the body.
Knight would go on to paint a stegosaur with a staggered double plate row in 1927 for the Field Museum of Natural History, and was followed by Rudolph F. Zallinger, who painted ''Stegosaurus'' this way in his "Age of Reptiles" mural at the Peabody Museum in 1947.
stenops'' had four dermal spikes, each about  long.
However, recent research re-examined this and concluded this species also had four.
Following renovations to the museum in the 2010s, the model was moved once again for display at the Museum of the Earth in Ithaca, New York.
(In 1893, Richard Lydekker mistakenly re-published Marsh's drawing under the label ''Hypsirhophus'').
Stegosaurian teeth were small, triangular, and flat; wear facets show that they did grind their food.
Grazing on grasses, seen in many modern mammalian herbivores, would not have been possible for ''Stegosaurus'', as grasses did not evolve until late into the Cretaceous Period, long after ''Stegosaurus'' had become extinct.
In 2015, Maidment ''et al.''
Past the first few dorsals, the centrum of the bones become more elongate front-to-back, and the transverse processes become more elevated dorsal.
The findings were published in the journal ''Scientific Reports''.
With multiple well-preserved skeletons, ''S.
Recently, stegosaurids have been shown to be present in the lower Morrison Formation, existing several million years before the occurrence of ''Stegosaurus'' itself, with the discovery of the related ''Hesperosaurus'' from the early Kimmeridgian.
The origin of ''Stegosaurus'' is uncertain, as few remains of basal stegosaurs and their ancestors are known.
* The plates lie flat along the back, as a shingle-like armor.
stenops'' type specimen, which had been on display in relief nearby since 1918.
There is a small bump on the back of the blade, that would have served as the base of the ''triceps'' muscle.
In ''Hesperosaurus'' there are two dorsosacrals, and only four fused sacrals, but in ''Kentrosaurus'' there may be as many as seven vertebrae in the sacrum, with both dorsosacrals and caudosacrals.
* By 1891, Marsh published a more familiar view of ''Stegosaurus'', with a single row of plates.
Type specimen of ''S.
By the early 1960s, this had become (and remains) the prevalent idea, mainly because some ''S.
In a 2010 review of ''Stegosaurus'' species, Peter Galton suggested that the arrangement of the plates on the back may have varied between species, and that the pattern of plates as viewed in profile may have been important for species recognition.
''Stegosaurus'', one of the many dinosaurs first collected and described in the Bone Wars, was originally named by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1877, from remains recovered north of Morrison, Colorado.
Due to their distinctive combination of broad, upright plates and tail tipped with spikes, ''Stegosaurus'' is one of the most recognizable kinds of dinosaur.
The aging mount was dismantled in 2003 and replaced with a cast in an updated pose in 2004.
The model was based on Knight's latest miniature with the double row of staggered plates, and was exhibited in the United States Government Building at the exposition in St. Louis before being relocated to Portland, Oregon for the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in 1905.
Bakker suggested the plates were the bony cores of pointed horn-covered plates that a ''Stegosaurus'' could flip from one side to another to present a predator with an array of spikes and blades that would impede it from closing sufficiently to attack the ''Stegosaurus'' effectively.
Due to the fragmentary nature of most early ''Stegosaurus'' fossil finds, it took many years before reasonably accurate restorations of these animals could be produced.
The type specimen of ''S.
The lower jaw of ''Stegosaurus'' had a flat upward extension that would have completely hidden the teeth when viewed from the side, and which probably supported a turtle-like beak in life.
Other researchers have interpreted these ridges as modified versions of similar structures in other ornithischians which might have supported fleshy cheeks, rather than beaks.
Later, more comprehensive histological surveys of plate microstructure attributed the vascularization to the need to transport nutrients for rapid plate growth, asserting the plates' physiology, if beneficial, was a side benefit secondary to their primary function, identification and display.
It has traditionally been considered a synonym of ''S.&nbsp;armatus'', though more recent studies suggest it is not.
The skull's low position suggests that ''Stegosaurus'' may have been a browser of low-growing vegetation.
1918 saw the completion of the second ''Stegosaurus'' mount, and the first depicting ''S.
Marsh's type specimen of ''S.
This mount was created under the direction of Charles Gilmore at the U.S. National Museum of Natural History.
This scenario has ''Stegosaurus'' foraging at most 1&nbsp;m above the ground.
stenops'' is known from at least 50&nbsp;partial skeletons of adults and juveniles, one complete skull, and four partial skulls.
ungulatus'' (YPM 1853) was incorporated into the first ever mounted skeleton of a stegosaur at the Peabody Museum of Natural History in 1910 by Richard Swann Lull.
No specimens have been found with complete or articulated sets of tail spikes, but no additional specimens have been found that preserve eight spikes together.
Lucas also re-examined the issue of the life appearance of ''Stegosaurus'', coming to the conclusion that the plates were arranged in pairs in two rows along the back, arranged above the bases of the ribs.
Confirmed ''Stegosaurus'' remains have been found in the Morrison Formation's stratigraphic zones 2–6, with additional remains possibly referrable to ''Stegosaurus'' recovered from stratigraphic zone 1.
''Kentrosaurus'' is also known from juvenile specimens, and they can be identified as different genders.
All four limbs were supported by pads behind the toes.
stenops'' by the presence of longer hind limbs, proportionately smaller, more pointed plates with wide bases and narrow tips, and by several small, flat, spine-like plates just before the spikes on the tail.
They regarded ''S.&nbsp;longispinus'' as dubious.
A trackway of a possible early armored dinosaur, from around 195 Mya, has been found in France.
This interpretation is supported by the absence of front teeth and their likely replacement by a horny beak or rhamphotheca.
The two juveniles are both relatively small, with the smaller individual being  long, and the larger having a length of .
ungulatus'' plates have been found, and none articulated, making the arrangement in this species more difficult to determine.
stenops'' as type species.
Such an extensive beak was probably unique to ''Stegosaurus'' and some other advanced stegosaurids among ornithischians, which usually had beaks restricted to the jaw tips.
Again under Lucas, Knight revised his version of ''Stegosaurus'' again two years later, producing a model with a staggered double row of plates.
A well-preserved ''Stegosaurus'' braincase allowed Othniel Charles Marsh to obtain, in the 1880s, a cast of the brain cavity or endocast of the animal, which gave an indication of the brain size.
Galton noted that the plated in ''S.
The function of ''Stegosaurus'' plates has been much debated.
marshi'', by Frederick Lucas in 1901.
in 1986 marked a major step out of the realm of speculation and into the realm of science, with its microscopic analyses of multiple ''Stegosaurus'' plate specimens, proving unequivocally "extreme vascularization of the outer layer of bone", which was seen by Buffrénil as further evidence the plates "acted as thermoregulatory devices".
ungulatus'' was discovered with eight spikes, though they were scattered away from their original positions.
A study published in 2005 supports the idea of their use in species identification.
Marsh named a second species, ''Stegosaurus ungulatus'', in 1879, and finally gave a more detailed description of all the ''Stegosaurus'' fossils collected to far the following year.
The following cladogram shows the position of ''Stegosaurus'' within the Stegosauridae according to Mateus, 2009:
Marsh initially believed the remains were from an aquatic turtle-like animal, and the basis for its scientific name, 'roof(ed) lizard' was due to his early belief that the plates lay flat over the animal's back, overlapping like the shingles (tiles) on a roof.
It was a composite of several skeletons, primarily USNM 6531, with proportions designed to closely follow the ''S.
Despite its popularity in books and film, mounted skeletons of ''Stegosaurus'' did not become a staple of major natural history museums until the mid-20th century, and many museums have had to assemble composite displays from several different specimens due to a lack of complete skeletons.
Marsh published his more accurate skeletal reconstruction of ''Stegosaurus'' in 1891, and within a decade ''Stegosaurus'' had become among the most-illustrated types of dinosaur.
ungulatus'' on the basis of their notched tail vertebrae, are preserved with only four tail spikes.
His reasoning for these plates to be covered in horn is that the surface fossilized plates have a resemblance to the bony cores of horns in other animals known or thought to bear horns, and his reasoning for the plates to be defensive in nature is that the plates had insufficient width for them to stand erect easily in such a manner as to be useful in display without continuous muscular effort.
Peter Galton suggested it should be considered a valid species due to its unique spikes.
In some specimens of ''S.
The most recognizable features of ''Stegosaurus'' are its dermal plates, which consisted of between 17 and 22 separate plates and flat spines.
It had a small antorbital fenestra, the hole between the nose and eye common to most archosaurs, including modern birds, though lost in extant crocodylians.
The blade is relatively straight, although it curves towards the back.
The first cervical vertebra is the axis bone, which is connected and often fused to the atlas bone.
''Stegosaurus'' and related genera were herbivores.
'', which showed a high incidence of trauma-related damage, lends more weight to the position that the spikes were indeed used in combat.
In the past, some palaeontologists, notably Robert Bakker, have speculated that the plates may have been mobile to some degree, although others disagree.
A detailed computer analysis of the biomechanics of ''Stegosaurus'''s feeding behavior was performed in 2010, using two different three-dimensional models of ''Stegosaurus'' teeth given realistic physics and properties.
Since a cooling trend occurred towards the end of the Jurassic, a large ectothermic reptile might have used the increased surface area afforded by the plates to absorb radiation from the sun.
Animal fossils discovered include bivalves, snails, ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles like ''Dorsetochelys'', sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans like ''Hoplosuchus'', several species of pterosaurs such as ''Harpactognathus'' and ''Mesadactylus'', numerous dinosaur species, and early mammals such as docodonts (like ''Docodon''), multituberculates, symmetrodonts, and triconodonts.
ungulatus'' with missing parts filled in from ''S.
The scapula (shoulder blade) is sub-rectangular, with a robust blade.
A spike associated with the type specimen, originally thought to be a tail spike, may in fact come from the shoulder or hip, since its base is much larger than the corresponding tail vertebrae.
The ''Stegosaurus'' in the 1933 film, ''King Kong'', has this arrangement.
The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons, and flat floodplains.
Tobin restored the ''Stegosaurus'' as bipedal and long-necked, with the plates arranged along the tail and the back covered in spikes.
Mounted under the direction of Charles J.
* Two rows of alternating plates.
The Stegosauridae are one of two families within the infraorder Stegosauria, with the other being the Huayangosauridae.
The earliest popular image of ''Stegosaurus'' was an engraving produced by A. Tobin for the November 1884 issue of ''Scientific American'', which included the dinosaur amid a speculative Morrison age landscape.
''Stegosaurus'' would have lived alongside dinosaurs such as ''Apatosaurus'', ''Diplodocus'', ''Brachiosaurus'', ''Allosaurus'' and ''Ceratosaurus''; the latter two may have been predators of it.
Palaeontologists believe it would have eaten plants such as mosses, ferns, horsetails, cycads, and conifers or fruits.
stenops''''', '''''S.
This species is generally agreed to have been inadequately described, and therefore is a ''nomen nudum'' (a name lacking a formal description).
''Stegosaurus ungulatus'' can be distinguished from ''S.
The plates would naturally sag to the sides of the ''Stegosaurus'', the length of the plates reflecting the width of the animal at that point along its spine.
Though considered one of the most distinctive types of dinosaur, ''Stegosaurus'' displays were missing from a majority of museums during the first half of the 20th century, due largely to the disarticulated nature of most fossil specimens.
However, their teeth and jaws are very different from those of other herbivorous ornithischian dinosaurs, suggesting a different feeding strategy that is not yet well understood.
As further and complete plates were found, their form showed they stood on edge, rather than lying flat.
The resultant bite forces calculated for ''Stegosaurus'' were 140.1 Newton (N), 183.7 N, and 275 N (for anterior, middle and posterior teeth, respectively), which means its bite force was less than half that of a Labrador Retriever.
''Stegosaurus'' had a relatively low brain-to-body mass ratio.
That ''Stegosaurus'' plates could "blush" has become the predominant interpretation of plate function since the late 20th century, and is even depicted in the popular BBC documentary ''Walking with Dinosaurs'', with the sudden reddening of the plates used in conjunction with threatening swings of the spiked tail to intimidate and confuse an attacking ''Allosaurus''.
Marsh continued to collect and examine new ''Stegosaurus'' specimens, and in 1887 he named three new species: ''Stegosaurus stenops'', ''S.
The plates' large size suggests that they may have served to increase the apparent height of the animal, either to intimidate enemies or to impress other members of the same species, in some form of sexual display, although both male and female specimens seemed to have had the same plates.
The presence of a beak extended along much of the jaws may have precluded the presence of cheeks in these species.
''Stegosaurus'' was the first-named genus of the family Stegosauridae.
stenops'' includes four sacral vertebrae, but one of the dorsals is also incorporated into the structure.
In 1914, Charles Gilmore argued against Lull's interpretation, noting that several specimens of ''S.
A third mounted skeleton of ''Stegosaurus'', referred to ''S.
These small, lightly armored dinosaurs were closely related to the direct ancestor of both stegosaurs and ankylosaurs.
stenops'', including the now-completely prepared holotype, preserved the plates in alternating rows near the peak of the back, and that there was no evidence of the plates having shifted relative to the body during fossilization.
Despite the animal's overall size, the braincase of ''Stegosaurus'' was small, being no larger than that of a dog.
''Emausaurus'' from Germany was another small quadruped, while ''Scutellosaurus'' from Arizona was an even earlier genus and was facultatively bipedal.
Articulated with the scapula, the coracoid is sub-circular.
At , it was the longest species within the genus ''Stegosaurus''.
Based on this data, it is likely ''Stegosaurus'' also ate woodier, tougher plants such as cycads, perhaps even acting as a means of spreading cycad seeds.
revised their suggestion due to the recognition by Galton of ''S.
* ''Stegosaurus stenops'', meaning "narrow-faced roof lizard", was named by Marsh in 1887, with the holotype having been collected by Marshal Felch at Garden Park, north of Cañon City, Colorado, in 1886.
Initially, several species were described.
stenops'', was published by Marsh in 1891.
These have often been interpreted as indicating that the animal had four pairs of tail spikes.
ungulatus'' based on his new interpretation.
armatus'' as a ''nomen dubium'' and its replacement by ''S.
Other ornithischians included ''Camptosaurus'', ''Gargoyleosaurus'', ''Dryosaurus'', ''Othnielosaurus'' and ''Drinker'' .
It was shorter than other species, at .
stenops'', a caudal is also incorporated, as a caudosacral.
Lucas reclassified this species in the new genus ''Hoplitosaurus'' later that year.
More recently, a study of tail spikes by McWhinney ''et al.
Robert Bakker noted the tail was likely to have been much more flexible than that of other dinosaurs, as it lacked ossified tendons, thus lending credence to the idea of the tail as a weapon.
This hypothesis has been seriously questioned, since its closest relatives, such as ''Kentrosaurus'', had more low surface area spikes than plates, implying that cooling was not important enough to require specialized structural formations such as plates.
The presacrals are divided into cervical (neck) and dorsal (back) vertebrae, with around 10 cervicals and 17 dorsals, the total number being one greater than in ''Hesperosaurus'', two greater than ''Huayangosaurus'', although ''Miragaia'' preserves 17 cervicals and an unknown number of dorsals.
However, this classification scheme has not generally been followed by other researchers.
Additional support for this idea was a punctured tail vertebra of an ''Allosaurus'' into which a tail spike fits perfectly.
Some 2010 structural comparisons of ''Stegosaurus'' plates to ''Alligator'' osteoderms seem to support the conclusion that the potential for a thermoregulatory role in the plates of ''Stegosaurus'' definitely exists.
sulcatus'' is distinguished mainly by its unusually large, furrowed spikes with very large bases.
Initially thought of as some form of armor, they appear to have been too fragile and ill-placed for defensive purposes, leaving the animal's sides unprotected.
The tail appears to have been held well clear of the ground, while the head of ''Stegosaurus'' was positioned relatively low down, probably no higher than  above the ground.
Their teeth were "not tightly pressed together in a block for efficient grinding", and no evidence in the fossil record of stegosaurians indicates use of gastroliths—the stone(s) some dinosaurs (and some present-day bird species) ingested—to aid the grinding process, so how exactly ''Stegosaurus'' obtained and processed the amount of plant material required to sustain its size remains "poorly understood".
These first bones became the holotype of ''Stegosaurus armatus''.
This was Marsh's initial interpretation, which led to the name 'roof lizard'.
''Stegosaurus'' could have easily bitten through smaller green branches, but would have had difficulty with anything over 12&nbsp;mm in diameter.
One species, ''Stegosaurus ungulatus'', is the largest known of all the stegosaurians (bigger than related dinosaurs such as ''Kentrosaurus'' and ''Huayangosaurus'').
The model was moved to the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (now the Arts and Industries Building) in Washington, D.C. along with other prehistory displays, and to the current National Museum of Natural History building in 1911.
The function of this array of plates and spikes has been the subject of much speculation among scientists.
Long, the American Museum mount was a composite consisting of partial remains filled in with replicas based on other specimens.
Earlier still is ''Scelidosaurus'', from Early Jurassic England, which lived about 190&nbsp;Mya.
The other ornithischians possessed teeth capable of grinding plant material and a jaw structure capable of movements in planes other than simply orthal (i.e.
ungulatus'' at the Peabody Museum of Natural History, which was put on display in 1910.
This "blushing capacity", instead of thermoregulatory functions, may be the plates' purpose, though the two functions certainly could have coexisted.
Tracks discovered by Matthew Mossbrucker (Morrison Natural History Museum, Colorado) suggest that ''Stegosaurus'' lived in multiple-age herds.
It was revived, in somewhat modified form, in the 1980s, by Stephen Czerkas, based on the arrangement of iguana dorsal spines.
Though it is not always perfectly preserved, the acromion ridge is slightly larger than in ''Kentrosaurus''.
More recently discussed, this space (also found in sauropods) may have been the location of a glycogen body, a structure in living birds whose function is not definitely known, but which is postulated to facilitate the supply of glycogen to the animal's nervous system.
The specimen was later lost.
These were highly modified osteoderms (bony-cored scales), similar to those seen in crocodiles and many lizards today.
stenops'' have been found articulated in two staggered rows, rather than paired.
Many later researchers have considered ''Hypsirhophus'' to be a synonym of ''Stegosaurus'', though Peter Galton (2010) suggested that it is distinct based on differences in the vertebrae.
A fragmentary ''Stegosaurus'' specimen discovered in Portugal and dating from the upper Kimmeridgian-lower Tithonian stage has been tentatively assigned to this species.
The name ''Stegosaurus'' means "roof lizard" or "covered lizard", in reference to its bony plates.
Actual brain anatomy in ''Stegosaurus'' is poorly known, but the brain itself was, however, small even for a dinosaur, fitting well with a slow, herbivorous lifestyle and limited behavioural complexity.
Also, the pelvic region of the specimens are similar to ''Kentrosaurus'' juveniles.
However, many of these have since been considered to be invalid or synonymous with existing species, leaving two well-known and one poorly known species.
ungulatus''''' and '''''S.
In 1910, Richard Swann Lull wrote that the alternating pattern seen in ''S.
Around the middle of the tail, the neural spines become bifurcated, meaning they are divided near the top.
Found in the Morrison Formation, Colorado, Wyoming, and Utah.
Thus, their conception of ''Stegosaurus'' would include three valid species (''S.&nbsp;armatus'', ''S.&nbsp;homheni'', and ''S.&nbsp;mjosi'') and would range from the Late Jurassic of North America and Europe to the Early Cretaceous of Asia.
The stegosaurs were a clade of animals similar in appearance, posture, and shape that mainly differed in their array of spikes and plates.
More recently, researchers have proposed that they may have helped to control the body temperature of the animal, in a similar way to the sails of the pelycosaurs ''Dimetrodon'' and ''Edaphosaurus'' (and modern elephant and rabbit ears).
ungulatus'' preserves two flattened spine-like plates from the tail that are nearly identical in shape and size, but are mirror images of each other, suggesting that at least these were arranged in pairs.
Some form of armor appears to have been necessary, as ''Stegosaurus'' species coexisted with large predatory theropod dinosaurs, such as ''Allosaurus'' and ''Ceratosaurus''.
This is probably the most common arrangement in illustrations, especially earlier ones.
Although large individuals could grow up to  in length, the various species of ''Stegosaurus'' were dwarfed by their contemporaries, the giant sauropods.
The argument has been a major one in the history of dinosaur reconstruction.
''Stegosaurus'' remains were first identified during the "Bone Wars" by Othniel Charles Marsh.
Also, this blushing could have been used to attract mates.
A wealth of ''Stegosaurus'' material was recovered over the next few years, and Marsh published several papers on the genus from 1877 to 1897.
''Stegosaurus'' is commonly found at the same sites as ''Allosaurus'', ''Apatosaurus'', ''Camarasaurus'', and'' Diplodocus''.
Comparisons were made between it (represented by a specimen known as "Sophie" from the United Kingdom's Natural History Museum) and two other herbivorous dinosaurs; ''Erlikosaurus'' and ''Plateosaurus'' to determine if all three had similar bite forces and similar niches.
Another explanation for ''Stegosaurus'' plates' heavily vascular design is that, when under threat, blood could rush into the plates, causing them to "blush" which would add a colorful, red warning, "embellishing" the visual threat display.
However, A study published on May 20, 2016 by Stephen Lautenschlager et al.
Debate has been going on about whether the tail spikes were used for display only, as posited by Gilmore in 1914 or used as a weapon.
In his article about the new mount for the museum's journal, Barnum Brown described (and disputed) the popular misconception that the ''Stegosaurus'' had a "second brain" in its hips.
stenops'' preserves 46 caudal vertebrae, and up to 49, and along the series both the centrums and the neural spines become smaller, until the neural spines disappear at caudal 35.
The popularity of ''Stegosaurus'' is owed partly to its prominent display in natural history museums.
It was initially mounted with paired plates set wide, above the base of the ribs, but was remounted in 1924 with two staggered rows of plates along the midline of the back.
However, the type specimen of ''S.
It is on display in the University of Wyoming Geological Museum.
The first known skeletons were fragmentary and the bones were scattered, and it would be many years before the true appearance of these animals, including their posture and plate arrangement, became well understood.
The publication of "Growth and Function of ''Stegosaurus'' Plates" by Buffrénil, et al.
Artist Charles R. Knight published his first illustration of ''Stegosaurus ungulatus'' based on Marsh's skeletal reconstruction in a November 1897 issue of ''Century Magazine''.
The hind feet each had three short toes, while each fore foot had five toes; only the inner two toes had a blunt hoof.
The earlier and more basal genus ''Huayangosaurus'' from the Middle Jurassic of China (some 165 million years ago – Mya) antedates ''Stegosaurus'' by 20 million years and is the only genus in the family Huayangosauridae.
This study showed that 9.8% of ''Stegosaurus'' specimens examined had injuries to their tail spikes.
Four possible plate arrangements have been proposed over the years:
