At Lincoln's request, he undertook a mission to the Border States and to the Midwest to rouse the spirit of Unionism; he spoke in Virginia, Ohio and Illinois.
Douglas campaigned energetically, attacking abolitionism in the North, and disunionism in the South.
He was buried on the shore of Lake Michigan.
Even his Republican critics praised him for this stand, and he restored his standing with the moderates of the North.
He evaded Douglas' question about the admission of a slave state.
After the bombardment of Fort Sumter, Lincoln decided to proclaim a state of rebellion and call for 75,000 troops to suppress it.
The year after their marriage, her father died and bequeathed Martha a 2,500-acre cotton plantation with 100 slaves on the Pearl River in Lawrence County, Mississippi.
He denounced Lincoln for his insistence that slavery was a moral issue that had to be resolved by the nation as a whole.
In his "Freeport Doctrine" of 1858, he repeatedly said that he did not care whether slavery was voted up or down, but only that the people had the right to vote it up or down.
He appointed Douglas the property manager but, as a senator of the free state of Illinois, and with presidential aspirations, Douglas found the Southern plantation presented difficulties.
Payne later became a prominent businessman and politician in Cleveland, Ohio, and was a supporter of Douglas' subsequent campaigns for president.
He concludes that Douglas was the "ideological and practical head of the northern opposition to the antislavery movement" and questions whether Douglas "opposed black slavery for any reason, including economics".
With Stephen's approval, she had his two sons baptized as Catholic and reared in that faith.
Edgar Lee Masters' work ''Children of the Marketplace: A fictitious biography'' is about Stephen Douglas.
It was enough to satisfy Illinoisans, even in many former Know-Nothing strongholds.
(While this was clearly directed at Southern secessionists, it also included by clear implication the anti-slavery activists who resisted enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act.)
In 1833 Douglas migrated first to Cleveland, and then to Winchester, Illinois, where he served as an itinerant teacher and opened a school for three months at three dollars a pupil.
Lincoln disclaimed the radical views on racial equality attributed to him by Douglas, arguing only for the right of negroes to personal liberty and to earn their own livings.
When civil war came in April 1861, he rallied his supporters to the Union cause with all his energies, but he died of typhoid fever a few weeks later.
He was a member of several Masonic organizations in Springfield.
At Raleigh, North Carolina, he said "I am in favor of executing in good faith every clause and provision of the Constitution and protecting every right under it - and then hanging every man who takes up arms against it!"
Douglas stepped in and divided the parts of the Compromise into separate bills, each of which had majority support, though a different majority for each, and thus the Compromise was passed.
The bolted Southern Democrats nominated Vice President John C. Breckinridge.
After his death, Douglas's friends created the Douglas Monument Association.
Lincoln took the oath of office, then took off his "stovepipe" hat in preparation for giving his inaugural address.
"You do not know the dishonest purposes of those men as well as I do," he said.
Douglas is referenced by folk-artist Sufjan Stevens in the song "Decatur, or, Round of Applause for Your Stepmother!
Douglas looked over the proclamation before it was issued and endorsed it completely.
Douglas set off a tremendous political upheaval with the Kansas–Nebraska Act in 1854.
In Congress, he championed territorial expansion and supported the Mexican War.
was his cry, and he insisted that the people locally could and should make the decisions about slavery, rather than the national government.
Douglas, who was on the platform, stepped forward and took the hat from Lincoln's hands.
This struck down key elements of the Missouri and 1850 Compromises, made the Kansas–Nebraska Act irrelevant, and denied the basis of "popular sovereignty".
It did not reach the Gulf until afterward.
Douglas strongly opposed Buchanan's machinations, and the two became bitter enemies.
The remaining delegates now voted on a Presidential nominee.
Leonard Volk, a prominent sculptor, was commissioned to design the monument.
Lincoln followed Douglas around the state, answering each Douglas speech with one of his own a day or two later.
Another issue came up at this time, and here Douglas did take a side.
Historian Allan Nevins was harsh on Douglas, writing "When it slavery paid it was good, and when it did not pay it was bad."
He was largely responsible for the Compromise of 1850 that apparently settled slavery issues; however, in 1854 he reopened the slavery question with the Kansas–Nebraska Act, which opened some previously prohibited territories to slavery under popular sovereignty.
But he responded with a principled argument which won over many of his critics.
As a teenager, he was apprenticed to a cabinetmaker in Middlebury.
Harry V. Jaffa thought Douglas was tricking the South with popular sovereignty—telling Southerners it would protect slavery but believing the people would vote against it.
In early October, Republicans won state elections in Ohio and Pennsylvania.
After several such incidents, Douglas agreed to seven formal joint appearances, now known as the Lincoln-Douglas Debates.
Southern leaders proposed a deal: they would support the central route if slavery was permitted in the new Territories.
He was a champion of the Young America movement which sought to modernize politics and replace the agrarian and strict constructionist orthodoxies of the past.
He disagreed with the Supreme Court's ''Dred Scott'' decision that Congress had no ability to regulate slavery in the territories.
At Galesburg, Douglas explicitly declared that the Declaration of Independence was not meant to apply to non-whites.
Despite the vigor of his campaign, Douglas was defeated.
He criticized what he called Douglas's "dim moral perceptions."
Though he and Lincoln had been well-known rivals for both Senator and President, his respect for the office and his loyalty to the Union overcame any personal bad feelings.
Douglas became a member of the Masonic fraternity in Springfield Lodge No.
On November 20, 1856, Douglas married a second time, to 20-year-old Adele Cutts, a southern woman from the capital.
He invoked "popular sovereignty", the doctrine that the people of a community were rightfully entitled to decide such issues for themselves.
He went to the South to rally Unionist sentiment.
When Buchanan supported the Lecompton Constitution and the pro-slavery position on Kansas, Douglas fought him in a long battle that gained Douglas the 1860 Democratic nomination but ripped his party apart.
Among them was Abraham Lincoln, who attacked Douglas in three major public speeches, most notably at Peoria on October 16, 1854.
In the alternate history short story ''Lincoln's Charge'' by Bill Fawcett (published in ''Alternate Presidents''), Douglas wins the election of 1860, a change which only postpones the outbreak of war by one year.
Opposition to this led to the formation of the Republican Party.
During the subsequent campaign, Douglas broke an unwritten rule by campaigning in person.
While studying law he became friendly with Henry B. Payne, a law student in another attorney's office.
He also opposed the efforts of President James Buchanan and his Southern allies to enact a Federal slave code and impose the Lecompton Constitution on Kansas.
He traveled the state, making speeches for the Democratic ticket.
The pro-Buchanan "Danite" candidates got only a handful of votes.
Douglas made one last attempt to square the circle.
Douglas briefly courted Mary Todd (who married Abraham Lincoln instead).
The Memorial and tomb were completed in 1883.
If he embraced ''Dred Scott'', he would lose northern support.
Douglas discovered a "clerical error", and revised the Act to suit.
"Let the people rule!"
He denounced as sacrilegious the petitions signed by thousands of clergymen in 1854, who said the Kansas–Nebraska Act offended God's will.
In the first version of the Act, Douglas allowed for the Territories to choose slave or free status at statehood, but the Southerners demanded immediate permission for slavery there (an implicit repeal of that part of the Missouri and 1850 compromises).
He then settled in Jacksonville, Illinois, where he was admitted to the bar.
In March 1847 he married Martha Martin, the 21-year-old daughter of wealthy Colonel Robert Martin of North Carolina.
The Convention adopted the committee's minority report, which evaded ''Dred Scott'' and rejected a slave code, prompting 50 delegates from seven Southern states to withdraw.
But he had nowhere to set down the hat.
If he rejected ''Dred Scott'', he would lose Southern support he needed for the presidential election of 1860.
The "Fire-Eaters" denounced Douglas as no better than an abolitionist.
Douglas joked that he could travel from Washington back to Illinois by the light of burning effigies of him.
The girl died a few weeks later, and Douglas and the two boys were bereft.
In 1940, Canadian actor Gene Lockhart portrayed Douglas in the RKO film ''Abe Lincoln in Illinois''.
Johannsen found Douglas "did not regard slavery as a moral question; at least, he never condemned the institution in moral terms either publicly or privately."
The convention reconvened on June 18 in Baltimore, Maryland.
But Douglas, seeing the dangers facing the country, went on speaking tours across the country.
Pro-slavery Southerners had praised Douglas for relaxing restrictions on slavery in the Kansas–Nebraska Act; now, ardent pro-slavery "Fire-Eaters" denounced him for supporting any restrictions at all.
Douglas argued that therefore, the people of a Territory should decide whether to permit or exclude slavery, not Congress.
In 1860, the conflict over slavery led to the split in the Democratic Party in the 1860 Convention.
An avid promoter of railroad expansion, he devised the land grant system to fund the Illinois Central railroad.
Douglas received just over 150 votes out of 250 cast, but the Convention's rules required a 2/3 majority for a nomination, and chairman Caleb Cushing ruled that 2/3 of the entire convention was needed.
This was the first appearance of the Solid South.
Douglas died in Chicago from typhoid fever on June 3, 1861.
Douglas is a significant character in the mash-up novel ''Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter''.
The railroad was begun, but its southern extension was interrupted by the Civil War.
Instead, he began to teach school while studying law with Walter and Levi Hubbell.
Critics said that he wanted to enhance the value of his adjoining lots.
However, in the film adaptation, his role is reduced to a cameo played by Alan Tudyk.
If he answered "Yes", he would reject ''Dred Scott'', and would alienate Southerners.
The Freeport Doctrine was vehemently rejected by most Southerners.
Douglas faced an ugly dilemma.
Douglas told his secretary "Mr. Lincoln is the next President.
Douglas owned land in Chicago which the railroad would make more valuable, but his primary motivation was political.
Douglas had previously defeated Lincoln in a Senate contest, noted for the famous Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858.
Congress passed the Act by the votes of some Northern Democrats and of all
Martha Douglas died young on January 19, 1853, after the birth of her third child, a daughter.
He supported the proposals of Henry Clay, despite their partisan differences (Clay was a Whig).
The newlyweds moved their Illinois home from Springfield to fast-growing Chicago in the summer of 1847.
In the debates, Douglas reiterated his support of popular sovereignty.
It was famously said of him that he didn't care "whether slavery was voted up or voted down," as long as it was voted on by the people.
He suggested only one change: Lincoln should call for ''200,000'' troops, not just 75,000.
They had two sons: Robert M. Douglas (January 1849 – 1917) and Stephen Arnold Douglas, Jr., (November 1850 – 1908).
He also asserted that the soil and climate of the Territories was unsuitable for slave agriculture anyway, which reassured northerners.
Moving back, he remarked "If I can't be the President, at least I can hold his hat."
We must try to save the Union.
Douglas dropped the second "s" from his name some years later.
Douglas supporters responded that with such a platform, they would lose every Northern state.
Douglas was a leading proponent of democracy, and believed in the principle of popular sovereignty: that the majority of citizens should decide contentious issues such as slavery and territorial expansion.
Nebraska Territory, west of Missouri, was then being settled, and Congress needed to provide territorial organization for the region.
He was born Stephen Arnold Douglass in Brandon, Vermont, to Stephen Arnold Douglass and Sarah Fisk.
He was a U.S. representative, a U.S. senator, and the Democratic Party nominee for president in the 1860 election, losing to Republican Abraham Lincoln.
Douglas was appointed as State's Attorney of Morgan County in 1834, serving until 1836.
(That is, Federal law prohibiting any Freeport-style "hostile legislation" by any Territory, and committing Federal authority to protect slavery there.)
Douglas defended applying popular sovereignty as consistent with American democratic tradition, and said it would remove the slavery issue from national politics, where it threatened to rip the nation apart.
By 1852, he was considered one of the Democrats' national leaders.
There was a Senate election in Illinois in 1855: Republicans and dissident Democrats elected "Anti-Nebraska" Democrat Lyman Trumbull, a clear rebuke to Douglas.
As chairman of the Committee on Territories, Douglas dominated the Senate in the 1850s.
After 57 ballots, the convention adjourned on May 3.
She had a miscarriage in 1858 and became ill.
Then in 1857, the US Supreme Court issued the ''Dred Scott'' decision, which declared that under the Constitution, neither Congress nor a Territorial legislature created by Congress had the power to prohibit slavery in a Territory.
He said, "This Government was made by our fathers on the white basis ... made by white men for the benefit of white men and their posterity forever".
She was left weakened by childbirth.
At that time, Republican areas in northern Illinois were much less settled and so received fewer seats.
He resigned from the Court upon being elected US Representative in 1843, and was re-elected in 1844.
Republican candidates actually received more votes statewide, but the districts had been laid out per the Census of 1850.
Although he wished to attend Middlebury College like his father, his family couldn't support his continued formal education.
Douglas continued to steer a middle course on the slavery issue.
This action was initially highly unpopular in the North.
President James Buchanan and his Southern allies tried to get Kansas admitted as a slave state.
Douglas always had a deep and abiding faith in democracy.
He declared that while the Supreme Court had barred explicit prohibition of slavery, that didn't really matter, because the people of a Territory could exclude slavery in practice by "unfriendly legislation".
(Buchanan had used Federal patronage to form an anti-Douglas faction of Illinois Democrats.
The following year, Adele gave birth to a daughter, Ellen, who lived only a few weeks.
Graham Peck finds that while several scholars have said that Douglas was personally opposed to slavery, none has presented "extensive arguments to justify the conclusion".
He demanded to know whether Lincoln would ever vote to admit a new slave state, even if the majority of settlers favored slavery.
He cites recent scholarship as (equally briefly) finding Douglas "insensitive to the moral repugnance of slavery" or even "proslavery".
He contended  for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1852, but was passed over for "dark horse" Franklin Pierce.
He received 1,376,957 popular votes (second at 29%), but only 12 electoral votes (fourth and last at 4%), with Lincoln receiving 180.
In the 1858 legislative elections, the Democrats won a narrow majority of seats, and Douglas was re-elected by a vote of 54 to 46.
(His height is given in various sources as being in the range of five feet to five feet, four inches; five feet four is reported most often.)
At the same time, some Northerners, seeing "popular sovereignty" apparently dead, went over to the Republicans.
But Clay's "omnibus" bill for the Compromise of 1850 was defeated - there being a majority who were opposed to various parts of it.
Douglas was well known as a resourceful party leader, and an adroit, ready, skillful tactician in debate and passage of legislation.
This group, known as "Danites", ran their own candidates for the legislature.)
(Douglas was provided with a private train by the Illinois Central, through his friend, IC vice-president and future Civil War general George McClellan.)
But the anti-slavery majority in Kansas rejected this, despite efforts to rig the voting there.
For his part, Lincoln criticized Douglas for his moral indifference to slavery, but denied any intention of interference with slavery in the South.
He tried to avoid both hazards, issuing a tepid endorsement of the decision, while continuing to assert popular sovereignty without explicitly saying the Court was wrong.
At this time, various proposals for a transcontinental railroad to California had been offered.
Hardline pro-slavery Southerners rejected Douglas, and nominated their own candidate, Vice President John C. Breckinridge, while the Northern Democrats nominated Douglas.
Other stars of the segment are Lloyd Corrigan and Tom Tryon, and Alan Hale, Jr.
Many Southerners openly predicted the collapse of the party and the election of Republican front-runner William H. Seward.
The Democrats selected Douglas; the Republicans named Lincoln.
Douglas also emphasized his opposition to the Lecompton Constitution and alluded to the hostility of the Buchanan Administration.
In 1939, actor Milburn Stone portrayed Douglas in the Twentieth Century-Fox film ''Young Mr. Lincoln''.
Douglas deeply believed in democracy, arguing the will of the people should always be decisive.
This was critically important, because his Senate term ended in 1859, and he wanted to be re-elected.
In the second debate, at Freeport, he asked a direct question: "Can the people of a United States Territory, in any lawful way ... exclude slavery from its limits prior to the formation of a State Constitution?"
He made no compromises.
In 1846 the Illinois General Assembly elected him a US Senator.
"Free-soil" and anti-slavery Northerners remained critical.
Douglas described this as causing an unnecessary conflict between free and slave states, which threatened to boil up into disunion and war.
Some former Whigs formed the Constitutional Union Party and nominated John Bell.
By the end of the year, he wrote his Vermont relatives, "I have become a Western man, have imbibed Western feelings principles and interests and have selected Illinois as the favorite place of my adoption."
The debates were redefining republicanism.
In 1957, the actor Walter Coy portrayed Douglas in the episode "Springfield Incident" of CBS's ''The 20th Century Fox Hour''.
He was elected to the Illinois House of Representatives, was appointed registrar of the Springfield Land Office, became Illinois Secretary of State, and at age 27 was appointed an associate justice of the Illinois Supreme Court when the court was expanded in 1841.
Southerners, Democrat and Whig alike; Douglas had little to do with the final text.
His sole lengthy visit to Mississippi was in 1848, and he made only brief emergency trips thereafter.
But during the 1858 Senate campaign, he argued its effect could be negated by popular sovereignty.
'''Stephen Arnold Douglas''' (April 23, 1813 – June 3, 1861) was an American politician from Illinois and the designer of the Kansas–Nebraska Act.
Opponents of the Act saw it as a triumph for the hated Slave Power.
Her great-aunt was the former U.S. First Lady Dolley Madison.
The support for Douglas in the North came from the Irish Catholics and the poorer farmers; in the South, the Irish Catholics were his main supporters.
Her mother Ellen O'Neal Cutts was from a Maryland Catholic family and raised Adele as a Catholic.
The Missouri Compromise prohibited slavery there (because it was north of the 36°30' compromise line), and the Compromise of 1850 had reaffirmed this.
One was for a southern route, from New Orleans; another was for a central route, from Chicago.
The Southern-controlled platform committee explicitly endorsed ''Dred Scott'', and called for Congress to enact a slave code for all the Territories.
After replacement delegates were seated in place of some of the withdrawn delegates, most of the remaining Southerners withdrew.
If Douglas answered "No", he would fully endorse ''Dred Scott'', and would alienate Illinoisans and other Northerners.
He grew up with his mother (or under the care of a bachelor uncle) and was educated in the local schools.
She was the daughter of James Madison Cutts of Washington, D.C., nephew of President James Madison, and Ellen O'Neal, sister of Rose O'Neal Greenhow.
Douglas was easily reelected to the Senate in 1853.
From the first presidential election, that had been considered beneath the dignity of a presidential candidate.
However, Douglas faced implacable opposition in the Deep South.
The Whig Party dissolved; anti-slavery Northern Whigs formed the Republican Party instead, joined by many "free-soil" Democrats.
He also suggested that, despite the public break between Douglas and Buchanan over Kansas, Douglas, Buchanan, and Chief Justice Roger B. Taney worked together to extend and perpetuate slavery.
He also asserted that Lincoln supported civil and social equality between the races, and insinuated that Lincoln even accepted interracial marriage.
His mother remarried in 1830 and moved to western New York.
Douglas initially endorsed the ''Dred Scott'' decision of 1857.
