H. G. Wells remarked upon "the great influence of the studio" on Crane's work, quoting a passage from ''The Red Badge of Courage'' as an example: "At nightfall the column broke into regimental pieces, and the fragments went into the fields to camp.
In December 1879, Crane wrote a poem about wanting a dog for Christmas.
In early June, he observed the establishment of an American base in Cuba when Marines seized Guantánamo Bay.
"None of them knew the color of the sky.
Beginning with the publication of ''Maggie: A Girl of the Streets'' in 1893, Crane was recognized by critics mainly as a novelist.
His older sister Helen took him to Asbury Park to be with their brother Townley and his wife, Fannie.
On the St. Johns River and less than  from Jacksonville, ''Commodore'' struck a sandbar in a dense fog and damaged its hull.
— Stephen Crane, account of the JOUAM parade as it appeared in the ''Tribune''
Visiting battlefields in Northern Virginia, including Fredericksburg, he would later produce five more Civil War tales: "Three Miraculous Soldiers", "The Veteran", "An Indiana Campaign", "An Episode of War" and ''The Little Regiment''.
He rose rapidly in the ranks of the student battalion.
He would later remember "how I looked forward to publication and pictured the sensation I thought it would make.
Meanwhile, Crane's affair with Taylor blossomed.
The novel was published in late February or early March 1893 by a small printing shop that usually printed medical books and religious tracts.
Dr. Crane died on February 16, 1880, at the age of 60; Stephen was eight years old.
Crane wrote his first known story, "Uncle Jake and the Bell Handle", when he was 14.
''The Black Riders'' in particular is essentially a dramatic concept and the poems provide continuity within the dramatic structure.
''The Monster and Other Stories'' was in production and ''War Is Kind'', his second collection of poems, was published in the United States in May.
During his brief literary career, he wrote more than a hundred short stories and fictional sketches.
Upon arrival in Old Point Comfort, Virginia, he spent a few weeks resting in a hotel.
Do they want the public to think the coal mines gilded ball-rooms with the miners eating ice-cream in boiled shirt-fronts?"
"The Open Boat", "The Blue Hotel", ''The Monster'' and "The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky" are generally considered by critics to be examples of Crane's best work.
A storm of controversy erupted over a report he wrote on the Junior Order of United American Mechanics' American Day Parade, entitled "Parades and Entertainments".
Meanwhile, Crane felt "heavy with troubles" and "chased to the wall" by expenses.
Upon returning to England, Crane secured a solicitor to act as guarantor for their debts, after which Crane and Taylor relocated to Brede Place.
Conceiving his story from the point of view of a young private who is at first filled with boyish dreams of the glory of war and then quickly becomes disillusioned by war's reality, Crane borrowed the private's surname, "Fleming", from his sister-in-law's maiden name.
Crane's later novels have not received as much critical praise.
Although similar to Crane's noted novel, ''The Little Regiment'' was believed to lack vigor and originality.
It is possible that Crane utilized religion's formal psychic space, now suddenly available resulting from the recent "Death of God," as a milieu for his compensative art.
When asked whether or not he would write an autobiography in 1896, Crane responded that he "dare not say that I am honest.
Poetic lunacy would be a better name for the book."
Taylor, left alone in England, was also penniless.
While the war idled, he interviewed people and produced occasional copy.
His early New York City sketches and Bowery tales accurately described the results of industrialization, immigration and the growth of cities and their slums.
Against the advice of the arresting sergeant, Crane made a statement confirming Dora Clark's innocence, stating that "I only know that while with me she acted respectably, and that the policeman's charge was false."
''The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure'' (1898) contains thirteen short stories that deal with three periods in Crane's life: his Asbury Park boyhood, his trip to the West and Mexico in 1895, and his Cuban adventure in 1897.
While he held an impressive record on the drill field and baseball diamond, Crane generally did not excel in the classroom.
Having lost the gold given to him for his journey, Crane wired Cora Taylor for help.
Although some critics considered the work overly graphic and profane, it was widely heralded for its realistic portrayal of war and unique writing style.
The ninth surviving child of Protestant Methodist parents, Crane began writing at the age of four and had published several articles by the age of 16.
Not having a middle name, as was customary among other students, he took to signing his name "Stephen T. Crane" in order "to win recognition as a regular fellow".
He left Jacksonville on January 11 for New York City, where he applied for a passport to Cuba, Mexico and the West Indies.
They arrived in Athens in early April; between April 17 (when Turkey declared war on Greece) and April 22, Crane wrote his first published report of the war, "An Impression of the 'Concert'&nbsp;".
In mid-1888, Crane became his brother Townley's assistant at a New Jersey shore news bureau, working there every summer until 1892.
Garland became a mentor for and champion of the young writer, whose intellectual honesty impressed him.
Crane's work, however, cannot be determined by style solely on chronology.
Although his mother was a popular spokeswoman for the Woman's Christian Temperance Union and a highly religious woman, Crane wrote that he did not believe "she was as narrow as most of her friends or family."
With almost no money coming in from his finished stories, Crane accepted the assignment and left Oxted for New York.
Crane was reportedly disgusted by the cuts, asking Linson: "Why the hell did they send me up there then?
Despite his weakened condition, Crane continued to dictate fragmentary episodes for the completion of ''The O'Ruddy''.
''Active Service'', a novella based on Crane's correspondence experience, was published in October.
While "The Open Boat" and "The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky" are often considered short stories, others are variously identified.
The ''Detroit Free Press'' declared that ''The Red Badge'' would give readers "so vivid a picture of the emotions and the horrors of the battlefield that you will pray your eyes may never look upon the reality."
After the trial ended on October 16, the arresting officer was exonerated, but Crane's reputation was ruined.
Sources report that following an encounter with a male prostitute that spring, Crane began a novel on the subject entitled ''Flowers of Asphalt,'' which he later abandoned.
In the introduction, Hemingway wrote that the novel "is one of the finest books of our literature, and I include it entire because it is all as much of a piece as a great poem is."
The Cranes were descended from Jaspar Crane, a founder of New Haven Colony, who had migrated there from England in 1639.
There is no order for good writers."
During this battle, Crane encountered "a fat waddling puppy" that he immediately claimed, dubbing it "Velestino, the Journal dog".
Whitman's ''Leaves of Grass'' were luminous in comparison.
His father had been principal there from 1849 to 1858.
— Stephen Crane, ''The Red Badge of Courage''
Hamlin Garland reviewed the work in the June 1893 issue of ''The Arena'', calling it "the most truthful and unhackneyed study of the slums I have yet read, fragment though it is."
His first known inquiry, recorded by his father, dealt with writing; at the age of three, while imitating his brother Townley's writing, he asked his mother, "how do you spell ''O''?"
He confided to his agent that he was $2,000 in debt but that he would "beat it" with more literary output.
In ''The Red Badge of Courage'', the main character both longs for the heroics of battle but ultimately fears it, demonstrating the dichotomy of courage and cowardice.
Crane's work is often thematically driven by Naturalistic and Realistic concerns, including ideals versus realities, spiritual crises and fear.
When he left for Epirus in the northwest, Taylor remained in Athens, where she became the Greek war's first woman war correspondent.
Although Crane was confident among peers, strong negative reviews of the recently published ''The Third Violet'' were causing his literary reputation to dwindle.
He became fascinated with issues of the ''Century'' that were largely devoted to famous battles and military leaders from the Civil War.
Whereas he found the lower class in New York pitiful, he was impressed by the "superiority" of the Mexican peasants' contentment and "even refused to pity them."
Just where and how it takes hold upon the heart is difficult of description."
Some 1,400&nbsp;people mourned Dr. Crane at his funeral, more than double the size of his congregation.
It appeared in the February 1890 Claverack College ''Vidette''.
''George's Mother'' is less allegorical and more personal than his two previous novels, and it focuses on the conflict between a church-going, temperance-adhering woman (thought to be based on Crane's mother) and her single remaining offspring, who is a naive dreamer.
The novel has been anthologized numerous times, including in Ernest Hemingway's 1942 collection ''Men at War: The Best War Stories of All Time''.
Crane's first publication under his byline was an article on the explorer Henry M. Stanley's famous quest to find the Scottish missionary David Livingstone in Africa.
During this time, he expanded or entirely reworked ''Maggie: A Girl of the Streets'', which is about a girl who "blossoms in a mud-puddle" and becomes a pitiful victim of circumstance.
Although towed off the sandbar the following day, it was beached again in Mayport and again damaged.
Crane wrote many different types of fictional pieces while indiscriminately applying to them terms such as "story", "tale" and "sketch".
Although the novel's plot is simple, its dramatic mood, quick pace and portrayal of Bowery life have made it memorable.
The work deals almost exclusively with boyhood, and the stories are drawn from events occurring in Port Jervis, where Crane lived from the age of six to eleven.
This novel would ultimately become ''The Red Badge of Courage''.
These stories, which Crane wrote while desperately ill, include "The Price of the Harness" and "The Lone Charge of William B. Perkins" and are dramatic, ironic and sometimes humorous.
His last novel, a suspenseful and picaresque work entitled ''The O'Ruddy'', was finished posthumously by Robert Barr and published in 1903.
"Hunting Wild Dogs" and "The Last of the Mohicans" were the first of fourteen unsigned Sullivan County sketches and tales that were published in the ''Tribune'' between February and July 1892.
The title of the work is ironic; Henry wishes "that he, too, had a wound, a red badge of courage", echoing a wish to have been wounded in battle.
A vigorous cross-examination took place that sought to portray Crane as a man of dubious morals; while the prosecution proved that he frequented brothels, Crane claimed this was merely for research purposes.
He also wrote five or six poems a day.
Not only did Crane call out God specifically with the lines "Well then I hate thee / righteous image" in "The Black Riders" (1895), but even his most hopeful tropes, such as the "comradeship" of his "Open Boat" survivors, make no mention of deity, specifying only "indifferent nature."
Crane later wrote that his father, Dr. Crane, "was a great, fine, simple mind," who had written numerous tracts on theology.
Referring to themselves as Mr. and Mrs. Crane, the couple lived openly in England, but Crane concealed the relationship from his friends and family in the United States.
He attended a Delta Upsilon chapter meeting on June 12, 1891, but shortly afterward left college for good.
For this reason, critics have found clear-cut classification of Crane's work problematic.
Returning to New York five months later, Crane joined the Lantern (alternately spelled "Lanthom" or "Lanthorne") Club organized by a group of young writers and journalists.
Plans were made for him to travel as a correspondent to Gibraltar to write sketches from Saint Helena, the site of a Boer prison, but at the end of March and in early April he suffered two more hemorrhages.
Although ''The Red Badge of Courage'' had by this time gone through fourteen printings in the United States and six in England, Crane was running out of money.
In June, the ''New York Tribune'' dismissed the book as "so much trash."
He published his fictional story, "Great Bugs of Onondaga," simultaneously in the ''Syracuse Daily Standard'' and the ''New York Tribune''.
Crane's writing is characterized by vivid intensity, distinctive dialects, and irony.
Extreme isolation from society and community is also apparent in Crane's work.
Plagued by financial difficulties and ill health, Crane died of tuberculosis in a Black Forest sanatorium in Germany at the age of 28.
Although recognized primarily for ''The Red Badge of Courage'', which has become an American classic, Crane is also known for his poetry, journalism, and short stories such as "The Open Boat", "The Blue Hotel", "The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky", and ''The Monster''.
Instead, they were identified by epithets: Maggie, for example, was the girl who "blossomed in a mud-puddle" and Pete, her seducer, was a "knight".
For the next four months the book was in the top six on various bestseller lists around the country.
In October 1892, he moved into a rooming house in Manhattan whose boarders were a group of medical students.
In December, the couple held an elaborate Christmas party at Brede, attended by Conrad, Henry James, H. G. Wells and other friends; it lasted several days.
Although a ''Tribune'' colleague stated that Crane "was not highly distinguished above any other boy of twenty who had gained a reputation for saying and writing bright things," that summer his reporting took on a more skeptical, hypocrisy-deflating tone.
Crane's reputation was then enhanced by faithful support from writer friends such as Joseph Conrad, H. G. Wells and Ford Madox Ford, all of whom either published recollections or commented upon their time with Crane.
Their relationship suffered in later years, however, because Garland disapproved of Crane's alleged immorality, related to his living with a woman married to another man.
In early 1894, he showed some of his poems, or "lines" as he called them, to Hamlin Garland, who said he read "some thirty in all" with "growing wonder."
When the boy was almost two, his father wrote in his diary that his youngest son became "so sick that we are anxious about him."
Later that summer, Crane met and befriended author Hamlin Garland, who had been lecturing locally on American literature and the expressive arts; on August 17 he gave a talk on novelist William Dean Howells, which Crane wrote up for the ''Tribune''.
He was the fourteenth and last child born to the couple.
Crane considered it a "quiet little story."
At 2 a.m. on September 16, 1896, he escorted two chorus girls and Clark from New York City's Broadway Garden, a popular "resort" where he had interviewed the women for a series he was writing.
This is apparent in his first novel, in which Crane ignored the romantic, sentimental approach of  slum fiction; he instead concentrated on the cruelty and sordid aspects of poverty, expressed by the brashness of the Bowery's crude dialect and profanity, which he used lavishly.
A classmate remembered him as a highly literate but erratic student, lucky to pass examinations in math and science, and yet "far in advance of his fellow students in his knowledge of History and Literature", his favorite subjects.
He brought along Taylor, who had sold the Hotel de Dream in order to follow him.
Although Crane had filed more than twenty dispatches in the three months he had covered the war, the ''World'''s business manager believed that the paper had not received its money's worth and fired him.
Within a few months, Crane was persuaded by his family to forgo a military career and transfer to Lafayette College in Easton, Pennsylvania, in order to pursue a mining engineering degree.
While writing feature articles for the Bacheller syndicate, he traveled to Saint Louis, Missouri, Nebraska, New Orleans, Galveston, Texas and then Mexico City.
He wrote in quick succession stories such as ''The Monster'', "The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky", "Death and the Child" and "The Blue Hotel".
The two spent much time together while Crane awaited his departure.
In his will he left everything to Taylor, who took his body to New Jersey for burial.
Amy Leslie, a reporter from Chicago and a former lover, sued him for $550.
One undeniable fact about Crane's work, as Anthony Splendora noted in 2015, is that Death haunts it; like a  threatening eclipse it overshadows his best efforts, each of which features the signal demise of a main character.
Truth to life itself was the only test, the greatest artists were the simplest, and simple because they were true."
In an ordeal that he recounted in the short story "The Open Boat", Crane and three other men (including the ship's Captain) floundered off the coast of Florida for a day and a half before trying to land the dinghy at Daytona Beach.
In late 1885, he enrolled at Pennington Seminary, a ministry-focused coeducational boarding school  north of Trenton.
His favorite book, for example, was Mark Twain's ''Life on the Mississippi'', in which God is mentioned only twice—once as irony and once as "a swindle."
He sporadically sent out dispatches and stories; he wrote about the mood in Havana, the crowded city sidewalks, and other topics, but he was soon desperate for money again.
He roomed in the Delta Upsilon fraternity house and joined the baseball team.
Frustrated with the dryly written stories, Crane stated, "I wonder that some of those fellows don't tell how they ''felt'' in those scraps.
Similarities between the stylistic techniques in Crane's writing and Impressionist painting—including the use of color and chiaroscuro—are often cited to support the theory that Crane was not only an Impressionist but also influenced by the movement.
Concentrating on his writing, Crane began to experiment with tone and style while trying out different subjects.
By this time, however, blockades had formed along the Florida coast as tensions rose with Spain, and Crane concluded that he would never be able to travel to Cuba.
As Crane saw one woman safely to a streetcar, a plainclothes policeman named Charles Becker arrested the other two for solicitation; Crane was threatened with arrest when he tried to interfere.
None of his books after ''The Red Badge of Courage'' had sold well, and he bought a typewriter to spur output.
Although Garland and William Dean Howells encouraged him to submit his poetry for publication, Crane's free verse was too unconventional for most.
They wrote frequently, traveling throughout the country separately and together.
She wrote under the pseudonym "Imogene Carter" for the ''New York Journal'', a job that Crane had secured for her.
Believing they were being ridiculed, some JOUAM marchers were outraged and wrote to the editor.
Crane, who initially went briefly to Philadelphia to escape the pressure of publicity, returned to New York to give testimony at Becker's trial despite advice given to him from Theodore Roosevelt, who was Police Commissioner at the time and a new acquaintance of Crane.
H. G. Wells considered "The Open Boat" to be "beyond all question, the crown of all his work", and it is one of the most frequently discussed of Crane's works.
He sold "The Open Boat" to Scribner's for $300 in early March.
During the final years of his life, he covered conflicts in Greece (accompanied by Cora, recognized as the first woman war correspondent) and later lived in England with her.
Recalling this feat, he wrote that it "sounds like the lie of a fond mother at a teaparty, but I do remember that I got ahead very fast and that father was very pleased with me."
Between the third and the ninth of December 1894, ''The Red Badge of Courage'' was published in some half-dozen newspapers in the United States.
Although it is not certain when Crane began to write poetry seriously, he once said that his overall poetic aim was "to give my ideas of life as a whole, so far as I know it".
Although most stories about his life tended toward the romantic, rumors about his alleged drug use and alcoholism persisted long after his death.
He later looked back on his time at Claverack as "the happiest period of my life although I was not aware of it."
In "The Open Boat", "An Experiment in Misery" and other stories, Crane uses light, motion and color to express degrees of epistemological uncertainty.
Crane struggled to make a living as a free-lance writer, contributing sketches and feature articles to various New York newspapers.
He later said he did so for research.
The name "Maggie" was added to the title later.
Although academically weak, Crane gained experience at Claverack that provided background (and likely some anecdotes from the Civil War veterans on the staff) that proved useful when he came to write ''The Red Badge of Courage''.
After showing a willingness to serve during fighting at Cuzco, Cuba, by carrying messages to company commanders, Crane was officially cited for his "material aid during the action".
As he waited in Jacksonville, Florida, for passage, he met Cora Taylor, with whom he began a lasting relationship.
One classmate described him as "indeed physically attractive without being handsome", but he was aloof, reserved and not generally popular at Claverack.
The ''New York Times'' reviewer questioned "whether the author of 'Active Service' himself really sees anything remarkable in his newspapery hero."
Living in near-poverty and greatly anticipating the publication of his books, Crane began work on two more novels: ''The Third Violet'' and ''George's Mother''.
Crane was pleased that the book was "making some stir".
While ''McClure's'' delayed giving him an answer on his novel, they offered him an assignment writing about the Pennsylvania coal mines.
She took a position at Asbury Park's intermediate school and moved in with Helen to care for the young Stephen.
First, Townley and his wife lost their two young children.
There is also a dramatic interplay in which there is frequently a major voice reporting an incident seen ("In the desert / I saw a creature, naked, bestial") or experienced ("A learned man came to me once").
Poet and biographer John Berryman suggested that there were three basic variations, or "norms", of Crane's narrative style.
His health worsened, and by late 1899 he was asking friends about health resorts.
She lived a bohemian lifestyle, owned a hotel of assignation,  and was a well-known and respected local figure.
Crane began to attach price tags to his new works of fiction, hoping that "The Bride", for example, would fetch $175.
Today he is mainly remembered for ''The Red Badge of Courage'', which is regarded as an American classic.
One of the women was released after Crane confirmed her erroneous claim that she was his wife, but Clark was charged and taken to the precinct.
Conrad wrote that Crane was an "artist" and "a seer with a gift for rendering the significant on the surface of things and with an incomparable insight into primitive emotions".
The owner of the ''Tribune'', Whitelaw Reid, was that year's Republican vice-presidential candidate, and this likely increased the sensitivity of the paper's management to the issue.
Crane was often criticized by early reviewers for his frequent incorporation of everyday speech into dialogue, mimicking the regional accents of his characters with colloquial stylization.
Columbia University purchased much of the Stephen Crane materials held by Cora Crane at her death.
Crane was seen as friendly, but also moody and rebellious.
I had an editor friend named Johnson, and put in the "t", and no one could find me in the mob of Smiths."
'''Stephen Crane''' (November 1, 1871 – June 5, 1900) was an American poet, novelist, and short story writer.
It is believed that Crane based the fictional battle in the novel on that of Chancellorsville; he may also have interviewed veterans of the 124th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment, commonly known as the Orange Blossoms, in Port Jervis, New York.
She had apparently recovered by early 1886, but later that year, her son, 23-year-old Luther Crane, died after falling in front of an oncoming train while working as a flagman for the Erie Railroad.
Camp fires, like red, peculiar blossoms, dotted the night.... From this little distance the many fires, with the black forms of men passing to and fro before the crimson rays, made weird and satanic effects."
Although Munroe later said Crane "was not a handsome man", she admired his "remarkable almond-shaped gray eyes."
He begged her to elope with him, but her family opposed the match because Crane lacked money and prospects, and she declined.
Determined to work as a war correspondent, Crane signed on with William Randolph Hearst's ''New York Journal'' to cover the impending Greco-Turkish conflict.
They spout enough of what they ''did'', but they're as emotionless as rocks."
After her husband's death, Mrs. Crane moved to Roseville, near Newark, leaving Stephen in the care of his older brother Edmund, with whom the young boy lived with cousins in Sussex County.
Critic Sergio Perosa, for example, wrote in his essay, "''Stephen Crane fra naturalismo e impressionismo,''" that the work presents a "symbiosis" of Naturalistic ideals and Impressionistic methods.
Crane was fascinated by war and death, as well as fire, disfigurement, fear and courage, all of which inspired him to write many works based on these concepts.
In retaliation, Crane signed with Hearst's ''New York Journal'' with the wish to return to Cuba.
Crane also showed Johnson an early draft of his first novel, ''Maggie: A Girl of the Streets''.
In March 1893, Crane spent hours lounging in Linson's studio while having his portrait painted.
Crane's "Swede" in that story can be taken, following current psychoanalytical theory, as a surrogative, sacrificial victim, ritually to be purged.
This manor in Sussex, which dated to the 14th&nbsp;century and had neither electricity nor indoor plumbing, was offered to them by friends at a modest rent.
He used this area as the geographic setting for several short stories, which were posthumously published in a collection under the title ''Stephen Crane: Sullivan County Tales and Sketches''.
In 1896, Crane endured a highly publicized scandal after appearing as a witness in the trial of a suspected prostitute, an acquaintance named Dora Clark.
Crane pushed himself to write feverishly during the first months at Brede; he told his publisher that he was "doing more work now than I have at any other period in my life".
The Club, located on the roof of an old house on William Street near the Brooklyn Bridge, served as a drinking establishment of sorts and was decorated to look like a ship's cabin.
He was finally cleared to leave for the Cuban port of Cienfuegos on New Year's Eve aboard the ''SS Commodore''.
Irving Bacheller would later state that he "sent Crane to Mexico for new color", which the author found in the form of Mexican slum life.
