Hawking has a rare early-onset, slow-progressing form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), commonly known as motor neurone disease in the UK, that has gradually paralysed him over the decades.
The wager was an "insurance policy" against the proposition that black holes did not exist.
Several buildings have been named after him, including the Stephen W. Hawking Science Museum in San Salvador, El Salvador, the Stephen Hawking Building in Cambridge, and the Stephen Hawking Centre at Perimeter Institute in Canada.
Hawking is greatly concerned over health care, he stated:
Hawking has also guest-starred in ''Futurama'' and ''The Big Bang Theory''.
In his early work, Hawking spoke of God in a metaphorical sense.
With the encouragement of Sciama, he returned to his work.
He worked with a friend on the faculty, Kip Thorne, and engaged him in a scientific wager about whether the dark star Cygnus X-1 was a black hole.
His mother was Scottish.
After several prototypes that did not perform as planned, they finally settled on an adaptive word predictor made by the London-based startup SwiftKey, which utilized a system similar to his original technology, so Hawking could adapt to it easier than a brand new complex system, and after inputting large amounts of Hawking's papers and other written materials, developed a satisfactory system that saves time by predicting words and phrases he uses frequently, similar to typing software used on most smartphones today.
A film version of ''A Brief History of Time'', directed by Errol Morris and produced by Steven Spielberg, premiered in 1992.
Hawking returned to Cambridge in 1975 to a new home and a new job, as reader.
This specified that such singularities would occur without extra conditions.
Hawking did not rule out the existence of a Creator, asking in ''A Brief History of Time'' "Is the unified theory so compelling that it brings about its own existence?"
The same year, Thorne, Hawking and Preskill made another bet, this time concerning the black hole information paradox.
In the late 1980s, Hawking had grown close to one of his nurses, Elaine Mason, to the dismay of some colleagues, caregivers and family members, who were disturbed by her strength of personality and protectiveness.
Hawking has estimated that he studied about a thousand hours during his three years at Oxford.
One cannot travel north of the North Pole, but there is no boundary there—it is simply the point where all north-running lines meet and end.
The voice he uses has an American accent and is no longer produced.
One of those employed was Elaine Mason, who was to become Hawking's second wife.
Since the 1990s, Hawking has accepted the mantle of role model for disabled people, lecturing and participating in fundraising activities.
At Google's Zeitgeist Conference in 2011, Hawking said that "philosophy is dead".
In an interview published in ''The Guardian'', Hawking regarded the concept of Heaven as a myth, believing that there is "no heaven or afterlife" and that such a notion was a "fairy story for people afraid of the dark".
He also received increasing academic recognition of his work.
Despite his headmaster's advice to wait until the next year, Hawking was awarded a scholarship after taking the examinations in March 1959.
Despite their families' financial constraints, both parents attended the University of Oxford, where Frank studied medicine and Isobel, Philosophy, Politics and Economics.
In the same book he suggested the existence of God was unnecessary to explain the origin of the universe.
He is an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, a lifetime member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, and a recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States.
Media attention was intense, and Newsweek magazine cover and a television special both described him as "Master of the Universe".
Talk about creating life in our own image."
In 1997 he conceded a 1991 public scientific wager made with Kip Thorne and John Preskill of Caltech.
The impact of his celebrity was challenging for colleagues and family members, while the prospect of living up to a worldwide fairytale image was daunting for the couple.
After discovering his concession might have been premature, a new, more refined, wager was made.
Hawking also maintained his public profile, including bringing science to a wider audience.
In January 2014 he called the alleged loss of information in black holes his "biggest blunder".
He subsequently developed the research in collaboration with Jim Hartle, and in 1983 they published a model, known as the Hartle–Hawking state.
One of the first messages Hawking produced with his speech-generating device was a request for his assistant to help him finish writing ''A Brief History of Time''.
Inspired by Roger Penrose's theorem of a spacetime singularity in the centre of black holes, Hawking applied the same thinking to the entire universe, and during 1965 wrote his thesis on this topic.
His essay titled "Black Holes" won the Gravity Research Foundation Award in January 1971.
Along with Thomas Hertog at the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) and Jim Hartle, from 2006 on Hawking developed a theory of "top-down cosmology", which says that the universe had not one unique initial state but many different ones, and therefore that it is inappropriate to formulate a theory that predicts the universe's current configuration from one particular initial state.
He preferred to be regarded as "a scientist first, popular science writer second, and, in all the ways that matter, a normal human being with the same desires, drives, dreams, and ambitions as the next person."
Hawking was, however, fiercely independent and unwilling to accept help or make concessions for his disabilities.
Hawking told Jane that he was leaving her for Mason and departed the family home in February 1990.
Jane and Hellyer Jones determined not to break up the family and their relationship remained platonic for a long period.
The book was followed by sequels in 2009 and 2011.
As it was not possible to read mathematics there at the time, Hawking decided to study physics and chemistry.
In August 2014, Hawking was one of 200 signatories to a letter opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to September's referendum on that issue.
In 2002, following a UK-wide vote, the BBC included Hawking in their list of the 100 Greatest Britons.
The National Health Service would pay for a nursing home, but Jane was determined that he would live at home.
In 1969, Hawking accepted a specially created Fellowship for Distinction in Science to remain at Caius.
In 1981, he proposed that information in a black hole is irretrievably lost when a black hole evaporates.
His wife Jane Hawking later noted that "Some people would call it determination, some obstinacy.
His scientific works include a collaboration with Roger Penrose on gravitational singularity theorems in the framework of general relativity, and the theoretical prediction that black holes emit radiation, often called Hawking radiation.
A daughter, Lucy, was born in 1970.
Although at school he was known as "Einstein", Hawking was not initially successful academically.
Despite suggestions that he might leave the United Kingdom as a protest against public funding cuts to basic scientific research, Hawking has continued to work as director of research at the Cambridge University Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, and indicated in 2012 that he had no plans to retire.
Hawking's father wanted his son to attend the well-regarded Westminster School, but the 13-year-old Hawking was ill on the day of the scholarship examination.
This included not only the existence of singularities but also the theory that the universe might have started as a singularity.
Its revelations caused a sensation in the media, but as was his usual practice regarding his personal life, Hawking made no public comment except to say that he did not read biographies about himself.
In doing so, the theory suggests a possible resolution of the fine-tuning question.
Some colleagues were resentful of the attention Hawking received, feeling it was due to his disability.
In September 2014 he joined Starmus Festival as keynote speaker and declared himself an atheist.
However, his disease progressed more slowly than doctors had predicted.
In 2013, the biographical documentary film ''Hawking'', in which Hawking himself is featured, was released.
The family spent a generally happy and stimulating year in Pasadena.
The same year, his synthesiser voice was recorded for the Pink Floyd song "Keep Talking", and in 1999 for an appearance on ''The Simpsons''.
Although Hawking had difficulty walking unsupported and his speech was almost unintelligible, an initial diagnosis that he had only two years to live proved unfounded.
Hawking has used his fame to advertise products, including a wheelchair, National Savings, British Telecom, Specsavers, Egg Banking, and Go Compare.
He believes that philosophers "have not kept up with modern developments in science" and that scientists "have become the bearers of the torch of discovery in our quest for knowledge".
At this point, Hawking activated a switch using his hand and could produce up to 15 words a minute.
Upon his appointment in 1974 to a year-long position at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, California, Jane proposed that a graduate or post-doctoral student live with them and help with his care.
The rowing trainer at the time noted that Hawking cultivated a daredevil image, steering his crew on risky courses that led to damaged boats.
He wanted Hawking to attend University College, Oxford, his own alma mater.
On 20 July 2015, Hawking helped launch Breakthrough Initiatives, an effort to search for extraterrestrial life and attempt to answer the question: Are we alone?
degree in Natural Science, and following a trip to Iran with a friend, he began his graduate work at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in October 1962.
In the early 1970s, Hawking's work with Carter, Werner Israel and David C. Robinson strongly supported Wheeler's no-hair theorem that no matter what the original material from which a black hole is created, it can be completely described by the properties of mass, electrical charge and rotation.
The following year he received the Albert Einstein Medal and an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford.
He said that philosophical problems can be answered by science, particularly new scientific theories which "lead us to a new and very different picture of the universe and our place in it".
Don Page, with whom Hawking had begun a close friendship at Caltech, arrived to work as the live-in graduate student assistant.
After his divorce from Jane in 1995, Hawking married Mason in September, declaring "It's wonderful — I have married the woman I love."
Their joint essay was the runner-up in the 1968 Gravity Research Foundation competition.
Hawking appeared in documentaries entitled ''The Real Stephen Hawking'' (2001), ''Stephen Hawking: Profile'' (2002)  and ''Hawking'' (2013), and the documentary series ''Stephen Hawking, Master of the Universe'' (2008).
In 1989, he was appointed Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH).
His inaugural lecture as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics was titled: "Is the end in sight for Theoretical Physics" and proposed N=8 Supergravity as the leading theory to solve many of the outstanding problems physicists were studying.
In a method he uses to this day, Hawking could now simply press a switch to select phrases, words or letters from a bank of about 2,500–3,000 that are scanned.
By December 1977, Jane had met organist Jonathan Hellyer Jones when singing in a church choir.
In the late 1970s, Hawking was elected Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge.
Hawking allowed the use of his copyrighted voice in the biographical 2014 film ''The Theory of Everything'', in which he was portrayed by Eddie Redmayne in an Academy Award-winning role.
But in 1986 he received a computer program called the "Equalizer" from Walter Woltosz, CEO of Words Plus, who had developed an earlier version of the software to help his mother-in-law, who also suffered from ALS and had lost her ability to speak and write.
The citation continues:
He reportedly declined a knighthood.
Already early in the list, in 1974 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS).
A third child, Timothy, was born in April 1979.
The diagnosis of motor neurone disease came when Hawking was 21, in 1963.
In general, however, Hawking had ambivalent feelings about his role as a disability rights champion: while wanting to help others, he sought to detach himself from his illness and its challenges.
The cost of the care was funded by an American foundation.
He is a longstanding Labour Party supporter.
To communicate with others, someone who knew him well would translate his speech into intelligible speech.
Hawking has expressed concern that life on Earth is at risk from a sudden nuclear war, a genetically engineered virus, global warming, or other dangers we have not yet thought of.
His family could not afford the school fees without the financial aid of a scholarship, so Hawking remained at St Albans.
As Hawking insisted, this time the focus was entirely on science.
Hawking has received numerous awards and honours.
Beginning in 1973, Hawking moved into the study of quantum gravity and quantum mechanics.
Awards do not pay the bills, however, and motivated by the need to finance the children's education and home expenses, in 1982 Hawking determined to write a popular book about the universe that would be accessible to the general public.
For the first 18 months, he was bored and lonely: he was younger than many other students, and found the academic work "ridiculously easy".
Lectures were prepared in advance and were sent to the speech synthesiser in short sections to be delivered.
As required by Cambridge University regulations, Hawking retired as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 2009.
When Hawking began his graduate studies, there was much debate in the physics community about the prevailing theories of the creation of the universe: the Big Bang and the Steady State theories.
During his career Hawking has supervised 39 successful PhD students.
He obtained his PhD degree in Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, specializing in general relativity and cosmology, in March 1966, and his essay entitled "Singularities and the Geometry of Space-Time" shared top honours with one by Penrose to win that year's prestigious Adams Prize.
Hawking's father advised him to study medicine, concerned that there were few jobs for mathematics graduates.
Motivated by the desire to increase public interest in spaceflight and to show the potential of people with disabilities, in 2007 he participated in zero-gravity flight in a "Vomit Comet", courtesy of Zero Gravity Corporation, during which he experienced weightlessness eight times.
Hawking's speech deteriorated, and by the late 1970s he could be understood by only his family and closest friends.
In 1999, Hawking was awarded the Julius Edgar Lilienfeld Prize of the American Physical Society.
Hawking gradually lost the use of his hand, and in 2005 he began to control his communication device with movements of his cheek muscles, with a rate of about one word per minute.
Hawking was the first to set forth a theory of cosmology explained by a union of the general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.
In 2006 Hawking posed an open question on the Internet: "In a world that is in chaos politically, socially and environmentally, how can the human race sustain another 100 years?
Hawking has maintained ties to Caltech, spending a month there almost every year since this first visit.
A first draft of the book, called ''A Brief History of Time'', was completed in 1984.
The initial singularity of the classical Big Bang models was replaced with a region akin to the North Pole.
Hawking continued to travel widely, including trips to Chile, Easter Island, South Africa, Spain (to receive the Fonseca Prize in 2008), Canada, and multiple trips to the United States.
He required much persuasion to accept the use of a wheelchair at the end of the 1960s, but ultimately became notorious for the wildness of his wheelchair driving.
Hawking's views of religion also contrasted with her strong Christian faith and resulted in tension.
Hawking had bet that Penrose's proposal of a "cosmic censorship conjecture"—that there could be no "naked singularities" unclothed within a horizon—was correct.
To Hawking's irritation, Jacob Bekenstein, a graduate student of John Wheeler, went further—and ultimately correctly—to apply thermodynamic concepts literally.
Nimoy made the necessary contact, and Hawking played a holographic simulation of himself in an episode of ''Star Trek: The Next Generation'' in 1993.
Hawking accepted, and Bernard Carr travelled with them as the first of many students who fulfilled this role.
He warned that aliens might pillage Earth for resources.
The particle was discovered in July 2012 at CERN following construction of the Large Hadron Collider.
Hawking and Higgs engaged in a heated and public debate over the matter in 2002 and again in 2008, with Higgs criticising Hawking's work and complaining that Hawking's "celebrity status gives him instant credibility that others do not have."
Top-down cosmology posits that the present "selects" the past from a superposition of many possible histories.
Hawking pursued his work in physics: in 1993 he co-edited a book on Euclidean quantum gravity with Gary Gibbons and published a collected edition of his own articles on black holes and the Big Bang.
Honours continued to be awarded: in 1981 he was awarded the American Franklin Medal, and in 1982 made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE).
A change occurred during his second and third year when, according to Berman, Hawking made more effort "to be one of the boys".
A paper by Don Page and independent calculations by Raymond Laflamme led Hawking to withdraw this concept.
In August 2014, Hawking accepted the Ice Bucket Challenge to promote ALS/MND awareness and raise contributions for research.
", later clarifying: "I don’t know the answer.
At the time, he was one of the youngest scientists to become a Fellow.
Since this contradicted the quantum mechanics of microcausality, quantum mechanics theory would need to be rewritten.
With this decline there is a risk of his developing locked-in syndrome, so Hawking collaborated with Intel researchers on systems that could translate his brain patterns or facial expressions into switch activations.
In March 1968, Hawking marched alongside Tariq Ali and Vanessa Redgrave to protest against the Vietnam War.
Hawking has stated that, given the vastness of the universe, aliens likely exist, but that contact with them should be avoided.
Preskill argued the opposite, that since quantum mechanics suggests that the information emitted by a black hole relates to information that fell in at an earlier time, the concept of black holes given by general relativity must be modified in some way.
He has applied to trademark his name.
His physics tutor, Robert Berman, later said, "It was only necessary for him to know that something could be done, and he could do it without looking to see how other people did it."
He received further academic recognition, including five further honorary degrees, the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1985), the Paul Dirac Medal (1987) and, jointly with Penrose, the prestigious Wolf Prize (1988).
Initially, Hawking radiation was controversial.
Hawking was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge between 1979 and 2009 and has achieved commercial success with works of popular science in which he discusses his own theories and cosmology in general; his book ''A Brief History of Time'' appeared on the British ''Sunday Times'' best-seller list for a record-breaking 237 weeks.
That is why I asked the question, to get people to think about it, and to be aware of the dangers we now face."
From 1958, and with the help of the mathematics teacher Dikran Tahta, they built a computer from clock parts, an old telephone switchboard and other recycled components.
Hawking was appointed to the Sherman Fairchild Distinguished visiting professorship at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in 1970.
The family placed a high value on education.
At the turn of the century, he and eleven other luminaries signed the ''Charter for the Third Millennium on Disability'' which called on governments to prevent disability and protect disability rights.
Hawking's promotion coincided with a health crisis which led to Hawking accepting, albeit reluctantly, some nursing services at home.
Hellyer Jones became close to the Hawking family, and by the mid-1980s, he and Jane had developed romantic feelings for each other.
Hawking has argued that computer viruses should be considered a new form of life, and has stated that "maybe it says something about human nature, that the only form of life we have created so far is purely destructive.
According to Jane, her husband was accepting of the situation, stating "he would not object so long as I continued to love him."
For a period of about five years in the early 2000s, his family and staff became increasingly worried that he was being physically abused.
At the same time, he was also making a transition in his approach to physics, becoming more intuitive and speculative rather than insisting on mathematical proofs.
The couple had difficulty finding housing that was within Hawking's walking distance to the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics (DAMTP).
However, such a planet-wide disaster need not result in human extinction if the human race were to be able to colonize additional planets before the disaster.
Later discussions with Neil Turok led to the realisation that it is also compatible with an open universe.
He was initially disappointed to find that he had been assigned Dennis William Sciama, one of the founders of modern cosmology, as a supervisor rather than noted astronomer Fred Hoyle, and he found his training in mathematics inadequate for work in general relativity and cosmology.
Police investigations took place, but were closed as Hawking refused to make a complaint.
At the release party for the home video version of the ''A Brief History of Time'', Leonard Nimoy, who had played Spock on ''Star Trek'', learned that Hawking was interested in appearing on the show.
Hawking's first year as a doctoral student was difficult.
Hawking quickly conceded that he had lost his bet and said that Higgs should win the Nobel Prize for Physics, which he did in 2013.
In ''A Brief History of Time'' he wrote: "If we discover a complete theory, it would be the ultimate triumph of human reason—for then we should know the mind of God."
Success led to significant financial rewards, but also the challenges of celebrity status.
Hawking was concerned that he was viewed as a lazy and difficult student, so when asked at the oral to describe his future plans, he said, "If you award me a First, I will go to Cambridge.
A positive consequence was that Hawking remained with a close group of friends with whom he enjoyed board games, the manufacture of fireworks, model aeroplanes and boats, and long discussions about Christianity and extrasensory perception.
In a 2004 lecture in Dublin, he conceded his 1997 bet with Preskill, but described his own, somewhat controversial solution, to the information paradox problem, involving the possibility that black holes have more than one topology.
Further work by Hawking in the area of arrows of time led to the 1985 publication of a paper theorising that if the no-boundary proposition were correct, then when the universe stopped expanding and eventually collapsed, time would run backwards.
They lived in Highgate, but as London was being bombed in those years, Isobel went to Oxford to give birth in greater safety.
There were other positive developments: Hawking received a research fellowship at Gonville and Caius College.
The film, while a critical success, was however not widely released.
As he had pneumonia in 2013, he was advised not to have ice poured over him, but his children volunteered to accept the challenge on his behalf.
Hawking started developing a reputation for brilliance and brashness when he publicly challenged the work of Fred Hoyle and his student Jayant Narlikar at a lecture in June 1964.
His work in this area was spurred by a visit to Moscow and discussions with Yakov Borisovich Zel'dovich and Alexei Starobinsky, whose work showed that according to the uncertainty principle, rotating black holes emit particles.
They lived a frugal existence in a large, cluttered, and poorly maintained house, and travelled in a converted London taxicab.
Jane felt overwhelmed by the intrusion into their family life of the required nurses and assistants.
He now communicates using a single cheek muscle attached to a speech-generating device.
Following a conference in Moscow in October 1981, Hawking and Gary Gibbons organized a three-week Nuffield Workshop in the summer of 1982 on the Very Early Universe at Cambridge University, which focused mainly on inflation theory.
It proposed that prior to the Planck epoch, the universe had no boundary in space-time; before the Big Bang, time did not exist and the concept of the beginning of the universe is meaningless.
He was awarded the Copley Medal from the Royal Society (2006), the Presidential Medal of Freedom which is America's highest civilian honour (2009), and the Russian Special Fundamental Physics Prize (2013).
He developed into a popular, lively and witty college member, interested in classical music and science fiction.
Hawking acknowledged that he had lost the bet in 1990, which was the first of several that he was to make with Thorne and others.
With Page's help and that of a secretary, Jane's responsibilities were reduced so she could return to her thesis and her new interest in singing.
Hawking began his university education at University College, Oxford in October 1959 at the age of 17.
Hawking received the 2015 BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in Basic Sciences shared with Viatcheslav Mukhanov for discovering that the galaxies were formed from quantum fluctuations in the early Universe.
After being diagnosed with motor neurone disease, Hawking fell into a depression; though his doctors advised that he continue with his studies, he felt there was little point.
By 2009 he could no longer drive his wheelchair independently, but the same people who created his new typing mechanics are working on a method to drive his chair using movements made by his chin.
Nurses were hired for the three shifts required to provide the round-the-clock support he required.
She refused but the consequence was a tracheotomy, which would require round-the-clock nursing care, and remove what remained of his speech.
Success in creating AI would be the biggest event in human history.
Hawking also began a new line of quantum theory research into the origin of the universe.
With James M. Bardeen and Brandon Carter, he proposed the four laws of black hole mechanics, drawing an analogy with thermodynamics.
Anxious, he slept poorly the night before the examinations, and the final result was on the borderline between first- and second-class honours, making a ''viva'' (oral examination) necessary.
In the 2005 paper he published on the subject, he argued that the information paradox was explained by examining all the alternative histories of universes, with the information loss in those with black holes being cancelled out by those without.
This has proven difficult, since Hawking can not move his neck, and trials have shown that while he can indeed drive the chair, the movement is sporadic and jumpy.
