As the only child of well-to-do parents living in the San Remo on Central Park West, he was described in Meryle Secrest's biography (''Stephen Sondheim: A Life'') as an isolated, emotionally-neglected child.
"Send in the Clowns", a song from the musical, was a hit for Judy Collins.
It moved to the Majestic Theatre on September 17, 1973, where it finished its run.
Sondheim and Babbitt would meet once a week in New York City for four hours (at the time, Babbitt was teaching at Princeton University).
He devoured 1940s and 1950s films, and has called cinema his "basic language"; his film knowledge got him through ''The $64,000 Question'' contestant tryouts.
Sondheim later said, "I don't have any emotional reaction to ''Saturday Night'' at all – except fondness.
He said that although he was not a big fan of Sondheim's music, he enjoyed the lyrics from ''Saturday Night'' and he could audition for Bernstein.
The composer wanted to write music and lyrics; after consulting with Hammerstein, Bernstein told Sondheim he could write music later.
Judged by George Stiles and Anthony Drewe, each contestant performs a Sondheim song and a new song.
Sondheim, concerned that writing lyrics again would pigeonhole him as a lyricist, called his mentor for advice.
In 1966, Sondheim semi-anonymously provided lyrics for "The Boy From...," a parody of "The Girl from Ipanema" in the off-Broadway revue ''The Mad Show''.
He had the young composer write four musicals, each with one of the following conditions:
* Based on a play he liked but thought flawed; Sondheim chose Maxwell Anderson's ''High Tor''
Guare said that working with Sondheim was like being with an old college roommate, and he depended on him to "decode and decipher their crazy way of working"; Bernstein worked only after midnight, and Robbins only in the early morning.
Sondheim collaborated with Wynton Marsalis on ''A Bed and a Chair: A New York Love Affair'', an Encores!
The show went through a number of drafts, and was interrupted briefly by Sondheim's next project.
Sondheim had another "conversation with" Sean Patrick Flahaven (associate editor of ''The Sondheim Review'') at the Kravis Center in West Palm Beach on February 4, 2009, in which he discussed many of his songs and shows: "On the perennial struggles of Broadway: 'I don't see any solution for Broadway's problems except subsidized theatre, as in most civilized countries of the world.'"
Sondheim had participated in three straight hits, but his next show – 1964's ''Anyone Can Whistle'' – was a nine-performance failure (although it introduced Angela Lansbury to musical theatre).
He asked Gilbert for permission to use his idea; although Gilbert offered to write the book, Sondheim had Weidman in mind.
''Pacific Overtures'' (1976), the most non-traditional of the Sondheim—Prince collaborations, explored the westernization of Japan.
The following year, its score was recorded; a revised version, with two new songs, ran off-Broadway at Second Stage Theatre in 2000 and at London's Jermyn Street Theatre in 2009.
According to Sondheim, they spent the first hour dissecting Rodgers and Hart or George Gershwin or studying Babbitt's favorites (Buddy DeSylva, Lew Brown and Ray Henderson).
A Broadway production, starring Nathan Lane and Victor Garber, directed by Sam Mendes and planned for the spring of 2000, was delayed.
In December 2007 he said that in addition to continuing work on ''Bounce'', he was "nibbling at a couple of things with John Weidman and James Lapine."
The revue's cast included Barbara Cook, Vanessa L. Williams, Tom Wopat, Norm Lewis and Leslie Kritzer.
The rights transferred to his widow, Shirley, and due to her inexperience the show did not continue as planned; it opened off-Broadway in 2000.
* Based on an existing novel or short story not previously dramatized, which became his unfinished version of ''Mary Poppins'' (''Bad Tuesday'', unrelated to the musical film and stage play scored by the Sherman Brothers)
* An original, which became ''Climb High''
Herbert sought custody of Stephen but was unsuccessful.
Because you just don't know.
Among them were the New York Philharmonic's March 15 and 16 ''Sondheim: The Birthday Concert'' at Lincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall, hosted by David Hyde Pierce.
''Saturday Night'' was shelved until its 1997 production at London's Bridewell Theatre.
Sondheim agreed; ''Gypsy'' opened on May 21, 1959, and ran for 702 performances.
Other recipients were Patti LuPone in 2012, Hal Prince in 2013 and Jonathan Tunick in 2014.
With a run of 280 performances, ''Passion'' was the shortest-running show to win a Tony Award for Best Musical.
When Sondheim was interested in the idea he called a friend, Larry Gelbart, to co-write the script.
Sondheim was invited to Robbins' house in the hope that Guare would convince him to write the lyrics for a musical version of ''The Exception and the Rule''; according to Robbins, Bernstein would not work without Sondheim.
The 1973 film, directed by Herbert Ross, featured Dyan Cannon, Raquel Welch, James Mason, James Coburn and Richard Benjamin.
And it's not Rodgers and it's not Simon.
Sondheim has expressed dissatisfaction with his lyrics, saying that they do not always fit the characters and are sometimes too consciously poetic.
It's a diminution of energy and the worry that there are no new ideas.
Burt Shevelove invited Sondheim to a party; Sondheim arrived before him, and knew no one else well.
On November 19 the New York Pops, led by Steven Reineke, performed at Carnegie Hall for the composer's 80th birthday.
I'm not sure I would put it like that.
The Kennedy Center held a Sondheim Celebration, running from May to August 2002, consisting of six of Sondheim's musicals: ''Sweeney Todd'', ''Company'', ''Sunday in the Park With George'', ''Merrily We Roll Along'', ''Passion'' and ''A Little Night Music''.
He saw a familiar face: Arthur Laurents, who had seen one of the auditions of ''Saturday Night'', and they began talking.
He turned down an offer to musicalize Nathanael West's ''A Cool Million'' with James Lapine around 1982.
We worked together a while, but we were both involved with so many other projects that this one fell through".
Melich described the evening: He was visibly taken by the university choir, who sang two songs during the evening, "Children Will Listen" and "Sunday", and then returned to reprise "Sunday".
Sondheim has received an Academy Award, eight Tony Awards (more than any other composer, including a Special Tony Award for Lifetime Achievement in the Theatre), eight Grammy Awards, a Pulitzer Prize, the Laurence Olivier Award, and a 2015 Presidential Medal of Freedom.
I've always hated my last name.
''Do I Hear a Waltz?
The concert was broadcast on PBS' ''Great Performances'' show in November, and its DVD was released on November 16.
Sondheim said in response to the honor, "I'm deeply embarrassed.
''A Little Night Music'' (1973), with a more traditional plot based on Ingmar Bergman's ''Smiles of a Summer Night'' and a score primarily in waltz time, was one of the composer's greatest successes.
The concert included Sondheim's music, performed by some of the original performers.
A new lyricist was needed, and Laurents and Rodgers' daughter, Mary, asked Sondheim to fill in.
Written for the anthology series ''ABC Stage 67'' and produced by Hubbell Robinson, it was broadcast on November 16, 1966.
What works now, he said, are musicals that are easy to take; audiences don't want to be challenged".
Sondheim and Leonard Bernstein wrote ''The Race to Urga'', scheduled for Lincoln Center in 1969, but when Jerome Robbins left the project it was not produced.
Renamed ''Bounce'' in 2003, it was produced at the Goodman Theatre in Chicago and the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C.
A revised version, ''Sondheim on Sondheim'', was produced at Studio 54 by the Roundabout Theatre Company; previews began on March 19, 2010, and it ran from April 22 to June 13.
What a diatonic scale is – Oh my God!
None of the "assignment" musicals was produced professionally.
"A few painful years of struggle" followed, when Sondheim auditioned songs, lived in his father's dining room to save money and spent time in Hollywood writing for the television series ''Topper''.
Sondheim's score was not well received; although the show won several Tony Awards (including best musical), he did not receive a nomination.
It's not bad stuff for a 23-year-old.
A member of the Beta Theta Pi fraternity, he graduated ''magna cum laude'' in 1950.
The first musical for which Sondheim wrote the music and lyrics was ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum'', which opened in 1962 and ran for 964 performances.
Its sequel, ''Look, I Made a Hat: Collected Lyrics (1981–2011) with Attendant Comments, Amplifications, Dogmas, Harangues, Digressions, Anecdotes and Miscellany'', was published on November 22, 2011.
Directed by John Doyle, it closed on December 28, 2008.
When he did not return, a doorman said he had gotten into a limousine to go to John F. Kennedy International Airport.
I'm not, by nature, a prose writer, but I'm literate, and I have a couple of people who are vetting it for me, whom I trust, who are excellent prose writers".
His musical influences are varied; although he has said that he "loves Bach", his favorite musical period is from Brahms to Stravinsky.
Its idea derived from Sondheim's days as a panelist at producer Stuart Ostrow's Musical Theater Lab, when he read a script by playwright Charles Gilbert.
When Sondheim was ten, his father (already a distant figure) left his mother for another woman (Alicia, with whom he had two sons).
It just doesn't sing.
The book, continuing from ''Sunday in the Park With George'' (where ''Finishing the Hat'' ended), includes sections on Sondheim's work in film and television.
Sondheim and Rich had additional conversations on January 18, 2009 at Avery Fisher Hall, on February 2 at the Landmark Theatre in Richmond, Virginia, on February 21 at the Kimmel Center in Philadelphia and on April 20 at the University of Akron in Akron, Ohio.
Sondheim spent several summers at Camp Androscoggin.
When Sondheim asked Hammerstein to evaluate it as though he had no knowledge of its author, he said it was the worst thing he had ever seen: "But if you want to know why it's terrible, I'll tell you."
According to Sondheim's music director, Paul Gemignani, "Part of Steve's ability is this extraordinary versatility."
They collaborated on ''Into the Woods'' (1987), a musical based on several Brothers Grimm fairy tales.
Sondheim and Furth have revised the show since its original production, and Sondheim later said: "Did I feel betrayed?
And Barrow made me realize that all my romantic views of art were nonsense.
Lane said, "We love our corporate sponsors and we love their money, but there's something sacred about naming a theatre, and there's something about this that is right and just".
He wrote five songs for 1990's ''Dick Tracy'', including "Sooner or Later (I Always Get My Man)" by Madonna, which won the Academy Award for Best Song.
He has been described by Frank Rich of ''The New York Times'' as "now the greatest and perhaps best-known artist in the American musical theater."
'''Stephen Joshua Sondheim''' () (born March 22, 1930) is an American composer and lyricist known for more than a half-century of contributions to musical theatre.
Although Sondheim has been called the first composer to bring rap music to Broadway (with the Witch in the opening number of "Into the Woods"), he attributes the first rap in theatre to Meredith Willson's "Rock Island" from ''The Music Man''.
''Merrily We Roll Along'' (1981), with a book by George Furth, is one of Sondheim's more traditional scores; Frank Sinatra and Carly Simon have recorded songs from the musical.
They spent the rest of the day going over the musical, and Sondheim later said, "In that afternoon I learned more about songwriting and the musical theater than most people learn in a lifetime."
I have a feeling it may not be experimental and fresh any more".
He has lived in a Turtle Bay, Manhattan brownstone since writing ''Gypsy'' in 1959.
In 1990 Sondheim, as the Cameron Mackintosh chair in musical theatre at Oxford, conducted workshops with promising musical writers including George Stiles, Anthony Drewe, Andrew Peggie, Paul James and Stephen Keeling.
The book, by Hugh Wheeler, is based on Christopher Bond's 1973 stage version of the Victorian original.
The two Sondheim contributions were "In There" (from the adaptation of ''The Exception and the Rule'') and a song cut from ''West Side Story'', "Kids Ain't (Like Everybody Else)".
People expect more of you and you're aware of it and you shouldn't be."
I'm an apostate: I like Weill's music when he came to America better than I do his stuff before&nbsp;...
Sondheim detested his mother, who was said to be psychologically abusive and projected her anger from her failed marriage on her son: "When my father left her, she substituted me for him.
The composer told Meryle Secrest, "I just wanted to study composition, theory, and harmony without the attendant musicology that comes in graduate school.
Conceived and written by Betty Comden, Adolph Green and Norman L. Berman and directed by Michael Bawtree, ''By Bernstein'' featured Jack Bittner, Margery Cohen, Jim Corti, Ed Dixon, Patricia Elliott, Kurt Peterson and Janie Sell.
Sondheim later said he wished "someone stuffed a handkerchief in my mouth because it would have been nice to get that extra percentage".
And she used me the way she used him, to come on to and to berate, beat up on, you see.
He remembered that shortly before Hammerstein's death, Hammerstein had given him a portrait of himself.
In Larson's musical ''Tick, Tick...
In 1959, Sondheim was approached by Laurents and Robbins for a musical version of Gypsy Rose Lee's memoir after Irving Berlin and Cole Porter turned it down.
According to a ''New York Times'' review, "The lyrics under consideration here, written during a 27-year period, aren't presented as fixed and sacred paradigms, carefully removed from tissue paper for our reverent inspection.
According to a rumor (denied by Shaffer in a March 10, 1996 ''New York Times'' interview), ''Sleuth'' had the working title ''Who's Afraid of Stephen Sondheim?''
They went from movie to movie to movie, and every third movie was good and every fifth movie was great.
The plot centers on a reunion, in a crumbling Broadway theatre scheduled for demolition, of performers in Weismann's Follies (a musical revue, based on the Ziegfeld Follies, which played in that theatre between the world wars).
Barrow suggested that Sondheim study with Milton Babbitt, who Sondheim described as "a frustrated show composer" with whom he formed "a perfect combination."
It sings better than Schoenfeld and Jacobs.
Babbitt and Sondheim, fascinated by mathematics, studied songs by a variety of composers (especially Jerome Kern).
Stuart Ostrow, who worked with Sondheim on ''The Girls Upstairs'', agreed to produce the musical (now entitled ''A Pray By Blecht'' and, later, ''The Race to Urga'').
It's also an increasing lack of confidence.
''Jerome Robbins' Broadway'' features "You Gotta Have a Gimmick" from ''Gypsy'', "Suite of Dances" from ''West Side Story'' and "Comedy Tonight" from ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum''.
When Sondheim agreed, Guare asked: "Why haven't you all worked together since ''West Side Story''?"
Several benefits and concerts were performed to celebrate Sondheim's 80th birthday in 2010.
After Larson's death, Sondheim called him one of the few composers "attempting to blend contemporary pop music with theater music, which doesn't work very well; he was on his way to finding a real synthesis.
In an interview with Sondheim for ''The Legacy Project'', composer-lyricist Adam Guettel (son of Mary Rodgers and grandson of Richard Rodgers) recalls how as a 14-year-old boy he showed Sondheim his work.
In addition to published and unpublished lyrics from ''West Side Story'', ''Follies'' and ''Company'', the tome finds Sondheim discussing his relationship with Oscar Hammerstein II and his collaborations with composers, actors and directors throughout his lengthy career".
The evening included a performance of ''Sondheim on Sondheim'', dinner and a show at the New York Sheraton.
Ayers and Sondheim met as ushers at a wedding, and Ayers commissioned Sondheim for three songs for the show; Julius Epstein flew in from California and hired Sondheim, who worked with him in California for four or five months.
It's my baby pictures.
In 1991 Sondheim worked with Terrence McNally on a musical, ''All Together Now''.
That year  Goldman and Sondheim hit a creative wall on ''The Girls Upstairs'', and Goldman asked Sondheim about writing a TV musical.
Around 2008, Sondheim approached Lin-Manuel Miranda to work with him translating ''West Side Story'' lyrics into Spanish for an upcoming Broadway revival.
During the late 1990s, Sondheim and Weidman reunited with Hal Prince for ''Wise Guys'', a  musical comedy following brothers Addison and Wilson Mizner.
A new revue, ''Secret Sondheim&nbsp;... a celebration of his lesser known work'', conceived and directed by Tim McArthur, was produced at the Jermyn Street Theatre in July 2010.
There are some things that embarrass me so much in the lyrics – the missed accents, the obvious jokes.
During that final moment, Sondheim and I were standing, facing the choir of students from the University of Utah's opera program, our backs to the audience, and I could see tears welling in his eyes as the voices rang out.
After finishing ''Do I Hear a Waltz'', Sondheim devoted himself to composing and writing lyrics for a variety of musicals.
What she did for five years was treat me like dirt, but come on to me at the same time."
At age 22, Sondheim had finished the four shows requested by Hammerstein.
He asked author and playwright James Goldman to join him as bookwriter for a new musical.
Sondheim uses angular harmonies and intricate melodies.
You're in, though it's luxurious, you're in an environment that supplies you with everything but human contact.
'', the phone message is played in which Sondheim apologizes for leaving early, says he wants to meet him and is impressed with his work.
Although after poor reviews ''Bounce'' never reached Broadway, a revised version opened off-Broadway as ''Road Show'' at the Public Theater on October 28, 2008.
The show, tentatively called ''All Together Now'', was assumed to follow the format of ''Merrily We Roll Along''.
Without a straightforward plot, ''Company'' (with a book by George Furth) centered on a set of characters and themes.
Sondheim described the project as "two people and what goes into their relationship&nbsp;... We'll write for a couple of months, then have a workshop.
Sondheim took the stage during an encore of his song, "Old Friends".
Sondheim said, "It's going to be long.
Thrilled, but deeply embarrassed.
When Sondheim was about ten years old (around the time of his parents' divorce), he became friends with James Hammerstein, son of lyricist and playwright Oscar Hammerstein II.
He said about Babbitt, "I am his maverick, his one student who went into the popular arts with all his serious artillery".
According to Sondheim and director Paul Bogart, the musical was written only because Goldman needed money for rent.
'', based on Arthur Laurents' 1952 play ''The Time of the Cuckoo'', was intended as another Rodgers and Hammerstein musical with Mary Martin in the lead.
Directed by John Doyle with choreography by Parker Esse, it consisted of "more than two dozen Sondheim compositions, each piece newly re-imagined by Marsalis".
Hammerstein designed a course of sorts for Sondheim on constructing a musical.
Sondheim asked him to inscribe it, and said later about the request that it was "weird&nbsp;... it's like asking your father to inscribe something".
Although Patti LuPone, Barbara Cook, Bernadette Peters, Tom Aldredge and Victor Garber were originally scheduled to perform, they did not appear.
But despite that there is nothing ordinary about the music."
The concert featured Bernadette Peters, Jeremy Jordan, Norm Lewis, Cyrille Aimee, four dancers and the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra conducted by David Loud.
Signature Theatre in Arlington, Virginia established its Sondheim Award, which includes a $5,000 donation to a nonprofit organization of the recipient's choice, "as a tribute to America's most influential contemporary musical theatre composer".
After Catherine Zeta-Jones performed "Send in the Clowns", Julie Andrews sang part of "Not a Day Goes By" in a recorded greeting.
Jonathan understood that instinctively."
McNally said, "Steve was interested in telling the story of a relationship from the present back to the moment when the couple first met.
What did surprise me was the feeling around the Broadway community – if you can call it that, though I guess I will for lack of a better word – that they wanted Hal and me to fail."
''High Tor'' and ''Mary Poppins'' have never been produced: The rights holder for the original ''High Tor'' refused permission, and ''Mary Poppins'' was unfinished.
Bernadette Peters performed a song which had been cut from a Sondheim show.
Sondheim explained to biographer Secrest that he was "what they call an institutionalized child, meaning one who has no contact with any kind of family.
He is noted for complex polyphony in his vocals, such as the five minor characters who make up a Greek chorus in 1973's ''A Little Night Music''.
It just doesn't sing.
An April 26 New York City Center birthday celebration and concert to benefit Young Playwrights, among others, featured (in order of appearance) Michael Cerveris, Alexander Gemignani, Donna Murphy, Debra Monk, Joanna Gleason, Maria Friedman, Mark Jacoby, Len Cariou, B. D. Wong, Claybourne Elder, Alexander Hanson, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Raúl Esparza, Sutton Foster, Nathan Lane, Michele Pawk, the original cast of ''Into the Woods'', Kim Crosby, Chip Zien, Danielle Ferland and Ben Wright, Angela Lansbury and Jim Walton.
The comic musical he wrote at George School, ''By George'', was a success among his peers and buoyed the young songwriter's self-esteem.
Sondheim insisted that Bernstein told the producers to list him as the sole lyricist.
He collaborated with producer-director Hal Prince on six musicals from 1970 to 1981, beginning with the 1970 concept musical ''Company''.
''Finishing the Hat'' was published in October 2010.
You think it's a talent, you think you're born with this thing.
It seemed experimental and fresh 20 years ago.
Lonny Price directed, and Paul Gemignani conducted; performers included Laura Benanti, Matt Cavenaugh, Michael Cerveris, Victoria Clark, Jenn Colella, Jason Danieley, Alexander Gemignani, Joanna Gleason, Nathan Gunn, George Hearn, Patti LuPone, Marin Mazzie, Audra McDonald, John McMartin, Donna Murphy, Karen Olivo, Laura Osnes, Mandy Patinkin, Bernadette Peters, Bobby Steggert,  Elaine Stritch, Jim Walton, Chip Zien and the 2009 Broadway revival cast of ''West Side Story''.
After ''West Side Story'' opened, Shevelove lamented the lack of "low-brow comedy" on Broadway and mentioned a possible musical based on Plautus' Roman comedies.
I thought that was thrilling."
"A butler took a duster and brushed it up, tinkling the keys.
I've checked with other people.
Inspired by a ''New York Times'' article about a gathering of former Ziegfeld Follies showgirls, it was entitled ''The Girl Upstairs'' (and would later become ''Follies'').
''Follies'' focuses on two couples: Buddy and Sally Durant Plummer, and Benjamin and Phyllis Rogers Stone.
Its annual Student Performer of the Year Competition awards a £1,000 prize to one of twelve musical-theatre students from UK drama schools and universities.
The show, retitled ''Saturday Night'', was intended to open during the 1954–55 Broadway season; however, Ayers died of leukemia in his early forties.
When he walked away from the house that evening, Sondheim remembered a sad, sinking feeling that they had said their final goodbye.
Sondheim and Lapine's last work together was the rhapsodic ''Passion'' (1994), adapted from Ettore Scola's Italian film ''Passione D'Amore''.
Its lyrics and music were by Leonard Bernstein, with additional lyrics by others (including Sondheim).
And, of course, what that meant to me was: Well, I can do that.
Sondheim has also written film music, contributing "Goodbye for Now" to Warren Beatty's 1981 ''Reds''.
In attendance were Nathan Lane, Patti LuPone and John Weidman.
On April 28, 2002, in connection with the Sondheim Celebration Sondheim and Frank Rich of ''the New York Times'' had a conversation.
* Based on a play he admired (which became ''All That Glitters'')
Sondheim dislikes movie musicals, favoring classic dramas such as ''Citizen Kane'', ''The Grapes of Wrath'' and ''A Matter of Life and Death'': "Studio directors like Michael Curtiz and Raoul Walsh&nbsp;... were heroes of mine.
Leonard Bernstein had not written for the stage in some time, and his contract as conductor of the New York Philharmonic was ending.
An avid fan of games, in 1968 and 1969 Sondheim published a series of cryptic crossword puzzles in ''New York'' magazine.
Julius and Philip Epstein's ''Front Porch in Flatbush'', unproduced at the time, was being shopped around by Lemuel (Lem) Ayers.
They then proceeded to other forms of music (such as Mozart's Jupiter Symphony), critiquing them the same way.
As soon as you find out what a leading tone is, you think, Oh my God.
Guettel was "crestfallen" since he had come in "sort of all puffed up thinking he would be rained with compliments and things", which was not the case since Sondheim had some "very direct things to say."
When he lived in New York, Sondheim attended ECFS, the Ethical Culture Fieldston School known simply as "Fieldston.
Sondheim wrote additional songs for the film adaptation of ''Into the Woods'', including "Rainbows" (which he included in his second book).
Never occurred to me that art was something worked out.
