As Decatur's ship came closer to ''Philadelphia'', Catalano called out to the harbor personnel in Arabic that their ship had lost its anchors during a recent storm and was seeking refuge at Tripoli for repairs.
Two squadrons were then assembled, one at New York, under the command of Stephen Decatur, and one at Boston, under the command of Commodore William Bainbridge.
The conference between the two seconds lasted three-quarters of an hour.
In May 1814, Decatur transferred his commodore's pennant to ''President'', a frigate with 44 guns.
With orders to rendezvous with merchantmen bound for America, ''Norfolk'' continued on to Cartagena with orders to escort the ships back to the United States, protecting them from pirates and privateers.
Decatur's wife Susan held an even more damning view of the matter and spent much of her remaining life pursuing justice for what she termed "the assassins" involved.
After the funeral, rumors circulated of a last-minute conversation between the duelists that could have avoided the deadly outcome of the duel, moreover, that the seconds involved might have been planning for such an outcome and accordingly made no real attempts to stop the duel.
At a social gathering in April 1816, Decatur uttered an after-dinner toast that would become famous:
Before allowing himself to be carried in he insisted that his wife and nieces be taken upstairs, sparing them the sight of his grave condition.
The US was demanding the release of Americans held captive as slaves, an end of annual payments of tribute, and finally to procure favorable prize agreements.
On May 13, 1801, at the beginning of the war, Decatur was assigned duty aboard the frigate  to serve as the first lieutenant.
By 1814 Britain had committed nearly 100 warships along the American coast and other points.
After catching up with and pulling alongside the Tripolitan ship, Decatur was the first to board the enemy vessel with Midshipman Macdonough at his heels along with nine volunteer crew members.
News of the incident soon reached President Jefferson, the Department of the Navy,  and the general population in America.
Upon his arrival Decatur boasted to the Secretary of the Navy that the settlement had "been dictated at the mouths of our cannon."
Sailing across the Atlantic and back proved to be an effective remedy, and Decatur came home completely recovered.
To further avoid suspicion, on board were five Sicilian volunteers including the pilot Salvador Catalano, who spoke Arabic.
In 1798, John Barry obtained Decatur's appointment as midshipman on ''United States'', under Barry’s command.
For this campaign, he became known as "the Conqueror of the Barbary Pirates".
He also had a talent for drawing ships and designing and building ship models and when time allowed would also pursue this hobby.
Decatur accepted the appointment on May 1.
The duel was to take place at nine o'clock in the morning on March 22, at Bladensburg, Maryland, near Washington, at a distance of only eight paces.
He was promoted to captain at the age twenty-five, largely for his daring capture and destruction of ''Philadelphia'' in Tripoli's harbor, making him the youngest man ever to hold the rank.
The senior naval officer at the prison took the earliest opportunity to parole Decatur to New London, and on February 8, with news of the cessation of hostilities, Decatur traveled aboard  (32), landing in New London on February 21.
In almost every theater of operation, Decatur's service was characterized with acts of heroism and exceptional performance.
Democratic-Republicans (the then-future Democratic Party) immediately blamed the Federalists who were adamantly against the war from the beginning, and so here earned themselves the name "Blue-light Federalists".
Three days later, after capturing , Decatur separated from Rodgers and his squadron and with ''United States'' continued to cruise eastward.
Though his parents were not pleased with his decision, they were apparently wise enough to now let the aspiring young man pursue his own course through life.
Hayes in a gesture of admiration returned the sword to Decatur saying that he was "proud in returning the sword of an officer, who had defended his ship so nobly."
Decatur transferred back to ''United States'' by June 1800; with extra guns and sails and improved structure the refurbished ship made her way down the Delaware River.
:*An island in the San Juan Archipelago (Washington state) is named Decatur Island
President Jefferson, known for his aversion to standing armies and the navy, acted contrary to such sentiment and began his presidency by sending U.S. naval forces to fight the Barbary states rather than continue paying huge annual tributes to the petty North African kingdoms.
During the engagement Decatur was standing on a box of shot when he was knocked down almost unconscious when a flying splinter struck him in the chest.
The few warships that were available were converted into merchant ships.
On August 31, Decatur sailed ''United States'' to Boston.
In a letter to the Navy Secretary, dated December 20, Decatur charged that traitors in the New London area were in collusion with the British to capture ''United States'', ''Hornet'' and ''Macedonian''.
Decatur along with surviving crew were taken prisoner and held captive in a Bermuda prison, arriving January 26, and were held there until February 1815.
This attracted much attention and prompted the departure of several dispatch vessels to warn Hammida of the squadron's arrival.
On board were a small number of Tripolitan soldiers.
He proposed that matched ships from either side meet and, in effect, have a duel, to settle their otherwise idle situation.
Upon the onset of the war President James Madison ordered several naval vessels to be dispatched to patrol the American coastline.
On October 31, 1803, ''Philadelphia'', under the command of Commodore William Bainbridge, ran aground on an uncharted reef (known as Kaliusa reef) near Tripoli's harbor.
After an hour and a half of twisting and hogging, with Decatur's ship procuring hull damage and a sprung mast, the ship finally broke free.
After its capture the small ship was taken to Syracuse, condemned by Commodore Preble as a legitimate prize of war, and given a new name, .
While en route to Tripoli the five-ship squadron to which ''New York'' was attached encountered gale force winds, lasting more than a week, which forced the squadron to put up in Malta.
After bringing the government in Algiers to terms, Decatur's squadron set sail to Tunis and Tripoli to demand reimbursement for proceeds withheld by those governments during the War of 1812.
Decatur had little trouble singling out the corsair captain, the man responsible for James' death, and immediately engaged the man.
While this was happening Decatur made an attempt to escape.
Consequently, a new treaty was agreed upon within 48 hours of Decatur's arrival, confirming the success of his objectives.
On the morning of the 22nd the dueling party assembled.
In September 1802, Decatur transferred to the 36-gun frigate  as 1st Lieutenant under Commodore James Barron.
On July 1, after encountering and being forestalled by adverse winds, the squadron sailed into the Mediterranean with the mission to confront the Barbary pirates.
Upon his return to Syracuse, Decatur resumed command of ''Enterprise''.
Just before the duel, Barron spoke to Decatur of conciliation; however, the men's seconds did not attempt to halt the proceedings.
Decatur's family returned to Philadelphia shortly after Decatur's birth, and Decatur grew up in Philadelphia, eventually graduating from the Episcopal Academy.
Decatur supervised the construction of several U.S. naval vessels, one of which he would later command.
Decatur's father, Stephen Decatur, Sr., was a commodore in the U.S. Navy, and brought the younger Stephen into the world of ships and sailing early on.
During this segment of his life, Decatur's father, Stephen Decatur Sr., died in November 1808 at the relatively young age of 57, with his mother's death following the next year.
At the direction of his father, Decatur attended the Protestant Episcopal Academy, at the time an all-boys school that specialized in Latin, mathematics and religion; however, Decatur had not applied himself adequately, and barely graduated from the academy.
Three days after the United States declared war against Britain, a squadron under the command of Commodore John Rodgers in ''President'', along with Commodore Stephen Decatur of ''United States'', ''Argus'', ''Essex'' and ''Hornet'', departed from the harbor at New York City.
At Naples, Decatur was praised and dubbed "Terror of the Foe" by the local media.
While ''Intrepid'' was under fire from the Tripolitans who were now gathering along the shore and in small boats, the larger ''Syren'' was nearby providing covering fire at the Tripolitan shore batteries and gunboats.
Decatur's command suffered 24 men killed and 55 wounded, a fifth of his crew, including Decatur himself who was wounded by a large flying splinter.
Hardy's squadron, which emerged from behind Montauk Point, consisted of the ships of the line  and  along with the frigates  and .
Midshipman Brown, who was next in command after James, managed to break away from the ambushing vessel and immediately approached Decatur's gunboat bringing the news of his brother's death.
Decatur, who was now on the board of naval commissioners, strongly opposed Barron's reinstatement and was notably critical about the prospect in communications with other naval officers and government officials.
A Dr. Thomas Simms arrived from his home nearby to give his assistance to the naval physicians.
As had occurred during the First Barbary War American merchant ships and crews were once again being seized and held for large ransoms.
Perry had written to Decatur nearly a year previously, revealing that he had no intention of firing any shot at Heath.
At dawn on October 25, five hundred miles south of the Azores, lookouts on board reported seeing a sail 12 miles to windward.
Decatur and his men left the burning vessel in Tripoli's harbor and set sail for the open sea, barely escaping in the confusion.
After a brief engagement Decatur and his crew captured the ship, killing or wounding the few men defending the vessel.
While wounded, he is said to have cried out, "I did not know that any man could suffer such pain!"
In the years leading up to the Quasi-War, an undeclared naval war with France involving disputes over U.S. trading and shipping with Britain, the U.S. Congress passed the 'Act to provide for a Naval Armament' on March 27, 1794; it was promptly signed by George Washington that same day.
Later James Decatur was taken aboard ''Constitution'' where he was joined by his brother Stephen, who stayed with him until he had died.
In the spring of 1806, Decatur was given command of a squadron of gunboats stationed in the Chesapeake Bay at Norfolk, Virginia, the home of his future wife, Susan Wheeler.
The first war against the Barbary States was in response to the frequent piracy of American vessels in the Mediterranean Sea and the capture and enslavement of American crews for huge ransoms.
Decatur, mortally wounded and clutching his side, exclaimed, "Oh, Lord, I am a dead man."
Because of the greater range of the guns aboard ''United States'', Decatur and his crew got off seventy broadsides, with ''Macedonian'' only getting off thirty, and consequently emerged from the battle relatively unscathed.
Decatur specified that his house had to be suitable for "impressive entertainments".
Decatur's shot hit Barron in the lower abdomen and ricocheted into his thigh.
Decatur, now dressed in full dress uniform, boarded ''Majestic'' and surrendered his sword to Captain Hayes.
Decatur's distinguished career came to an early end when he lost his life in a duel with a rival officer.
After some debate and at the insistence of President Washington, Congress passed an act on April 20, 1796, allowing the construction and funding to continue, but only on the three ships nearest to completion at the time: ,  and .
Preble divided his gunboats into two divisions, putting Decatur in command of the second division.
After a fierce fight lasting several hours, during which ''Endymion'' was severely damaged, Decatur reluctantly surrendered as there were four remaining British ships he would have to fight.
However, through much protest and appeal from naval officers, the plan to confine America's naval vessels to port never materialized.
It was later moved to Philadelphia, where he was buried at St. Peter's Church, alongside his mother and father.
When a good number of days passed without the reinforcements of ships promised by president Jefferson, the attack on Tripoli was renewed by Preble on August 24.
Now that war with Britain was over, the United States could concentrate on pressing matters in the Mediterranean, at Algiers.
Dale assumed they were about to embark on the Atlantic to prey on American merchant ships.
Lying wounded, Commodore Barron (who ultimately survived) declared that the duel was carried out properly and honorably and told Decatur that he forgave him from the bottom of his heart.
After completing this mission the ship was taken to Norfolk, Virginia, for minor repairs and then set sail for Newport, Rhode Island, arriving on September 12.
After their marriage in March, Decatur lived with his wife's family in Norfolk until June when Secretary of the Navy Robert Smith gave him orders to supervise the building of four gunboats at Newport, Rhode Island, and four others in Connecticut of which he would later take command.
He became an affluent member of Washington society and counted James Monroe and other Washington dignitaries among his personal friends.
Commodore Preble's order to Decatur was to destroy the ship where she berthed as a last resort, if ''Philadelphia'' was unseaworthy.
He was met with much criticism among fellow naval officers, among whom Decatur was one of the most outspoken.
He served under three presidents, and played a major role in the early development of the American navy.
Having just put to sea, ''Chesapeake'' was not prepared to do battle and was unable to return fire.
Armed with a cutlass Decatur deflected the lunge, breaking his own weapon at the hilt.
On May 22, 1799, Decatur was promoted to lieutenant by President Adams after serving for more than a year as midshipman aboard the frigate ''United States''.
Susan was once pursued by Vice President Aaron Burr and Jérôme Bonaparte, brother to Napoleon, both of whom she turned down.
Decatur and his crew were outnumbered 5 to 1 but were organized and kept their form, fighting furiously side by side.
However, success and promotion were overshadowed by an unfortunate turn of events for Decatur.
He served on the Board of Navy Commissioners from 1816 to 1820.
Commodore Barron had just been relieved of command following his court martial over the incident.
A congressional investigation was called while Decatur made efforts to discover who was responsible but was unsuccessful.
As the flames intensified, the guns aboard ''Philadelphia'', all loaded and ready for battle, became heated and began discharging, some firing into the town and shore batteries, while the ropes securing the ship burned off, allowing the vessel to drift into the rocks at the western entrance of the harbor.
Capturing the flagship of the Algerian fleet at the Battle off Cape Gata Decatur was able to secure sufficient levying power to bargain with the Dey of Algiers.
Armed with a dagger the Tripolitan attempted to stab Decatur in the heart, but while wresting the arm of his adversary, Decatur managed to take hold of his pistol and fired a shot point-blank, immediately killing his formidable foe.
One of his more notable decisions as a commissioner involved his strong objection to the reinstatement of James Barron upon his return to the United States after being barred from command for five years for his questionable handling of the ''Chesapeake'', an action that would soon lead to Barron challenging him to a duel.
By the time hostilities with France came to a close, America had a renewed appreciation for the value of a navy.
Rodgers' squadron again sailed on October 8, 1812, this time from Boston, Massachusetts.
Arriving at Gibraltar, Commodore Dale learned that Tripoli had already declared war upon the United States.
While serving aboard ''United States'' Decatur received what was the equivalent to formal naval training not only from Hamilton but through active service aboard a commissioned ship, which is something that distinguished the young midshipman from many of his contemporaries.
Consequently, Barron's previous orders to sail for the Mediterranean were canceled and ''Chesapeake'' was instead assigned to Commodore Decatur, with a squadron of gunboats, to patrol the New England coast enforcing the Embargo Act throughout 1809.
Before marrying Susan, Decatur had already vowed to serve in the U.S. Navy and maintained that to abandon his service to his country for personal reasons would make him unworthy of her hand.
The next day, after a funeral and military ceremony that was conducted by Preble, Stephen Decatur saw his brother's remains committed to the depths of the Mediterranean.
When Stephen was eight years old, he developed a severe case of whooping cough.
Eager to know the Bey's decision, Decatur dispatched the president's letter which ultimately prompted the Bey to abandon his practice of piracy and kidnapping and come to terms with the United States.
By December 1, 1814, Secretary of the Navy William Jones, a staunch proponent of coastal defense, appointed Decatur to lead a four-ship squadron comprising ''President'', which would be the flagship of his new squadron, along with ''Hornet'', a sloop bearing 20 guns,  bearing 22 and  bearing 12 guns.
Decatur emerged as a national hero in his own lifetime, becoming the first post-Revolutionary War hero.
Whether the signals were given by an British spy or an American citizen remains uncertain.
He learned from observers there that a squadron under the command of the notorious Rais Hamidu had passed by into the Mediterranean, most likely off Cape Gata.
Before entering the harbor eight sailors from ''Syren'' boarded ''Intrepid'', including Thomas Macdonough who had recently served aboard ''Philadelphia'' and knew the ship's layout intimately.
The newspaper also reported that Decatur's squadron had run another Spanish frigate onshore near Carthagena.
On February 16, 1804, at seven o'clock in the evening under the dim light of a waxing crescent moon, ''Intrepid'' slowly sailed into Tripoli harbor.
Unaware that Decatur had surrendered, and then tried to flee, ''Pomone'' fired two broadsides into ''President'' before they realized that the battle was over.
Inside twenty minutes, three of her crew were killed and eighteen wounded.
However, the engagement in a heavy swell proved otherwise as ''United States'' pounded '''' ''Macedonian'' into a dismasted wreck from long range.
Soon ''Majestic'' caught up with the British fleet.
However, according to naval historian Alexander Slidell Mackenzie, Decatur made a poor choice: Bainbridge, who was five years his senior, had long been jealous of the younger and more famous Decatur.
Before Decatur assumed command of ''Chesapeake'' he learned from observers, and then informed the Navy Secretary, that the British ships  and  were lightening their ballasts to prepare for a blockade at Norfolk.
One shot was fired; Heath missed his opponent while Perry, keeping his word, returned no fire.
At this time there were two Tripolitan warships of sizable consequence berthed in Gibraltar's harbour, but their captains claimed that they had no knowledge of the war.
Stephen Decatur died childless.
By 9:30&nbsp;p.m. Decatur's ship was within 200 yards of ''Philadelphia'', whose lower yards were now resting on the deck with her foremast missing, as Bainbridge had ordered it cut away and had also jettisoned some of her guns in a futile effort to refloat the ship by lightening her load.
Decatur remained calm and left the scene without further incident.
Decatur, being an expert shot with a pistol, told his friend Lieutenant Charles Stewart that he believed his opponent not to be as able and he would thus endeavour to only wound his opponent in the hip, which is exactly how the duel turned out.
While there Decatur and another American officer were involved in a personal confrontation with a British officer which resulted in Decatur returning to the United States.
To ensure his son's success in his naval career, the senior Decatur hired a tutor, Talbot Hamilton, a former officer of the Royal Navy, to instruct his son in navigational and nautical sciences.
The matter was then referred to the British minister at Washington, a Mr. Erskine, who in turn referred the matter to the Navy Department through Commodore Barron, demanding that the three deserters be surrendered to British authority.
Decatur came to love the sea and sailing in a roundabout manner.
Barron struck the ship's colors and surrendered his ship, whereupon she was boarded and the alleged deserters were taken into British custody.
Barron cried back "God bless you, Decatur" – and with a weak voice Decatur called back "Farewell, farewell, Barron."
He was a large and formidable man in Muslim garb, and armed with a boarding pike he thrust his weapon at Decatur's chest.
Decatur's body was temporarily placed in the tomb of Joel Barlow at Washington.
After desperate and failed attempts to refloat the ship she was subsequently captured and her crew imprisoned by Tripolitan forces.
Upon closing with ''Chesapeake'', Barron was hailed by the captain of ''Leopard'' and informed that a letter would be sent on board with a demand from Vice-Admiral Humphreys that ''Chesapeake'' be searched for deserters.
Making their way into the west end of Tripoli harbor, they began bombarding Tripoli on August 3, 1804.
As a result, Barron became embittered towards Decatur and challenged him to a duel.
The next day ''President'' emerged from the west, and Decatur attempted to break through the blockade alone in ''President'' and make for the appointed rendezvous at Tristan da Cunha, but encountered the British West Indies Squadron composed of razee  bearing 56 guns, under the command of Captain John Hayes, along with the frigates , bearing 40 guns, commanded by Captain Henry Hope, , bearing 38 guns, commanded by Captain John Richard Lumley, and , bearing 38 guns, commanded by Captain Hyde Parker.
As the ship slowly rose over the horizon, Captain Decatur made out the fine, familiar lines of , a British frigate bearing 38 guns.
For several months after their marriage the couple resided with Susan's parents in Norfolk, after which Stephen received orders sending him to Newport to supervise the building of gunboats.
He was serving on board this vessel as a midshipman when it was launched on May 10, 1797, under the command of Commodore John Barry.
On September 10, 1804, Commodore Barron arrived at Tripoli with two ships, ''President'' and ''Constellation'', whereupon Commodore Preble relinquished command of his blockading squadron to him.
Decatur soon realized that the small ''Intrepid'' could not tow the larger and heavier warship out of the harbor.
Shortly after attending college, Decatur followed in his father's footsteps and joined the U.S. Navy at the age of nineteen as a midshipman.
Bainbridge called out, 'One', Decatur and Barron both firing before the count of 'two'.
Washington society and the nation were shocked upon learning that Decatur had been killed at the age of forty-one in a duel with a rival navy captain.
Decatur's funeral was attended by Washington's elite, including President James Monroe and the justices of the Supreme Court, as well as most of Congress.
''Endymion'' had sustained severe damage to the rigging, and her captain, Hope, decided to carry out repairs before tying up ''President''.
Wounded, he soon recovered and was on his feet in command again.
With the ship secure, Decatur's crew began placing combustibles about ''Philadelphia'' with orders to set her ablaze.
On June 4, 1805, the Bashaw of Tripoli finally surrendered and signed a peace treaty with the United States.
He is the youngest man to reach the rank of captain in the history of the United States Navy.
However, the British had established a strict blockade in the squadron's port of New York, therefore restricting any cruises.
Shortly after his recapture and destruction of ''Philadelphia'', Decatur was given command of the frigate ''Constitution'', a post he held from October 28 to November 9, 1804.
On the evening of December 18, while attempting to leave the Thames River, Decatur saw blue lights burning near the mouth of the river in sight of the British blockaders.
On February 26, Decatur arrived in New York City, where he convalesced in a boarding house.
Decatur was promoted to captain with the date of rank February 16, 1804.
Intended to avoid war, the Embargo Act only compounded matters that led to war.
In 1812 he sailed with ''Argus'' and ''Congress'' but were soon recalled upon receiving news about the outbreak of war with Britain.
As a result, France began intercepting American ships that were involved in trading with Britain.
After taking command of ''United States'', now the rallying point of the young American Navy, Decatur sailed to most of the naval ports on the eastern seaboard and was well received at each stop.
He abandoned the project and returned to New London.
Light vessels with shallow drafts were needed to make their way about in the shallow and confined waters of Tripoli's harbor.
After overtaking the ''Mashouda'', Decatur fired two broadsides, crippling the ship, killing 30 of the crew, including Hammida himself, and taking more than 400 prisoners.
Decatur was prepared to negotiate peace or resort to military measures.
At this point Decatur requested that his will be brought forward so as to receive his signature, granting his wife all his worldly possessions, with directives as to who would be the executors of his will.
Decatur's frigate was finally overtaken by ''Pomone''.
Barron found the demand extraordinary and when he refused to surrender any of his crew, ''Leopard'' soon opened fire on ''Chesapeake''.
By an act of Congress on March 3, 1837, she was granted a pension retroactive to Decatur's death.
Not wanting to remain with ''United States'' during the months of repairs and outfitting, Decatur obtained a transfer to the brig  under the command of Thomas Calvert.
''Chesapeake'' had just returned to Norfolk after repairs to damage incurred during the ''Chesapeake''–''Leopard'' Affair.
By 1801 the American Navy consisted of 42 naval vessels, three of which were , ''Constellation'' and .
Having drawn many illustrations of and designed and built many models of ships, along with having experience as a ship builder and designer from when he was employed at Gurney and Smith in 1797 while overseeing the construction of the frigate ''United States'', Decatur was a natural choice for this new position.
Decatur was a member of that court martial, which had found Barron guilty of "unpreparedness", barring him from command for five years.
Following were naval officers and seamen.
The incident soon came to be referred to as the ''Chesapeake''–''Leopard'' Affair, an event whose controversy would lead to a duel between Barron and Decatur some years later, as Decatur served on Barron's court-martial and later was one of the most outspoken critics of the questionable handling of ''Chesapeake''.
The allegations of treason soon became public, causing controversy and debate among New London residents and others over the matter.
To avoid making known the presence of an American squadron, Decatur did not enter the ports but instead dispatched a messenger in a small boat to communicate with the consuls.
Decatur had served on the court-martial that had found Barron guilty of "unpreparedness".
During the fight Decatur was almost killed by another Tripolitan crew member, but his life was spared by the already wounded Daniel Frazier, a crewman who threw himself over Decatur just in time, receiving a blow intended for Decatur to his own head.
It was elaborate and well planned, brigs, schooners and bomb ketches coming into the attack at various stages.
Since the recruiting party was not under the command of Decatur, he refused to intervene.
After his victory in the Mediterranean over the Barbary states who had terrorized and enslaved Christian merchants for centuries, Decatur returned to the United States, arriving at New York on November 12, 1815, with the brig ''Enterprise'', along with Bainbridge of ''Guerriere'' who arrived three days later.
Finally on June 18, 1812, the United States declared war on Great Britain.
While ''United States'' was undergoing repairs Decatur received orders to remain in Philadelphia to recruit and assemble a crew for the vessel.
After undergoing routine repairs at New York, ''United States'' was part of a small squadron that included the newly captured  (formerly HMS ''Macedonian'') and the sloop of war ''Hornet''.
