Research since the 1930s suggested that people are highly similar with each other in how they describe different racial and national groups, although those people have no personal experience with the groups they are describing.
Stereotyping can also play a central role in depression, when people have negative self-stereotypes about themselves, according to Cox, Abramson, Devine, and Hollon (2012).
As for sociologists, they may focus on the relations among different groups in a social structure.
Modern research asserts that full understanding of stereotypes requires considering them from two complementary perspectives: as shared within a particular culture/subculture and as formed in the mind of an individual person.
A 1977 study by Snyder, Tanke, and Berscheid found a similar pattern in social interactions between men and women.
Participants had to decide as quickly as possible whether to shoot the target.
A 1994 study by McConnell, Sherman, and Hamilton found that people formed stereotypes based on information that was not distinctive at the time of presentation, but was considered distinctive at the time of judgement.
The students that argued in favor of euthanasia came from the same law department or from different departments.
This idea has been refuted by contemporary studies that suggest the ubiquity of stereotypes and  it was suggested to regard stereotypes  as collective group beliefs, meaning that people who belong to the same social group share the same set of stereotypes.
crime) is statistically less frequent than desirable behavior.
A complementary perspective theorizes how stereotypes function as time- and energy-savers that allow people to act more efficiently.
The results suggest that the level of prejudice and stereotype endorsement affects people's judgements when the category&nbsp;&ndash; and not the stereotype per se &ndash; is primed.
Weiner's character Peggy Olson continually battles gender stereotypes throughout the series, excelling in a workplace dominated by men.
A series of pioneering studies in the 1930s found no empirical support for widely held racial stereotypes.
Stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination are understood as related but different concepts.
Whereas declaring that a storyteller has relied on cliché is to pejoratively observe a simplicity and lack of originality in the tale.
(2000), for example, participants were presented with a category label and taught to respond "No" to stereotypic traits and "Yes" to nonstereotypic traits.
Stereotypes are regarded as the most cognitive component and often occurs without conscious awareness, whereas prejudice is the affective component of stereotyping and discrimination is one of the behavioral components of prejudicial reactions.
Groups that do not compete with the in-group for the same resources (e.g., college space) are perceived as warm, whereas high-status (e.g., economically or educationally successful) groups are considered competent.
Accordingly, in this context, it is better to categorise ingroup members under different categories (e.g., Democrats versus Republican) than under a shared category (e.g., American).
If there are no changes to an intergroup relationship, then relevant stereotypes do not change.
(2002) showed that activated stereotypes about blacks can influence people's behavior.
Media stereotypes of women first emerged in the early 20th century.
Narrative genre relies heavily on ''typical'' features to remain recognizable and generate meaning in the reader/viewer.
Early studies suggested that stereotypes were only used by rigid, repressed, and authoritarian people.
Word, Zanna, and Cooper (1974) demonstrated the effects of stereotypes in the context of a job interview.
However, it was not until 1922 that "stereotype" was first used in the modern psychological sense by American journalist Walter Lippmann in his work ''Public Opinion''.
Finally, ingroup members may influence each other to arrive at a common outgroup stereotype.
Thus, information is more easily identified, recalled, predicted, and reacted to.
The heightened salience results in more attention and more effective encoding, which strengthens the belief that the events are correlated.
Stereotypes can help make sense of the world.
Those studies suggested that one group’s stereotype of another group would become more or less positive depending on whether their intergroup relationship had improved or degraded.
The model explains the phenomenon that some out-groups are admired but disliked, whereas others are liked but disrespected.
Stereotypes can be efficient shortcuts and sense-making tools.
Moreover, it can lead to the belief that one's efforts are not directly linked to the outcomes, thereby depressing one's motivation to succeed.
Henri Tajfel described his observations of how some people found that the anti-Semitic contents of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion only made sense if Jews have certain characteristics.
(1991) showed that when black participants were evaluated by a white person who was aware of their race, black subjects mistrusted the feedback, attributing negative feedback to the evaluator's stereotypes and positive feedback to the evaluator's desire to appear unbiased.
In commedia dell'arte this is similarly common.
As mentioned previously, stereotypes can be used to explain social events.
Time pressure made the shooter bias even more pronounced.
When it was not presented in that manner, the performance gap narrowed.
Since both events "blackness" and "undesirable behavior" are distinctive in the sense that they are infrequent, the combination of the two leads observers to overestimate the rate of co-occurrence.
Outside of printing, the first reference to "stereotype" was in 1850, as a noun that meant ''image perpetuated without change''.
Lepore and Brown (1997), for instance, noted that the words used in Devine's study were both neutral category labels (e.g., "Blacks") and stereotypic attributes (e.g., "lazy").
For example, after WWII, Black American students held a more negative stereotype of people from countries that were the United States’s WWII enemies.
A number of studies have found that stereotypes are activated automatically.
Various stereotypic depictions or "types" of women appeared in magazines, including Victorian ideals of femininity, the New Woman, the Gibson Girl, the Femme fatale, and the Flapper.
Thus while Shylock remains politically unstable in being a stereotypical Jew, the subject of prejudicial derision in Shakespeare's era, his many other detailed features raise him above a simple stereotype and into a unique character, worthy of modern performance.
Warmth and competence are respectively predicted by lack of competition and status.
In a second experiment, trained interviewers were instructed to treat applicants, all of whom were white, like the whites or blacks had been treated in the first experiment.
This effect is based on the learning of new and more positive stereotypes rather than the negation of already existing ones.
In a design similar to Devine's, Lepore and Brown primed the category of African-Americans using labels such as "blacks" and "West Indians" and then assessed the differential activation of the associated stereotype in the subsequent impression-formation task.
The correspondence bias was a significant predictor of stereotyping even after controlling for other measures that have been linked to beliefs about low status groups, the just-world hypothesis and social dominance orientation.
First, the cognitive effects of schematic processing (see schema) make it so that when a member of a group behaves as we expect, the behavior confirms and even strengthens existing stereotypes.
A depersonalised person abandons individual differences and embraces the stereotypes associated with their relevant group membership.
Male undergraduate students were asked to talk to female undergraduates, whom they believed to be physically attractive or unattractive, on the phone.
Alternatively, positive feedback can either be attributed to personal merit or discounted as a form of sympathy or pity.
Subsequent experiments showed that framing the test as diagnostic of intellectual ability made black students more aware of negative stereotypes about their group, which in turn impaired their performance.
In a series of experiments, black and white participants played a video game, in which a black or white person was shown holding a gun or a harmless object (e.g., a mobile phone).
(2006) has shown that Asian American women rated their math ability more favorably when their ethnicity and the relevant stereotype that Asian Americans excel in math was made salient.
(2012) found that people who tend to draw dispositional inferences from behavior and ignore situational constraints are more likely to stereotype low-status groups as incompetent and high-status groups as competent.
People are likely to self-stereotype their ingroup as homogenous in an intergroup context, and they are less likely to do so in an intragroup context where the need to emphasise their group membership is not as great.
The conversations were taped and analysis showed that men who thought that they were talking to an attractive woman communicated in a more positive and friendlier manner than men who believed that they were talking to unattractive women.
Studies emerging since the 1940s refuted the suggestion that stereotype contents cannot be changed at will.
According to a third explanation, shared stereotypes are neither caused by the coincidence of common stimuli, nor by socialisation.
Results showed that participants who received a high proportion of racial words rated the target person in the story as significantly more hostile than participants who were presented with a lower proportion of words related to the stereotype.
Yet another perspective suggests that stereotypes are people's biased perceptions of their social contexts.
John C. Turner proposed in 1987 that if ingroup members disagree on an outgroup stereotype, then one of three possible collective actions follow: First, ingroup members may negotiate with each other and conclude that they have different outgroup stereotypes because they are stereotyping different subgroups of an outgroup (e.g., Russian gymnasts versus Russian boxers).
For example, according to Tajfel, Europeans stereotyped Turkish, Indian, and Chinese people as being incapable of achieving financial advances without European help.
According to Daniel Katz and Kenneth Braly, stereotyping leads to racial prejudice when people emotionally react to the name of a group, ascribe characteristics to members of that group, and then evaluate those characteristics.
Claude M. Steele and Joshua Aronson conducted the first experiments showing that stereotype threat can depress intellectual performance on standardized tests.
For example, Bargh, Chen, and Burrows (1996) activated the stereotype of the elderly among half of their participants by administering a scrambled-sentence test where participants saw words related to age stereotypes.
In this tripartite view of intergroup attitudes, stereotypes reflect expectations and beliefs about the characteristics of members of groups perceived as different from one's own, prejudice represents the emotional response, and discrimination refers to actions.
Although related, the three concepts can exist independently of each other.
Analysis of the videotaped interviews showed that black job applicants were treated differently: They received shorter amounts of interview time and less eye contact; interviewers made more speech errors (e.g., stutters, sentence incompletions, incoherent sounds) and physically distanced themselves from black applicants.
Within stereotypes, objects or people are as similar to each other as possible.
Based on that, the authors argued that some aspects of ethnic and gender stereotypes are accurate while stereotypes concerning political affiliation and nationality are much less accurate.
For instance, Correll (2001, 2004) found that specific stereotypes (e.g., the stereotype that women have lower mathematical ability) affect women's and men's evaluations of their abilities (e.g., in math and science), such that men assess their own task ability higher than women performing at the same level.
Subjects primed with the stereotype walked significantly more slowly than the control group (although the test did not include any words specifically referring to slowness), thus acting in a way that the stereotype suggests that elderly people will act.
People can actively create certain images for relevant outgroups by stereotyping.
Similarly, in workplaces where women are underrepresented and negative behaviors such as errors occur less frequently than positive behaviors, women become more strongly associated with mistakes than men.
They argued that if only the neutral category labels were presented, people high and low in prejudice would respond differently.
If any room for uncertainty remains, stereotyped individuals tend to blame themselves.
Gordon Allport has suggested possible answers to why people find it easier to understand categorized information.
This despite the fact the proportion of positive to negative behaviors was equivalent for both groups and that there was no actual correlation between group membership and behaviors.
Second, categorized information is more specific than non-categorized information, as categorization accentuates properties that are shared by all members of a group.
Simply because one feature of a character can be categorized as being typical does not make the entire character a stereotype.
Portrayals of Latin Americans in film and print media are restricted to a narrow set of characters.
Attributional ambiguity has been shown to affect a person's self-esteem.
When the target was unarmed, the participants avoided shooting him more quickly when he was white.
Participants reported that group membership, i.e., the department that the students belonged to, affected the students' opinions about euthanasia.
People create stereotypes of an outgroup to justify the actions that their ingroup has committed (or plans to commit) towards that outgroup.
In the case of negative feedback, ambiguity has been shown to have a protective effect on self-esteem as it allows people to assign blame to external causes.
Research on the role of illusory correlations in the formation of stereotypes suggests that stereotypes can develop because of incorrect inferences about the relationship between two events (e.g., membership in a social group and bad or good attributes).
A study by Terracciano et al.
Despite their proximity in etymological roots, cliché and stereotype are not used synonymously in cultural spheres.
If two statistically infrequent events co-occur, observers overestimate the frequency of co-occurrence of these events.
People change their stereotype of their ingroups and outgroups to suit context.
Labeling a situation or character in a story as ''typical'' suggests it is fitting for its genre or category.
When they receive positive evaluations, stereotyped individuals are uncertain of whether they really deserved their success and, consequently, they find it difficult to take credit for their achievements.
In a study by Kawakami et al.
This altered the women's behavior: Female subjects who, unknowingly to them, were perceived to be physically attractive behaved in a friendly, likeable, and sociable manner in comparison with subjects who were regarded as unattractive.
Second, the affective or emotional aspects of prejudice render logical arguments against stereotypes ineffective in countering the power of emotional responses.
In one study, they found that black college students performed worse than white students on a verbal test when the task was framed as a measure of intelligence.
To criticize Ian Fleming for a ''stereotypically'' unlikely escape for James Bond would be understood by the reader or listener, but it would be more appropriately criticized as a cliché in that it is overused and reproduced.
Third, people can readily describe object in a category because objects in the same category have distinct characteristics.
found, however, that the effect of stereotypes on self-evaluations is mediated by the degree to which close people in someone's life endorse these stereotypes.
In the intergroup context, illusory correlations lead people to misattribute rare behaviors or traits at higher rates to minority group members than to majority groups, even when both display the same proportion of the behaviors or traits.
By contrast, a newer model of stereotype content theorizes that stereotypes are frequently ambivalent and vary along two dimensions: warmth and competence.
Because stereotypes simplify and justify social reality, they have potentially powerful effects on how people perceive and treat one another.
They are a form of categorization that helps to simplify and systematize information.
When the target person was armed, both black and white participants were faster in deciding to shoot the target when he was black than when he was white.
Sometimes such stereotypes can be sophisticated, such as Shakespeare's Shylock in ''The Merchant of Venice''.
The problem with the ‘common environment’ explanation in general is that it does not explain how shared stereotypes can occur without direct stimuli.
Negative behaviors outnumbered positive actions and group B was smaller than group A, making negative behaviors and membership in group B relatively infrequent and distinctive.
Stereotype threat effects have been demonstrated for an array of social groups in many different arenas, including not only academics but also sports, chess and business.
Law students were perceived to be more in favor of euthanasia than students from different departments despite the fact that a pretest had revealed that subjects had no preexisting expectations about attitudes toward euthanasia and the department that students belong to.
* Preventing some people of stereotyped groups from entering or succeeding in activities or fields
Results showed that subjects overestimated the frequency with which both distinctive events, membership in group B and negative behavior, co-occurred, and evaluated group B more negatively.
This means that at least some stereotypes are inaccurate.
By the mid-1950s, Gordon Allport wrote that, "It is possible for a stereotype to grow in defiance of all evidence."
White participants interviewed black and white subjects who, prior to the experiments, had been trained to act in a standardized manner.
Finally, people can take for granted the characteristics of a particular category because the category itself may be an arbitrary grouping.
Similarly, experiments suggest that gender stereotypes play an important role in judgments that affect hiring decisions.
Early researchers believed that stereotypes were inaccurate representations of reality.
After this training period, subjects showed reduced stereotype activation.
Between stereotypes, objects or people are as different from each other as possible.
For example, in a study by Roguer and Yzerbyt (1999) participants watched a video showing students who were randomly instructed to find arguments either for or against euthanasia.
Attributive ambiguity refers to the uncertainty that members of stereotyped groups experience in interpreting the causes of others' behavior toward them.
Second, ingroup members may negotiate with each other, but conclude that they are disagreeing because of categorical differences amongst themselves.
Patricia Devine (1989), for example, suggested that stereotypes are automatically activated in the presence of a member (or some symbolic equivalent) of a stereotyped group and that the unintentional activation of the stereotype is equally strong for high- and low-prejudice persons.
These stereotypes change, and in modern times only a few of the stereotyped characters shown in John Bunyan's ''The Pilgrim's Progress'' would be recognizable.
In this view, people use stereotypes as shortcuts to make sense of their social contexts, and this makes a person's task of understanding his or her world less cognitively demanding.
It is important to note from this explanation that stereotypes are the consequence, not the cause, of intergroup relations.
Empirical evidence suggests that stereotype activation can automatically influence social behavior.
Words related to the cultural stereotype of blacks were presented subliminally.
Similarly, undesirable behavior (e.g.
These thoughts or beliefs may or may not accurately reflect reality.
The attribution error created the new stereotype that law students are more likely to support euthanasia.
They can, however, keep people from processing new or unexpected information about each individual, thus biasing the impression formation process.
Thus, the racial stereotype was activated even for low-prejudice individuals who did not personally endorse it.
Similarly, Correll et al.
Different disciplines give different accounts of how stereotypes develop: Psychologists may focus on an individual's experience with groups, patterns of communication about those groups, and intergroup conflict.
This explanation assumes that when it is important for people to acknowledge both their ingroup and outgroup, they will emphasise their difference from outgroup members, and their similarity to ingroup members.
Stereotypes are common in various cultural media, where they take the form of dramatic stock characters.
People may also show prejudice internalization through self-stereotyping because of negative childhood experiences such as verbal and physical abuse.
Subsequent research suggested that the relation between category activation and stereotype activation was more complex.
In a second study, subjects rated actual groups&nbsp;&ndash; the poor and wealthy, women and men &ndash; in the United States in terms of their competence.
The instantly recognizable nature of stereotypes mean that they are effective in advertising and situation comedy.
People do so when they see that their ingroup is no longer as clearly and/or as positively differentiated from relevant outgroups, and they want to restore the intergroup differentiation to a state that favours the ingroup.
Intergroup events (e.g., World War Two, Persian Gulf conflict) often changed intergroup relationships.
In contrast, they rated their math ability less favorably when their gender and the corresponding stereotype of women's inferior math skills was made salient.
reviewed four studies concerning racial and seven studies that examined gender stereotypes about demographic characteristics, academic achievement, personality and behavior.
Stereotyped individuals who receive negative feedback can attribute it either to personal shortcomings, such as lack of ability or poor effort, or the evaluator's stereotypes and prejudice toward their social group.
Stereotypes are categories of objects or people.
Subjects who scored high on the measure of correspondence bias stereotyped the poor, women, and the fictitious lower-status Pacific Islanders as incompetent whereas they stereotyped the wealthy, men, and the high-status Pacific Islanders as competent.
In social psychology, a '''stereotype''' is a thought that can be adopted about specific types of individuals or certain ways of doing things.
For example, Tilcsik (2011) has found that employers who seek job applicants with stereotypically male heterosexual traits are particularly likely to engage in discrimination against gay men, suggesting that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is partly rooted in specific stereotypes and that these stereotypes loom large in many labor markets.
People's self-stereotyping can increase or decrease depending on whether close others view them in stereotype-consistent or inconsistent manner.
During an ostensibly unrelated impression-formation task, subjects read a paragraph describing a race-unspecified target person's behaviors and rated the target person on several trait scales.
Stereotypes can emphasise a person’s group membership in two steps: First, stereotypes emphasise the person’s similarities with ingroup members on relevant dimensions, and also the person’s differences from outgroup members on relevant dimensions.
The groups within each of the four combinations of high and low levels of warmth and competence elicit distinct emotions.
Similarly, a study by Sinclair et al.
More recently, artists such as Anne Taintor and Matthew Weiner (the producer of ''Mad Men'') have used vintage images or ideas to insert their own commentary of stereotypes for specific eras.
* Unwillingness to rethink one's attitudes and behavior towards stereotyped groups
Stereotypes can affect self-evaluations and lead to self-stereotyping.
Empirical social science research shows that stereotypes are often accurate.
However, this is only a fundamental psychological definition of a stereotype.
Once a person judges non-distinctive information in memory to be distinctive, that information is re-encoded and re-represented as if it had been distinctive when it was first processed.
Agerström and Rooth (2011) showed that automatic obesity stereotypes captured by the Implicit Association Test can predict real hiring discrimination against the obese.
Some contemporary studies indicate that racial, ethnic and cultural stereotypes are still widespread in Hollywood blockbuster movies.
They found that high-prejudice participants increased their ratings of the target person on the negative stereotypic dimensions and decreased them on the positive dimension whereas low-prejudice subjects tended in the opposite direction.
Craig McGarty, Russell Spears, and Vincent Y. Yzerbyt (2002) argued that the cognitive functions of stereotyping are best understood in relation to its social functions, and vice versa.
By comparison, they are rarely portrayed as working professionals, business leaders or politicians.
Arguably a stereotype that becomes complex and sophisticated ceases to be a stereotype ''per se'' by its unique characterization.
Hamilton and Gifford's distinctiveness-based explanation of stereotype formation was subsequently extended.
This stereotype was used to justify European colonialism in Turkey, India, and China.
First, people can consult a category to identify response patterns.
When the black participants' race was unknown to the evaluator, they were more accepting of the feedback.
Black people, for instance, are a minority group in the United States and interaction with blacks is a relatively infrequent event for an average white American.
Results showed that participants attributed the students' responses to their attitudes although it had been made clear in the video that students had no choice about their position.
This model was empirically tested on a variety of national and international samples and was found to reliably predict stereotype content.
Possible prejudicial effects of stereotypes are:
Therefore, according to Tajfel, Jews were stereotyped as being evil and yearning for world domination to match the anti-Semitic ‘facts’ as presented in The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.
Attributional ambiguity can also make it difficult to assess one's skills because performance-related evaluations are mistrusted or discounted.
Some of these definitions share commonalities, though each one may also harbor unique aspects that may contradict the others.
This effect held true for both high- and low-prejudice subjects (as measured by the Modern Racism Scale).
also found that stereotypic beliefs about nationality do not reflect the actual personality traits of people from different cultures.
Some studies, however, have found that this effect only holds when stereotyped individuals can be absolutely certain that their negative outcomes are due to the evaluators's prejudice.
This depression that is caused by prejudice (i.e., "deprejudice") can be related to a group membership (e.g., Me–Gay–Bad) or not (e.g., Me–Bad).
For example, a cliché is a high criticism in narratology where genre and categorization automatically associates a story within its recognizable group.
In literature and art, stereotypes are clichéd or predictable characters or situations.
Participants were then asked who had performed a set of actions: a person of group A or group B.
Research has shown that stereotypes can develop based on a cognitive mechanism known as illusory correlation&nbsp;– an erroneous inference about the relationship between two events.
The underlying reason is that rare, infrequent events are distinctive and salient and, when paired, become even more so.
These characters are found in the works of playwright Bertold Brecht, Dario Fo, and Jacques Lecoq, who characterize their actors as stereotypes for theatrical effect.
This explanation posits that stereotypes are shared because group members are motivated to behave in certain ways, and stereotypes reflect those behaviours.
Although Hamilton and Gifford found a similar effect for positive behaviors as the infrequent events, a meta-analytic review of studies showed that illusory correlation effects are stronger when the infrequent, distinctive information is negative.
If someone holds prejudicial beliefs about a stigmatized group and then becomes a member of that group, they may internalize their prejudice and develop depression.
In another experiment, Bargh, Chen, and Burrows also found that because the stereotype about blacks includes the notion of aggression, subliminal exposure to black faces increased the likelihood that randomly selected white college students reacted with more aggression and hostility than participants who subconsciously viewed a white face.
