He attained the rank of Eagle Scout.
He was made aware of the Holocaust by his parents, who he says “talked about it all the time, and so it was always on my mind.” His father had lost between sixteen and twenty relatives during the Holocaust.
Crawford, however, was "speechless, and then horrified" at the thought of a twenty-one-year-old newcomer directing her, one of Hollywood's leading stars.
Spielberg has often referred to the gruelling shoot as his professional crucible.
He then applied and was admitted to California State University, Long Beach, where he majored in English, and became a brother of Theta Chi Fraternity.
Spielberg's ''The BFG'' is an adaptation of Roald Dahl's celebrated children's story, starring newcomer Ruby Barnhill, and Rylance as the titular Big Friendly Giant.
In 1993, Spielberg acted as executive producer for the highly anticipated television series ''seaQuest DSV''; a science fiction series set "in the near future" starring Roy Scheider (who Spielberg had directed in ''Jaws'') and Jonathan Brandis that aired on Sundays at 8:00&nbsp;pm.
It was previously adapted into the 1986 made-for-TV film ''Sword of Gideon''.
He also collaborated with software publishers Knowledge Adventure on the multimedia game ''Steven Spielberg's Director's Chair'', which was released in 1996.
'', is the most famous example of this theme.
The film was the last to be written by ''E.T.''
Spielberg also said he suffered from acts of anti-Semitic prejudice and bullying: "In high school, I got smacked and kicked around.
His first home movie was of a train wreck involving his toy Lionel trains, then age 12.
Spielberg stated he made Indiana Jones a Boy Scout in honor of his experience in Scouting.
The film was also the first major hit for DreamWorks, which co-produced the film with Paramount Pictures (as such, it was Spielberg's first release from the latter that was not part of the ''Indiana Jones'' series).
In 2011, Spielberg launched ''Falling Skies'', a science fiction television series, on the TNT network.
The film received generally positive reviews from critics, and was financially successful, grossing $786&nbsp;million worldwide.
Spielberg said in a statement that "''I find that my conscience will not allow me to continue business as usual''."
Artificial Intelligence'' (2001), and ''War of the Worlds'' (2005).
This film and the Spielberg-produced ''Gremlins'' led to the creation of the PG-13 rating due to the high level of violence in films targeted at younger audiences.
In 1985, Spielberg released ''The Color Purple,'' an adaptation of Alice Walker's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel of the same name, about a generation of empowered African-American women during depression-era America.
Spielberg's film ''Munich'', about the events following the 1972 Munich Massacre of Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games, was his second film essaying Jewish relations in the world (the first being ''Schindler's List'').
was also nominated for nine Academy Awards including Best Picture and Best Director.
Following this theme of reluctant fathers and father figures, Tim looks to Dr. Alan Grant as a father figure.
"It isn't something I enjoy admitting," he once said, "but when I was seven, eight, nine years old, God forgive me, I was embarrassed because we were Orthodox Jews.
Spielberg also produced ''The River'', ''Smash'', ''Under the Dome'', ''Extant'' and ''The Whispers'', as well as a TV adaptation of ''Minority Report''.
Before those years, his family was involved in the synagogue and had many Jewish friends and nearby relatives.
Studio producers Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown offered Spielberg the director's chair for ''Jaws'', a thriller-horror film based on the Peter Benchley novel about an enormous killer shark.
In September 2008, Spielberg and his wife offered their support to same-sex marriage, by issuing a statement following their donation of $100,000 to the "No on Proposition 8" campaign fund, a figure equal to the amount of money Brad Pitt donated to the same campaign less than a week prior.
Spielberg supports Hillary Clinton for President of the United States in the 2016 election.
In ''Empire of the Sun'', Jim, a well-groomed and spoiled English youth, loses his innocence as he suffers through World War II China.
A futuristic film about a humanoid android longing for love, ''A.I.''
In a prolific career spanning more than four decades, Spielberg's films have spanned many themes and genres.
In 1958, he became a Boy Scout and fulfilled a requirement for the photography merit badge by making a nine-minute 8&nbsp;mm film entitled ''The Last Gunfight''.
He donated US$1 million to Priorities USA, a pro-Clinton Super PAC.
The film was released and distributed by Walt Disney Studios, with whom DreamWorks made a distribution deal in 2009; ''War Horse'' was the first of four consecutive Spielberg films released by Disney.
The project at one time had Javier Bardem attached to play the lead role of explorer Hernán Cortés.
Spielberg directed ''Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull'', which wrapped filming in October 2007 and was released on May 22, 2008.
Years later, Spielberg recalled to a magazine interviewer, "My dad's still-camera was broken, so I asked the scoutmaster if I could tell a story with my father's movie camera.
It won Oscars in two categories (Cinematography, Vilmos Zsigmond, and a Special Achievement Award for Sound Effects Editing, Frank E. Warner).
the Extra-Terrestrial'' (protagonist Elliot's mother is divorced) and ''Catch Me If You Can'' (Frank Abagnale's mother and father split early on in the film).
In 2008, Spielberg and DreamWorks acquired the rights to produce a live-action film adaptation of the original ''Ghost in the Shell'' manga.
Spielberg then revisited his ''Close Encounters'' project and, with financial backing from Columbia Pictures, released ''Close Encounters: The Special Edition'' in 1980.
Spielberg won the Academy Award for Best Director for ''Schindler's List'' and ''Saving Private Ryan'', as well as receiving five other nominations.
It won the award for Best Production Design and Day-Lewis won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Lincoln, becoming the first three time winner in that category as well as the first to win for a performance directed by Spielberg.
The film was another huge box office smash, grossing over $591&nbsp;million worldwide.
Most of his films deal with ordinary characters searching for or coming in contact with extraordinary beings or finding themselves in extraordinary circumstances.
She accused him, along with actress Jennifer Love Hewitt, of controlling her thoughts through "cybertronic" technology and being part of a satanic conspiracy against her.
Napolis was committed to a mental institution before pleading guilty to stalking, and released on probation with a condition that she have no contact with either Spielberg or Hewitt.
the Extra-Terrestrial'', ''Empire of the Sun'', ''Jurassic Park'', etc.
Reviewer Andrew Sarris called it the best film of the year and later included it among the best films of the decade.
Spielberg's early science-fiction and adventure films, such as ''Jaws'' (1975), ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind'' (1977), ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' (1981), and ''E.T.
''Raiders'' is still considered a landmark example of the action-adventure genre.
Spielberg "rediscovered the honor of being a Jew," he says, before he made ''Schindler's List'', when he married Kate Capshaw.
The film earned generally positive reviews and was another box office success, becoming the highest-grossing film worldwide that year; its total box office receipts even topped those of Tim Burton's much-anticipated film ''Batman'', which had been the bigger hit domestically.
The film's graphic, realistic depiction of combat violence influenced later war films such as ''Black Hawk Down'' and ''Enemy at the Gates''.
Upon release, ''Lincoln'' received widespread critical acclaim, and was nominated for twelve Academy Awards (the most of any film that year) including Best Picture and Best Director for Spielberg.
Drawing from his own experiences in Scouting, Spielberg helped the Boy Scouts of America develop a merit badge in cinematography in order to help promote filmmaking as a marketable skill.
The film was a huge box office success, grossing over $481&nbsp;million worldwide and was the biggest film of the year at the North American box office (worldwide it made second place after Michael Bay's ''Armageddon'').
Spielberg followed with ''War Horse'', shot in England in the summer of 2010.
The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Spielberg in 2005, the first year it considered non-literary contributors.
Spielberg was also a co-producer of the 1987 film ''*batteries not included''.
His parents divorced while he was still in school, and soon after he graduated Spielberg moved to Los Angeles, staying initially with his father.
featured groundbreaking visual effects and a multi-layered, allegorical storyline, adapted by Spielberg himself.
Spielberg's cinematography for the police chase was praised by reviewers, and ''The Hollywood Reporter'' stated that "a major new director is on the horizon."
He says he made the film partly to create “something that would confirm my Judaism to my family and myself.”
They married on October 12, 1991.
the Extra-Terrestrial'', ''Hook'', ''A.I.
Avi Arad and Steven Paul were later confirmed as producers, Rupert Sanders directed, and Scarlett Johansson stars in the lead role.
screenwriter Melissa Mathison before she died.
Spielberg appeared in a cameo on Cyndi Lauper's music video for the movie's theme song, "The Goonies 'R' Good Enough".
Spielberg was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, to an Orthodox Jewish family.
The film received eleven Academy Award nominations, including two for Goldberg and Winfrey.
Even Oskar Schindler, from ''Schindler's List'', is reluctant to have a child with his wife.
The film was considered an homage to the cliffhanger serials of the Golden Age of Hollywood.
Apart from being an ardent gamer Spielberg has had a long history of involvement in video games.
But Spielberg persevered and finished the film.
He was the president of the jury for the 2013 Cannes Film Festival.
If one views each of his films, one will see this shot utilized by the director, notably the water scenes in ''Jaws'' are filmed from the low-angle perspective of someone swimming.
Special praise of this film by the influential British critic Dilys Powell was highly significant to Spielberg's career.
It also set the domestic record for box office gross, leading to what the press described as "Jawsmania."
In 2007, Steven Spielberg and Mark Burnett co-produced ''On the Lot'' a short-lived TV reality show about filmmaking.
At age thirteen, while living in Phoenix, Spielberg won a prize for a 40-minute war film he titled ''Escape to Nowhere'', using a cast composed of other high school friends.
Spielberg served as an uncredited executive producer on ''The Haunting'', ''The Prince of Egypt'', ''Just Like Heaven'', ''Shrek'', ''Road to Perdition'', and ''Evolution''.
Aside from his principal role as a director, Spielberg has acted as a producer for a considerable number of films, including early hits for Joe Dante and Robert Zemeckis.
The film would follow a global human war against a robot uprising about 15–20 years in the future.
Written by Tony Kushner, the film was shot in Richmond, Virginia, in late 2011, and was released in the United States in November 2012.
Spielberg received a score of 47, meaning 47% of the US believes he is influential.
She and Spielberg were reportedly close friends until her death.
The notable absence of Elliott's father in ''E.T.
Jonathan Norman was arrested after making two attempts to enter Spielberg's Pacific Palisades home in June and July 1997.
There are of course exceptions; Brody in ''Jaws'' is a committed family man, while John Anderton in ''Minority Report'' is a shattered man after the disappearance of his son.
Spielberg will follow that with a fifth installment in the ''Indiana Jones'' series.
He was set to be honored with the Cecil B. DeMille Award at the January 2008 Golden Globes; however, the new, watered-down format of the ceremony resulting from conflicts in the 2007–08 writers strike, the HFPA postponed his honor to the 2009 ceremony.
''Bridge of Spies'' received positive reviews from critics, and was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture; Rylance won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, becoming the second actor to win for a performance directed by Spielberg.
"This shiksa goddess has made me a better Jew than my own parents."
the Extra-Terrestrial'').
Spielberg cast Mark Rylance in ''Bridge of Spies'' and ''The BFG'', as well as the upcoming ''Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara'' and ''Ready Player One''.
He did another segment on ''Night Gallery'' and did some work for shows such as ''Owen Marshall: Counselor at Law'' and ''The Psychiatrist'', before landing the first series episode of ''Columbo'' (previous episodes were actually TV films).
His next film, ''1941'', a big-budgeted World War II farce, was not nearly as successful and though it grossed over $92.4&nbsp;million worldwide (and did make a small profit for co-producing studios Columbia and Universal) it was seen as a disappointment, mainly with the critics.
Jackson has been announced to direct the second film.
Little known also is Tim in ''Jurassic Park'' (early in the film, another secondary character mentions Tim and Lex's parents' divorce).
Spielberg won his second Academy Award for his direction.
Spielberg described himself as feeling like an alien during childhood, and his interest came from his father, a science fiction fan, and his opinion that aliens would not travel light years for conquest, but instead curiosity and sharing of knowledge.
Three of Spielberg's films—''Jaws'', ''E.T.
He bought Orson Welles's own directorial copy of the script for the radio broadcast ''The War of the Worlds'' (1938) in 1994.
In January 2007, screenwriter Jonathan Nolan met with them to discuss adapting Obst and Thorne's treatment into a narrative screenplay.
In 1993, Spielberg returned to the adventure genre with the film version of Michael Crichton's novel ''Jurassic Park'', about a theme park with genetically engineered dinosaurs.
It is being written by David Koepp, who has written numerous other films for Spielberg, including the last ''Indiana Jones'' film.
Spielberg had cameo roles in ''The Blues Brothers'', ''Gremlins'', ''Vanilla Sky'', and ''Austin Powers in Goldmember'', as well as small uncredited cameos in a handful of other films, such as a life-station worker in ''Jaws''.
Due to his work on these series, in the official titles, most of them say, "Steven Spielberg presents" as well as making numerous cameos on the shows.
Spielberg's first romantic film, ''Always'' was only a moderate success and had mixed reviews.
He grew away from Judaism after his family moved to various cities during his high school years, where they became the only Jews in the neighborhood.
the Extra-Terrestrial'' went on to become the top-grossing film of all time.
The film was shot from September to December 2014 on location in New York City, Berlin and Wroclaw, Poland (which doubled for East Berlin), and was released on October 16, 2015.
Spielberg's next film, ''Schindler's List'', was based on the true story of Oskar Schindler, a man who risked his life to save 1,100 Jews from the Holocaust.
However, by the end of the film, he has changed, and the kids even fall asleep with their heads on his shoulders.
In 1999, Spielberg received an honorary degree from Brown University.
In July 2016, Spielberg was awarded a gold Blue Peter badge on the BBC children's television programme ''Blue Peter''.
In later years, his films began addressing humanistic issues such as the Holocaust, the transatlantic slave trade, civil rights, war, and terrorism in such films as ''The Color Purple'' (1985), ''Empire of the Sun'' (1987), ''Schindler's List'' (1993), ''Amistad'' (1997), ''Saving Private Ryan'' (1998), ''Munich'' (2005), ''War Horse'' (2011), ''Lincoln'' (2012), and ''Bridge of Spies'' (2015).
On November 19, 2013, Spielberg was honored by the National Archives and Records Administration with its Records of Achievement Award.
His three sisters and mother remained in Saratoga.
In the cases when his films include children (''E.T.
The badge was launched at the 1989 National Scout Jamboree, which Spielberg attended, and where he personally counseled many boys in their work on requirements.
Spielberg has also considered directing a remake of ''West Side Story''.
The film is based on ''Vengeance'', a book by Canadian journalist George Jonas.
On October 22, 2011 he was admitted as a Commander of the Belgian Order of the Crown.
With the film a huge success at the box office, Spielberg used the profits to set up the Shoah Foundation, a non-profit organization that archives filmed testimony of Holocaust survivors.
He also teamed with Clint Eastwood for the first time in their careers, co-producing Eastwood's ''Flags of Our Fathers'' and ''Letters from Iwo Jima'' with Robert Lorenz and Eastwood himself.
Spielberg is attached to direct an adaptation of American photojournalist Lynsey Addario's memoir ''It's What I Do''.
These visual scenes often uses images of the sun (e.g.
Studio vice president Sidney Sheinberg was impressed by the film, which had won a number of awards, and offered Spielberg a seven-year directing contract.
In 1987, as China began opening to Western capital investment, Spielberg shot the first American film in Shanghai since the 1930s, an adaptation of J. G. Ballard's autobiographical novel ''Empire of the Sun'', starring John Malkovich and a young Christian Bale.
It received mixed reviews but performed relatively well at the box office.
The opening scene shows a teenage Indiana Jones in scout uniform bearing the rank of a Life Scout.
Starring Whoopi Goldberg and future talk-show superstar Oprah Winfrey, the film was a box office smash and critics hailed Spielberg's successful foray into the dramatic genre.
* Jessica Capshaw (born August 9, 1976) – daughter from Kate Capshaw's previous marriage to Robert Capshaw
He has donated over $800,000 to the Democratic party and its nominees.
''Time'' listed him as one of the 100 Most Important People of the Century.
In early 2009, Spielberg shot the first film in a planned trilogy of motion capture films based on ''The Adventures of Tintin'', written by Belgian artist Hergé, with Peter Jackson.
The film, based on the novel of the same name written by Michael Morpurgo and published in 1982, follows the long friendship between a British boy and his horse Joey before and during World War I – the novel was also adapted into a hit play in London which is still running there, as well as on Broadway.
In 1998 he was awarded the Federal Cross of Merit with Ribbon of the Federal Republic of Germany.
The untitled film is set to star Harrison Ford and will be produced by Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall.
Between 1982 and 1985, Spielberg produced three high-grossing films: ''Poltergeist'' (for which he also co-wrote the screenplay), a big-screen adaptation of ''The Twilight Zone'' (for which he directed the segment "Kick The Can"), and ''The Goonies'' (Spielberg, executive producer, also wrote the story on which the screenplay was based).
It earned Christopher Walken an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor.
Spielberg's name no longer appeared in the third season and the show was cancelled midway through it.
It will also star Oscar Isaac.
For this, Spielberg fixed some of the flaws he thought impeded the original 1977 version of the film and also, at the behest of Columbia, and as a condition of Spielberg revising the film, shot additional footage showing the audience the interior of the mothership seen at the end of the film (a decision Spielberg would later regret as he felt the interior of the mothership should have remained a mystery).
Aside from his role as Indiana Jones, Spielberg also cast Harrison Ford as a headteacher in ''E.T.
He is considered one of the founding pioneers of the New Hollywood era, as well as being viewed as one of the most popular directors and producers in film history.
The Commander is the third highest rank of the Order of the Crown.
He developed the series with Robert Rodat and is credited as an executive producer.
According to Warren Buckland, these themes are portrayed through the use of low height camera tracking shots, which have become one of Spielberg's directing trademarks.
Though some critics accuse his films of being a little overly sentimental, Spielberg feels it is fine as long as it is disguised.
In 1963, at age sixteen, Spielberg wrote and directed his first independent film, a 140-minute science fiction adventure called ''Firelight'', which would later inspire ''Close Encounters''.
Spielberg served as executive producer for ''Disturbia'' and the ''Transformers'' live action film with Brian Goldner, an employee of Hasbro.
His personal net worth is estimated to be more than $3 billion.
Another TV film (''Something Evil'') was made and released to capitalize on the popularity of ''The Exorcist'', then a major best-selling book which had not yet been released as a film.
Spielberg's statement drew criticism from Chinese officials and state-run media calling his criticism "unfair".
In 1950, his family moved to Haddon Township, New Jersey when his father took a job with RCA.
Spielberg is a major collector of the work of American illustrator and painter Norman Rockwell.
In an AFI interview in August 2000 Spielberg commented on his interest in the possibility of extra terrestrial life and how it has influenced some of his films.
Once again teaming up with Lucas and Ford, Spielberg also cast actor Sean Connery in a supporting role as Indy's father.
In 2008, Spielberg was awarded the Légion d'honneur.
''Munich'' received five Academy Awards nominations, including Best Picture, Film Editing, Original Music Score (by John Williams), Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Director for Spielberg.
He also served as one of the executive producers of ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit'' and its three related shorts (''Tummy Trouble'', ''Roller Coaster Rabbit'', ''Trail Mix-Up''), which were all released by Disney, under both the Walt Disney Pictures and the Touchstone Pictures banners.
The miniseries is believed to have cost $250&nbsp;million and is a 10-part war miniseries centered on the battles in the Pacific Theater during World War II.
The film also led to Ford's casting in Ridley Scott's ''Blade Runner''.
''Empire of the Sun'', ''Saving Private Ryan'', the final scene of ''Jurassic Park'', and the end credits of ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade'' (where they ride into the sunset)), of which the last two feature a Williams score at that end scene.
I was embarrassed by the outward perception of my parents' Jewish practices.
Peter Banning in ''Hook'' starts off in the beginning of the film as a reluctant married-to-his-work parent who through the course of the film regains the respect of his children.
In 2002, Spielberg was one of eight flagbearers who carried the Olympic Flag into Rice-Eccles Stadium at the Opening Ceremonies of the 2002 Winter Olympic Games in Salt Lake City.
''Jaws'' made Spielberg a household name and one of America's youngest multi-millionaires, allowing him a great deal of autonomy for his future projects.
It was announced on May 2, 2013, that Spielberg would direct the film about the story of U.S. sniper Chris Kyle, titled ''American Sniper''.
He directed an 18-minute film for the project, scored by John Williams and entitled ''The American Journey''.
Like ''Lincoln'', it was to be released by Disney in the United States and Fox overseas.
"Why was this happening to me?"
Rejecting offers to direct ''Jaws 2'', ''King Kong'' and ''Superman'', Spielberg and actor Richard Dreyfuss re-convened to work on a film about UFOs, which became ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind'' (1977).
In 2001, Spielberg filmed fellow director and friend Stanley Kubrick's final project, ''A.I.
Also in 2005, Spielberg directed a modern adaptation of ''War of the Worlds'' (a co-production of Paramount and DreamWorks), based on the H. G. Wells book of the same name (Spielberg had been a huge fan of the book and the original 1953 film).
Spielberg usually supports U.S. Democratic Party candidates.
Spielberg is attached to direct ''Cortes'', a historical epic written by Steven Zaillian about the Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire, and Cortes's relationship with Aztec ruler Montezuma.
and ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind'', which depicted friendly alien visitors, ''War of the Worlds'' featured violent invaders.
While the first season was moderately successful, the second season did less well.
A famous example of Spielberg working with the same professionals is his long-time collaboration with John Williams and the use of his musical scores in all of his films since ''The Sugarland Express'' (except ''Bridge of Spies'', ''The Color Purple'' and ''Twilight Zone: The Movie'').
Some claim the film has made Spielberg "the one true heir to the great Jewish moguls who created Hollywood," most of whom had actively avoided depicting Jews or the Holocaust in their films.
In November 2015, it was announced that Spielberg would be awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama in a ceremony at the White House.
On July 15, 2006, Spielberg was also awarded the Gold Hugo Lifetime Achievement Award at the Summer Gala of the Chicago International Film Festival, and also was awarded a Kennedy Center honour on December 3.
I've lived on its outer edges."
The episode is unusual in his body of work, in that the camerawork is more highly stylized than his later, more "mature" films.
In 2011, he produced the J. J. Abrams science fiction thriller film ''Super 8'' for Paramount Pictures.
Norman was jailed for 25 years in California.
In 1996, Spielberg worked on and shot original footage for a movie-making simulation game called ''Steven Spielberg's Director's Chair''.
Spielberg received an honorary degree at Boston University's 136th Annual Commencement on May 17, 2009.
* Max Samuel Spielberg (born June 13, 1985) – son from Spielberg's previous marriage to actress Amy Irving
He is also one of the co-founders of DreamWorks Studios.
It made him the youngest director ever to be signed for a long-term deal with a major Hollywood studio.
The following July, Kip Thorne said there was a push by people for him to portray himself in the film.
In October 2009 Steven Spielberg received the Philadelphia Liberty Medal; presenting him with the medal was former US president and Liberty Medal recipient Bill Clinton.
The book follows the true story of a young Jewish boy in 1858 Italy who was secretly baptized by a family servant and then kidnapped from his family by the Papal States, where he was raised and trained as a priest, causing international outrage and becoming a media sensation.
