The Stockholm metro, opened in 1950, is well known for its decoration of the stations; it has been called the longest art gallery in the world.
In the 1980s, the planning ideas of modernism were starting to be questioned, resulting in suburbs with a denser planning, such as Skarpnäck.
There are two types of cards: the Season Card (valid from 1 April to 31 October) and the 3-day card.
* The Stockholm School of Theology (''Teologiska Högskolan, Stockholm'')
The City Centre is within the congestion tax zone.
The urban heat island combined with prevailing wind travelling over land rather than sea during summer renders Stockholm to have the warmest summers in the Nordic countries.
'''Largest groups of foreign residents'''
New residential areas sprang up such as the development on Gärdet while industrial development added to the growth, such as the KF manufacturing industries on Kvarnholmen located in the Nacka Municipality.
Out of 35 participant cities, eight finalists were chosen: Stockholm, Amsterdam, Bristol, Copenhagen, Freiburg, Hamburg, Münster, and Oslo.
The Stockholm Municipal Council () is the name of the local assembly.
This gives the sky a bright blue colour in summer once the sun has set, because it does not get any darker than nautical twilight.
In the 1950s, suburban development entered a new phase with the introduction of the Stockholm metro.
The central parts of the city consist of fourteen islands that are continuous with the Stockholm archipelago.
The districts of these parts are:
By the turn of the 19th century, Stockholm largely consisted of the area today known as City Centre, roughly  or one-fifth of the current municipal area.
* Ersta Sköndal University College
With an average of just over 1800 hours of sunshine per year, it is also one of the sunniest cities in Northern Europe, receiving more sunshine than Paris, London and a few other major European cities of a more southerly latitude.
'''Stockholm City Centre'''
Stockholm Central Station has train connections to many Swedish cities as well as to Oslo, Norway and Copenhagen, Denmark.
The 17th century saw Sweden grow into a major European power, reflected in the development of the city of Stockholm.
Over 30% of the city area is made up of waterways and another 30% is made up of parks and green spaces.
The city was also second runner up in the 2004 Summer Olympics bids.
All the entrances and exits of this area have unmanned control points operating with automatic number plate recognition.
* Swedbank&nbsp;— 3,610
* Capgemini&nbsp;— 2,500
Additionally, about 45% of Swedish companies with more than 200 employees are headquartered in Stockholm.
* Veolia Transport&nbsp;— 2,300
Summers average daytime high temperatures of  and lows of around , but temperatures can reach  on some days.
Stockholm has regular ferry lines to Helsinki and Turku in Finland (commonly called "Finlandsfärjan"); Tallinn, Estonia; Riga, Latvia, Åland islands and to Saint Petersburg.
The entire Stockholm metropolitan area, consisting of 26 municipalities, has a population of over 2,2 million, making it the most populous city in the Nordic region.
It was founded in the 13th century but is clad in a baroque exterior dating to the 18th century.
Trading rules were also created that gave Stockholm an essential monopoly over trade between foreign merchants and other Swedish and Scandinavian territories.
The City Executive Board () is elected by the City Council and can be thought of as the equivalent of a cabinet.
* Hägersten-Liljeholmen
The most notable buildings from this period is the ensemble of the House of Culture, City Theatre and National Bank at Sergels Torg, designed by architect Peter Celsing.
Of the population of 765,044 in 2004, 370,482 were men and 394,562 women.
There are over 1000 restaurants in Stockholm.
Settlement began to expand outside the city limits.
It has four nationwide daily newspapers and is also the central location of the publicly funded radio (SR) and television (SVT).
Founded in 1995, the Royal National City Park is the world’s first legally protected "national urban park".
According to Eric Chronicles the city is said to have been founded by Birger Jarl to protect Sweden from sea invasions made by Karelians after the pillage of Sigtuna on Lake Mälaren in the summer of 1187.
* Military Academy Karlberg, the world's oldest military academy to remain in its original location, inaugurated in 1792 and housed in Karlberg Palace.
In the last few years a gallery district has emerged around Hudiksvallsgatan where leading galleries such as Andréhn-Schiptjenko, Brändström & Stene have located.
With a journey of 20 minutes, the train ride is the fastest way of travelling to the city center.
After the Ice Age around 8,000 BCE, there already was a large number of people living around the present-day Stockholm area but, as temperatures dropped, inhabitants moved towards the South.
Between 1296 and 1478 Stockholm's City Council was made up of 24 members, half of whom were selected from the town's German-speaking burghers.
The Mayor and each majority Vice Mayor is a head of a department, with responsibility for a particular area of operation, such as City Planning.
New industries emerged and Stockholm was transformed into an important trade and service centre as well as a key gateway point within Sweden.
Among 44 European cities Stockholm had the 6th highest growth in number of nights spent in the period 2004–2008.
North of Stockholm Municipality: Järfälla, Solna, Täby, Sollentuna, Lidingö, Upplands Väsby, Österåker, Sigtuna, Sundbyberg, Danderyd, Vallentuna, Ekerö, Upplands-Bro, Vaxholm, and Norrtälje.
The novelist Per Anders Fogelström (1917–1998) wrote a popular series of historical novels depicting life in Stockholm from the mid-18th to mid-20th century.
The climate table below presents weather data from the years 1981–2010 although the official Köppen reference period was from 1961–1990.
When their validity runs out they can be reactivated and are therefore reusable.
It also incorporates many historical institutions, such as the Observatory, the Swedish Museum of Natural History, and the botanical garden ''Bergianska trädgården''.
The city is spread across 14 islands on the coast in the southeast of Sweden at the mouth of Lake Mälaren, by the Stockholm archipelago and the Baltic Sea.
Noted clothes retailer H&M is also headquartered in the city.
The Södertörn University College was founded in 1995 as a multi-disciplinary institution for southern Metropolitan Stockholm, to balance the many institutions located in the northern part of the region.
Population growth halted and economic growth slowed.
Stockholms' location appears in Norse sagas as Agnafit, and in Heimskringla in connection with the legendary king Agne.
Notable works of this time period include public buildings such as the Royal Swedish Opera and private developments such as the luxury housing developments on Strandvägen.
The then-reigning government (Persson Cabinet) stated that they would only take into consideration the results of the referendum in Stockholm Municipality.
Throughout the century, many industries shifted away from work-intensive activities into more high-tech and service industry areas.
As a green project, the City Line includes the purification of waste water; noise reduction through sound-attenuating tracks; the use of synthetic diesel, which provides users with clean air; and the recycling of excavated rocks.
Stockholm is one of the cleanest capitals in the world.
Despite its northern location, Stockholm has relatively mild weather compared to other locations at similar latitude, or even farther south.
Between Riddarholmen and Söder Mälarstrand, the City Line will run through a submerged concrete tunnel.
Its meetings are not open to the public.
In addition to the eight political parties which are also represented on the national level in the Riksdag, the Feminist Initiative also hold seats in the municipal council and is part of the ruling majority.
The elected majority has a Mayor and eight Vice Mayors.
Single tickets are now available in forms of cash ticket, individual unit pre-paid tickets, pre-paid ticket slips of 8, sms-ticket and machine ticket.
During the winter months the trees lose their leaves.
In the 20th century, a nationalistic push spurred a new architectural style inspired by medieval and renaissance ancestry as well as influences of the Jugend/Art Nouveau style.
The General Art and Industrial Exposition was held in 1897.
The Stockholm region is home to around 22% of Sweden's total population, and accounts for about 29% of its gross domestic product.
The Stockholm School of Economics, founded in 1909, is one of the few private institutions of higher education in Sweden.
Stockholm developed strong economic and cultural linkages with Lübeck, Hamburg, Gdańsk, Visby, Reval, and Riga during this time.
Winters generally bring cloudy weather with the most precipitation falling in December and January (as rain or as snow).
The medical education was eventually formalized in 1811 as the Karolinska Institutet.
The municipality is usually described in terms of its three main parts: Innerstaden (Stockholm City Centre), Söderort (Southern Stockholm) and Västerort (Western Stockholm).
In 2015, the Stockholms Kungar Rugby league club were formed.
In the 1930s modernism characterized the development of the city as it grew.
Starting 1 April 2007, a new zone system (A, B, C) and price system applies for single tickets.
The Mayor holds a special position among the Vice Mayors, chairing both the Council of Mayors and the City Executive Board.
Due to recent mildening of the climate it could be classified as cold marine with significant continental influence if the  isotherm is used.
The archipelago boat traffic is handled by Waxholmsbolaget, which is also wholly owned by the County Council.
Stockholm boasts a total of eight Michelin star restaurants, two of which have two stars.
In the following municipalities some of the districts are contained within the Stockholm urban area, though not all:
The highest temperature ever recorded in Stockholm was  on 3 July 1811; the lowest was  on 20 January 1814.
The opposition also has four Vice Mayors, but they hold no executive power.
The city was in shock after having lost its place as the capital of a Great power.
A 30-day card costs 790&nbsp;SEK (83&nbsp;EUR; 130&nbsp;USD).
A half-completed motorway ring road exists on the south and west sides of the City Centre.
South of Stockholm: Huddinge, Nacka, Botkyrka, Haninge, Tyresö, Värmdö, Södertälje, Salem, Nykvarn and Nynäshamn.
Around the Summer solstice the sun never reaches further below the horizon than 7.3 degrees.
The modern centre Norrmalm, (concentrated around the town square Sergels torg), is the largest shopping district in Sweden.
Other major sport arenas are Friends Arena the new national football stadium, Stockholm Globe Arena, a multi-sport arena and one of the largest spherical buildings in the world and the nearby indoor arena Hovet.
* Sodexo&nbsp;— 1,580
Other important commercial galleries include Nordenhake, Milliken Gallery and Galleri Magnus Karlsson.
Large employers include IBM, Ericsson, and Electrolux.
It is the most central part of Stockholm in business and shopping.
The Stockholm region alone accounts for over a third of the country's GDP, and is among the top 10 regions in Europe by GDP per capita.
Cards allow users to rent bikes from any Stockholm City Bikes stand spread across the city and return them in any stand.
Major Swedish banks, such as Nordea, Swedbank, Handelsbanken, and Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken, are headquartered in Stockholm, as are the major insurance companies Skandia, Folksam and Trygg-Hansa.
The oldest building in Stockholm is the Riddarholmskyrkan from the late 13th century.
In Stockholm, the aurora borealis can occasionally be observed.
The area has been settled since the Stone Age, in the 6th millennium BC, and was founded as a city in 1252 by a Swedish statesman Birger Jarl.
With the accession of Gustav Vasa in 1523 and the establishment of a royal power, the population of Stockholm began to grow, reaching 10,000 by 1600.
From 1610 to 1680 the population multiplied sixfold.
* ISS Facility Services&nbsp;— 2,000
The many islands and waterways make extensions of the road system both complicated and expensive, and new motorways are often built as systems of tunnels and bridges.
For details about the other municipalities in the Stockholm area, see the pertinent articles.
A north section of the ring road will open for traffic in 2015 while the final subsea eastern section is being discussed as a future project.
With an estimated cost of SEK 16.8 billion (January 2007 price level), which equals 2.44 billion US dollars, the City Line, an environmentally certified project, comprises a -long commuter train tunnel (in rock and water) beneath Stockholm, with two new stations (Stockholm City and Stockholm Odenplan), and a -long railway bridge at Årsta.
A single ticket is valid for one hour.
The 19th century saw the establishment of a number of scientific institutes, including the Karolinska Institutet.
Beside the 1912 Summer Olympics, Stockholm hosted the 1956 Summer Olympics Equestrian Games and the UEFA Euro 1992.
However Stockholm maintained its role as the political centre of Sweden and continued to develop culturally under Gustav III.
The municipal border was established in 1971; with the exception of Hansta, in 1982 purchased by Stockholm Municipality from Sollentuna Municipality and today a nature reserve.
At the same time that this suburban development was taking place, the most central areas of the inner city were being redesigned, known as ''Norrmalmsregleringen''.
After the trial period was over, consultative referendums were held in Stockholm Municipality and several other municipalities in Stockholm County.
They had a positive trade impact on the area because of the trade routes they created.
All three clubs have ice hockey teams; Djurgårdens IF plays in the first tier, AIK in the second and Hammarby in the third tier.
The largest companies by number of employees:
The population also grew dramatically during this time, mainly through immigration.
* Handelsbanken&nbsp;— 2,800
The Stockholm Palace is the official residence and principal workplace of the Swedish monarch, while the Drottningholm Palace, a World Heritage Site on the outskirts of Stockholm, serves as the Royal Family's private residence.
The matters on which the councillors decide have generally already been drafted and discussed by various boards and committees.
In the 1960s this suburban development continued but with the aesthetic of the times, the industrialized and mass-produced blocks of flats received a large amount of criticism.
The opposition parties won the general election and a few days before they formed government (Reinfeldt Cabinet) they announced that the congestion tax would be reintroduced in Stockholm, but that the revenue would go entirely to road construction in and around Stockholm.
However, in many other parts of Stockholm (such as in Gamla stan, Södermalm, Östermalm, Kungsholmen and Vasastan), many "old" buildings, blocks and streets built before the modernism and functionalism movements took off in Sweden (around 1930–1935) survived this era of demolition.
According to the European Cities Monitor 2010, Stockholm is the best city in terms of freedom from pollution.
Tickets of all these types are available with reduced prices for persons under 20 and over 65 years of age
The Stockholm suburbs are places with diverse cultural background.
Most of the trains are run by SJ AB.
For the 2002–2014 measurements some further increases have been found, although some months such as June have been relatively flat.
Some of the reasons why Stockholm won the 2010 European Green Capital Award were: its integrated administrative system, which ensures that environmental aspects are considered in budgets, operational planning, reporting, and monitoring; its cut in carbon dioxide emissions by 25% per capita in ten years; and its decision towards being fossil fuel free by 2050.
For a description of the formation process, value assets and implementation of the legal protection of The Royal National Urban Park, see  Schantz 2006 The water in Stockholm is so clean that people can dive and fish in the centre of the city.
The strategic and economic importance of the city made Stockholm an important factor in relations between the Danish Kings of the Kalmar Union and the national independence movement in the 15th century.
* Posten AB (national postal service)&nbsp;— 4,710
All vehicles entering or exiting the congestion tax affected area, with a few exceptions, have to pay 10–20&nbsp;SEK (1.09–2.18&nbsp;EUR, 1.49–2.98&nbsp;USD) depending on the time of day between 06:30 and 18:29.
Gröna Lund is an amusement park located on the island of Djurgården.
Stockholm's core of the present Old Town (Gamla Stan) was built on the central island next to Helgeandsholmen from the mid 13th century onward.
The city’s current environmental program is the fifth since the first one was established in the mid-1970s.
After a fire in 1697 when the original medieval castle was destroyed, Stockholm Palace was erected in a baroque style.
The most popular spectator sports are football and ice hockey.
Stockholm County is ranked as the 10th largest visitor destination in Europe, with over 10 million commercial overnight stays per year.
Stockholm, with a February mean of , had a humid continental climate (Köppen ''Dfb'') for the most recent official reference period.
Since the 1990s, the operation and maintenance of the SL public transport services are contracted out to independent companies bidding for contracts, such as MTR, which currently operate the Metro.
The Danish King Christian II was able to enter the city in 1520.
Research and higher education in the sciences started in Stockholm in the 18th century, with education in medicine and various research institutions such as the Stockholm Observatory.
Ericsson Globe, the national indoor arena, is in the southern part of the city.
Stockholm is Sweden's financial centre.
In spite of its mild climate it is actually located further to the north of where areas of Canada are above the Arctic tree line at sea level.
According to ongoing measurements, the temperature has increased during the years 1991–2009 as compared with the last series.
Approximately 27% of Stockholm's residents are of an immigrant or non-Swedish background.
It is an important global city, and the main centre for corporate headquarters in the Nordic region.
Stockholm is the cultural, media, political, and economic centre of Sweden.
Also, when looking straight up towards the zenith, few stars are visible after the sun has gone down.
Arlanda Express airport rail link runs between Arlanda Airport and central Stockholm.
Other institutes of higher education are:
Stockholm has a vibrant art scene with a number of internationally recognized art centres and commercial galleries.
Currently, Stockholm's metropolitan area is one of the fastest-growing regions in Europe, and its population is expected to number 2.5 million by 2024.
Stockholm also hosted all but one of the Nordic Games, a winter multi-sport event that predated the Winter Olympics.
Other notable works of these times are the Stockholm Public Library and the World Heritage Site Skogskyrkogården.
In 1634, Stockholm became the official capital of the Swedish empire.
The last decade has seen a significant number of jobs created in high technology companies.
Gröna Lund also serves as a concert venue.
Djurgårdens IF and Hammarby play at Tele2 Arena in Johanneshov, with a capacity of 30,000 spectators.
In 1710, a plague killed about 20,000 (36 percent) of the population.
Once decisions are referred for practical implementation, the employees of the City administrations and companies take over.
Thousands of years later, as the ground thawed, the climate became tolerable, and the lands became fertile, some life moved back to the North.
As Stockholm Central Station is overloaded, the purpose of this project is to double the city’s track capacity and improve service efficiency.
In the 1990s this idea was taken further with the development of and old industrial area close to the inner city, resulting in a sort of mix of modernistic and urban planning in the new area of Hammarby Sjöstad.
309,480 people, or 40.4% of the population, over the age 15 were unmarried.
A key landmark of Stockholm, the Stockholm City Hall, was erected 1911–1923 by architect Ragnar Östberg.
The three most popular football clubs in Stockholm are AIK, Djurgårdens IF and Hammarby IF, who all play in the first tier, Allsvenskan.
* Nordea&nbsp;— 2,820
By the second half of the 19th century, Stockholm had regained its leading economic role.
As of December 2012, there were 201,821 foreign-born persons in Stockholm.
Sergels torg, with its five high-rise office towers was created in the 1960s, followed by the total clearance of large areas to make room for new development projects.
All major magazines are also located to Stockholm, as are the largest literature publisher, the Bonnier group.
The tickets are of two main types, single ticket and travel cards, both allowing for unlimited travel with SL in the entire Stockholm County for the duration of the ticket validity.
Days between  and  are relatively common especially in July and August.
Snowfall may occasionally occur in late October as well as in April.
During the trial period and according to the agenda of the previous government the revenue went entirely to public transport.
The large Stockholm archipelago is served by the archipelago boats of Waxholmsbolaget (owned and subsidized by Stockholm County Council).
Residents of Stockholm are known as Stockholmers.
A bypass motorway for traffic between Northern and Southern Sweden will be built west of Stockholm 2013–2023.
2011 was the final year of a three-year project which brought fiber to 100% of public housing, meaning an extra 95,000 houses were added.
Snowfall occurs mainly from December through March.
Stockholm's architecture (along with Visby, Gotland) provided the inspiration for Japanese anime director Hayao Miyazaki as he sought to evoke an idealized city untouched by World War.
* Enskede-Årsta-Vantör
They are Stockholms first Rugby league team and will play in Sweden's National Rugby league championship.
The biome Stockholm belongs to is the Temperate Deciduous Forest, which means the climate is very similar to that of the far north-eastern area of the United States and coastal Nova Scotia in Canada.
The temperature has not dropped to below  since 10 January 1987.
Stockholm's location just south of the 60th latitude means that the number of daylight hours is relatively small during winter&nbsp;— about six hours, while in June and the first half of July, the nights are relatively short, with about 18 hours of daylight.
Cash tickets bought at the point of travel are the most expensive and pre-paid tickets slips of 8 are the cheapest.
The City Executive Board consists of 13 members, who represent both the majority and the opposition.
The largest group of them are the Finns (17,579), followed by Iraqis (16,374) and Iranian people (11,429).
SL has a common ticket system in the entire Stockholm County, which allows for easy travel between different modes of transport.
