The facility, located near Weston, serves as a special campus for West Virginia University and the WVU Extension Service.
James I. Robertson, Jr. suggests that Jackson was "a Christian soldier in every sense of the word."
Fitzhugh Lee found the entire right side of the Federal lines in the middle of open field, guarded merely by two guns that faced westward, as well as the supplies and rear encampments.
Although the Union troops put up a furious defense, Pope's army was forced to retreat in a manner similar to the embarrassing Union defeat at First Bull Run, fought on roughly the same battleground.
Her sister, Isabella Morrison, was married to Daniel Harvey Hill.
Let us determine to die here, and we will conquer.
Jackson himself had said, "My religious belief teaches me to feel as safe in battle as in bed."
Both of Jackson's parents were natives of Virginia.
Maj. Gen. Irvin McDowell's large corps were poised to hit Richmond from the north, and Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks's army threatened the Shenandoah Valley.
After the war, Jackson's wife and young daughter Julia moved from Lexington to North Carolina.
Though he spent a great deal of time preparing in depth for each class meeting, Jackson was unpopular as a teacher.
At the Battle of Chancellorsville, the Army of Northern Virginia was faced with a serious threat by the Army of the Potomac and its new commanding general, Major General Joseph Hooker.
He excelled as well in other battles: the First Battle of Bull Run (First Manassas), where he received his famous nickname "Stonewall"; the Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas); and the battles of Antietam and Fredericksburg.
Jackson's troops served well under Lee in the series of battles known as the Seven Days Battles, but Jackson's own performance in those battles is generally considered to be poor.
Just before the battle, Jackson was delighted to receive a letter about the birth of his daughter, Julia Laura Jackson, on November 23.
The words "Strength—Mobility" are emblazoned on the ship's banner, words taken from letters written by General Jackson.
Nearby, at Stonewall Jackson's historical childhood home, his uncle's grist mill is the centerpiece of a historical site at the Jackson's Mill Center for Lifelong Learning and State 4-H Camp.
A third stamp commemorating Jackson was released in 1995 (copyrighted stamp not shown).
Because of his inadequate schooling, he had difficulty with the entrance examinations and began his studies at the bottom of his class.
A sorry description of our most famous general, but a correct one."
He defeated Banks at Front Royal and Winchester, ejecting him from the Valley.
Major Burnett Rhett, chief of staff to General Joseph E. Johnston, claimed that Bee was angry at Jackson's failure to come immediately to the relief of Bee's and Bartow's brigades while they were under heavy pressure.
He certainly made a poor figure on a horseback, with his stirrup leather six inches too short, putting his knees nearly level with his horse's back, and his heels turned out with his toes sticking behind his horse's foreshoulder.
Their older brother, Warren, went to live with other relatives on his mother's side of the family, but he later died of tuberculosis in 1841 at the age of twenty.
Darkness and confusion prevented Jackson from getting immediate care.
He later replaced the wooden box with a metal one, and reburied the arm.
Jackson helped around the farm, tending sheep with the assistance of a sheepdog, driving teams of oxen and helping harvest wheat and corn.
Elizabeth, a strong, blonde woman over  tall, born in London, was also convicted of larceny in an unrelated case for stealing 19 pieces of silver, jewelry, and fine lace, and received a similar sentence.
Their second son was Edward Jackson (March 1, 1759 – December 25, 1828), and Edward's third son was Jonathan Jackson, Thomas's father.
The U.S. M36 tank destroyer was nicknamed Jackson after him by British forces in World War II.
One Union officer said that, though she seemed depressed at hearing the news, her Unionism was stronger than her family bonds.
His father also died of a typhoid fever on March 26.
By utilizing a railroad tunnel under the Blue Ridge Mountains and then transporting troops to Hanover County on the Virginia Central Railroad, Jackson and his forces made a surprise appearance in front of McClellan at Mechanicsville.
Thomas was treated by Brake as an outsider and, having suffered verbal abuse for over a year, ran away from the family.
Jackson pursued relentlessly back toward the center of the Federal line until dusk.
West Virginia's Stonewall Jackson State Park is named in his honor.
Mary Anna Jackson wrote two books about her husband's life, including some of his letters.
At Malvern Hill Jackson participated in the futile, piecemeal frontal assaults against entrenched Union infantry and massed artillery, and suffered heavy casualties (but this was a problem for all of Lee's army in that ill-considered battle).
He became Professor of Natural and Experimental Philosophy and Instructor of Artillery.
Those who subscribe to this opinion believe that Bee's statement was meant to be pejorative: "Look at Jackson standing there like a stone wall!"
Jackson died of complications from pneumonia on May 10, 1863.
His hand was struck by a bullet or a piece of shrapnel and he suffered a small loss of bone in his middle finger.
On his deathbed, though he became weaker, he remained spiritually strong, saying towards the end: "It is the Lord's Day; my wish is fulfilled.
During a training exercise in Virginia by U.S. Marines in 1921, the Marine commander, General Smedley Butler was told by a local farmer that Stonewall Jackson's arm was buried nearby under a granite marker, to which Butler replied, "Bosh!
A second volley was fired in response; in all, Jackson was hit by three bullets, two in the left arm and one in the right hand.
His commanding officer was Major William H. French.
Displaying a dogged determination that was to characterize his life, he became one of the hardest working cadets in the academy, and moved steadily up the academic rankings.
There is some dispute about the actual location of Jackson's birth.
Jackson encouraged the Confederate States Army revival that occurred in 1863, although it was probably more of a grass-roots movement than a top-down revival.
They began to acquire large parcels of virgin farming land near the present-day town of Buckhannon, including 3,000 acres (12&nbsp;km²) in Elizabeth's name.
Several other men in his staff were killed, in addition to many horses.
Rally behind the Virginians!"
He was emphatically the black man's friend."
In the spring of 1862, Union Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan's Army of the Potomac approached Richmond from the southeast in the Peninsula Campaign.
One of his many nicknames was "Old Blue Lights," a term applied to a military man whose evangelical zeal burned with the intensity of the blue light used for night-time display.
During the assault on Chapultepec Castle, he refused what he felt was a "bad order" to withdraw his troops.
", but fired before evaluating the reply.
Jackson rose to prominence and earned his most famous nickname at the First Battle of Bull Run (First Manassas) on July 21, 1861.
An addition was built onto the president's residence for the Jacksons, and when Robert E. Lee became president of Washington College he lived in the same home, now known as the Lee–Jackson House.
John and Elizabeth had eight children.
He memorized his lectures and then recited them to the class; any student who came to ask for help was given the same explanation as before.
Ellie gave birth to a stillborn son on October 22, 1854, experiencing a hemorrhage an hour later that proved fatal.
After the battle, Jackson was promoted to major general (October 7, 1861) and given command of the Valley District, with headquarters in Winchester.
As the war loomed, she became a staunch Unionist in a somewhat divided Harrison County.
In a letter, he wrote that Laura had said she "would rather know that he was dead than to have him a leader in the rebel army."
James I. Robertson, Jr. notes that "no place existed in his Sunday schedule for labor, newspapers, or secular conversation."
Jackson was so embarrassed with the attention that he did not wear the new uniform for months.
While living in London, England, he was convicted of the capital crime of larceny for stealing £170; the judge at the Old Bailey sentenced him to seven years of indentured servitude in America.
What happened next is given in Fitzhugh Lee's own words:
Jackson's family owned six slaves in the late 1850s.
'''Thomas Jonathan''' "'''Stonewall'''" '''Jackson''' (January 21, 1824 – May 10, 1863) was a Confederate general during the American Civil War, and the best-known Confederate commander after General Robert E. Lee.
Darkness ended the assault.
Thomas Jonathan Jackson was the great-grandson of John Jackson (1715 or 1719 – 1801) and Elizabeth Cummins (also known as Elizabeth Comings and Elizabeth Needles) (1723–1828).
He was stationed briefly at Fort Casey before being named second-in-command at Fort Meade, a small fort about thirty miles south of Tampa.
This proved a crucial factor in McClellan's decision to re-establish his base at a point many miles downstream from Richmond on the James River at Harrison's Landing, essentially a retreat that ended the Peninsula Campaign and prolonged the war almost three more years.
However, according to Sears, "this fanatical religiosity had drawbacks.
Jonathan's mother died in 1798 and his father remarried three years later.
Jackson purchased the only house he ever owned while in Lexington.
Jackson graduated 17th out of 59 students in the Class of 1846.
He required little sleep but was known to take catnaps.
James Robertson wrote about Jackson's view on slavery:
Jackson held a lifelong belief that one of his arms was longer than the other, and thus usually held the "longer" arm up to equalize his circulation.
In 1830, Julia Neale Jackson remarried.
He was named for his maternal grandfather.
Jackson stayed in Florida less than a year.
General Lee decided to employ a risky tactic to take the initiative and offensive away from Hooker's new southern thrust – he decided to divide his forces.
He once made a deal with one of his uncle's slaves to provide him with pine knots in exchange for reading lessons; Thomas would stay up at night reading borrowed books by the light of those burning pine knots.
Laura Jackson Arnold was close to her brother Thomas until the Civil War period.
After a series of maneuvers, Jackson defeated Frémont's command at Cross Keys and Brig.
Jackson was greatly admired and respected throughout the South, and his death had a profound effect there on civilians and soldiers alike.
His horse was named "Little Sorrel" (also known as "Old Sorrel"), a small chestnut gelding which ironically was a captured Union horse from a Connecticut farm.
Jackson also suffered a significant hearing loss in both of his ears as a result of his prior service in the U.S. Army, as an artillery officer.
The Civil War has sometimes been referred to as a war of "brother against brother," but in the case of the Jackson family, it was brother against sister.
Built in 1801, the brick town house at 8 East Washington Street was purchased by Jackson in 1859.
Artillery Regiment and was sent to fight in the Mexican–American War from 1846 to 1848.
Amy also requested that Jackson purchase her from a public slave auction and she served the family as a cook and housekeeper.
Then he had his troops destroy all of it, for it was the main depot for the Union Army.
As the Confederate lines began to crumble under heavy Union assault, Jackson's brigade provided crucial reinforcements on Henry House Hill, demonstrating the discipline he instilled in his men.
Gen. James Shields at Port Republic on June 8–9.
Parts of Jackson's curriculum are still taught at VMI, regarded as timeless military essentials: discipline, mobility, assessing the enemy's strength and intentions while attempting to conceal your own, and the efficiency of artillery combined with an infantry assault.
Both Jackson and his troops were completely exhausted.
I will take a squad of Marines and dig up that spot to prove you wrong!"
A former Confederate soldier who admired Jackson, Captain Thomas R. Ranson of Staunton, Virginia, also remembered the tragic life of Jackson's mother.
John Jackson was an Ulster Scots Protestant  from Coleraine, County Londonderry, Ireland.
Robert H. Milroy and Robert C. Schenck.
Jackson then retreated and then took up a defensive position and effectively invited Pope to assault him.
He arrived late at Mechanicsville and inexplicably ordered his men to bivouac for the night within clear earshot of the battle.
In 1855, he was instrumental in the organization of Sunday School classes for blacks at the Presbyterian Church.
Many of the Federals were captured without a shot fired, the rest were driven into a full rout.
On April 27, 1861, Virginia Governor John Letcher ordered Colonel Jackson to take command at Harpers Ferry, where he would assemble and command the famous "Stonewall Brigade", consisting of the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 27th, and 33rd Virginia Infantry regiments.
She sold the family's possessions to pay the debts.
With little sense of humor, he once tried to get a cadet dismissed from VMI for playing a prank on him.
His body was moved to the Governor's Mansion in Richmond for the public to mourn, and he was then moved to be buried in the Stonewall Jackson Memorial Cemetery, Lexington, Virginia.
He wore a cap pulled down nearly to his nose and was riding a rawboned horse that did not look much like a charger, unless it would be on hay or clover.
Jackson's religion has often been discussed.
He addressed his students by name and they, in turn, referred to him affectionately as "Marse Major".
He was described as a "champion sleeper", and even fell asleep with food in his mouth, occasionally.
At Gettysburg, this resulted in lost opportunities.
He refused medical advice to have the finger amputated.
He was late and disoriented at Gaines' Mill, and late again at Savage's Station.
There is some controversy over Bee's statement and intent, which could not be clarified because he was killed almost immediately after speaking and none of his subordinate officers wrote reports of the battle.
The unit's shoulder sleeve insignia worn until 2008 depicted Stonewall Jackson mounted on horseback.
Preston's second wife, Margaret Junkin Preston, was the sister of Jackson's first wife, Elinor.
John and his two teenage sons, were early recruits for the American Revolutionary War, fighting in the Battle of Kings Mountain on October 7, 1780; John finished the war as captain and served as a lieutenant of the Virginia militia after 1787.
Union forces were withdrawn from the Valley.
He rode Little Sorrel throughout the war, and was riding him when he was shot at Chancellorsville.
It was said by his peers that if he had stayed there another year, he would have graduated first.
The following year, after giving birth to Thomas's half-brother Willam Wirt Woodson, Julia died of complications, leaving her three older children orphaned.
The Commonwealth of Virginia honors Jackson's birthday on Lee–Jackson Day, a state holiday observed as such since 1904.
A recurring story concerns Jackson's love of lemons, which he allegedly gnawed whole to alleviate symptoms of dyspepsia.
"Stonewall" Jackson appeared on the CSA $500 bill (7th Issue, February 17, 1864).
Also before the battle, Maj. Gen. J. E. B. Stuart, Lee's dashing and well-dressed cavalry commander, presented to Jackson a fine general's frock coat that he had ordered from one of the best tailors in Richmond.
In 1861, as the American Civil War broke out, Jackson became a drill master for some of the many new recruits in the Confederate Army.
It warped Jackson's judgment of men, leading to poor appointments; it was said he preferred good Presbyterians to good soldiers."
However, recent research by his biographer, James I. Robertson, Jr., has found that none of Jackson's contemporaries, including members of his staff, his friends, or his wife, recorded any unusual obsessions with lemons.
After the war, Jackson was briefly assigned to forts in New York, and then to Florida during the Second Interbellum of the Seminole Wars, during which the Americans were attempting to force the remaining Seminoles to move West.
Jackson was not universally successful as a commander, however, as displayed by his late arrival and confused efforts during the Seven Days Battles around Richmond, in 1862.
Julia took in sewing and taught school to support herself and her three young children for about four years.
He was offered Chandler's home for recovery, but Jackson refused and suggested using Chandler's plantation office building instead.
Jackson became known for his relentless drilling of his troops; he believed discipline was vital to success on the battlefield.
''Stonewall Jackson'' (SSBN 634), commissioned in 1964, was named for him.
The reasons for Jackson's sluggish and poorly coordinated actions during the Seven Days are disputed, although a severe lack of sleep after the grueling march and railroad trip from the Shenandoah Valley was probably a significant factor.
Reports had last placed Jackson's forces in the Shenandoah Valley; their presence near Richmond added greatly to the Union commander's overestimation of the strength and numbers of the forces before him.
In his later years at Jackson's Mill, Thomas served as a schoolteacher.
At White Oak Swamp he failed to employ fording places to cross White Oak Swamp Creek, attempting for hours to rebuild a bridge, which limited his involvement to an ineffectual artillery duel and a missed opportunity.
Jackson and his entire corps went on an aggressive flanking maneuver to the right of the Union lines: this flanking movement would be one of the most successful and dramatic of the war.
With a defeated and disorganized Union Army trying to regroup on high ground near town and vulnerable, Lee sent one of his new corps commanders, Richard S. Ewell, discretionary orders that the heights (Cemetery Hill and Culp's Hill) be taken "if practicable."
The stamp was issued on September 19, 1970 in conjunction with the dedication of the Stone Mountain Confederate Memorial in Georgia on May 9, 1970.
While an instructor at VMI in 1853, Thomas Jackson married Elinor "Ellie" Junkin, whose father, George Junkin, was president of Washington College (later named Washington and Lee University) in Lexington.
Longstreet commanded the Right Wing (later to become known as the First Corps) and Jackson commanded the Left Wing.
On August 28–29, the start of the Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas),  Pope launched repeated assaults against Jackson as Longstreet and the remainder of the army marched north to reach the battlefield.
Certainly Jackson's discipline and tactical sense were sorely missed.
Jackson's peculiar personal traits contributed to his unpopularity as an educator.
She declined family charity and moved into a small rented one-room house.
The military reputations of Lee's corps commanders are often characterized as Stonewall Jackson representing the audacious, offensive component of Lee's army, whereas his counterpart, James Longstreet, more typically advocated and executed defensive strategies and tactics.
Jackson had a poor reputation as a horseman.
The lineage of Jackson's Confederate Army unit, the Stonewall Brigade, continues to the present day in form of the 116th Infantry Brigade of the U.S. Army, currently part of the Virginia National Guard.
While riding with his infantry in a wide berth well south and west of the Federal line of battle, Jackson employed Maj. Gen. Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry to provide for better reconnaissance regarding the exact location of the Union right and rear.
They spent four years together at the Mill before being separated—Laura Ann was sent to live with her mother's family, Thomas to live with his Aunt Polly (his father's sister) and her husband, Isaac Brake, on a farm four miles from Clarksburg.
The family already had two young children and were living in Clarksburg, in what is now West Virginia, when Thomas was born.
As it transpired, it was Jackson's only defeat in the Valley.
Jackson was fond of all fruits, particularly peaches, "but he enjoyed with relish lemons, oranges, watermelons, apples, grapes, berries, or whatever was available."
Cummins Jackson was strict with Thomas, who looked up to Cummins as a schoolteacher.
He rarely ate much food and often subsisted on crackers and milk.
It was a classic military campaign of surprise and maneuver.
Jackson and French disagreed often, and filed numerous complaints against each other.
When his cousin in Clarksburg urged him to return to Aunt Polly's, he replied, "Maybe I ought to, ma'am, but I am not going to."
An explanation for this and other lapses by Jackson was tersely offered by his colleague and brother in-law General Daniel Harvey Hill: "Jackson's genius never shone when he was under the command of another."
Although they were sent to different locations in Maryland for their indentures, the couple married in July 1755.
The United States Navy submarine U.S.S.
His staff insisted that he wear it to dinner, which caused scores of soldiers to rush to see him in uncharacteristic garb.
Lee wrote to Jackson after learning of his injuries, stating: "Could I have directed events, I would have chosen for the good of the country to be disabled in your stead."
On October 10, Jackson was promoted to lieutenant general, being ranked just behind Lee and Longstreet and his command was redesignated the Second Corps.
The Jacksons named her Julia Laura, after his mother and sister.
In 1770, they moved farther west to the Tygart Valley.
The Confederate forces held their position, but the battle was extremely bloody for both sides, and Lee withdrew the Army of Northern Virginia back across the Potomac River, ending the invasion.
After the American Civil War began he appears to have hired out or sold his slaves.
It was the third U.S. Navy ship named for him.
The founder of VMI and one of its first two faculty members was John Thomas Lewis Preston.
Jackson's men bore the brunt of the initial attacks on the northern end of the battlefield and, at the end of the day, successfully resisted a breakthrough on the southern end when Jackson's subordinate, Maj. Gen. A. P. Hill, arrived at the last minute from Harpers Ferry.
Thomas and Laura Ann returned from Jackson's Mill in November 1831 to be at their dying mother's bedside.
Jackson has been described as the army's hammer, Longstreet its anvil.
He lived in it for two years before being called to serve in the Confederacy.
Another, Albert, requested that Jackson purchase him and allow him to work for his freedom; he was employed as a waiter in one of the Lexington hotels and Jackson rented him to VMI.
Many theorists through the years have postulated that if Jackson had lived, Lee might have prevailed at Gettysburg.
At Manassas Junction, Jackson was able to capture all of the supplies of the Union Army depot.
The family migrated west across the Blue Ridge Mountains to settle near Moorefield, Virginia (now West Virginia) in 1758.
On August 30, Pope came to believe that Jackson was starting to retreat, and Longstreet took advantage of this by launching a massive assault on the Union army's left with over 25,000 men.
Jackson strictly observed the Sunday Sabbath.
The men were eating and playing games in carefree fashion, completely unaware that an entire Confederate corps was less than a mile away.
Years after the war, he went to the tiny mountain hamlet of Ansted in Fayette County, West Virginia, and had a marble marker placed over the unmarked grave of Julia Neale Jackson in Westlake Cemetery, to make sure that the site was not lost forever.
When Lee decided to invade the North in the Maryland Campaign, Jackson took Harpers Ferry, then hastened to join the rest of the army at Sharpsburg, Maryland, where they fought McClellan in the Battle of Antietam (Sharpsburg).
He was thought to be out of harm's way; but unknown to the doctors, he already had classic symptoms of pneumonia, complaining of a sore chest.
He became the most celebrated soldier in the Confederacy (until he was eventually eclipsed by Lee) and lifted the morale of the Southern public.
In 1856, a group of alumni attempted to have Jackson removed from his position.
Confronted by his superior, he explained his rationale, claiming withdrawal was more hazardous than continuing his overmatched artillery duel.
And if a student asked for help a second time, Jackson viewed him as insubordinate and punished him.
A paper presented to the Society of Clinical Psychologists hypothesized that Jackson had Asperger syndrome, although other possible explanations, such as a herniated diaphragm, exist.
Thomas Jackson was the third child of Julia Beckwith (née Neale) Jackson (1798–1831) and Jonathan Jackson (1790–1826), an attorney.
His second wife, Mary Anna Jackson, taught with Jackson, as "he preferred that my labors should be given to the colored children, believing that it was more important and useful to put the strong hand of the Gospel under the ignorant African race, to lift them up."
