William Gowland oversaw the first major restoration of the monument in 1901 which involved the straightening and concrete setting of sarsen stone number 56 which was in danger of falling.
In straightening the stone he moved it about half a metre from its original position.
The University of Buckingham's Humanities Research Institute believes that the community who built Stonehenge lived here over a period of several millennia making it potentially "one of the pivotal places in the history of the Stonehenge landscape."
William Stukeley in 1740 notes, "Pendulous rocks are now called henges in Yorkshire...I doubt not, Stonehenge in Saxon signifies the hanging stones."
Even so, the monument appears to have eclipsed the site at Avebury in importance towards the end of this phase.
As many as seventeen new monuments, revealed nearby, may be Late Neolithic monuments that resemble Stonehenge.
Again, there is little firm dating evidence for this phase.
The "henge" portion has given its name to a class of monuments known as henges.
One of the conditions of the licence was that the remains should be reinterred within two years and that in the intervening period they should be kept safely, privately and decently.
They may have come from a quarry, around  north of Stonehenge on the Marlborough Downs, or they may have been collected from a "litter" of sarsens on the chalk downs, closer to hand.
On 6 December 2007, it was announced that extensive plans to build Stonehenge road tunnel under the landscape and create a permanent visitors' centre had been cancelled.
Further standing timbers were placed at the northeast entrance, and a parallel alignment of posts ran inwards from the southern entrance.
How the stones could be transported by a prehistoric people without the aid of the wheel or a pulley system is not known.
The pits may have contained standing timbers creating a timber circle, although there is no excavated evidence of them.
The point where the Stonehenge Avenue meets the river was also excavated, and revealed a previously unknown circular area which probably housed four further stones, most likely as a marker for the starting point of the avenue.
A licence for the removal of human remains at Stonehenge had been granted by the Ministry of Justice in May 2008, in accordance with the ''Statement on burial law and archaeology'' issued in May 2008.
The holes held up to 80 standing stones (shown blue on the plan), only 43 of which can be traced today.
They are arranged symmetrically.
The Altar Stone may have been moved within the oval at this time and re-erected vertically.
On 26 November 2011, archaeologists from University of Birmingham announced the discovery of evidence of two huge pits positioned within the Stonehenge Cursus pathway, aligned in celestial position towards midsummer sunrise and sunset when viewed from the Heel Stone.
The 'Court of Human Rights' rulings recognises that members of any genuine religion have a right to worship in their own church, and Stonehenge is a place of worship  to Neo-Druids, Pagans and other 'Earth based' or 'old' religions.
Isotope analysis indicates that some of the buried individuals were from other regions.
", whereupon the Devil threw one of the stones at him and struck him on the heel.
In August and September 2008, as part of the Riverside Project, Julian Richards and Mike Pitts excavated Aubrey Hole 7, removing the cremated remains from several Aubrey Holes that had been excavated by Hawley in the 1920s, and re-interred in 1935.
To alert future diggers to their work they were careful to leave initialled metal tokens in each barrow they opened.
Importantly Wood’s plan was made before the collapse of the southwest trilithon, which fell in 1797 and was restored in 1958.
The surrounding circular earth bank and ditch, which constitute the earliest phase of the monument, have been dated to about 3100 BC.
Indeed, there is some evidence that, as an uncommon geological feature, it could have been deliberately incorporated into the monument at the outset.
Radiocarbon dating suggests that the first bluestones were raised between 2400 and 2200 BC, although they may have been at the site as early as 3000 BC.
Further astronomical associations, and the precise astronomical significance of the site for its people, are a matter of speculation and debate.
Roman coins and medieval artefacts have all been found in or around the monument but it is unknown if the monument was in continuous use throughout British prehistory and beyond, or exactly how it would have been used.
This phase saw further rearrangement of the bluestones.
As motorised traffic increased, the setting of the monument began to be affected by the proximity of the two roads on either side—the A344 to Shrewton on the north side, and the A303 to Winterbourne Stoke to the south.
They were arranged in a circle between the two rings of sarsens and in an oval at the centre of the inner ring.
According to Geoffrey the rocks of Stonehenge were healing rocks, called the Giant's dance, which Giants had brought from Africa to Ireland for their healing properties.
Some Druids have arranged an assembling of monuments styled on Stonehenge in other parts of the world as a form of Druidist worship.
Over the years, various authors have suggested that supernatural or anachronistic methods were used, usually asserting that the stones were impossible to move otherwise due to their massive size.
Another theory is that they were brought much nearer to the site as glacial erratics by the Irish Sea Glacier although there is no evidence of glacial deposition within southern central England.
In another legend of Saxons and Britons, in 472 the invading king Hengist invited Brythonic warriors to a feast, but treacherously ordered his men to draw their weapons from concealment and fall upon the guests, killing 420 of them.
The site was known to scholars during the Middle Ages and since then it has been studied and adopted by numerous groups.
1 School of Aerial Navigation and Bomb Dropping") was built on the downs just to the west of the circle and, in the dry valley at Stonehenge Bottom, a main road junction was built, along with several cottages and a cafe.
Atkinson's work was instrumental in furthering the understanding of the three major phases of the monument's construction.
The last restoration was carried out in 1963 after stone 23 of the Sarsen Circle fell over.
A number of myths surround the stones.
It subsequently passed to Lord Carleton and then the Marquess of Queensberry.
The lintels were fitted to one another using another woodworking method, the tongue and groove joint.
This phase is contemporary with the Seahenge site in Norfolk.
Part of English Heritage's response to this criticism was to commission research to collate and bring together all the archaeological work conducted at the monument up to this date.
This first stage is dated to around 3100 BC, after which the ditch began to silt up naturally.
It seems that whatever the holes' initial function, it changed to become a funerary one during Phase 2.
Dating evidence is provided by the late Neolithic grooved ware pottery that has been found in connection with the features from this phase.
There is little or no direct evidence revealing the construction techniques used by the Stonehenge builders.
The site and its surroundings were added to UNESCO's list of World Heritage Sites in 1986.
It was thought the ring might have been left incomplete, but an exceptionally dry summer in 2013 revealed patches of parched grass which may correspond to the location of removed sarsens.
Archaeologists have found four, or possibly five, large Mesolithic postholes (one may have been a natural tree throw), which date to around 8000 BC, beneath the nearby modern tourist car-park.
By 1928 the land around the monument had been purchased with the appeal donations, and given to the National Trust to preserve.
After the Battle of the Beanfield in 1985, this use of the site was stopped for several years and ritual use of Stonehenge is now heavily restricted.
During the twentieth century, Stonehenge began to revive as a place of religious significance, this time by adherents of Neopaganism and New Age beliefs, particularly the Neo-druids.
A number of other adjacent stone and wooden structures and burial mounds, previously overlooked, may date as far back as 4000 BC.
Three of the posts (and possibly four) were in an east-west alignment which may have had ritual significance; no parallels are known from Britain at the time but similar sites have been found in Scandinavia.
During the 1920 restoration William Hawley, who had excavated nearby Old Sarum, excavated the base of six stones and the outer ditch.
Another idea has to do with a quality of the stones themselves: Researchers from the Royal College of Art in London have discovered that some of the monument’s stones possess "unusual acoustic properties"—when they are struck they respond with a "loud clanging noise".
They also discovered organic material from 7000 BC, which, along with the Mesolithic postholes, adds support for the site having been in use at least 4,000 years before Stonehenge was started.
In 2013 a team of archaeologists, led by Mike Parker Pearson, excavated more than 50,000 cremated bones of 63 individuals buried at Stonehenge.
At about the same time, a large timber circle and a second avenue were constructed  away at Durrington Walls overlooking the River Avon.
A new landscape investigation was conducted in April 2009.
John Aubrey was one of the first to examine the site with a scientific eye in 1666, and recorded in his plan of the monument the pits that now bear his name.
The centre, designed by Denton Corker Marshall, opened to the public on 18 December 2013.
They argue that this accounts for the high number of burials in the area and for the evidence of trauma deformity in some of the graves.
An area extending to  was studied to a depth of three metres with ground-penetrating radar equipment.
Some claim "Friar's Heel" is a corruption of "Freyja's He-ol" from the Germanic goddess Freyja and the Welsh word for ''track''.
Each monolith measures around  in height, between  wide and around  thick.
A consequence of the end of the festival in 1985 was the violent confrontation between the police and New Age travellers that became known as the Battle of the Beanfield when police blockaded a convoy of travellers to prevent them from approaching Stonehenge.
It presented a rephasing of the monument.
Evidence of huge fires on the banks of the Avon between the two avenues also suggests that both circles were linked, and they were perhaps used as a procession route on the longest and shortest days of the year.
Although this would seem the most impressive phase of work, Stonehenge 3 IV was rather shabbily built compared to its immediate predecessors, as the newly re-installed bluestones were not well-founded and began to fall over.
He excavated some 24 barrows before digging in and around the stones and discovered charred wood, animal bones, pottery and urns.
Some archaeologists argue that some of these bluestones were from a second group brought from Wales.
Each had clearly been worked with the final visual effect in mind; the orthostats widen slightly towards the top in order that their perspective remains constant when viewed from the ground, while the lintel stones curve slightly to continue the circular appearance of the earlier monument.
Analysis of animal teeth found at nearby Durrington Walls, thought to be the 'builders camp', suggests that as many as 4,000 people gathered at the site for the mid-winter and mid-summer festivals; the evidence showed that the animals had been slaughtered around 9 months or 15 months after their spring birth.
These fragments do not seem to match any of the standing stones or bluestone stumps.
Today it is uniformly referred to as the Heel Stone.
The pair of trilithons in the north east are smallest, measuring around  in height; the largest, which is in the south west of the horseshoe, is almost  tall.
Professor Geoffrey Wainwright, president of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and Timothy Darvill,  of Bournemouth University, have suggested that Stonehenge was a place of healing—the primeval equivalent of Lourdes.
He also identified the hole in which the Slaughter Stone once stood.
The most common theory of how prehistoric people moved megaliths has them creating a track of logs on which the large stones were rolled along.
Two, or possibly three, large portal stones were set up just inside the north-eastern entrance, of which only one, the fallen Slaughter Stone,  long, now remains.
The chalk dug from the ditch was piled up to form the bank.
Stukeley was so fascinated with Druids that he originally named Disc Barrows as Druids' Barrows.
Strontium isotope analysis of the animal teeth showed that some had travelled from as far afield as the Scottish Highlands for the celebrations.
According to Paul Devereux, editor of the journal ''Time and Mind: The Journal of Archaeology, Consciousness and Culture'', this idea could explain why certain bluestones were hauled nearly 200 miles—a major technical accomplishment at the time.
However, in 1985 the site was closed to festivalgoers by English Heritage and the National Trust.
It cannot be accurately dated and may have been installed at any time during phase 3.
Other features, loosely dated to phase 3, include the four Station Stones, two of which stood atop mounds.
Dating and understanding the various phases of activity is complicated by disturbance of the natural chalk by periglacial effects and animal burrowing, poor quality early excavation records, and a lack of accurate, scientifically verified dates.
Stonehenge was produced by a culture that left no written records.
In the survey of conditions at 94 leading World Heritage Sites, 400 conservation and tourism experts ranked Stonehenge 75th in the list of destinations, declaring it to be "in moderate trouble".
According to team leader Vince Gaffney, this discovery may provide a direct link between the rituals and astronomical events to activities within the Cursus at Stonehenge.
The Antrobus family sold the site after their last heir was killed in the fighting in France.
A total of 75 stones would have been needed to complete the circle (60 stones) and the trilithon horseshoe (15 stones).
In 1540 Henry gave the estate to the Earl of Hertford.
Stonehenge evolved in several construction phases spanning at least 1500 years.
Only one upright from the Great Trilithon still stands, of which  is visible and a further  is below ground.
The Devil then cried out, "No-one will ever find out how these stones came here!"
They discovered the Mesolithic postholes dating from between 7000 and 8000 BC, as well as a  length of a palisade ditch&nbsp;– a V-cut ditch into which timber posts had been inserted that remained there until they rotted away.
The site, specifically the great trilithon, the encompassing horseshoe arrangement of the five central trilithons, the heel stone, and the embanked avenue, are aligned to the sunset of the winter solstice and the opposing sunrise of the summer solstice.
The Antrobus family of Cheshire bought the estate in 1824.
The earlier rituals were augmented by the Stonehenge free festival, loosely organised by the Politantric Circle, held between 1972 and 1984, during which time the number of midsummer visitors had risen from 500 to 30,000.
It stood in open grassland on a slightly sloping spot.
Later archaeologists, including Christopher Chippindale of the Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge and Brian Edwards of the University of the West of England, campaigned to give the public more knowledge of the various restorations and in 2004 English Heritage included pictures of the work in progress in its book ''Stonehenge: A History in Photographs''.
The buildings were removed (although the roads were not), and the land returned to agriculture.
These remains had originally been buried individually in the Aubrey holes, exhumed during a previous excavation conducted by William Hawley in 1920, been considered unimportant by him, and subsequently re-interred together in one hole, Aubrey Hole 7, in 1935.
On 18 December 2011, geologists from University of Leicester and the National Museum of Wales announced the discovery of the exact source of some of the rhyolite fragments found in the Stonehenge debitage.
They were placed within the outer sarsen circle and may have been trimmed in some way.
However, the controversy surrounding expensive re-routing of the roads has led to the scheme being cancelled on multiple occasions.
It is a rough stone,  above ground, leaning inwards towards the stone circle.
In the late 1920s a nationwide appeal was launched to save Stonehenge from the encroachment of the modern buildings that had begun to rise around it.
The name is not unique; there was a monolith with the same name recorded in the nineteenth century by antiquarian Charles Warne at Long Bredy in Dorset.
He suggests that the area around Durrington Walls Henge was a place of the living, whilst Stonehenge was a domain of the dead.
Beginning in 1985, the year of the Battle of the Beanfield, no access was allowed into the stones at Stonehenge for any religious reason.
Salisbury Plain was then still wooded but 4,000 years later, during the earlier Neolithic, people built a causewayed enclosure at Robin Hood's Ball and long barrow tombs in the surrounding landscape.
Archaeologists define henges as earthworks consisting of a circular banked enclosure with an internal ditch.
A dedicated team of more than 100 workers managed to push and pull the slab along the 18-mile journey from Marlborough Downs.
The timber circle was oriented towards the rising sun on the midwinter solstice, opposing the solar alignments at Stonehenge, whilst the avenue was aligned with the setting sun on the summer solstice and led from the river to the timber circle.
More recently two major new theories have been proposed.
A shallow mound, rising to about  was identified between stones 54 (inner circle) and 10 (outer circle), clearly separated from the natural slope.
The inward-facing surfaces of the stones are smoother and more finely worked than the outer surfaces.
Such an experiment with a sleigh carrying a 40-ton slab of stone was successful near Stonehenge in 1995.
Richard Colt Hoare supported Cunnington's work and excavated some 379 barrows on Salisbury Plain including on some 200 in the area around the Stones, some excavated in conjunction with William Coxe.
However, they do concede that the site was probably multifunctional and used for ancestor worship as well.
Notable is the massive Iron Age hillfort Vespasian's Camp built alongside the Avenue near the Avon.
:The Devil bought the stones from a woman in Ireland, wrapped them up, and brought them to Salisbury plain.
The stones were dressed and fashioned with mortise and tenon joints before 30 were erected as a  diameter circle of standing stones, with a ring of 30 lintel stones resting on top.
Despite being contemporary with true Neolithic henges and stone circles, Stonehenge is in many ways atypical—for example, at more than  tall, its extant trilithons supporting lintels held in place with mortise and tenon joints, make it unique.
A recent excavation has suggested that the Aubrey Holes may have originally been used to erect a bluestone circle.
These are interpreted as the spread of spoil from the original Y and Z holes, or more speculatively as hedge banks from vegetation deliberately planted to screen the activities within.
''Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable'' attributes this tale to Geoffrey of Monmouth, but though book eight of Geoffrey's ''Historia Regum Britanniae'' does describe how Stonehenge was built, the two stories are entirely different.
Later in the Bronze Age, although the exact details of activities during this period are still unclear, the bluestones appear to have been re-erected.
The ''Oxford English Dictionary'' cites Ælfric's tenth-century glossary, in which ''henge-cliff'' is given the meaning "precipice", or stone, thus the ''stanenges'' or ''Stanheng'' "not far from Salisbury" recorded by eleventh-century writers are "supported stones".
Richard Atkinson, Stuart Piggott and John F. S. Stone re-excavated much of Hawley's work in the 1940s and 1950s, and discovered the carved axes and daggers on the Sarsen Stones.
Stonehenge with about 30 acres, 2 rods, 37 perches 12.44&nbsp;ha of adjoining downland."
Visitors are no longer permitted to touch the stones, but are able to walk around the monument from a short distance away.
Christopher Chippindale's ''Stonehenge Complete'' gives the derivation of the name ''Stonehenge'' as coming from the Old English words ''stān'' meaning "stone", and either ''hencg'' meaning "hinge" (because the stone lintels hinge on the upright stones) or ''hen(c)en'' meaning "hang" or "gallows" or "instrument of torture" (though elsewhere in his book, Chippindale cites the "suspended stones" etymology).
Also included in the discovery is that the cursus track is terminated by two five-meter wide extremely deep pits, whose purpose is still a mystery.
One of the stones fell into the Avon, the rest were carried to the plain.
It has not been dated but speculation that it represents careless backfilling following earlier excavations seems disproved by its representation in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century illustrations.
In certain ancient cultures rocks that ring out, known as lithophones, were believed to contain mystic or healing powers, and Stonehenge has a history of association with rituals.
Within this circle stood five trilithons of dressed sarsen stone arranged in a horseshoe shape  across with its open end facing north east.
Plans to upgrade the A303 and close the A344 to restore the vista from the stones have been considered since the monument became a World Heritage Site.
The interpretation suggests a complex of numerous related monuments.
Another megalith transport theory involves the use of a type of sleigh running on a track greased with animal fat.
He also began the excavation of many of the barrows in the area, and it was his interpretation of the landscape that associated it with the Druids.
On 20 January 2010 Wiltshire Council granted planning permission for a centre  to the west and English Heritage confirmed that funds to build it would be available, supported by a £10m grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund.
This project mainly investigated other monuments in the landscape and their relationship to the stones&nbsp;— notably Durrington Walls, where another "Avenue" leading to the River Avon was discovered.
During the next major phase of activity, 30 enormous Oligocene-Miocene sarsen stones ''(shown grey on the plan)'' were brought to the site.
The modern phasing most generally agreed to by archaeologists is detailed below.
At least twenty-five of the Aubrey Holes are known to have contained later, intrusive, cremation burials dating to the two centuries after the monument's inception.
Stonehenge is therefore interpreted as functioning as an enclosed cremation cemetery at this time, the earliest known cremation cemetery in the British Isles.
As there was evidence of the underlying chalk beneath the graves being crushed by substantial weight, the team concluded that the first bluestones brought from Wales were probably used as grave markers.
Some of the stones of Stonehenge were brought from near a town in Wales called Maenclochog, a name which means "ringing rock".
Parker Pearson speculates that the wooden circle at Durrington Walls was the centre of a 'land of the living', whilst the stone circle represented a 'land of the dead', with the Avon serving as a journey between the two.
The tops of the lintels are  above the ground.
Like Stonehenge's trilithons, medieval gallows consisted of two uprights with a lintel joining them, rather than the inverted L-shape more familiar today.
However, now due to the ''Roundtable'' process and the 'Court of Human Rights' rulings gained by picketing by campaigners such as Brian "Viziondanz" Felstein and King Arthur Pendragon, some access had been gained four times a year.
Archaeological excavation has indicated that around 2600 BC, the builders abandoned timber in favour of stone and dug two concentric arrays of holes (the Q and R Holes) in the centre of the site.
This two-year research project resulted in the publication in 1995 of the monograph ''Stonehenge in its landscape'', which was the first publication presenting the complex stratigraphy and the finds recovered from the site.
As often happens in archaeological terminology, this is a holdover from antiquarian use, and Stonehenge is not truly a henge site as its bank is inside its ditch.
This phase of the monument was abandoned unfinished, however; the small standing stones were apparently removed and the Q and R holes purposefully backfilled.
Features mentioned in the text are numbered and shown on the plan, right.
In the early 1980s Julian Richards led the Stonehenge Environs Project, a detailed study of the surrounding landscape.
Radiocarbon dating of the remains has put the date of the site 500 years earlier than previously estimated, to around 3000 BC.
In April 2008 Tim Darvill of the University of Bournemouth and Geoff Wainwright of the Society of Antiquaries, began another dig inside the stone circle to retrieve dateable fragments of the original bluestone pillars.
However, conventional techniques, using Neolithic technology as basic as shear legs, have been demonstrably effective at moving and placing stones of a similar size.
William Stukeley continued Aubrey’s work in the early eighteenth century, but took an interest in the surrounding monuments as well, identifying (somewhat incorrectly) the Cursus and the Avenue.
Thirty further cremations were placed in the enclosure's ditch and at other points within the monument, mostly in the eastern half.
The presence of these "ringing rocks" seems to support the hypothesis that Stonehenge was a "place for healing", as has been pointed out by Bournemouth University archaeologist Timothy Darvill, who consulted with the researchers.
Proposed functions for the site include usage as an astronomical observatory or as a religious site.
English Heritage does, however, permit access during the summer and winter solstice, and the spring and autumn equinox.
The first monument consisted of a circular bank and ditch enclosure made of Late Cretaceous (Santonian Age) Seaford Chalk, measuring about  in diameter, with a large entrance to the north east and a smaller one to the south.
A decapitated seventh century Saxon man was excavated from Stonehenge in 1923.
The lintel stones are each around  long,  wide and  thick.
Then Merlin, using "gear" and skill, easily dismantled the stones and sent them over to Britain, where Stonehenge was dedicated.
At first it was accompanied by a second stone, which is no longer visible.
The Roundtable meetings include members of the Wiltshire Police force, National Trust, English Heritage, Pagans, Druids, Spiritualists and others.
The 2004 gathering was smaller (around 21,000 people).
On 13 May 2009, the government gave approval for a £25&nbsp;million scheme to create a smaller visitors' centre and close the A344, although this was dependent on funding and local authority planning consent.
Evidence of the second phase is no longer visible.
A folk tale, relates the origin of the Friar's Heel reference.
This assembly was largely ridiculed in the press, who mocked the fact that the Neo-druids were dressed up in costumes consisting of white robes and fake beards.
After it had been rebuilt near Amesbury, Geoffrey further narrates how first Ambrosius Aurelianus, then Uther Pendragon, and finally Constantine III, were buried inside the "Giants' Ring of Stonehenge".
The average thickness of the stones is  and the average distance between them is .
In 1993 the way that Stonehenge was presented to the public was called 'a national disgrace' by the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee.
The researchers have identified the source as a  long rock outcrop called Craig Rhos-y-Felin (), near Pont Saeson in north Pembrokeshire, located  from Stonehenge.
Excavations were once again carried out in 1978 by Atkinson and John Evans during which they discovered the remains of the Stonehenge Archer in the outer ditch, and in 1979 rescue archaeology was needed alongside the Heel Stone after a cable-laying ditch was mistakenly dug on the roadside, revealing a new stone hole next to the Heel Stone.
The Heelstone, a Tertiary sandstone, may also have been erected outside the north-eastern entrance during this period.
Additionally, visitors can make special bookings to access the stones throughout the year.
Charcoal from the ‘Blick Mead’ camp  from Stonehenge (near the Vespasian's Camp site) has been dated to 4000 BC.
During World War I an aerodrome (Royal Flying Corps "No.
These huge stones, ten uprights and five lintels, weigh up to 50 tons each.
In 1958 the stones were restored again, when three of the standing sarsens were re-erected and set in concrete bases.
