As part of Imperial Germany, Strasbourg was rebuilt and developed on a grand and representative scale, such as the ''Neue Stadt'', or "new city" around the present Place de la République.
The metropolitan area of Strasbourg had a population of 768,868 inhabitants in 2012 (French side of the border only), while the transnational Eurodistrict had a population of 915,000 inhabitants in 2014.
The futuristic ''Parc des Poteries'' is an example of European park-conception in the late 1990s.
Drainage works converted the stilthouses to houses built on dry land.
In 1922, Strasbourg was the venue for the XVI Grand Prix de l’A.C.F.
At the end of the siege 10,000 inhabitants were left without shelter; over 600 died, including 261 civilians, and 3200 were injured, including 1,100 civilians.
From the fourth century, Strasbourg was the seat of the Bishopric of Strasbourg (made an Archbishopric in 1988).
Nowadays, Strasbourg is known to offer among the best university courses in France, after Paris.
It was composed by a group of 25 young men aged from 14 to 18 years old who led several attacks against the German occupation.
The Alsatian autonomists who were pro French had won many votes in the more rural parts of the region and other towns since the annexation of the region by Germany in 1871.
The French annexation was recognized by the Treaty of Ryswick (1697).
His last words will be: "If I have to die, I shall die but with a pure heart".
Located in the heart of the city's commercial area, it was named after general Jean-Baptiste Kléber, born in Strasbourg in 1753 and assassinated in 1800 in Cairo.
After the war, the few that survived were often accused of being traitors or collaborationists, because this tough situation was not known in the rest of France, and they had to face the incomprehension of many.
Although Strasbourg had been annexed by the Kingdom of France in 1683, it still remained connected to the German-speaking intellectual world throughout the 18th century and the university attracted numerous students from the Holy Roman Empire, including Goethe, Metternich and Montgelas, who studied law in Strasbourg, among the most prominent.
The tower was saved, however, when in May of the same year citizens of Strasbourg crowned it with a giant tin Phrygian cap.
* The ENA (École nationale d'administration).
The ''Jardin des deux Rives'', spread over Strasbourg and Kehl on both sides of the Rhine opened in 2004 and is the most extended (60-hectare) park of the agglomeration.
Blockhouses and casemates were built along the Grand Canal d'Alsace and the Rhine in the Robertsau forest and the port.
The city is some  east of Paris.
Strasbourg is immersed in the Franco-German culture and although violently disputed throughout history, has been a bridge of unity between France and Germany for centuries, especially through the University of Strasbourg, currently the second largest in France, and the coexistence of Catholic and Protestant culture.
Unlike most other cities, Strasbourg's collections of European art are divided into several museums according not only to type and area, but also to epoch.
(Hence the town is commonly called ''Argentina'' in medieval Latin.)
The movement started with the first election for the Reichstag; those elected were called "les députés protestataires", and until the fall of Bismarck in 1890, they were the only deputies elected by the Alsatians to the German parliament demanding the return of those territories to France.
Strasbourg also offers high-class eclecticist buildings in its very extended German district, the ''Neustadt'', being the main memory of Wilhelmian architecture since most of the major cities in Germany proper suffered intensive damage during World War II.
The gothic cathedral was damaged as well as the medieval church of Temple Neuf, the theatre, the city hall, the court of justice and many houses.
The German Renaissance has bequeathed the city some noteworthy buildings (especially the current ''Chambre de commerce et d'industrie'', former town hall, on ''Place Gutenberg''), as did the French Baroque and Classicism with several ''hôtels particuliers'' (i.e.
The town was also called ''Stratisburgum'' or ''Strateburgus'' in Latin, from which later came ''Strossburi'' in Alsatian and ''Straßburg'' in Standard German, and then ''Strasbourg'' in French.
While certain streets are discontinuous for cars, they connect to a network of pedestrian and bike paths which permeate the entire centre.
A major street of the city now bears the name of that date (''Rue du 22 Novembre'') which celebrates the entry of the French in the city.
Historian Rodolphe Reuss and Art historian Wilhelm von Bode were in charge of rebuilding the municipal archives, libraries and museums.
The Romans under Nero Claudius Drusus established a military outpost belonging to the ''Germania Superior'' Roman province at Strasbourg's current location, and named it ''Argentoratum''.
The city's Gallicized name (Lower Alsatian: ''Strossburi'', ; , ) is of Germanic origin and means  "Town (at the crossing) of roads".
Following the defeat of the German empire in World War I and the abdication of the German Emperor, some revolutionary insurgents declared Alsace-Lorraine as an independent Republic, without preliminary referendum or vote.
In 2006, after a long and careful restoration, the inner decoration of the ''Aubette'', made in the 1920s by Hans Arp, Theo van Doesburg, and Sophie Taeuber-Arp and destroyed in the 1930s, was made accessible to the public again.
Until the end of the 18th century, Jews were forbidden to remain in town after 10&nbsp;pm.
The Roman camp was destroyed by fire and rebuilt six times between the first and the fifth centuries AD: in 70, 97, 235, 355, in the last quarter of the fourth century, and in the early years of the fifth century.
ENA trains most of the nation's high-ranking civil servants.
* The IEP (Institut d'études politiques de Strasbourg), the University of Strasbourg's political science & international studies center.
The ''Parc des Contades'', although the oldest park of the city, was completely remodeled after World War II.
"Argentorate" as the toponym of the Gaulish settlement preceded it before being Latinized, but it is not known by how long.
France and Germany have created a Eurodistrict straddling the Rhine, combining the Greater Strasbourg and the Ortenau district of Baden-Württemberg, with some common administration.
It moved into the former Imperial Palace.
palaces), among which the ''Palais Rohan'' (1742, now housing three museums) is the most spectacular.
The modern ''Stras-'' is cognate to the German ''Straße'' and English ''street'', all of which are derived from Latin ''strata'' ("paved road"), while ''-bourg'' is cognate to the German ''Burg'' and English ''borough'', all of which are derived from Proto-Germanic ''*burgz'' ("hill fort, fortress").
Economically, Strasbourg is an important centre of manufacturing and engineering, as well as a hub of road, rail, and river transportation.
The largest baroque building of Strasbourg though is the  long 1720s main building of the ''Hôpital civil''.
French troops commanded by French general Henri Gouraud entered triumphantly in the city on 22 November.
* Strasbourg III – Robert Schuman University
which saw Fiat battle Bugatti, Ballot, Rolland Pilain, and Britain's Aston Martin and Sunbeam.
In 2013, the city proper had 275,718 inhabitants, the Eurométropole de Strasbourg (Greater Strasbourg) had 475,934 inhabitants, the Arrondissement of Strasbourg had 482,384 inhabitants and Strasbourg's metropolitan area had a population of 773,347 (not counting the section across the border in Germany), making it the ninth largest metro area in France and home to 13% of the Grand Est region's inhabitants.
It is supposed that this was the first seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Strasbourg.
Viewing the massive cheering crowd gathered under the balcony of Strasbourg's town hall, French President Raymond Poincaré stated that "the plebiscite is done".
Precipitation is elevated from mid-spring to the end of summer, but remains largely constant throughout the year, totaling  annually.
On 24 and 26 August 1870, the Museum of Fine Arts was destroyed by fire, as was the Municipal Library housed in the Gothic former Dominican church, with its unique collection of medieval manuscripts (most famously the Hortus deliciarum), rare Renaissance books, archeological finds and historical artifacts.
While the First World War had not notably damaged the city, Anglo-American bombing caused extensive destruction in raids of which at least one was allegedly carried out by mistake.
The mouth of the Rhine lies approximately  to the north, or  as the river flows, whilst the head of navigation in Basel is some  to the south, or  by river.
On 27 March 2007, the city was found guilty of neglect over the accident and fined €150,000.
In 1871, after the end of the war, the city was transferred to the newly established German Empire as part of the Reichsland Elsass-Lothringen under the terms of the Treaty of Frankfurt.
Old master graphic arts until 1871 is displayed in the ''Cabinet des estampes et dessins''.
Indeed, the bridge over the Rhine at Strasbourg had been used repeatedly by Imperial (Holy Roman Empire) forces, and three times during the Franco-Dutch War Strasbourg had served as a gateway for Imperial invasions into Alsace.
When, in July 1940, the first evacuees were allowed to return, only residents of Alsatian origin were admitted.
*The ''Musée des Beaux-Arts'' owns paintings by Hans Memling, Francisco de Goya, Tintoretto, Paolo Veronese, Giotto di Bondone, Sandro Botticelli, Peter Paul Rubens, Anthony van Dyck, El Greco, Correggio, Cima da Conegliano and Piero di Cosimo, among others.
Schools part of the Université de Strasbourg include:
A revolution in 1332 resulted in a broad-based city government with participation of the guilds, and Strasbourg declared itself a free republic.
In 1836, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte unsuccessfully tried to lead his first Bonapartist coup in Strasbourg.
On 23 November 1944, the city was officially liberated by the 2nd French Armoured Division under General Leclerc.
Since 1952, the European Parliament has met in Strasbourg, which was formally designated its official 'seat' at the Edinburgh meeting of the European Council of EU heads of state and government in December 1992.
As for modern and contemporary architecture, Strasbourg possesses some fine Art Nouveau buildings (such as the huge ''Palais des Fêtes'' and houses and villas like ''Villa Schutzenberger'' and ''Hôtel Brion''), good examples of post-World War II functional architecture (the ''Cité Rotterdam'', for which Le Corbusier did not succeed in the architectural contest) and, in the very extended ''Quartier Européen'', some spectacular administrative buildings of sometimes utterly large size, among which the European Court of Human Rights building by Richard Rogers is arguably the finest.
* The EPITECH (École pour l'informatique et les nouvelles technologies).
The highest temperature ever recorded was  in August 2003, during the 2003 European heat wave.
Until the arrival of the Wehrmacht troops mid-June 1940, the city was, for ten months, completely empty, with the exception of the garrisoned soldiers.
The cathedral lost hundreds of its statues (later replaced by copies in the 19th century) and in April 1794, there was talk of tearing its spire down, on the grounds that it was against the principle of equality.
Being a city on the Ill and close to the Rhine, Strasbourg has always been an important centre of fluvial navigation, as is attested by archeological findings.
During the Franco-Prussian War and the Siege of Strasbourg, the city was heavily bombarded by the Prussian army.
From 1943 the city was bombarded by Allied aircraft.
However, only the (four-day) plenary sessions of the Parliament are held in Strasbourg each month, with all other business being conducted in Brussels and Luxembourg.
Many Roman artifacts have also been found along the current ''Route des Romains'', the road that led to Argentoratum, in the suburb of Kœnigshoffen.
The bombardment of the city was meant to break the morale of the people of Strasbourg.
Archaeological excavations below the current ''Église Saint-Étienne'' in 1948 and 1956 unearthed the apse of a church dating back to the late fourth or early fifth century, considered to be the oldest church in Alsace.
This was where the largest burial places were situated, as well as the densest concentration of civilian dwelling places and commerces next to the camp.
The women's tennis Internationaux de Strasbourg is one of the most important French tournaments of its kind outside Roland-Garros.
Around 400 people were afflicted with dancing mania and danced constantly for weeks, most of them eventually dying from heart attack, stroke or exhaustion.
At the last Reichstag election in Strasbourg and its periphery, the clear winners were the Social Democrats; the city was the administrative capital of the region, was inhabited by many Germans appointed by the central government in Berlin and its flourishing economy attracted many Germans.
The relocation to Strasbourg was meant to give a European vocation to the school and to implement the French government's "décentralisation" plan.
Strasbourg was a centre of humanist scholarship and early book-printing in the Holy Roman Empire, and its intellectual and political influence contributed much to the establishment of Protestantism as an accepted denomination in the southwest of Germany.
Today, Strasbourg's different public and institutional libraries again display a sizable total number of incunabula, distributed as follows: ''Bibliothèque nationale et universitaire'', ca.
After the invention of the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg around 1440, the first printing offices outside the inventor's hometown Mainz were established around 1460 in Strasbourg by pioneers Johannes Mentelin and Heinrich Eggestein.
Nonetheless, the progressive disappearance of heavy industry on both banks of the Rhine, as well as effective measures of traffic regulation in and around the city have reduced air pollution.
Between 1995 and 2010, a new district has been built in the same vein, the ''Quartier des Poteries'', south of Hautepierre.
With the Oath of Kuffra, they swore to keep up the fight until the French flag flew over the Cathedral of Strasbourg.
These attributes are accomplished by applying the principle of "filtered permeability" to the existing irregular network of streets.
Many of these men, especially those who did not answer the call immediately, were pressured to "volunteer" for service with the SS, often by direct threats on their families.
Strasbourg's historic city centre, the ''Grande Île'' (Grand Island), was classified a World Heritage site by UNESCO in 1988, the first time such an honour was placed on an entire city centre.
Louis' advisors believed that, as long as Strasbourg remained independent, it would endanger the King's newly annexed territories in Alsace, and, that to defend these large rural lands effectively, a garrison had to be placed in towns such as Strasbourg.
The latter museum also displays the city's photographic library.
Located close to the border with Germany, it is the capital of the Bas-Rhin département.
Strasbourg's location in the Rhine valley, sheltered from the dominant winds by the Vosges and Black Forest mountains, results in poor natural ventilation, making Strasbourg one of the most atmospherically polluted cities of France.
This border is formed by the River Rhine, which also forms the eastern border of the modern city, facing across the river to the German town Kehl.
A librarian from Munich later pointed out "...that the destruction of the precious collection was not the fault of a German artillery officer, who used the French map, but of the slovenly and inaccurate scholarship of a Frenchman."
On 11 November 1918 (Armistice Day), communist insurgents proclaimed a "soviet government" in Strasbourg, following the example of Kurt Eisner in Munich as well as other German towns.
This logic of filtering a mode of transport is fully expressed in a comprehensive model for laying out neighbourhoods and districts – the Fused Grid.
He achieved the oath that he made with his soldiers, after the decisive Capture of Kufra.
During this period Jean-Baptiste Kléber, also born in Strasbourg, led the French army to win several decisive victories.
Their adherents established a Gymnasium, headed by Johannes Sturm, made into a University in the following century.
Those forts subsequently served the French army (Fort Podbielski/Ducrot for instance was integrated into the Maginot Line), and were used as POW-camps in 1918 and 1945.
Notable squares of the German district include: ''Place de la République'', ''Place de l'Université'', ''Place Brant'', and ''Place Arnold''
The outline of the Roman "castrum" is visible in the street pattern in the Grande Ile.
The transnational Eurodistrict Strasbourg-Ortenau had a population of 915,000 inhabitants in 2014.
Up until January 2009 there were three universities in Strasbourg, with an approximate total of 48,500 students  (another 4,500 students are being taught at one of the diverse post-graduate schools):
Strasbourg is situated on the eastern border of France with Germany.
The Oaths of Strasbourg is considered as marking the birth of the two countries of France and Germany with the division of the Carolingian Empire.
This threat obliged the majority of them to remain in the German army.
Protestant iconoclasm caused much destruction to churches and cloisters, notwithstanding that Luther himself opposed such a practice.
The largest square at the centre of the city of Strasbourg is the Place Kléber.
Between the German invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 and the Anglo-French declaration of War against the German Reich on 3 September 1939, the entire city (a total of 120,000 people) was evacuated, like other border towns as well.
The date of the assignment was retroactively established on Armistice Day.
The Bibliothèque nationale et universitaire (BNU) is, with its collection of more than 3,000,000 titles,  the second largest library in France after the Bibliothèque nationale de France.
* Strasbourg I – Louis Pasteur University
In 1947, a fire broke out in the Musée des Beaux-Arts and devastated a significant part of the collections.
Strasbourg, well known as centre of humanism, has a long history of excellence in higher-education, at the crossroads of French and German intellectual traditions.
For a city of comparatively small size, Strasbourg displays a large quantity and variety of museums:
International art (painting, sculpture, graphic arts) and decorative art since 1871 is displayed in the ''Musée d'art moderne et contemporain''.
It then included a cavalry section and covered an area of approximately 20 hectares.
Other noticeable contemporary buildings are the new Music school ''Cité de la Musique et de la Danse'', the ''Musée d'Art moderne et contemporain'' and the ''Hôtel du Département'' facing it, as well as, in the outskirts, the tramway-station Hoenheim-Nord designed by Zaha Hadid.
It was under Trajan and after the fire of 97 that Argentoratum received its most extended and fortified shape.
* The EMS (École de management Strasbourg), the University of Strasbourg's Business School.
Famous students included Goethe and Herder.
The natural courses of the two rivers eventually join some distance downstream of Strasbourg, although several artificial waterways now connect them within the city.
Together with four other free cities, Strasbourg presented the ''confessio tetrapolitana'' as its Protestant book of faith at the Imperial Diet of Augsburg in 1530, where the slightly different Augsburg Confession was also handed over to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor.
The Jews of Strasbourg had been evacuated to Périgueux and Limoges, the University had been evacuated to Clermont-Ferrand.
* The CUEJ (Centre universitaire d'enseignement du journalisme).
Subsequently, the first modern newspaper was published in Strasbourg in 1605, when Johann Carolus received the permission by the City of Strasbourg to print and distribute a weekly journal written in German by reporters from several central European cities.
This fire was an indirect consequence of the bombing raids of 1944: because of the destruction inflicted on the Palais Rohan, humidity had infiltrated the building, and moisture had to be fought.
On 2 January 366, the Alemanni crossed the frozen Rhine in large numbers to invade the Roman Empire.
In 1682 the ''Canal de la Bruche'' was added to the river navigations, initially to provide transport for sandstone from quarries in the Vosges for use in the fortification of the city.
This section of the Rhine valley is a major axis of north-south travel, with river traffic on the Rhine itself, and major roads and railways paralleling it on both banks.
Those sessions take place in the ''Immeuble Louise Weiss'', inaugurated in 1999, which houses the largest parliamentary assembly room in Europe and of any democratic institution in the world.
* The ECPM (École européenne de chimie, polymères et matériaux).
* The ESAD (École supérieure des arts décoratifs) is an art school of European reputation.
A major commercial centre, the town came under the control of the Holy Roman Empire in 923, through the homage paid by the Duke of Lorraine to German King Henry I.
Construction on Strasbourg Cathedral began in the twelfth century, and it was completed in 1439 (though, of the towers, only the north tower was built), becoming the World's Tallest Building, surpassing the Great Pyramid of Giza.
Decorative arts until 1681 ("German period") are displayed in the ''Musée de l'Œuvre Notre-Dame'', decorative arts from 1681 to 1871 ("French period") are displayed in the ''Musée des Arts décoratifs''.
The same year François Christophe Kellermann, a child of Strasbourg was appointed the head of the Mosel Army.
In chronological order, notable residents of Strasbourg include: Johannes Gutenberg, Hans Baldung, Martin Bucer, John Calvin, Joachim Meyer, Johann Carolus, Johann Wolfgang Goethe, Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz, Klemens Wenzel von Metternich, Georg Büchner, Louis Pasteur, Ferdinand Braun, Albrecht Kossel, Georg Simmel, Albert Schweitzer, Otto Klemperer, Marc Bloch, Alberto Fujimori, Marjane Satrapi, Paul Ricoeur and Jean-Marie Lehn.
Another royal guest was King Charles X of France in 1828.
But the two most handsome and ornate buildings of these times are the ''École internationale des Pontonniers'' (the former ''Höhere Mädchenschule'', girls college) with its towers, turrets and multiple round and square angles and the ''École des Arts décoratifs'' with its lavishly ornate façade of painted bricks, woodwork and majolica.
In the square is a statue of Kléber, under which is a vault containing his remains.
In August 1944, several buildings in the Old Town were damaged by bombs, particularly the Palais Rohan, the Old Customs House (''Ancienne Douane'') and the Cathedral.
It was founded by the German administration after the complete destruction of the previous municipal library in 1871 and holds the unique status of being simultaneously a students' and a national library.
He led his company to victory at the battle of Valmy and saved the young French republic.
With more than  of bicycle paths, biking in the city is convenient and the CTS operates a cheap bike-sharing scheme named ''Vélhop'''.
This annexation was one of the direct causes of the brief and bloody War of the Reunions whose outcome left the French in possession.
Other theatres are the ''Théâtre jeune public'', the ''TAPS Scala'', the ''Kafteur''...&nbsp;
Other bridges are the ornate 19th-century ''Pont de la Fonderie'' (1893, stone) and ''Pont d'Auvergne'' (1892, iron), as well as architect Marc Mimram's futuristic ''Passerelle'' over the Rhine, opened in 2004.
The tram system that now criss-crosses the historic city centre complements walking and biking in it.
Next to the ''Ponts Couverts'' is the ''Barrage Vauban'', a part of Vauban's 17th-century  fortifications, that does include a covered bridge.
The former imperial palace ''Palais du Rhin'', the most political and thus heavily criticized of all German Strasbourg buildings epitomizes the grand scale and stylistic sturdiness of this period.
With the growth of industry and commerce, the city's population tripled in the 19th century to 150,000.
Among the most outstanding finds in Kœnigshoffen were (found in 1911–12) the fragments of a grand Mithraeum that had been shattered by early Christians in the fourth century.
Impressive examples of Prussian military architecture of the 1880s can be found along the newly reopened ''Rue du Rempart'', displaying large-scale fortifications among which the aptly named ''Kriegstor'' (war gate).
In the 1950s and 1960s the city was enlarged by new residential areas meant to solve both the problem of housing shortage due to war damage and that of the strong growth of population due to the baby boom and immigration from North Africa: ''Cité Rotterdam'' in the North-East, ''Quartier de l'Esplanade'' in the South-East, ''Hautepierre'' in the North-West.
This trilingual text contains, alongside texts in Latin and Old High German (teudisca lingua), the oldest written variety of Gallo-Romance (lingua romana) clearly distinct from Latin, the ancestor of Old French.
On 6 July 2001, during an open-air concert in the ''Parc de Pourtalès'', a single falling Platanus tree killed thirteen people and injured 97.
A few years later, Johannes Gutenberg created the first European moveable type printing press in Strasbourg.
* TÉLÉCOM Physique Strasbourg,(École nationale supérieure de physique de Strasbourg), Institute of Technology, located in the South of Strasbourg (Illkirch-Graffenstaden).
In the 1520s during the Protestant Reformation, the city, under the political guidance of Jacob Sturm von Sturmeck and the spiritual guidance of Martin Bucer embraced the religious teachings of Martin Luther.
* The INSA (Institut national des sciences appliquées), the University of Strasbourg's Engineering School.
The Saverne Affair was vivid in the memory among the Alsatians.
The name "Argentoratum" was first mentioned in 12 BC and the city celebrated its 2,000th birthday in 1988.
The Alemanni fought the Battle of Argentoratum against Rome in 357.
After the total destruction of this institution in 1870, however, a new collection had to be reassembled from scratch.
It was established in 2005 and is fully functional since 2010.
After some negotiation, Louis marched into the city unopposed on 30 September 1681 and proclaimed its annexation.
Other buildings of its kind are the "Hôtel de Hanau" (1736, now the city hall), the ''Hôtel de Klinglin'' (1736, now residence of the préfet), the ''Hôtel des Deux-Ponts'' (1755, now residence of the military governor), the ''Hôtel d'Andlau-Klinglin'' (1725, now seat of the administration of the Port autonome de Strasbourg) etc.
* Strasbourg II – Marc Bloch University
The Strasbourg Councillor Sturm and guildmaster Matthias represented the city at the Imperial Diet of Speyer (1529), where their protest led to the schism of the Catholic Church and the evolution of Protestantism.
The Strasbourg municipal library had been marked erroneously as "City Hall" in a French commercial map, which had been captured and used by the German artillery to lay their guns.
The last Jews were deported on 15 July 1940 and the main synagogue, a huge Romanesque revival building that had been a major architectural landmark with its 54-metre-high dome since its completion in 1897, was set ablaze, then razed.
In the fifth century Strasbourg was occupied successively by Alemanni, Huns, and Franks.
The ''Grand contournement ouest'' (GCO) project, programmed since 1999, plans to construct a  long highway connection between the junctions of the A4 and the A35 autoroutes in the north and of the A35 and A352 autoroutes in the south.
Before that, the EP sessions had to take place in the main Council of Europe building, the Palace of Europe, whose unusual inner architecture had become a familiar sight to European TV audiences.
Early in the fifth century, the Alemanni appear to have crossed the Rhine, conquered, and then settled what is today Alsace and a large part of Switzerland.
The University, founded in 1567 and suppressed during the French Revolution as a stronghold of German sentiment, was reopened in 1872 under the name ''Kaiser-Wilhelms-Universität''.
The city first followed the Tetrapolitan Confession, and then the Augsburg Confession.
(John Calvin spent several years as a political refugee in the city).
They were defeated by Julian, later Emperor of Rome, and their King Chonodomarius was taken prisoner.
After the war, many Germans left Strasbourg and went back to Germany; some of them were denounced by the locals or expelled by the newly appointed authorities.
That canal has since closed, but the subsequent ''Canal du Rhone au Rhine'', ''Canal de la Marne au Rhin'' and ''Grand Canal d'Alsace'' are still in use, as is the important activity of the ''Port autonome de Strasbourg''.
In September 1940 the first Alsatian resistance movement led by Marcel Weinum called La main noire (The black hand) was created.
In March 1942, Marcel Weinum was prosecuted by the Gestapo and sentenced to be beheaded at the age of 18 in April 1942 in Stuttgart, Germany.
After the ceasefire following the Fall of France in June 1940, Alsace was annexed by Germany and a rigorous policy of Germanisation was imposed upon it by the ''Gauleiter'' Robert Heinrich Wagner.
(This position was reconfirmed and given treaty status in the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam).
In 1992, Strasbourg became the seat of the Franco-German TV channel and movie-production society Arte.
Its language also remained overwhelmingly German: the German Lutheran university persisted until the French Revolution.
As one of the earliest centers of book-printing in Europe (see above: History), Strasbourg for a long time held a large number of incunabula—documents printed before 1500—in her library as one of her most precious heritages.
Notable streets of the German district include: ''Avenue de la Forêt Noire'', ''Avenue des Vosges'', ''Avenue d'Alsace'', ''Avenue de la Marseillaise'', ''Avenue de la Liberté'', ''Boulevard de la Victoire'', ''Rue Sellénick'', ''Rue du Général de Castelnau'', ''Rue du Maréchal Foch'', and ''Rue du Maréchal Joffre''.
Two garrison churches were also erected for the members of the Imperial German army, the Lutheran ''Église Saint-Paul'' and the Roman Catholic ''Église Saint-Maurice''.
Strasbourg Cathedral, however, was taken from the Lutherans to be returned to the Catholics as the French authorities tried to promote Catholicism wherever they could (some other historic churches remained in Protestant hands).
Other Roman legions temporarily stationed in Argentoratum were the Legio XIV Gemina and the Legio XXI Rapax, the latter during the reign of Nero.
