Women are at times employed in adult-only venues to perform or pose topless in forms of commercial erotic entertainment.
Bachelor parties have come to symbolize the last time when the groom is free of the influence of his new wife.
That song pre-dated the opening of what is considered to be the first modern strip club, Condor Club on Broadway in the U.S. city of San Francisco, California.
1 hits in the U.S. in the 2000s with "Right Round" and "Low".
The integration of the burlesque pole as a nearly ubiquitous prop has shifted the emphasis in the performance toward a more acrobatic, explicit expression compared to the slow-developing burlesque style.
For any of the three types of clubs there are exceptions based on the individual dancer and management, and clubs are classified based on typical performances, zoning, and advertised services.
The stigma attached to sex work also creates another obstacle to organization because many strippers and other types of sex workers are uncomfortable with declaring their profession publicly, even in a movement to improve their work environment and benefits.
It has been debated whether or not bikini clubs and performances should count as striptease, but there is little contention over its classification as exotic dance.
Dancers, in an attempt to acquire a tip or monetary reward, will sell more than attractiveness and fantasy.
During a show where customer tipping is permitted, most strip clubs limit contact with a dancer's breasts to one way—from dancer to customer.
This is known as a bachelorette party or Hen party.
If permitted, during a lap dance the dancer grinds against the customer's crotch while he or she remains clothed in an attempt to arouse or bring the recipient to climax.
In areas where choice in formats exist, exotic dancers express concern that the more they offer in their performance (nudity included) the more they stand to profit.
;;Stage performance
There is no one "stripper lifestyle" where all striptease practitioners fit neatly into a single stereotype.
One of the more notorious local ordinances is San Diego Municipal Code 33.3610, specific and strict in response to allegations of corruption among local officials which included contacts in the nude entertainment industry.
Dancers effectively entertaining customers are the key to generating revenue by keeping the customers on site and enticing them to be repeat visitors.
Where legal (or legal restrictions are ignored), dancers may offer additional services such as lap dances or a trip to the champagne room for a set fee rather than a tip.
In the 1980s, the Vancouver Exotic Dancers Alliance formed and was active for about a decade.
Where legal (or legal restrictions are ignored), dancers may offer additional services such as lap dances or a trip to the champagne room for a set fee rather than a tip.
These pranks can involve a stripper if the entertainer is willing.
High-profile adult film performers Jenna Haze and Teagan Presley among others have participated in feature shows through the USA, as did now-retired stars such as Jenna Jameson.
Most strippers work in strip clubs.
''Portraits of a Naked Lady Dancer'' (2004) is a documentary, directed by Deborah Rowe.
Most clubs have a dancer rotation where each dancer in turn will perform for one or more songs in a fixed sequence which repeats during a shift.
Another group, the Scarlet Alliance has been involved in advocacy and projects geared towards improving the standing of sex workers since its inception in 1989.
The image of strippers as known today evolved through the late 1960s and 1970s in the U.S. and international cultures.
The additional clothing also acts as a deterrent to prevent a customer from exceeding the boundaries set by a particular dancer.
A stripper whose upper body is exposed but the genital areas remain obscured during a performance is said to be topless.
How dancers go about maximizing revenue varies.
Still, strippers have been known to dance only at topless clubs because of their desire not to strip completely nude.
Outside the U.S., the use of strip clubs to facilitate sex for hire is much more common, and stripping is viewed in those settings as advertising for sexually oriented services performed in private areas of the club or off premises.
Table dances also refer to a form of minimal touch private dance where the performer is physically located on a small table in front of the customer(s).
The phrase ''Go-Go'' was adopted by bars in the 1960s in Tokyo, Japan.
Entertainers (dancers) are often not actual employees of the club itself but allowed to perform as independent contractors for a predetermined house fee.
Feature dancers tend to have their own celebrity, touring a club circuit and making appearances.
A service provided by many clubs is for a customer to be placed on stage with one or more dancers for a public lap dance.
During each set of one or more songs, the current performer will dance on stage in exchange for tips.
In some localities strippers are required to obtain permits to work in adult entertainment.
''I Know Who Killed Me'' (2007) stars Lindsay Lohan as Dakota Moss, an alluring stripper involved in the machinations of a serial killer, and features a long striptease sequence at a strip club.
Strippers who uncover the genital areas along with other clothing during a performance are said to be dancing fully nude.
Many clubs do not allow any breast contact, and some go so far as to place markers on stage that a dancer is not permitted to cross while nude.
These activities are not mutually exclusive, meaning that a stripper who models on the side would be a stripper ''and'' a model.
Research suggests that exotic dancing can pay well, but often at a significant cost to the stripper.
5 hit on the Billboard chats with "I'm 'n Luv (Wit a Stripper)" in 2006.
They sell the fantasy of sex but do not typically follow through with the act.
Adult industry trade shows often have strippers working, though many of them are affiliated with individual companies and not necessarily freelancers.
A bachelor party may involve activities beyond the usual party and social-gathering ingredients (often drinking alcohol and gambling), such as going to a strip club or hiring a stripper to perform in a private setting like a home or hotel.
Private parties are popular events for which to hire strippers.
Some clubs permit both nude stage dancing and fully nude lap dances.
"Worked Up So Sexual" by The Faint is graphic in its depiction of dancer rivalry (''older dancers gag at what new talent seems to mean, smaller tits and younger limbs'') and customers longing to bed them.
Outside the club, dancers are indistinguishable by appearance from the general population and no more likely to be the targets of acts like violent crime than non-strippers.
''Exotica'' (1994), directed by Atom Egoyan, is set in a Canadian lap-dance club, and portrays a man's (Bruce Greenwood) obsession with a schoolgirl stripper named Christina (Mia Kirshner).
An essential draw of the strip club is the live entertainment, which the vast majority of the time are the strippers.
During a bikini performance, both breasts and genital areas typically remain covered by revealing attire, while dancers provide services and entertainment.
Performances are usually fully choreographed, involve dance routines and a costume of some sort.
Tips can also be collected during private dances.
Some strippers, although not necessarily the majority, are not interested in unionization or other forms of collectivization because they consider dancing "an individual profession" and prefer to seek success through competition, not cooperation, with their coworkers.
*''Stripping, Sex, and Popular Culture'', by Catherine M. Roach (2008), ISBN 978-1-84520-129-6
Dancers use props such as make-up, clothing, costumes, and appealing fragrances to complete their character and maintain their "front."
''Striptease'' (1996), was an adaptation of the novel starring Demi Moore.
For example, the classification of dancers as independent contractors has been challenged in court, successfully in Massachusetts in 2009.
Strippers appeal to masculine desires, but they can adapt to fit the needs of female patrons to view them as customers.
Tewkesbury argues that male strippers 'masculinise' the role; thus are not disempowered in the way that, he asserts, female strippers are.
Each club and dancer will have individual tolerance levels for customer interaction including tipping.
''The Players Club'' (1998) starred LisaRaye as a girl who becomes a stripper to earn enough money to enter college and study journalism.
Strip clubs are profit-oriented businesses like restaurants and other retail establishments and dancers are their primary enabler to encourage potential patrons to spend time in their establishment.
These strippers' unions have tended to focus on economic and workers' rights rather than civil rights, which constitutes a significant departure from the advocacy groups for prostitutes' rights that began in the 1970s and 1980s.
When revealing one's occupation, a person may be seeking immediate social acceptance from others.
;Books and printed media
;Boundaries and etiquette
An instrumental, "The Stripper", was a No.
They could also travel over significant (i.e.
The presence of male companionship has been cited in research as an indicator used by dancers to gauge the profitability of a female once she is perceived to be a customer.
The practice is banned in many jurisdictions, but many dancers will work around the constraints by selectively uncovering her vulva, anus, or both for short periods of time then replacing the clothing.
These allowed a naked dancer's body to be concealed by her fans or those of her attendants, until the end of an act, when she posed naked for a brief interval whilst standing stock still, and the lights went out or the curtain dropped to allow her to leave the stage.
The study also stated that "students were now a 'core supply group into the sex industries', with clubs even targeting freshers' week events with recruitment leaflets."
Among its provisions is the "six foot rule", copied by other municipalities in requiring that dancers maintain a six-foot distance while performing.
Regardless of size, name, or location in the world, strip clubs can be full nude, topless or bikini.
In response, the strippers formed a cooperative in 2003 to run the club themselves, now renamed the Looking Glass Collective.
Inside the club personal boundaries are frequently crossed between strippers, customers, and other club staff.
Otherwise, customer tips to dancers from a stage set are their primary form of payment per shift.
Not all strippers are comfortable dancing topless or fully nude.
Other rules forbid "full nudity".
Entertainers (dancers) are often not actual employees of the club itself but perform as independent contractors.
For customers they do not already know, dancers use factors such as clothing, shoes, age, and race to determine whom they wish to interact with.
One means of collectivization pursued by strippers is the formation of labor unions, which involves formal membership.
Strippers have been the inspiration for a number of musical artists, with several of the songs resulting in hit singles.
In early 2010, the U.S. city of Detroit, Michigan banned fully exposed breasts in its strip clubs, following the example of Houston, Texas who began enforcing a similar ordinance in 2008.
A '''house dancer''' works for a particular club or franchise, while a '''feature dancer''' tends to have her own celebrity, touring a club circuit making appearances.
The impact of these experiences are far reaching, and can continue to affect how the stripper approaches aspects of her life long after her days of actively stripping have concluded.
This is not limited to hip-hop, with contemporary songs in other styles of music sharing similar traits.
On 19 June 1964, Carol Doda began go-go dancing topless at the Condor Club on Broadway and Columbus in the North Beach neighborhood of San Francisco.
Public acceptance of the music has not faltered, and many dancers perform to these and other songs depicting women in subjectively negative ways while on stage.
In some locales, dancers may give a customer a "lap dance", whereby the dancer grinds against the customer's crotch while they are fully clothed in an attempt to arouse them or bring them to climax.
By revealing only a part of their identity, strippers attempt to avoid being characterized by the stigmatizing attributes associated with exotic dancing.
A bikini performance is far more likely to be performed by a female than a male given social norms throughout the world.
Modern Americanized forms of stripping minimize interaction by strippers with customers, reducing the importance of ''tease'' in the performance in favor of speed to undress (''strip'').
In a bikini performance, both breasts and genital areas typically remain covered by revealing attire while providing services and entertainment.
Touching of performers is illegal in many U.S. states.
In a bikini performance, both breasts and genital areas typically remain covered by revealing attire while dancers provide services and entertainment.
''Showgirls'' (1995) was directed by Paul Verhoeven and starred Elizabeth Berkley and Gina Gershon.
In areas where choice in formats exist, exotic dancers express concern that the more they offer in their performance (nudity included) the more they stand to profit.
Dancers are aware of this customer desire for increased confidence, and a dancer therefore will give off the impression that a customer is seeing her true self, when in reality it is just part of her act.
The Detroit city council has since softened the rules eliminating the requirement for pasties but kept other restrictions.
Lucy performs the song "Bring on the Men" during a show at The Red Rat (which was later replaced with "Good 'n' Evil" in the Broadway production, some claiming "Bring on the Men" was too "risqué").
However, some dancers and clubs allow touching of dancers during private dances.
Many U.S. jurisdictions have specific laws on the books related to striptease, with more being added increasing both complexity of enforcement and impact.
If a DJ is present, he or she will emcee the rotation and typically announce the current dancer(s) on stage and possibly who to expect in future sets.
While dancers feel this exploitation, and are affected by it, they also admit to exploiting their customers.
These stages are configured for close viewing of the striptease and are known for dancers lowering themselves from the stage onto customers during their set.
It has been reported when in direct competition with more conservative offerings, fully nude formats are seen by customers as a superior enough substitute for them to switch clubs.
In many clubs, while a stripper is walking the floor she will be required to wear her full bikini top and bottom.
This touching often includes the fondling of breasts, buttocks, and in rare cases the vaginal region.
Dancers and owners are always in agreement on the objective of making money.
Some strippers will only strip for private engagements and do not have a regular affiliation with a strip club.
One potential critique of the organization of strippers and sex workers of other types is that people in management positions in these industries, who are in a position to perpetuate the exploitation that sex workers face, can infiltrate these labor organizations and lobby for the maintenance of a status quo.
Dancers learn a set of rules, such as: never leave money unattended; never leave the club with a customer; and never refuse a table dance.
A ''champagne room'' (also called a ''champagne lounge'' or ''champagne court'') is a specialized VIP Room service offered by gentleman's clubs where a customer can purchase time (usually in half-hour increments) with an exotic dancer in a private room on the premises.
Tipping during a stage performance is prohibited by some clubs due to restrictions in local ordinance or past incidents on the premises.
Johanna Sigurðardottir, Iceland's prime minister, who is an open lesbian, said: "The Nordic countries are leading the way on women's equality, recognizing women as equal citizens rather than commodities for sale."
''The Raymond Revuebar: The Art of Striptease'' (2002) is a documentary, directed by Simon Weitzman.
The dancer qualifies a customer by sizing up their appearance and personal characteristics.
A female stripper whose upper body is exposed, but whose genital areas remain obscured during a performance, is said to be topless.
The politician behind the bill, Kolbrún Halldórsdóttir, said: "It is not acceptable that women or people in general are a product to be sold."
Patrons at the clubs in which the strippers work are a primary source of customers for their work outside the club.
Customers can make the first move and engage the dancer directly, but more experienced dancers will have seen most of their tactics already.
''Crazy Horse Le Show'' (2004) features dance routines from the Crazy Horse, Paris.
Customers rarely if ever see the preparation of these props; they are denied access to the backstage of a dancer's performance through the layout of the club.
Within the context of the strip club, dancers sometimes give the impression that they are revealing private information, or ''backstage'' information to a customer in order to play the confidence game for increased profit.
Strippers can engage in these alternate topless activities at sanctioned times inside the club or as independent contractors at outside venues.
The lack of explicit nudity makes go-go dancers more socially acceptable than topless and nude performers in public areas.
While working, a stripper is not necessarily required to remove all of her or his clothing.
Due to the common practice of hiring strippers as contractors, not as full-time employees, strippers must deal with extreme job insecurity, unstable pay, no health benefits, and the requirement of paying fees to the club for technically renting their stage.
In ''Closer'' (2004), Natalie Portman plays Alice, a young stripper just arrived in London from America.
These included ''Flashdance'' (1983), which told the story of blue-collar worker Alexandra (Alex) Owens (Jennifer Beals), who works as an exotic dancer in a Pittsburgh bar at night and at a steel mill as a welder during the day.
Several books have been written about strippers and their work, including personal accounts and even academic studies by strippers themselves.
The Lusty Lady of San Francisco is a notable example of collectivization of strippers in the U.S.
Porn stars will often become feature dancers to earn extra income and build their fan base.
Other common tip methods are to insert the dollar into the stripper's cleavage from the hand or mouth, or to simply place it or toss it onto the stage.
Some women also participate in a similar party to be held for the bride-to-be.
A customary tip (where customers can do so at the stage) is a dollar bill folded lengthwise and placed in the dancer's garter from the ''tip rail''.
Both municipalities were reputed to have rampant occurrences of illicit activity including prostitution linked to its striptease establishments within their city limits.
In parts of the USA, there are laws forbidding the exposure of female nipples, which have to be covered by pasties by the dancer.
''Blaze'' (1989) features Lolita Davidovitch as notorious stripper Blaze Starr.
Strippers are focused on making money from customers.
Private dances in the main club areas most often take the form of table dances, lap and couch dances, and bed dances among others.
Some also chose instead to hold a so-called Stag and Doe party in the US or a ''hag party'' or ''hag do'' in the UK ("hag" being a portmanteau "hen" and "stag"), in which both the bride and groom attend.
Clubs sell champagne by the glass or by the bottle for both the dancer and the customer.
What differentiates a bikini dancer from other types of performers is the degree to which her body is exposed.
Written agreements are atypical in this type of transaction unless a formal, registered business is involved.
''Los Debutantes'' (2003) is a Chilean film set in a strip club in Santiago.
Aside from advertising for striptease services outside the club, an unknown percentage of strippers also work in other aspects of the sex industry.
However, when an occupation is considered illegal, immoral, or improper, social acceptance is not granted.
House dancers work for a particular club or franchise.
They can also be performed with the customer standing in these designated areas.
Table dances are distinguished from other forms of dances in that they can be performed where the customer is seated on the main floor.
If viewed as a continuum, fewer dancers will dance topless than go-go and fewer still would dance fully nude.
The practice of topless dancing is banned in many jurisdictions, but strippers have been known to work around the constraints by selectively uncovering her breasts "peek-a-boo" style for short periods of time then replacing the clothing.
Research indicates that at some point a dancer has felt exploited by customers, management, or other dancers.
A customer often wants a dancer to "drop the act," which makes the customer feel special and desired.
As the sex industry has grown and become a more established sector of national economies, sex workers - strippers included - have mobilized to negotiate or demand workplace rights.
*''Burlesque: Legendary Stars of the Stage'' by Jane Briggeman (2004), ISBN 978-1-888054-94-1
In some parts of the USA, there are laws forbidding the exposure of female nipples, which have thus to be covered by pasties by the dancer (though not applied to the exposure of male nipples).
To get around that rule, models appeared naked in stationary tableaux vivants.
''Barely Phyllis'' is a play on Phyllis Dixey which was first staged at the Pomegranate Theatre, Chesterfield in 2009.
One distinction made is that many view working as a strip club dancer as a short-term means to address financial needs, while others view it as a profession and go on to other types of sex work such as performing in adult films.
While clubs can generate revenue through means such as cover charges and drink fees, dancers make most of their profit from giving lap dances or VIP dances where regulations allow.
flight required) distances for private events and appointments, most of the time passing the cost of travel and accommodations onto the customer.
The Striptease Artists of Australia formed in 2002.
The female cast of the film researched the film by dancing at strip clubs and created their parts and their storylines to be as realistic as possible.
Bed dances are the least common of the three, and in many clubs are a more expensive option than a lap dance because of the novelty and increased level of contact between customer and service provider.
Partial list of contemporary books on strippers:
"Girls, Girls, Girls" by Mötley Crüe was also a Top 20 hit on the U.S. charts.
The dancers are using the customers for money, employing all of the resources at their disposal to do so.
Table dances should not be confused with table stages, where the stripper is at or above eye level on a platform surrounded by chairs and usually enough table surface for customers to place drinks and tip money.
When the strippers of the establishment successfully unionized in 1996 through the Erotic Dancers' Alliance, the owners of the club closed it.
*''The Gold Club: The Jacklyn "Diva" Bush Story: How I Went from Gold Room to Court Room'', by Jacklyn Bush (2003), ISBN 978-0-9725941-2-7
The dancers continually interact with the customers in the club by walking around and attempting to solicit drinks and lap dances, usually scanning the floor of a club to find the most lucrative customer to target.
In some traditions more hazing-like tests and pranks at the future groom's expense, which shows the whole thing is also a rite of passage from bachelorhood (associated with an adolescent lifestyle, often in the common past of most participants, e.g.
Go-go dancers will retain their tops and bottoms for the duration of their performance.
Not all strippers are comfortable dancing topless.
Despite this establishment of an industry-wide minimum standard for labor rights, changes to employment legislature under a Conservative government enabled employers to utilize loopholes such as employing strippers as sub-contractors.
Strippers can be contracted for performances outside the strip club environment.
Fan dances were another device used to keep performances within the law.
This is particularly true if the customers do not appear to be engaged or actively tipping because they are not being compensated for their time on stage.
This precarious employment is accepted because of the stigma associated with exotic dancing.
''Dancing at the Blue Iguana'' (2000) is a feature film starring Daryl Hannah.
For both hip-hop artists, the depictions of strippers and expressions of lust are far more explicit than in songs released in earlier music eras.
Not every stripper will end a performance completely nude, though full nudity is common where not prohibited by law.
7 on the U.S. ''Billboard'' Hot 100 chart.
A stripper whose upper body is exposed but the genital areas remain obscured during a performance is said to be topless.
Research on strippers has examined erotic dancing as a type of sex work in larger sociocultural context, gender, sex roles, and perceived appropriateness of behavior.
in their student years) to "more responsible" marital life.
Dancers collect tips from customers either while on stage or after the dancer has finished a stage show and is mingling with the audience.
They portray feelings of intimacy and emotional connectedness for their customers, and most of the time they are overstated or false.
The Canadian Guild for Erotic Labour was established in 2004.
The fully nude practice is banned in many jurisdictions, but many dancers work around these constraints by selective uncovering of the vagina, anus, or both, for short periods of time, followed by immediate replacement of the clothing.
References to strippers as characters or plot devices are too numerous to name.
Private dances in particular are scrutinized to ensure that no club policies or local ordinances are being violated during the performance.
