* ''Large vessel disease'' involves the common and internal carotid arteries, the vertebral artery, and the Circle of Willis.
The most important modifiable risk factors for stroke are high blood pressure and atrial fibrillation although the size of the effect is small with 833 people have to be treated for 1 year to prevent one stroke.
If the stroke is severe enough, or in a certain location such as parts of the brainstem, coma or death can result.
PT and OT have overlapping areas of expertise, however PT focuses on joint range of motion and strength by performing exercises and re-learning functional tasks such as bed mobility, transferring, walking and other gross motor functions.
The condition may improve with time, but in the interim, a nasogastric tube may be inserted, enabling liquid food to be given directly into the stomach.
A stroke is the second leading cause of death in people under 20 with sickle-cell anemia.
In addition, the pressure may lead to a loss of blood supply to affected tissue with resulting infarction, and the blood released by brain hemorrhage appears to have direct toxic effects on brain tissue and vasculature.
Bleeding can develop inside areas of ischemia, a condition known as "hemorrhagic transformation."
After full range has been achieved by the therapist, the limb should be positioned in the lengthened positions to prevent against further contractures, skin breakdown, and disuse of the limb with the use of splints or other tools to stabilize the joint.
The number of procedures needed to cure one patient was 5 for early surgery (within two weeks after the initial stroke), but 125 if delayed longer than 12 weeks.
South Asians are at particularly high risk of stroke, accounting for 40% of global stroke deaths.
Family members may have a genetic tendency for stroke or share a lifestyle that contributes to stroke.
There is evidence supporting this procedure in selected cases.
A proportion may benefit from neurosurgical intervention to remove the blood and treat the underlying cause, but this depends on the location and the size of the hemorrhage as well as patient-related factors, and ongoing research is being conducted into the question as to which people with intracerebral hemorrhage may benefit.
Through continuous practice the patient relearns to use and adapt the hemiplegic limb during functional activities to create lasting permanent changes.
Test selection may vary since the cause of stroke varies with age, comorbidity and the clinical presentation.
Alcohol use could predispose to ischemic stroke, and intracerebral and subarachnoid hemorrhage via multiple mechanisms (for example via hypertension, atrial fibrillation, rebound thrombocytosis and platelet aggregation and clotting disturbances).
Large territory strokes can cause significant brain swelling with secondary brain injury in surrounding tissue.
A person's risk of dying if he or she does have a stroke also increases with age.
Use of these scales is recommended by professional guidelines.
Causes of stroke related to the heart can be distinguished between high and low-risk:
An ischemic stroke is typically caused by blockage of a blood vessel.
The most widely used anticoagulant to prevent thromboembolic stroke in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation is the oral agent warfarin while a number of newer agents including dabigatran are alternatives which do not require prothrombin time monitoring.
* dysarthria (motor speech disorder resulting from neurological injury)
People with intracerebral hemorrhage require supportive care, including blood pressure control if required.
Sickle-cell anemia, which can cause blood cells to clump up and block blood vessels, can also lead to stroke.
Between three and four and a half hours the effects are less clear.
While these findings are not perfect for diagnosing stroke, the fact that they can be evaluated relatively rapidly and easily make them very valuable in the acute setting.
However, brain tissue is especially vulnerable to ischemia since it has a little respiratory reserve and is completely dependent on aerobic metabolism, unlike most other organs.
Up to 10% of people following a stroke develop seizures, most commonly in the week subsequent to the event; the severity of the stroke increases the likelihood of a seizure.
Some current and future therapy methods include the use of virtual reality and video games for rehabilitation.
Thienopyridines (clopidogrel, ticlopidine) might be slightly more effective than aspirin and have a decreased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding, but are more expensive.
The main risk factor for stroke is high blood pressure.
In most cases, the symptoms affect only one side of the body (unilateral).
Primary prevention is less effective than secondary prevention (as judged by the number needed to treat to prevent one stroke per year).
Users of stimulant drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine are at a high risk for ischemic strokes.
Definitive therapy within the first few hours is aimed at removing the blockage by breaking the clot down (thrombolysis), or by removing it mechanically (thrombectomy).
Emotional lability, another consequence of stroke, causes the person to switch quickly between emotional highs and lows and to express emotions inappropriately, for instance with an excess of laughing or crying with little or no provocation.
* an angiogram of the cerebral vasculature (if a bleed is thought to have originated from an aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation);
Drugs, most commonly amphetamines and cocaine, can induce stroke through damage to the blood vessels in the brain and/or acute hypertension.
The results of stroke vary widely depending on size and location of the lesion.
Emotional problems following a stroke can be due to direct damage to emotional centers in the brain or from frustration and difficulty adapting to new limitations.
Many mobility problems can be improved by the use of ankle foot orthoses.
Dysfunctions correspond to areas in the brain that have been damaged.
Geographic disparities in stroke incidence have been observed, including the existence of a "stroke belt" in the southeastern United States, but causes of these disparities have not been explained.
As a result, the transmembrane ion gradients run down, and glutamate transporters reverse their direction, releasing glutamate into the extracellular space.
These include physicians trained in rehabilitation medicine, clinical pharmacists, nursing staff, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, speech and language therapists, and orthotists.
Physiotherapists can also work with patients to improve awareness and use of the hemiplegic side.
It is equally important in secondary prevention.
Good nursing care is fundamental in maintaining skin care, feeding, hydration, positioning, and monitoring vital signs such as temperature, pulse, and blood pressure.
Dipyridamole can be added to aspirin therapy to provide a small additional benefit, even though headache is a common side effect.
Statins have been shown to reduce the risk of stroke by about 15%.
The results of this study found that the only significant genetic factor was the person's blood type.
Bleeding may occur due to a brain aneurysm.
Strokes can be classified into two major categories: ischemic and hemorrhagic.
About 3.3 million deaths resulted from ischemic stroke while 3.2 million deaths resulted from hemorrhagic stroke.
However, stroke can occur at any age, including in childhood.
* decreased reflexes: gag, swallow, pupil reactivity to light
Between 1990 and 2010 the number of strokes decreased by approximately 10% in the developed world and increased by 10% in the developing world.
* apraxia (altered voluntary movements)
* lack of insight of his or her, usually stroke-related, disability
Until recently, human clinical trials with neuroprotective agents have failed, with the probable exception of deep barbiturate coma.
Gaining initial improvement in range of motion is often achieved through rhythmic rotational patterns associated with the affected limb.
Studies of surgical intervention for carotid artery stenosis without symptoms have shown only a small decrease in the risk of stroke.
Air pollution may also increase stroke risk.
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends against screening for carotid artery stenosis in those without symptoms.
Low doses of aspirin (for example 75–150&nbsp;mg) are as effective as high doses but have fewer side effects; the lowest effective dose remains unknown.
Damage to the blood vessel lining or endothelium is particularly important.
In people who have had a myocardial infarction or those with a high cardiovascular risk, it provides some protection against a first stroke.
Diagnosis is typically with medical imaging such as a computerized axial tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan along with a physical exam.
Post-stroke emotional difficulties include anxiety, panic attacks, flat affect (failure to express emotions), mania, apathy and psychosis.
* altered smell, taste, hearing, or vision (total or partial)
About half of people who have had a stroke live less than one year.
Electrical stimulation to the antagonist muscles or vibrations has also been used with some success.
Hippocrates (460 to 370 BC) was first to describe the phenomenon of sudden paralysis that is often associated with ischemia.
Emboli most commonly arise from the heart (especially in atrial fibrillation) but may originate from elsewhere in the arterial tree.
Depending on the stroke risk, anticoagulation with medications such as warfarin or aspirin is useful for prevention.
If studies show carotid stenosis, and the person has a degree of residual function on the affected side, carotid endarterectomy (surgical removal of the stenosis) may decrease the risk of recurrence if performed rapidly after stroke.
However, more recently NXY-059, the disulfonyl derivative of the radical-scavenging phenylbutylnitrone, is reported to be neuroprotective in stroke.
In fact, many antioxidant neuroprotectants such as uric acid and NXY-059 work at the level of the endothelium and not in the brain ''per se''.
Calcium influx can also lead to the failure of mitochondria, which can lead further toward energy depletion and may trigger cell death due to programmed cell death.
Tight blood sugar control in the first few hours does not improve outcomes and may cause harm.
Speech and language therapy is appropriate for people with the speech production disorders: dysarthria and apraxia of speech, aphasia, cognitive-communication impairments and/or problems with swallowing.
Patients may have particular problems, such as dysphagia, which can cause swallowed material to pass into the lungs and cause aspiration pneumonia.
Often, assistive technology such as wheelchairs, walkers and canes may be beneficial.
Cold in the form of ice wraps or ice packs have been proven to briefly reduce spasticity by temporarily dampening neural firing rates.
Signs and symptoms of a stroke may include an inability to move or feel on one side of the body, problems understanding or speaking, feeling like the world is spinning, or loss of vision to one side among others.
One example physiotherapists employ to promote motor learning involves constraint-induced movement therapy.
The following are commonly used techniques:
Nutrition, specifically the Mediterranean-style diet, has the potential for decreasing the risk of having a stroke by more than half.
There are various classification systems for acute ischemic stroke.
Given the disease burden of strokes, prevention is an important public health concern.
Those who experience a stroke are at risk of paralysis which could result in a self disturbed body image which may also lead to other social issues.
Prevention includes decreasing risk factors as well as possibly aspirin, statins, surgery to open up the arteries to the brain in those with problematic narrowing, and warfarin in those with atrial fibrillation.
Other modifiable risk factors include high blood cholesterol levels, diabetes mellitus, cigarette smoking (active and passive), drinking lots of alcohol and drug use, lack of physical activity, obesity, processed red meat consumption and unhealthy diet.
The symptoms of a stroke can be permanent.
Broader aspects of care must address the emotional impact speech impairment has on those who experience difficulties with speech after a stroke.
Benefit is greater the earlier it is used.
This phenomenon is mainly encountered in strokes of the middle cerebral artery territory and is also called "malignant cerebral infarction" because it carries a dismal prognosis.
Some risk factors for stroke apply only to women.
Having had a stroke in the past greatly increases one's risk of future strokes.
Treatment to try recover lost function is called stroke rehabilitation and ideally takes place in a stroke unit; however, these are not available in much of the world.
The term ''cerebrovascular accident'' was introduced in 1927, reflecting a "growing awareness and acceptance of vascular theories and (...) recognition of the consequences of a sudden disruption in the vascular supply of the brain".
Depending on the site of the aneurysm this may be by surgery that involves opening the skull or endovascularly (through the blood vessels).
Apoplexy, from the Greek word meaning "struck down with violence", first appeared in Hippocratic writings to describe this phenomenon.
However, several studies have shown that aspirin and antiplatelet drugs are highly effective in secondary prevention after a stroke or transient ischemic attack.
In primary prevention however, antiplatelet drugs did not reduce the risk of ischemic stroke but increased the risk of major bleeding.
The TOAST (Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment) classification is based on clinical symptoms as well as results of further investigations; on this basis, a stroke is classified as being due to (1) thrombosis or embolism due to atherosclerosis of a large artery, (2) an embolism originating in the heart, (3) complete blockage of a small blood vessel, (4) other determined cause, (5) undetermined cause (two possible causes, no cause identified, or incomplete investigation).
Removal of the clot may be attempted in those where it occurs within a large blood vessel and may be an option for those who either are not eligible for or do not improve with intravenous thrombolytics.
* High risk: atrial fibrillation and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, rheumatic disease of the mitral or aortic valve disease, artificial heart valves, known cardiac thrombus of the atrium or ventricle, sick sinus syndrome, sustained atrial flutter, recent myocardial infarction, chronic myocardial infarction together with ejection fraction +) across the cell membrane.
Thus, the source of the embolus must be identified.
A stroke sufferer may be unaware of his or her own disabilities, a condition called anosognosia.
Among people with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation, anticoagulation can reduce stroke by 60% while antiplatelet agents can reduce stroke by 20%.
Its use is endorsed by the American Heart Association and the American Academy of Neurology as the recommended treatment for acute stroke within three hours of onset of symptoms as long as there are not other contraindications (such as abnormal lab values, high blood pressure, or recent surgery).
* weakness in sternocleidomastoid muscle with inability to turn head to one side
Many clinics and hospitals are adopting the use of these off-the-shelf devices for exercise, social interaction, and rehabilitation because they are affordable, accessible and can be used within the clinic and home.
Many people who experience communication impairments after a stroke find it more difficult to cope with the social issues rather than physical impairments.
This decreases the risk of death, although some more people survive with disability who would otherwise have died.
They result in part of the brain not functioning properly.
Low-dose aspirin is also effective for stroke prevention after having a myocardial infarction.
They result in tissue injury by causing compression of tissue from an expanding hematoma or hematomas.
When a stroke has been diagnosed, various other studies may be performed to determine the underlying cause.
Agents that work in this way are referred to as being ''neuroprotective''.
Anticoagulation can prevent recurrent ischemic strokes.
* weakness in tongue (inability to stick out the tongue and/or move it from side to side)
High cholesterol levels have been inconsistently associated with (ischemic) stroke.
The incidence of stroke increases exponentially from 30 years of age, and etiology varies by age.
These processes are the same for any type of ischemic tissue and are referred to collectively as the ''ischemic cascade''.
Its use is now discouraged by a number of neurology textbooks, reasoning that the connotation of fortuitousness carried by the word ''accident'' insufficiently highlights the modifiability of the underlying risk factors.
Emotional lability occurs in about 20% of those who have had a stroke.
Clopidogrel has less side effects than ticlopidine.
A scoring system called ROSIER (recognition of stroke in the emergency room) is recommended for this purpose; it is based on features from the medical history and physical examination.
Some forms of stroke can cause additional symptoms.
Aspirin reduces the overall risk of recurrence by 13% with greater benefit early on.
It has been shown that people admitted to a stroke unit have a higher chance of surviving than those admitted elsewhere in hospital, even if they are being cared for by doctors without experience in stroke.
* balance problems and nystagmus
In the United States stroke is a leading cause of disability, and recently declined from the third leading to the fourth leading cause of death.
Treatment of spasticity related to stroke often involves early mobilizations, commonly performed by a physiotherapist, combined with elongation of spastic muscles and sustained stretching through various positionings.
Cognitive and psychological outcome after a stroke can be affected by the age at which the stroke happened, pre-stroke baseline intellectual functioning, psychiatric history and whether there is pre-existing brain pathology.
These forms of rehabilitation offer potential for motivating patients to perform specific therapy tasks that many other forms do not.
In 2013, stroke was the second most frequent cause of death after coronary artery disease, accounting for 6.4&nbsp;million deaths (12% of the total).
High blood pressure accounts for 35-50% of stroke risk.
Years later, that same idea, that rapid cerebral blood flow restoration results in fewer brain cells dying, has been proved and quantified.
Reduced fitness can reduce capacity for rehabilitation as well as general health.
* memory deficits (involvement of temporal lobe)
Surgery is most efficient when not delayed too long —the risk of recurrent stroke in a patient who has a 50% or greater stenosis is up to 20% after 5 years, but endarterectomy reduces this risk to around 5%.
Imaging techniques also assist in determining the subtypes and cause of stroke.
The available evidence does not show large differences in stroke prevention between antihypertensive drugs —therefore, other factors such as protection against other forms of cardiovascular disease and cost should be considered.
It is ranked after heart disease and before cancer.
Proposed systems include FAST (face, arm, speech, and time), as advocated by the Department of Health (United Kingdom) and the Stroke Association, the American Stroke Association, the National Stroke Association (US), the Los Angeles Prehospital Stroke Screen (LAPSS) and the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale (CPSS).
Aspirin should be used.
* disorganized thinking, confusion, hypersexual gestures (with involvement of frontal lobe)
The more extensive the area of the brain affected, the more functions that are likely to be lost.
It does not, however, improve chances of survival.
Signs and symptoms often appear soon after the stroke has occurred.
Medication is the most common method of stroke prevention; carotid endarterectomy can be a useful surgical method of preventing stroke.
Recent guidelines detail the evidence for primary prevention in stroke.
Lowering blood pressure has been conclusively shown to prevent both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes.
A number of specific recommendations have been made for women including taking aspirin after the 11th week of pregnancy if there is a history of previous chronic high blood pressure and taking blood pressure medications during pregnancy if the blood pressure is greater than 150&nbsp;mmHg systolic or greater than 100&nbsp;mmHg diastolic.
Angioplasty and stenting have begun to be looked at as possible viable options in treatment of acute ischemic stroke.
Disruption in self-identity, relationships with others, and emotional well-being can lead to social consequences after stroke due to the lack of ability to communicate.
Glutamate acts on receptors in nerve cells (especially NMDA receptors), producing an influx of calcium which activates enzymes that digest the cells' proteins, lipids, and nuclear material.
Various systems have been proposed to increase recognition of stroke.
These react with and damage a number of cellular and extracellular elements.
There is a lack of high quality studies looking at promotional efforts to improve lifestyle factors.
In thrombotic stroke a thrombus (blood clot) usually forms around atherosclerotic plaques.
* decreased sensation and muscle weakness of the face
Stroke prevention treatment for atrial fibrillation is determined according to the CHADS/CHADS2 system.
However, stroke cuts off the supply of oxygen and glucose which powers the ion pumps maintaining these gradients.
* an electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram (to identify arrhythmias and resultant clots in the heart which may spread to the brain vessels through the bloodstream);
Endarterectomy for a significant stenosis has been shown to be useful in preventing further strokes in those who have already had one.
Relief of the pressure may be attempted with medication, but some require hemicraniectomy, the temporary surgical removal of the skull on one side of the head.
SPECT documents cerebral blood flow and PET with FDG isotope the metabolic activity of the neurons.
* ''Small vessel disease'' involves the smaller arteries inside the brain: branches of the circle of Willis, middle cerebral artery, stem, and arteries arising from the distal vertebral and basilar artery.
A stroke often requires emergency care.
These four entities predict the extent of the stroke, the area of the brain that is affected, the underlying cause, and the prognosis.
Thrombolysis, such as with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA), in acute ischemic stroke, when given within three hours of symptom onset results in an overall benefit of 10% with respect to living without disability.
These benefits or lack of benefits occurred regardless of the age of the person treated.
This definition was supposed to reflect the reversibility of tissue damage and was devised for the purpose, with the time frame of 24 hours being chosen arbitrarily.
Except in people with atrial fibrillation, oral anticoagulants are not advised for stroke prevention —any benefit is offset by bleeding risk.
Wepfer also identified the main arteries supplying the brain, the vertebral and carotid arteries, and identified the cause of a type of ischemic stroke known as a cerebral infarction when he suggested that apoplexy might be caused by a blockage to those vessels.
Low blood sugar may cause similar symptoms.
When administered within the first three hours thrombolysis improves functional outcome without affecting mortality.
To be beneficial, the complication rate of the surgery should be kept below 4%.
Validated instruments such as the Barthel scale may be used to assess the likelihood of a stroke patient being able to manage at home with or without support subsequent to discharge from a hospital.
Other risk factors include tobacco smoking, obesity, high blood cholesterol, diabetes mellitus, previous TIA, and atrial fibrillation.
Stroke symptoms typically start suddenly, over seconds to minutes, and in most cases do not progress further.
A thrombus itself (even if it does not completely block the blood vessel) can lead to an embolic stroke (see below) if the thrombus breaks off and travels in the bloodstream, at which point it is called an embolus.
Depending on the part of the brain affected,  the defect in the brain is ''usually'' on the opposite side of the body.
Other difficulties may include a decreased ability to communicate emotions through facial expression, body language and voice.
Anticoagulants and antithrombotics can make bleeding worse and are generally discontinued (and reversed if possible).
Higher levels of Von Willebrand factor are more common amongst people who have had ischemic stroke for the first time.
Other novel non-invasive rehabilitation methods are currently being developed to augment physical therapy to improve motor function of stroke patients, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and transcranial direct-current stimulation (tDCS) and robotic therapies.
It does not appear that lowering levels of homocysteine with folic acid affects the risk of stroke.
Advanced age is one of the most significant stroke risk factors.
This position for tPA is based upon the findings of two studies by one group of investigators which showed that tPA improves the chances for a good neurological outcome.
In those who have previously had preeclampsia other risk factors should be treated more aggressively.
* altered walking gait
Keeping blood pressure below 140/90 mmHg is recommended.
Stroke was the second most frequent cause of death worldwide in 2011, accounting for 6.2&nbsp;million deaths (~11% of the total).
