Snow cover tends to last no longer than a few days although it has been known to last several weeks at a time as recently as 2010.
For example, Gaisburger Marsch is a stew that was invented in Stuttgart's Gaisburg area of Stuttgart East.
At the centre of Stuttgart lies its main square, Schlossplatz.
The sixth largest city in Germany, Stuttgart has a population of 600,068 (October 2014) while the greater Stuttgart Metropolitan Region has a population of 5.3&nbsp;million (2008), being the fourth-biggest in Germany after the Rhine-Ruhr area, Berlin/Brandenburg and Frankfurt/Rhine-Main.
In the Feuersee area in the west of Stuttgart lies one of two 'Feuersee's (literally fire lakes), striking for its views of the Johanneskirche (St.Johns) church across the lake, surrounded by nearby houses and offices.
There is also a Spring festival on the same grounds in April of each year.
These units of soldiers retrained in patrol and policing provided the law and order in the American zone of occupied Germany until the civilian German police forces could be re-established.
Finally, the Prussian king declined the revolutionaries' offer.
In 1775, Karl Eugen requested a return to Stuttgart, ordering the construction of the New Castle.
There are expansive areas of woodland to the west and south west of Stuttgart which are popular with walkers, families, cyclists and ramblers.
As the capital of Baden-Württemberg, Stuttgart is an important political centre in Germany and the seat of the State Parliament, or Landtag as well as all Baden-Württemberg state departments.
), Scharrena Stuttgart.
Exterior: Romanesque/Gothic; interior: Romanesque/Gothic/Modern.
In 1871, as an autonomous kingdom, Württemberg joined the German Empire created by Otto von Bismarck, Prime Minister of Prussia, during the unification of Germany.
The outlying suburbs of Stuttgart and nearby towns are served by a suburban railway system called the Stuttgart S-Bahn, using tracks supplied by the national Deutsche Bahn AG (DBAG).
It forms the center of the library system of the University, ensuring the supply of research, teaching and studies with literature and other information resources.
For economic and social innovation, the city was ranked 11th globally, second in Germany after Hamburg and 7th in Europe in 2009 out of 256 cities.
Under current plans to improve transport links to the international infrastructure (as part of the Stuttgart 21 project), in March 2008 the city unveiled a new logo and slogan, describing itself as "''''" ("The new heart of Europe").
The city boasts the largest mineral water deposits in Europe after Budapest, with over 250 springs within the urban area.
* ''Wilhelmpalais'' (the King Wilhelm Palais), 1840
Heilbronn-Franken, Neckar-Alb and Ostwürttemberg.
Stuttgart is home to five of the eleven state museums in Baden-Württemberg.
In the 18th century, Stuttgart temporarily surrendered its residence status after Eberhard Ludwig founded Ludwigsburg to the north of the city.
The Staatstheater was named Germany/Austria/Switzerland 'Theatre of the year' in 2006; the Stuttgart Opera has won the 'Opera of the year' award six times.
Important expressways like B10, B14, B27 and B29 connect Stuttgart with its suburbs.
* 1811–1813: Karl Eberhard von Wächter (* 1758; † 1829)
Other leading museums in Stuttgart include:
At the end of the First World War the Württemberg monarchy broke down as William II of Württemberg refused the crown—but also refused to abdicate—under pressure from revolutionaries who stormed the Wilhelm Palace.
At the end of the Second World War, French administrators appointed the independent politician Arnulf Klett as Burgomaster, a role he fulfilled without interruption until his death in 1974.
* The ''Württembergische Landesbibliothek'' state library, rebuilt in 1970.
In 2007, Stuttgart hosted the 2007 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships.
Parts of the former German States of Baden and Württemberg were merged in 1952 leading to the founding of the new state of Baden-Württemberg, now Germany's third largest state.
On the northern edge of the Rosensteinpark is the famous 'Wilhelma', Germany's only combined zoological and botanical garden.
The VII Corps Headquarters returned to Germany for a short period to close out operations and was deactivated later in the United States.
On the Karlsplatz side of the Old Castle is a museum dedicated to the memory of Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg, former resident of Stuttgart who attempted to assassinate Adolf Hitler on 20 July 1944.
At the center of Stuttgart lies a series of gardens which are popular with families and cyclists.
Fußball-Liga (third division) at the smaller Gazi Stadium close to the TV tower in Degerloch.
Around sixty percent of the German Jewish population had fled by the time restrictions on their movement were imposed on 1 October 1941, at which point Jews living in Württemberg were forced to live in 'Jewish apartments' before being 'concentrated' on the former Trade Fair grounds in Killesberg.
The population at the time was around 50,000.
Stuttgart has a light rail system known as the Stuttgart Stadtbahn.
It takes 30 minutes to reach the airport from the city centre using S-Bahn lines S2 or S3.
In 2008 a memorial to the US Constabulary was installed and dedicated at Patch Barracks.
Since 1967, Patch Barracks in Stuttgart has been home to the US EUCOM.
Reconstructed with simplified interior after World War II.
The Stuttgart Metropolitan Region is a wider regional concept, that, in addition to the districts of the ''Stuttgart Region'', encompasses most of North, Central, and East Württemberg, consisting of the cities of Heilbronn/Schwäbisch Hall, Reutlingen/Tübingen as well as Aalen/Schwäbisch Gmünd and their respective districts and regions, i.e.
Many leading companies in the financial services sector are headquartered in Stuttgart with around 100 credit institutes in total (e.g.
Between 1811 and 1819 he held the title of "Stadtdirektor" and between 1819 and 1929 "Stadtschultheiß".
Total GDP of Stuttgart is €33.9&nbsp;billion, of which service sector contributes around 65.3%, industry 34.5%, and agriculture 0.2%.
* 1997–2013: Wolfgang Schuster (* 1949), CDU
Stuttgart's development as a city was impeded in the 19th century by its location.
The Central State Archive Stuttgart is the archive in charge of the Ministries of the State of Baden-Württemberg.
Since shortly after the end of World War&nbsp;II there has been a US military presence in Stuttgart that remains to this day.
Because of this, the city is often described as lying "''zwischen Wald und Reben''", or between forest and vines.
As is the case wherever the US military is stationed, there is an American Forces Network (AFN) station.
In 2006 it was also one of the host cities of the Football World Cup.
Regular events that take place in Stuttgart:
The coldest month is January with an average temperature of .
To cultivate those steep terraces, paths and steps had to be constructed.
Summers last from May until September.
Thus, 40% of the city's population is of foreign background.
LBBW Bank, Wüstenrot & Württembergische, Allianz Life Assurance).
The Stuttgart Stock Exchange is the second largest in Germany (after Frankfurt).
In 2000, 22.8% of the population did not hold German citizenship, in 2006 this had reduced to 21.7%.
After his eventual abdication, the Free State of Württemberg was established, as a part of the Weimar Republic.
The Stadtarchiv Stuttgart is the archive in charge of the provincial capital Stuttgart.
Stuttgart also has a large bus network.
* The Linden Museum, established in 1911, a leading international ethnological museum
In 2008 it was host to the World Individual Debating and Public Speaking Championships.
Since the 1960s, many foreigners have also immigrated to Stuttgart to work here (as part of the "Gastarbeiter" program); another wave of immigrants came as refugees from the Wars in Yugoslavia in the 1990s.
In that dialect, the city's name is pronounced ''Schtugert'' or ''Schtuagerd''.
Since 1965, it is located right next to the WLB and belongs since 2005 as a department of the Landesarchiv Baden-Württemberg in.
* 1899–1911: Heinrich von Gauß (* 1858; † 1921)
The strongest local water polo team is SV Cannstatt, which won the German championship in 2006.
Stuttgart is still one of Germany's largest wine-growing cities with more than 400 hectares of vine area, thanks in main to its location at the centre of Germany's fourth largest wine region, the Württemberg wine growing area which covers  and is one of only 13 official areas captured under German Wine law.
* The ''Hauptbahnhof'' (Main Railway Station) was designed in 1920; its stark, functional lines are typical of the artistic trend 'Neue Sachlichkeit' (New Objectivity)
Stuttgart was also 2007 European Capital of Sport, hosting events such as the UCI World Cycling Championships Road Race and the IAAF World Athletics Final.
39% of the population fell into other categories: Muslims, Jews and those who either followed no religion or one not accounted for in official statistics.
Stuttgart experiences an oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification ''Cfb'') with features closely resembling continental climates.
As a result, there are more than 400 flights of steps around the city (called "Stäffele" in local dialect), equivalent to approximately  of steps.
Stuttgart is spread across a variety of hills (many of them vineyards), valleys and parks – unusual for a German city and often a source of surprise to visitors who primarily associate the city with its industrial reputation as the 'cradle of the automobile'.
Among others, this gallery houses works from Max Beckmann, Dalí, Matisse, Miró, Picasso, Klee, Chagall and Kandinsky.
In 1920 Stuttgart became the seat of the German National Government (after the administration fled from Berlin, see Kapp Putsch).
Unemployment in the Stuttgart Region is above the average of Baden-Württemberg, but very low compared to other metropolitan areas in Germany.
VfB is based at the Mercedes-Benz Arena in Bad Cannstatt.
*Hegel House (''Hegelhaus''), birthplace of the philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel which documents his life works
Stuttgart is nicknamed the ''Schwabenmetropole'' (Swabian metropolis), because of the city's location in the centre of Swabia, and as a reference to the Swabian dialect spoken by its native inhabitants.
In the late 1970s, the district of Stammheim was centre stage to one of the most controversial periods of German post-war history during the trial of Red Army Faction members at Stammheim high-security court.
The city of Stuttgart ranked 21st globally in Mercer's 2015 liveability rankings, and 6th in Germany behind top-ranked cities such as Frankfurt, Düsseldorf and Munich.
Because of its shape on a map, the locals refer to it as the ''Green U''.
Almost 45% of Baden-Württemberg scientists involved in R&D are based directly in the Swabian capital.
There are a number of natural and artificial lakes and ponds in Stuttgart.
Wine-growing in the area dates back to 1108 when, according to State archives, Blaubeuren Abbey was given vineyards in Stuttgart as a gift from 'Monk Ulrich'.
Other lower-division football teams are ''Sportfreunde Stuttgart'' – most famous for taking part in the Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy in 1908, considered the first ''World Cup'' – and FV Zuffenhausen.
It also has the microfilms of all church books (especially baptism, marriage, and family Death's Register) in the area of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church in Württemberg.
The Old Castle is also home to the State Museum of Württemberg which was founded in 1862 by William I of Württemberg.
The cellars with a collection of stone fragments from the Roman times are open to visitors
It is surrounded by an expansive open area overlooked by vineyards on the banks of the river Neckar near Mühlhausen.
The heaviest raid took place on 12 September 1944 when the British Royal Air Force bombed the old town of Stuttgart dropping over 184,000 bombs including 75 blockbusters.
Since 1985 Stuttgart is home to the International School of Stuttgart, one of less than 100 schools worldwide that offer all three International Baccalaureate programs- the IB Primary Years (Early Learning to Grade 5), IB Middle Years (Grade 6 to 10), IB Diploma (grades 11–12).
Stuttgart has the highest general standard of prosperity of any city in Germany.
Since 1930 the title of the mayor is called "Oberbürgermeister".
In the city centre and densely built-up areas, the Stadtbahn runs underground.
Classicism; reconstructed; has been housing the "Königsbau Passagen" shopping centre since 2006.
Stuttgart's Swabian cuisine, beer and wine have been produced in the area since the 17th century and are now famous throughout Germany and beyond.
Stuttgart covers an area of .
The International School of Stuttgart is accredited by both the Council of International Schools and the New England Association of Schools and Colleges.
* The Summer Festival (''Stuttgart Sommerfest'', usually in early August) with shows, music, children's entertainment and local cuisine in Schlossplatz, Stuttgart and adjacent parks
Many originate from the time when vineyards lined the entire valley until the early 19th century.
The city center lies in a lush valley, nestled between vineyards and thick woodland close to the River Neckar.
Stadtbahn lines and buses are operated by the Stuttgarter Straßenbahnen AG (SSB).
* 1799–1804: Christian Heinrich Günzler (* 1758; † 1842)
Stuttgart ranks as one of the safest cities in Germany.
After long discussions, the parliament decided to offer the title of "German Emperor" to King Frederick William IV of Prussia.
For business, it describes itself as "''''", "Where business meets the future").
* The ''Stiftskirche'' (Collegiate Church), dates back to the 12th century, but was changed to the Late Gothic style in the 15th century and has been a Protestant church since 1534.
The most frequented lakes form a  trio made up of the Bärensee, Neuer See and Pfaffensee.
In addition to several universities and colleges (e.g.
In the 17th century the city was the third largest German wine-growing community in the Holy Roman Empire.
Typically during summer months, the nearby Black Forest and Swabian Alb hills act as a shield from harsh weather but the city can be subject to thunderstorms whereas in the winter periods of snow may last for several days.
The name of the Roman fort is not recorded.
His speech led directly to the unification of the British and American occupation zones, resulting in the 'bi-zone' (later the 'tri-zone' including the French).
The Steelers play in the new Ege Trans Arena in Bietigheim.
The circumstances of what became known as 'The Stuttgart Crisis' provoked political repercussions up to the White House.
Stuttgart has two American Football teams, the Stuttgart Nighthawks American football team, who play in the Western Europe Pro League and Stuttgart Scorpions, who play in Stuttgarter Kickers' Gazi Stadium.
'The Blues', Stuttgarter Kickers, are the second most important football team.
* The North Station Memorial (''Gedenkstätte am Nordbahnhof Stuttgart)'' in memory of the 2000 or so Jewish holocaust victims deported by the Nazis from the now disused North Station
Stuttgart Rebels EC, plays in the "Landesliga" (4th tier) at the Waldau ice rink in Degerloch.
Stuttgart also has a ''Standseilbahn'', a funicular railway that operates in the Heslach area and the forest cemetery (Waldfriedhof).
Following the suit of other German cities such as Berlin, Cologne and Hanover, on 1 March 2008 a Low Emission Zone (LEZ) came into effect in Stuttgart with the aim of improving air quality.
It transmits on FM on 102.3&nbsp;MHz from Fernmeldeturm Frauenkopf and on AM on 1143&nbsp;kHz from Hirschlanden transmitter.
* 1820–1833: Willibald Feuerlein (* 1781; † 1850)
Six matches, three of them second round matches, including the 3rd and 4th place playoff, were played at the Gottlieb Daimler Stadium (today Mercedes-Benz Arena).
* ''Alte Kanzlei'' (the Old Chancellery) on Schillerplatz square which backs onto the 1598 Mercury Pillar
Especially devoted to the National Library of acquiring, cataloging, archiving and provision of literature about Württemberg, called ''Württembergica''.
On 15 November 1886, Robert Bosch opened his first 'Workshop for Precision Mechanics and Electrical Engineering' in Stuttgart.
The ''Stuttgart 21 project'' will include the rebuilding of surface and underground lines connecting the station in Stuttgart's enclosed central valley with existing railway and underground lines.
By comparison: unemployment for the whole of Germany stood at 7.1% (8 Nov) and 8.5% (9 Feb).
The city lies at the centre of a densely populated area, surrounded by a ring of smaller towns.
The State Library of Wurttemberg is the Badische Landesbibliothek (BLB) in Karlsruhe regional library for Baden-Württemberg.
Later, as the city continued to grow and vineyards were replaced by houses and streets, the "Stäffele" were used as foot paths to the newly built neighborhoods.
After returning from the Middle East, the bulk of VII Corps units were reassigned to the United States or deactivated.
So far, about 5,000 names of victims of the régime of National Socialism have been acquired.
The ''Staatstheater'' is home to the State opera and three smaller theatres and it regularly stages opera, ballet and theatre productions as well as concerts.
Unemployment in the actual city of Stuttgart during the same periods stood at 5.2% and 6.0% (8 Nov and 9 Feb respectively).
for their supposed part in the uprising of Duke Theudebald of Alamannia and Duke Odilo of Bavaria.
In total Stuttgart was subjected to 53 bombing raids, resulting in the destruction of 68% of all buildings and the deaths of 4477 people.
A number of auto-enthusiast magazines are published in Stuttgart.
* 1974–1996: Manfred Rommel (* 1928; † 2013), CDU
As in the rest of Germany, football is the most popular sport in Stuttgart which is home to 'The Reds' and 'The Blues'.
* ''Königsbau'' (the King's Building), 1850.
After years of political debate and controversy, plans were approved in October 2007 to convert the existing above-ground main train station to an underground through station.
In 2007 AFRICOM was established as a cell within EUCOM and in 2008 established as the US Unified Combatant Command responsible for most of Africa headquartered at Kelley Barracks.
They mostly perform in the ''Liederhalle'' concert hall.
A short while later, this rump parliament was dissolved by the Württemberg military.
The council of Cannstatt of 746 according to the annals of Metz, the ''annales Petaviani'' and an account by Childebrand,  took place on the invitation by   Carloman, the eldest son of Charles Martel, and ended in the summary execution of Alamannic nobility
In 1803, Stuttgart was proclaimed capital of the Electorate of Württemberg until Napoleon Bonaparte's break-up of the Holy Roman Empire in 1805 when Stuttgart became capital of the Kingdom of Württemberg.
Only 180 Jews from Württemberg held in concentration camps survived.
* 1911–1933: Karl Lautenschlager (* 1868; † 1952)
Established in 1873 it was extended to include Jewish graves in 1874 and also now houses the Russian Orthodox Church of Alexander Nevsky
The remaining U.S. bases around Stuttgart are organized into US Army Garrison Stuttgart and include Patch Barracks, Robinson Barracks, Panzer Kaserne and Kelley Barracks.
* The Mercedes-Benz Museum (1936, moved in 2006), now the most visited museum in Stuttgart (440,000 visits per year).
An early concept of the Marshall Plan aimed at supporting reconstruction and economic/political recovery across Europe was presented during a speech given by US Secretary of State James F. Byrnes at the Stuttgart Opera House.
Other parks in Stuttgart include the historic Botanischer Garten der Universität Hohenheim and Landesarboretum Baden-Württemberg at Castle Hohenheim (which date back to 1776 and are still used to catalogue and research plant species), Uhlandshöhe hill (between the city centre, Bad Cannstatt and Frauenkopf, and home to Stuttgart observatory), the Weißenburgpark (a five hectare park in the Bopser area of Stuttgart South which dates back to 1834 and is now home to a 'tea house' and the 'marble room' and offers a relaxing view across the city centre), the Birkenkopf a Schuttberg (at  the highest point in central Stuttgart, where many ruins were laid to commemorate the Second World War), and the Eichenhain park in Sillenbuch (declared a nature reserve in 1958 and home to 200 oak trees, many 300–400 years old).
* 1862–1872: Heinrich von Sick (* 1822; † 1881)
Wine remained Stuttgart's leading source of income well into the 19th century.
The WLB is specifically responsible for the administrative regions of Stuttgart and Tübingen.
The automobile and motorcycle were purported to have been invented in Stuttgart (by Karl Benz and subsequently industrialised in 1887 by Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach at the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft).
The first Waldorf School (also known as Rudolf Steiner School) was founded here in 1919 by the director of the Waldorf Astoria tobacco factory, Emil Molt, and Austrian social thinker Rudolf Steiner, a comprehensive school following Steiner's educational principles of anthroposophy and humanistic ideals.
By 1871 Stuttgart boasted 91,000 inhabitants, and by the time Gottlieb Daimler invented the automobile in a small workshop in Cannstatt in the 1880s, the population had risen rapidly to 176,000.
The French army occupied Stuttgart until the city was transferred to the American military occupation zone in 1946.
Although the city centre was heavily damaged during World War II, many historic buildings have been reconstructed and the city boasts some fine pieces of modern post-war architecture.
Two days later, the French forces coordinated with the US Seventh Army for the employment of US VI Corps heavy artillery to barrage the city.
At the height of the Cold War over 45,000 Americans were stationed across over 40 installations in and around the city.
As the Cold War developed US Army VII Corps was re-formed in July 1950 and assigned to Hellenen Kaserne (renamed Kelley Barracks in 1951) where the headquarters was to remain throughout the Cold War.
In 1948 the Headquarters for all Constabulary forces was moved to Stuttgart.
* The History Museum (''Haus der Geschichte'', 1987), examining local history, finds, the conflict between modern society and its cultural history
Stuttgart's current Bürgermeister (mayor) is Fritz Kuhn of the centre-left Alliance '90/The Greens party (German Green party).
Building work started in 2010 with controversial modifications to the Hauptbahnhof and should be completed in 2020.
The center of the city, referred to by locals as the "Kessel" (kettle), experiences more severe heat in the summer and less snow in the winter than the suburbs.
An established team in the German Bundesliga, VfB was founded in 1893 and has won five German titles since 1950, most recently in 1992 and 2007.
It is the only urban rack railway in Germany.
In 1990 VII Corps was deployed directly from Germany to Saudi Arabia for Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm to include many of the VII Corps troops stationed in and around Stuttgart.
More than 1000 people perished in the resulting firestorm.
At the far end of Schlossgarten lies the second ''Green U'' park, the larger Rosensteinpark which borders Stuttgart's Wilhelma zoo and botanical gardens.
* 1893–1899: Emil von Rümelin (* 1846; † 1899), independent
Several attempts were made to free the terrorists by force or blackmail during the 'German Autumn' of 1977, culminating in the abduction and murder of the German industrialist and President of the German Employers' Association Hanns Martin Schleyer as well as the hijacking of Lufthansa flight LH181.
* The Wine Village (''Weindorf'', late August/early September) – vintages are sold at this event held at Schlossplatz and Upper Palace Garden
Winters last from December to March.
The largest groups of foreign nationals were Turks (22,025), Greeks (14,341), Italians (13,978), Croats (12,985), Serbs (11,547) followed by immigrants from Romania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Portugal, Poland, France, and Austria.
The other Feuersee can be found in Vaihingen.
Stuttgart also has its own rail freight centre with marshalling yards and a container terminal in the Obertürkheim area of Hedelfingen.
Beyond bridges over an adjacent main road lies the final ''Green U'' park, Killesbergpark or 'Höhenpark' which is a former quarry that was converted for the Third Reich garden show of 1939 (and was used as a collection point for Jews awaiting transportation to concentration camps).
* The ''Großes Haus'' of Stuttgart National Theatre, 1909–1912
Stuttgart Ballet is connected to names like John Cranko and Marcia Haydée.
Stuttgart has two major ice hockey teams.
Today, four of these schools are located in Stuttgart.
The Green U starts with the old Schlossgarten, castle gardens first mentioned in records in 1350.
Among famous "Stäffele" are Wächterstaffel, Eugenstaffel, Sängerstaffel, Buchenhofstaffel or Sünderstaffel.
The Bietigheim Bissingen Steelers play in the 2nd division of the DEL (DEL2).
Next door to the Old State Gallery is the New State Gallery (1980) with its controversial modern architecture.
