According to a 2013 special report issued by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the number of HIV positive people in Africa receiving anti-retroviral treatment in 2012 was over seven times the number receiving treatment in 2005, with an almost 1 million added in the last year alone.
is cited by Morehouse University as giving the mid-1990s figure of 278,250,800 Muslims in Africa, but still as 40.8% of the total.
Influences from the Indian and Malay community can be seen its use of curries, sambals, pickled fish, fish stews, chutney, and samosa.
There are currently more than 1000 Africans playing for European clubs.
The Great Mosque of Djenne is most reflective of Sahelian architecture and is the largest adobe building in the world.
China, in particular, has emerged as an important investor.
In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as Bushmen (also "San", closely related to, but distinct from "Hottentots") have long been present.
In response, the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control (APOC) was launched in 1995 with the aim of controlling the disease.
Traditional society typically focused on raising, sheep, goats, and especially cattle.
It defines duality, the material and immaterial, male and female, heaven and earth.
These rock-hewn structures include the Church of St. George at Lalibela.
The use of the term has been criticized because it refers to the South only by cartography conventions and projects a connotation of inferiority; a vestige of colonialism, which some say, divided Africa into European terms of homogeneity.
Although Sub-Saharan African art is very diverse there are some common themes.
Malaria is an endemic illness in Sub-Saharan Africa, where the majority of malaria cases and deaths worldwide occur.
habilis'' was most likely not capable of competing with large predators and was more prey than hunter, although ''H.
But those in the television industry view the region as an untapped green market.
South Africa is the largest producer of platinum, with 80% of the total world's annual mine production and 88% of the world's platinum reserve.
Significant suppliers are Niger, Namibia, and South Africa.
Despite their work in the fields women are expected to be subservient to men in some African cultures.
African pluvial periods are associated with a "wet Sahara" phase during which larger lakes and more rivers existed.
Average coverage stands at more than a third of the population.
Women also have a very important role in African culture because they take care of the house and children.
Sub-Saharan Africans have specific name for masks.
Random outcomes are generated using a fractal recursive process.
Bantu-speakers can also be found in parts of Central Africa such as the Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and southern Cameroon.
It is thought that the camel was first brought to Egypt after the Persian Empire conquered Egypt in 525&nbsp;BCE, although large herds did not become common enough in North Africa for camels to be the pack animal of choice for the trans-saharan trade.
Some sectors are dominated by state spending, others by overseas development aid (ODA) and yet others by private investors.
Onchocerciasis ("river blindness"), a common cause of blindness, is also endemic to parts of the region.
Although a long-standing member of the Arab League, Sudan has around 30% non-Arab populations in the west (Darfur, Masalit, Zaghawa), far north (Nubian) and south (Kordofan, Nuba).
Because of rising prices in commodities such as coal and oil, thermal sources of energy are proving to be too expensive for power generation.
The number of AIDS-related deaths in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2011 was 33 percent less than the number in 2005.
Beverages include ting (fermented sorghum or maize), milk, chibuku (milky beer).
For example, the bamana sand divination uses well established symbolic codes that can be reproduced using four bits or marks.
A sculpture shaped like a hand can be used as a stool.
Mushroom is sometimes used as a meat substitute.
Other important foods include enset, noog, lentils, rice, banana, leafy greens, chiles, peppers, coconut milk and tomatoes.
Raffia cloth and barkcloth are also utilised in the region.
georgicus'', a ''H.
Following the Bantu Migration into Central Africa, during the 14th century, the Luba Kingdom in southeast Congo came about under a king whose political authority derived from religious, spiritual legitimacy.
This quickens the refining process and effectively reduces costs.
Cotton seems to be the dominant material.
Each country has federations that identify and cultivate top talent.
They built stone structures like in Tichit, but mainly constructed in adobe.
vice versa being influenced by enslaved Sub-Saharan Africans.
Mauritania and Niger only include a band of the Sahel along their southern borders.
Among Afro-Asiatic-speakers is henotheism, the belief in one's own gods but accepting the existence of other gods; evil here is caused by malevolent spirits.
Almost all reserves are offshore, so political turmoil within the host country will not directly interfere with operations.
The shape of the whole is the shape of the parts at different scales.
Crops utilised are sorghum, maize (corn), pumpkin beans, leafy greens, and cabbage.
It contrasts with North Africa, whose Arab states are part of the Arab world.
Early in 2009, George Soros highlighted a new farmland buying frenzy caused by growing population, scarce water supplies and climate change.
A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care, with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost.
Mauritius is the only country in Africa to have a Hindu majority.
The new strategy dramatically increased accessibility through community-based healthcare reform, resulting in more efficient and equitable provision of services.
Common principles of being and becoming are widespread: Among the Dogon, the principle of ''Amma'' (being) and ''Nummo'' (becoming), and among the Bambara, ''Pemba'' (being) and ''Faro'' (becoming).
Cosmology and ontology is also neither simple or linear.
The Swahili culture that emerged from these exchanges evinces many Arab and Islamic influences not seen in traditional Bantu culture, as do the many Afro-Arab members of the Bantu Swahili people.
More than 99% of people affected by the illness worldwide live in 31 countries therein.
The Chadic branch is distributed in Central and West Africa.
Prior to the introduction of the camel, the use of oxen, mule, and horses for desert crossing was common, and trade routes followed chains of oases that were strung across the desert.
The failure to exploit its full energy potential is largely due to significant underinvestment, as at least four times as much (approximately $23 billion a year) and what is currently spent is invested in operating high cost power systems and not on expanding the infrastructure.
Traditional Sub-Saharan African music is as diverse as the region's various populations.
The Sahel is the transitional zone between the Sahara and the tropical savanna (the Sudan region) and forest-savanna mosaic to the south.
New world religions such as Santería, Vodun, and Candomblé, would be derived from this world view.
Less than 40% of rural Africans live within two kilometers of an all-season road, the lowest level of rural accessibility in the developing world.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, the state spends around $9.4 billion out of a total of $24.9 billion.
In the 18th century, the Oyo and the Aro confederacy were responsible for most of the slaves exported from Nigeria, with Great Britain, France and Portugal shipping the majority of the slaves.
Source:  CIA.gov, World Facts Book > Oil exporters.
In 1987, the Bamako Initiative conference organised by the World Health Organization was held in Bamako, the capital of Mali, and helped reshape the health policy of Sub-Saharan Africa.
Sub-Saharan Africa has some of the oldest and most varied style of rock art in the world.
Among these are combination prevention programmes, considered to be the most effective initiative, the abstinence, be faithful, use a condom campaign, and the Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation's outreach programs.
Zambia is a major producer of copper.
Over the years, Ethiopia and Kenya have produced many notable long-distance athletes.
Six hundred million people could be served with electricity based on its photovoltaic potential.
Africa generates 47 GW of electricity, less than 0.6% of the global market share.
Between 13,000 and 11,000&nbsp;BCE wild grains began to be collected as a source of food in the cataract region of the Nile, south of Egypt.
Roughly 1.8 million years ago, ''Homo ergaster'' first appeared in the fossil record in Africa.
Nubians built famous structures and numerous pyramids.
A large part of Sub-Saharan music, mainly among speakers of Niger–Congo and Nilo-Saharan languages, is rhythmic and centered around the drum.
In 1487, Bartolomeu Dias became the first European to reach the southernmost tip of Africa.
Boxing is also a popular sport.
There were a number of medieval empires of the southern Sahara and the Sahel, based on trans-Saharan trade, including the Ghana Empire and the Mali Empire, Songhai Empire, the Kanem Empire and the subsequent Bornu Empire.
Dancing involve swaying body movements and footwork.
It was later returned to the Dutch in 1803, but soon afterwards the Dutch East India Company declared bankruptcy, and the British annexed the Cape Colony in 1806.
The Nilo-Saharan languages are concentrated in the upper parts of the Chari and Nile rivers of Central Africa and Southeast Africa.
Bantu speakers represent the majority of inhabitants in southern, central and southeastern Africa, though San, Pygmy, and Nilotic groups, respectively, can also be found in those regions.
Uranium is major commodity from the region.
Spices such as curry, saffron, cloves, cinnamon, pomegranate juice, cardamon, ghee, and sage are used, especially among Muslims.
Countries such as Gabon, Seychelles, and South Africa boast almost 100% penetration.
Nevertheless, some international organisations include Sudan as part of Sub-Saharan Africa.
On Madagascar a type of draped cloth called lamba is worn.
European influences can be seen in cuisines like biltong (dried beef strips), potjies (stews of maize, onions, tomatoes), French wines, and crueler or koeksister (sugar syrup cookie).
Oils include palm oil and shea butter(sahel).
Central African cuisine is very starchy and spicy hot.
Among Niger–Congo-speakers is a belief in a creator God; ancestor spirits; territorial spirits; evil caused by human ill will and neglecting ancestor spirits; priest of territorial spirits.
The Semitic branch of the family also has a notable presence in Western Asia, making Afro-Asiatic the only language family spoken in Africa that is also attested outside of the continent.
However, the literacy rates in Sub-Saharan Africa vary significantly between countries.
From ''Homo ergaster'', ''Homo erectus'' (upright man) evolved 1.5 million years ago.
Sub-Saharan African art is meant to be experienced in three dimensions, not two.
Grains include millet, sorghum, and rice, usually in the sahel, are incorporated.
After the Sahara became a desert, it did not present a totally impenetrable barrier for travelers between north and south because of the application of animal husbandry towards carrying water, food, and supplies across the desert.
Dishes include braai (barbecue meat), sadza, bogobe, pap (fermented cornmeal), milk products (buttermilk, yoghurt).
In the Middle Ages, several powerful Somali empires dominated the regional trade including the Ajuran Sultanate, which excelled in hydraulic engineering and fortress building, the Sultanate of Adal, whose General Ahmed Gurey was the first African commander in history to use cannon warfare on the continent during Adal's conquest of the Ethiopian Empire, and the Geledi Sultanate, whose military dominance forced governors of the Omani empire north of the city of Lamu to pay tribute to the Somali Sultan Ahmed Yusuf.
Of all new sources of oil, ⅓ are in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Digital television and pay for service are on the rise.
Widespread spicy hot fish cuisine is one of the differentiating aspects.
Athletes from Ethiopia and Kenya hold, save for two exceptions, all the men's outdoor records for Olympic distance events from 800m to the marathon.
Rugby is also popular in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Cornmeal is used to make ugali, a popular dish with different names.
Overall, aid, the private sector and non-OECD financiers between them exceed state spending.
Sub-Saharan music is polyrhythmic, usually consisting of multiple rhythms in one composition.
Access to the internet via cell phones is on the rise.
Although some recent writers suggest that ''H.
By 3 million years ago several australopithecine hominid species had developed throughout southern, eastern and central Africa.
On 1 January 1901, Nigeria became a British protectorate, part of the British Empire, the foremost world power at the time.
The development of tourism in this region has been identified as having the ability to create jobs and improve the economy.
Famous are the ruins at its old capital of Great Zimbabwe.
*Isoko mythology (Nigeria)
The second oldest abstract form of art and the oldest rock art is found in the Blombos Cave at the Cape in South Africa, dated 77,000 years.
These aspect of Sub-Saharan music has been transferred to the new world by enslaved Sub-Saharan Africans and can be seen in its influence on music forms as Samba, Jazz, Rhythm and Blues, Rock & Roll, Salsa, Reggae and Rap music.
During the 1950s and early 1960s, most Sub-Saharan African nations achieved independence from colonial rule.
Dance involves moving multiple body parts.
'''Sub-Saharan Africa''' is, geographically, the area of the continent of Africa that lies south of the Sahara desert.
Lastly, Sub-Saharan African art is visually abstract, instead of naturalistic.
Battling Siki the first world champion to come out of Sub-Saharan Africa.
The Confederation of African Rugby governs rugby games in the region.
Famous Sub-Saharan football stars include Emmanuel Adebayor, George Weah, Michael Essien, Didier Drogba, Kanu Nwankwo, Jay-Jay Okocha, Bruce Grobbelaar and Samuel Eto'o.
The imperial armies in Somalia alarmed the Dervish leader Mohammed Abdullah Hassan, who gathered Somali soldiers from across the Horn of Africa and began one of the longest anti-colonial wars known as the Somaliland Campaign.
Additionally, the African Union in July 2003 ratified the Maputo Protocol, which pledges to prohibit female genital mutilation (FGM).
Adire is a type of Yoruba cloth that is starch resistant.
Somalia, Djibouti, Comoros and Mauritania are geographically part of Sub-Saharan Africa, but are Arab states and a part of the Arab world.
The vast majority of languages of this family are tonal such as Yoruba, and Igbo, However, others such as Fulani and Wolof are not.
*Dinka mythology (South Sudan)
Barkcloth was also extensively used.
The Semitic branch was recorded as early as 2500&nbsp;BCE.
The several families lumped under the term Khoi-San include languages indigenous to Southern Africa and Tanzania, though some, such as the Khoi languages, appear to have moved to their current locations not long before the Bantu expansion.
This compares with 1% of GDP that is typical in industrialised countries, and 2–3% of GDP found in fast-growing emerging economies.
The private sector spending alone equals state capital expenditure, though the majority is focused on ICT infrastructure investments.
These early writings perhaps document the first wave of Bantu settlers to reach Southeast Africa during their migration.
Archeological finds in Central Africa provide evidence of human settlement that may date back over 100,000 years.
Broadband penetration outside of South Africa has been limited where it is exorbitantly expensive.
*Nilo-Saharan:&nbsp;(with other key actors of African or oil economy)
The Kingdom of Kongo existed from the Atlantic west to the Kwango river to the east.
Asian countries, notably China, India, and Japan, are playing an active role in power projects across the African continent.
**Kinyarwanda:&nbsp;12
Hausa is a lingua franca in West Africa (Niger, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Cameroon, and Chad).
Infrastructure investments contributed to Africa's growth, and increased investment is necessary to maintain growth and tackle poverty.
Aggressive moves by China, South Korea and Gulf states to buy vast tracts of agricultural land in Sub-Saharan Africa could soon be limited by a new global international protocol.
African countries below the Sahara are largely Christian, while those above the Sahara, in North Africa, are predominantly Muslim.
The most talented Sub-Saharan African football players find themselves courted and sought after by European leagues.
The area is located approximately  southwest of Lake Chad, and has been radiocarbon dated to the first millennium&nbsp;BCE.
Sub-Saharan African countries spent an average of 0.3% of their GDP on science and technology on in 2007.
In 2003 the Cricket World Cup was held in South Africa, first time it was held in Sub-Saharan Africa.
In 2010, Cameroon played in the World Cup for the sixth time, which is the current record for a Sub-Saharan team.
This system can be very difficult for outsiders to understand; however it is no less important.
The trans-saharan trade was in full motion by 500&nbsp;BCE with Carthage being a major economic force for its establishment.
Momentous achievements for Sub-Saharan African football.
The earliest Bantu inhabitants of the Southeast coast of Kenya and Tanzania encountered by these later Arab and Persian settlers have been variously identified with the trading settlements of Rhapta, Azania and Menouthias referenced in early Greek and Chinese writings from 50&nbsp;CE to 500&nbsp;CE, ultimately giving rise to the name for Tanzania.
Traditional Southern African cuisine surrounds meat.
*Yoruba mythology (Nigeria, Benin)
Dishes include ugali, sukumi wiki, and halva.
Training African technicians to use solar power is part of the China-Africa science and technology cooperation agreement signed by Chinese science minister Xu Guanhua and African counterparts during premier Wen Jiabao's visit to Ethiopia in December 2003.
*Lotuko mythology (South Sudan)
Many countries are affected by power shortages.
South Africa is a major exporter of manganese as well as Chromium.
During the early 1960s, the Southeast African nations achieved independence from colonial rule.
The Ndau in central Mozambique and the Shona mix hide with barkcloth and cotton cloth.
Sub-Saharan Africa boasts its own traditional  clothing style.
They slowly moved south, and the earliest ironworks in modern-day KwaZulu-Natal Province are believed to date from around 1050.
In some cases, 60% to 90% of the labor force are employed in agriculture.
Recently, there has been a trend to purchase large tracts of land in Sub-Sahara for agricultural use by developing countries.
One finds recipes that mixes fish and meat.
Biotechnology has been advocated to create high yield, pest and environmentally resistant crops in the hands of small farmers.
Egyptian was recorded as early as 3200&nbsp;BCE.
The small kingdom gained world fame during and after the Anglo-Zulu War.
In irrigation, SSA states represent almost all spending; in transport and energy a majority of investment is state spending; in ICT and water supply and sanitation, the private sector represents the majority of capital expenditure.
In Central Africa, the Kuba people developed raffia cloth from the raffia plant fibers.
According to the UN, it consists of all African countries that are fully or partially located south of the Sahara.
This has been described as an African brain drain.
Because of power shortages, the spread of television viewing has been limited.
This has made agricultural activity vulnerable to climate change and global warming.
The number of new HIV infections in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2011 was 25 percent less than the number in 2001.
The brain later grew in size, and ''H.
The common perception of Sub-Saharan African music is that it is rhythmic music centered around the drums.
Between 50,000 and 60,000 years ago, their expansion out of Africa launched the colonization of the planet by modern humans.
In ancient Somalia, city-states flourished such as Opone, Mosyllon and Malao that competed with the Sabaeans, Parthians and Axumites for the wealthy Indo&ndash;Greco&ndash;Roman trade.
According to the CIA, low global literacy rates are concentrated in Sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia and South Asia.
In Southern Africa one finds numerous uses of animal hide and skins for clothing.
The ruling dynasty centralised authority among the Lunda under the Mwata Yamyo or Mwaant Yaav.
The later Zagwe dynasty, established in the 12th century, built churches out of solid rock.
New World styles like Salsa, R&B/Rap, Reggae, and Zouk also have widespread popularity.
The Africa Cup of Nations is a competition of 16 national teams from various African countries held every two years.
South Africa and Zimbabwe have their own governing bodies.
They are principally spoken by Nilotic peoples and are also spoken in Sudan among the Fur, Masalit, Nubian and Zaghawa peoples and in West and Central Africa among the Songhai, Zarma and Kanuri.
By 10,000&nbsp;BCE, ''Homo sapiens'' had spread to all corners of the world.
Sub-Saharan Africa has been the focus of an intense race for oil by the West, China, India, and other emerging economies, even though it holds only 10% of proven oil reserves, less than the Middle East.
The tools were classed as Oldowan.
It is sometimes used to make dashiki and kufi.
Hydro Turbine Markets in Sub-Saharan Africa generated revenues of $120.0 million in 2007 and is estimated to reach $425.0 million.
The collecting of wild grains as source of food spread to Syria, parts of Turkey, and Iran by the eleventh millennium&nbsp;BCE.
