The oxygen in the air is sometimes kept a few percent less than atmospheric concentration to reduce fire danger.
''Tunny'' and its sister boat, , were the United States' first nuclear deterrent patrol submarines.
Large numbers of these submarines were built, with seventy-six completed before 1914.
A raised tower on top of a submarine accommodates the periscope and electronics masts, which can include radio, radar, electronic warfare, and other systems including the snorkel mast.
This external hull, which actually forms the shape of submarine, is called the outer hull (''casing'' in the Royal Navy) or light hull, as it does not have to withstand a pressure difference.
An  may have successfully operated at , though continuous operation at such depths would produce excessive stress on many submarine systems.
The submarine became a potentially viable weapon with the development of the Whitehead torpedo, the first practical self-propelled or 'locomotive' torpedo.
This design, visible in early submarines is sometimes called a "teardrop hull".
During the Cold War, the US and the Soviet Union maintained large submarine fleets that engaged in cat-and-mouse games.
Pumps can move water between the tanks, changing weight distribution and pointing the sub up or down.
The first tourist submarine was , which went in to service in 1964 at Expo64.
In 2011, the first class of female submarine officers graduated from Naval Submarine School's Submarine Officer Basic Course (SOBC) at the Naval Submarine Base New London.
The  accident in 1985 resulted in 10 fatalities and 49 other radiation injuries.
This was the first sinking by a submarine since World War II.
Previously there were fears that women were more at risk from a build-up of carbon dioxide in the submarine.
Inevitable minor deviations are resisted by stiffener rings, but even a one-inch (25&nbsp;mm) deviation from roundness results in over 30 percent decrease of maximal hydrostatic load and consequently dive depth.
A recent development is the deployment of so-called narco submarines by South American drug smugglers to evade law enforcement detection.
During the same war, the , a  on loan to Pakistan from the US, was sunk.
His 'mine ship' was an  long,  diameter torpedo propelled by compressed air, carrying an explosive warhead.
Modern deep-diving submarines derive from the bathyscaphe, which in turn evolved from the diving bell.
They range from small autonomous examples and one- or two-person vessels that operate for a few hours, to vessels that can remain submerged for six months—such as the Russian , the biggest submarines ever built.
Simply making the hull thicker increases the weight and requires reduction of onboard equipment weight, ultimately resulting in a ''bathyscaphe''.
The first electrically powered boats were built by James Franklin Waddington in England, Dupuy de Lôme and Gustave Zédé in France, and Isaac Peral in Spain.
In 1866, the first submarine that successfully dived, made a controlled underwater cruise and emerged to the surface again all by its own was the ''Sub Marine Explorer'' of the German American Julius H. Kroehl (in German, ''Kröhl''), which incorporated many technologies that are still essential to modern submarines.
The hydrostatic effect of variable ballast tanks is not the only way to control the submarine underwater.
The diesel or gasoline engine and the electric motor, separated by clutches, were initially on the same shaft driving the propeller.
In 1982 during the Falklands War, the Argentine cruiser  was sunk by the British submarine , the first sinking by a nuclear-powered submarine in war.
Waddington's ''Porpoise'' was similar in size to ''Resurgam'' and its propulsion system consisted of 45 accumulator cells with a capacity of 660 ampere hours each.
Germany is working on the torpedo tube-launched short-range IDAS missile, which can be used against ASW helicopters, as well as surface ships and coastal targets.
In September 2011, Colombian authorities seized a 16-meter-long submersible that could hold a crew of 5, costing about $2 million.
The US pioneered this concept in 1929, in the S-class submarines , , and .
The strategic mission of the SSM-N-8 and the P-5 was taken up by submarine-launched ballistic missile beginning with the US Navy's Polaris missile, and subsequently the Poseidon and Trident missiles.
By the end of the war, almost 3,000 Allied ships (175 warships, 2,825 merchantmen) had been sunk by U-boats.
Although the ''Gymnote'' project was terminated due to the vessel's limited range, its side hydroplanes became the standard for future submarine designs.
A submarine can have a variety of sensors, depending on its missions.
On 8 December 2011, British Defence Secretary Philip Hammond announced that the UK's ban on women in submarines was to be lifted from 2013.
The precise nature of this submarine is unclear, it may be possible that it resembled a bell towed by a boat.
ELF (Extremely Low Frequency) can reach a submarine at greater depths, but has a very low bandwidth and is generally used to call a submerged sub to a shallower depth where VLF signals can reach.
''Gymnote'' was also an electrically powered and fully functional military submarine.
Diesel-electric became the standard means of propulsion.
Most navies prohibited women from serving on submarines, even after they had been permitted to serve on surface warships.
Smaller, deep-diving and specialty submarines may deviate significantly from this traditional layout.
All surface ships, as well as surfaced submarines, are in a positively buoyant condition, weighing less than the volume of water they would displace if fully submerged.
Countries conducted many experiments on effective tactics and weapons for submarines, which led to their large impact in World War I.
Despite its benefits, the high cost of titanium construction led to the abandonment of titanium submarine construction as the Cold War ended.
One is VLF (Very Low Frequency) radio, which can reach a submarine either on the surface or submerged to a fairly shallow depth, usually less than .
High-strength alloy steel remains the primary material for submarines today, with  depths, which cannot be exceeded on a military submarine without design compromises.
The  long craft was designed for a crew of two, performed dives of  and remained underwater for two hours.
All hull parts must be welded without defects, and all joints are checked multiple times with different methods, contributing to the high cost of modern submarines.
It has produced several types of titanium submarines.
The French submarine ''Aigrette'' in 1904 further improved the concept by using a diesel rather than a gasoline engine for surface power.
The facility was used in both World Wars.
His design used leather bags that could fill with water to submerge the craft.
Submarines are also used in tourism, and for undersea archaeology.
Today, pregnant women are still not allowed to serve on submarines in Sweden.
A similar system is sometimes used to maintain stability.
The first air–independent and combustion–powered submarine was ''Ictineo II'', designed by the Catalan intellectual, artist and engineer Narcís Monturiol.
One or more diesel engines could be shut down for maintenance while the submarine continued to run on the remaining engine or battery power.
Nordenfelt then built ''Nordenfelt II'' () in 1886 and ''Nordenfelt III'' (''Abdül Mecid'') in 1887, a pair of  submarines with twin torpedo tubes, for the Ottoman navy.
Submarines could usually locate and attack other submarines only on the surface, although  managed to sink  with a four torpedo spread while both were submerged.
To increase combat endurance most World War I submarines functioned as submersible gunboats, using their deck guns against unarmed targets, and diving to escape and engage enemy warships.
Keeping a constant depth requires continual operation of either the depth control tanks or control surfaces.
Since then, the conn has been located within the hull of the submarine, and the tower is now called the "sail".
A typical nuclear submarine has a crew of over 80; conventional boats typically have fewer than 40.
Submarines also carry radar equipment to detect surface ships and aircraft.
A '''submarine''' is a watercraft capable of independent operation underwater.
These were coupled in series to a motor driving a propeller at about 750 rpm, giving the ship a sustained speed of  for at least 8 hours.
A burst transmission takes only a fraction of a second, minimizing a submarine's risk of detection.
Notably Sweden uses Stirling technology on the  and s. The Stirling engine is heated by burning diesel fuel with liquid oxygen from cryogenic tanks.
A machine that uses a catalyst to convert carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide (removed by the CO2 scrubber) and bonds hydrogen produced from the ship's storage battery with oxygen in the atmosphere to produce water, is also used.
It takes specialized technology to find and attack modern submarines.
It differs from a submersible, which has more limited underwater capability.
Before and during World War II, the primary role of the submarine was anti-surface ship warfare.
(For example, each  attack submarine costs US$2.6 billion, over US$200,000 per ton of displacement.)
During World War II the Germans experimented with the idea of the ''schnorchel'' (snorkel) from captured Dutch submarines, but didn't see the need for them until rather late in the war.
Although experimental submarines had been built before, submarine design took off during the 19th century, and they were adopted by several navies.
In a typical operation a surface vessel carries passengers to an offshore operating area and loads them into the submarine.
The first was ''Nordenfelt I'', a 56-tonne,  vessel similar to Garret's ill-fated ''Resurgam'' (1879), with a range of , armed with a single torpedo, in 1885.
X-1 was later converted to use diesel-electric drive.
Nordenfelt's efforts culminated in 1887 with ''Nordenfelt IV'', which had twin motors and twin torpedoes.
Additionally, more senior ranking and experienced female supply officers from the surface warfare specialty attended SOBC as well, proceeding to fleet Ballistic Missile (SSBN) and Guided Missile (SSGN) submarines along with the new female submarine line officers beginning in late 2011.
Among these is the only documented instance of a submarine sinking another submarine while both were submerged.
The dive depth cannot be increased easily.
The crew can use Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment to abandon the submarine.
Deep–diving civilian submarines have used thick acrylic pressure hulls.
Trash on modern large submarines is usually disposed of using a tube called a Trash Disposal Unit (TDU), where it is compacted into a galvanized steel can.
Diesel electric propulsion became the dominant power system and equipment such as the periscope became standardized.
A newer development in air-independent propulsion is hydrogen fuel cells, first used on the German Type 212 submarine, with nine 34&nbsp;kW or two 120&nbsp;kW cells and soon to be used in the new Spanish s.
It has been used since WWII by surface ships, submarines and aircraft (via dropped buoys and helicopter "dipping" arrays), but it reveals the emitter's position, and is susceptible to counter-measures.
Submarines would attack either on the surface, using deck guns or submerged, using torpedoes.
In 1578, the English mathematician William Bourne recorded in his book ''Inventions or Devises'' one of the first plans for an underwater navigation vehicle.
Although the U-boats had been updated in the interwar years, the major innovation was improved communications, encrypted using the famous Enigma cipher machine.
As early as World War I, it was realized that the optimal shape for withstanding pressure conflicted with the optimal shape for seakeeping and minimal drag, and construction difficulties further complicated the problem.
Operating a submarine is dangerous, even in peacetime, and many submarines have been lost in accidents.
In his autobiography of 1651, Constantijn Huygens reports about Drebbel's first submarine excursion:
The  reactor accident in 1968 resulted in 9 fatalities and 83 other injuries.
It was far from a perfect solution, however.
It was propelled by means of oars.
An alternative escape means is via a Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle that can dock onto the disabled submarine.
However, in the novel the ''Red October'' did not use MHD, but rather something more similar to the above-mentioned pump-jet.
The periscope—a retractable tube with a prism system that provides a view of the surface—is only used occasionally in modern submarines, since the visibility range is short.
Women have served on US Navy surface ships since 1993, and , began serving on submarines for the first time.
During World War I more than 5,000 Allied ships were sunk by U-boats.
It was the first verified submarine capable of independent underwater operation and movement, and the first to use screws for propulsion.
The Imperial Japanese Navy operated the most varied fleet of submarines of any navy, including ''Kaiten'' crewed torpedoes, midget submarines ( and es), medium-range submarines, purpose-built supply submarines and long-range fleet submarines.
By the mid-18th century, over a dozen patents for submarines/submersible boats had been granted in England.
Minelaying submarines of World War I and World War II were specially built for that purpose.
The conn is distinct from the "bridge", a small open platform in the top of the sail, used for observation during surface operation.
The importance of guns encouraged the development of the unsuccessful Submarine Cruiser such as the French  and the Royal Navy's  and M-class submarines.
These masts must still be deployed above the surface, and use electronic sensors for visible light, infrared, laser range-finding, and electromagnetic surveillance.
The human eye cannot detect sunlight below about  underwater, so high intensity lights are used to illuminate the viewing area.
This change in density incompletely compensates for hull compression, so buoyancy decreases as depth increases.
Seventy-four British submarines were lost, the majority, 42, in the Mediterranean.
A submerged submarine is in an unstable equilibrium, having a tendency to either sink or float to the surface.
In 1749, the Gentlemen's Magazine reported that a similar design had initially been proposed by Giovanni Borelli in 1680.
It was originally powered by a hydrogen peroxide/diesel engine and battery system until an explosion of her hydrogen peroxide supply on 20 May 1957.
The towed array is the mainstay of NATO submarine detection systems, as it reduces the flow noise heard by operators.
Periscopes are rarely used, except for position fixes and to verify a contact's identity.
These types of submarines were first used during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–05.
The first submersible of whose construction there exists reliable information was designed and built in 1620 by Cornelius Drebbel, a Dutchman in the service of James I of England.
Others followed suit including the Swedish Navy (1989), the Royal Australian Navy (1998), the German Navy (2001) and the Canadian Navy (2002).
Germany went further with the Type XXI, a general predecessor of modern submarines, in which the pressure hull was fully enclosed inside the light hull, but optimized for submerged navigation, unlike earlier designs that were optimized for surface operation.
Many other Soviet subs, such as  (the first Soviet nuclear submarine, and the first Soviet sub to reach the North Pole) were badly damaged by fire or radiation leaks.
In modern submarines, this structure is the "sail" in American usage, and "fin" in European usage.
No other navy adopted the system before 1945, apart from the Royal Navy's U-class submarines, though some submarines of the Imperial Japanese Navy used separate diesel generators for low speed running.
The first military submarine was the ''Turtle'' (1775), a hand-powered acorn-shaped device designed by the American David Bushnell to accommodate a single person.
With the arrival of Anti-submarine warfare (ASW) aircraft, guns became more for defense than attack.
Submarines were first widely used during World War I (1914–1918), and now figure in many navies large and small.
A "conning tower" was a feature of earlier designs: a separate pressure hull above the main body of the boat that allowed the use of shorter periscopes.
More submersibles than true submarines, U-boats operated primarily on the surface using regular engines, submerging occasionally to attack under battery power.
Double hulls are being considered for future submarines in the United States to improve payload capacity, stealth and range.
Launched in Barcelona in 1864, it was originally human-powered, but in 1867 Monturiol invented an air–independent engine to power it underwater.
Submarines could carry cargo through hostile waters or act as supply vessels for other submarines.
WWI submarines had hulls of carbon steel, with a  maximum depth.
In August 1914, a flotilla of ten U-boats sailed from their base in Heligoland to attack Royal Navy warships in the North Sea in the first submarine war patrol in history.
However, the policymakers thought that it was discriminatory with a general ban and demanded that females should be tried on their individual merits and have their suitability evaluated and compared to other candidates.
Greece, fearful of the return of the Ottomans, purchased it.
For general submersion or surfacing, submarines use the forward and aft tanks, called Main Ballast Tanks (MBT), which are filled with water to submerge or with air to surface.
Active systems are rarely used, as doing so reveals the sub's presence.
His invention is essentially the same now as it was 140 years ago.
At the outbreak of war Germany had only 20 submarines immediately available for combat, although these included vessels of the diesel-engined U-19 class with the range (5,000 miles) and speed (eight knots) to operate effectively around the entire British coast.
Titanium can be stronger than steel, lighter, and is not ferromagnetic, important for stealth.
To submerge hydrostatically, a ship must have negative buoyancy, either by increasing its own weight or decreasing its displacement of water.
Since the limitations of the propulsion systems of early submarines forced them to operate surfaced most of the time, their hull designs were a compromise.
While U-boats destroyed a significant number of ships, the strategy ultimately failed.
They still have light hull sections in the bow and stern, which house main ballast tanks and provide a hydrodynamically optimized shape, but the main cylindrical hull section has only a single plating layer.
With nuclear power or air-independent propulsion, submarines can remain submerged for months at a time.
Water density also marginally increases with depth, as the salinity and pressure are higher.
A concealed military submarine is a real threat, and because of its stealth, can force an enemy navy to waste resources searching large areas of ocean and protecting ships against attack.
The occupied pressure hulls of deep diving submarines such as  are spherical instead of cylindrical.
To exceed that limit, a few submarines were built with titanium hulls.
The submarine then visits underwater points of interest such as natural or artificial reef structures.
It is needed because surfaced submarines have limited freeboard, that is, they lie low in the water.
Fresh water is produced by either an evaporator or a reverse osmosis unit.
An ice plug is set on top of the ball valve to protect it, the cans atop the ice plug.
The onboard systems indicated a depth of , although this was later revised to  and more accurate measurements made in 1995 have found the Challenger Deep slightly shallower, at .
Water from showers and sinks is stored separately in "grey water" tanks and discharged overboard using drain pumps.
The first mechanically driven submarine was the 1863 French , which used compressed air for propulsion.
A mechanism was used to twist the water out of the bags and cause the boat to resurface.
Both the US and British navies operate nuclear-powered submarines that deploy for periods of six months or longer.
The Submarine Voyage ride opened at Disneyland in 1959, but although it ran under water it was not a true submarine, as it ran on tracks and was open to the atmosphere.
Submarines were also used for inserting and removing covert agents and military forces, for intelligence gathering, and to rescue aircrew during air attacks on islands, where the airmen would be told of safe places to crash-land so the submarines could rescue them.
Such missiles required the submarine to surface to fire its missiles.
The first production submarines with this system were the ''Porpoise''-class of the 1930s, and it was used on most subsequent US diesel submarines through the 1960s.
American and most other Western submarines switched to a primarily single-hull approach.
Although they occasionally deploy true submarines, most are self-propelled semi-submersibles, where a portion of the craft remains above water at all times.
The  and s use photonics masts rather than hull-penetrating optical periscopes.
Its major operating areas were around Norway, in the Mediterranean (against the Axis supply routes to North Africa), and in the Far East.
The Spanish ''Peral'' was launched in 1888, and had three  Schwarzkopf torpedoes and one torpedo tube in the bow, new air systems, hull shape, propeller, and cruciform external controls anticipating later designs.
Speed was limited to , lest the device snap from stress.
Anaerobic propulsion was first employed by the Spanish ''Ictineo II'' in 1864, which used a solution of zinc, manganese dioxide, and potassium chlorate to generate sufficient heat to power a steam engine, while also providing oxygen for the crew.
The ''schnorchel'' also had the effect of making the boat essentially noisy and deaf in sonar terms.
The US Navy, French Navy, and the British Royal Navy operate only nuclear submarines, which is explained by the need for distant operations.
The boat was armed with two externally mounted torpedoes as well as a mine torpedo that could be detonated electrically.
Modern submarines are built with an emphasis on stealth.
The US lost two nuclear submarines during this time:  due to equipment failure during a test dive while at its operational limit, and  due to unknown causes.
A submarine also has the option of floating a long, buoyant wire antenna to a shallower depth, allowing VLF transmissions by a deeply submerged boat.
After WWII, with the development of the homing torpedo, better sonar systems, and nuclear propulsion, submarines also became able to hunt each other effectively.
A number of nations built and used submarines.
The first launch of a cruise missile (SSM-N-8 Regulus) from a submarine occurred in July 1953, from the deck of , a World War II fleet boat modified to carry the missile with a nuclear warhead.
Titanium does not flex as readily as steel, and may become brittle during many dive cycles.
Further, they noted that a female complying with such high demands is unlikely to become pregnant.
Finally, Allied radar eventually became sufficiently advanced that the ''schnorchel'' mast could be detected beyond visual range.
To control their displacement, submarines have ballast tanks, which can hold varying amounts of water and air.
In the 1950s, nuclear power partially replaced diesel-electric propulsion.
This allowed for mass-attack naval tactics (''Rudeltaktik'', commonly known as "wolfpack"), but was also ultimately the U-boats' downfall.
Civilian uses for submarines include marine science, salvage, exploration and facility inspection and maintenance.
When the Japanese attacked Hawaii in December 1941, 111 boats were in commission; 203 submarines from the , , and es were commissioned during the war.
This was solved either by a compromise shape, or by using two hulls; internal for holding pressure, and external for optimal shape.
Although the design had been purchased entire from the US company, the actual design used was an untested improvement to the original Holland design using a new 180&nbsp;hp petrol engine.
''Abdül Hamid'' became the first submarine in history to fire a torpedo submerged.
Ballistic missiles can also be fired from a submarine's torpedo tubes, for example missiles such as the anti-submarine SUBROC.
The device had a speed of  and it could hit a target  away.
With internal volume as limited as ever and the desire to carry heavier warloads, the idea of the external launch tube was revived, usually for encapsulated missiles, with such tubes being placed between the internal pressure and outer streamlined hulls.
In 2009, senior officials, including then-Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus, Joint Chief of Staff Admiral Michael Mullen, and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Gary Roughead, began the process of finding a way to implement females on submarines.
Additionally, diesel-electric transmissions were more compact.
Late in World War II, when technology allowed faster and longer submerged operation and increased aircraft surveillance forced submarines to stay submerged, hull designs became teardrop shaped again to reduce drag and noise.
After two years of trials the project was scrapped by naval officials who cited, among other reasons, concerns over its limited range.
The clutch between the motor and the engine would be disengaged when the submarine dived, so that the motor could drive the propeller.
The Soviet Union lost at least four submarines during this period:  was lost in 1968 (a part of which the CIA retrieved from the ocean floor with the Howard Hughes-designed ship ''Glomar Explorer''),  in 1970,  in 1986, and  in 1989 (which held a depth record among military submarines—1000&nbsp;m).
