Levittown developed as a major prototype of mass-produced housing.
The suburban population in North America exploded during the post-World War II economic expansion.
Contrastingly, U.S. shows – such as ''Knots Landing'', ''Desperate Housewives'' and ''Weeds'' – portray the suburbs as concealing darker secrets behind a façade of perfectly manicured lawns, friendly people, and beautifully up-kept houses.
The earliest appearance of suburbs coincided with the spread of the first urban settlements.
These subdivisions are often segregated by minute differences in home value, creating entire communities where family incomes and demographics are almost completely homogeneous..
However, there are more affluent neighborhoods, more comparable to American suburbs, particularly east of the FNB Stadium.
New Towns such as Tin Shui Wai may gain notoriety as a slum.
The suburb attracted the talents of architects including Raymond Unwin and Sir Edwin Lutyens, and it ultimately grew to encompass over 800 acres.
In some cases, suburbanites saw self-government as a means to keep out people who could not afford the added suburban property maintenance costs not needed in city living.
These suburban residences are built on larger lots of land than in the central city.
In the U.S., 1950 was the first year that more people lived in suburbs than elsewhere.
The majority of recent population growth in Canada's three largest metropolitan areas (Greater Toronto, Greater Montreal, and Greater Vancouver) has occurred in non-core municipalities, although this trend has already reversed itself in Toronto, where a building boom has begun to take place.
* A greater percentage of whites and lesser percentage of citizens of other ethnic groups than in urban areas.
In an illustrative case of South Africa, RDP housing has been built.
During the fifties and the sixties, French singer-songwriter Léo Ferré evokes in his songs popular and proletarian suburbs of Paris, to oppose them to the city, considered by comparison as a bourgeois and conservative place.
Houses are made in many different architectural styles which may be of European, American and International architecture and which vary in size.
Suburban houses also brought about needs for products that were not needed in urban neighborhoods, such as lawnmowers and automobiles.
The 2010 album ''The Suburbs'' by the Canadian-based alternative band Arcade Fire dealt with aspects of growing up in suburbia, suggesting aimlessness, apathy and endless rushing are ingrained into the suburban culture and mentality.
In China, the term suburb is new, although suburbs are already being constructed rapidly.
Land use patterns in Canadian suburbs are often more mixed-use.
Because all traffic is forced onto these roads, they are often heavy with traffic all day.
Unlike other railway companies, which were required to dispose of surplus land, the Met was allowed to retain such land that it believed was necessary for future railway use.
The terms ''inner suburb'' and ''outer suburb'' are used to differentiate between the higher-density suburbs in proximity to the city center, and the lower-density suburbs on the outskirts of the urban area.
In certain areas such as Klang, Subang Jaya and Petaling Jaya, suburbs form the core of these places.
* A greater percentage of one-story administrative buildings than in urban areas.
In many parts of the developed world, suburbs can be economically distressed areas, inhabited by higher proportions of recent immigrants, with higher delinquency rates and social problems.
For example, the lot size for a residence in Chicago is usually  deep, while the width can vary from  wide for a row house to  wide for a large stand–alone house.
If a traffic crash occurs on a collector road, or if road construction inhibits the flow, then the entire road system may be rendered useless until the blockage is cleared.
* Lower densities than central cities, dominated by single-family homes on small plots of land – anywhere from 0.1 acres and up – surrounded at close quarters by very similar dwellings.
Although the semi-detached house was first designed by the Shaws (a father and son architectural partnership) in the 19th century, it was during the suburban housing boom of the interwar period that the design first proliferated as a suburban icon, being preferred by middle class home owners to the smaller terraced houses.
In the United States and Canada, ''suburb'' can refer either to an outlying residential area of a city or town or to a separate municipality or unincorporated area outside a town or city.
Suburban systems of the sprawl type are also quite inefficient for cyclists or pedestrians, as the direct route is usually not available for them either.
The goal is to "build sustainable communities" rather than housing estates.
The Committee's report of 1917 was taken up by the government, which passed the Housing, Town Planning, &c. Act 1919, also known as the Addison Act after Dr. Christopher Addison, the then Minister for Housing.
These suburbs also serve as major housing areas and commuter towns.
The first recorded usage of the term in English, according to the ''Oxford English Dictionary'', was made by John Wycliffe in 1380, where the form ''subarbis'' was used.
There are often high- or mid-rise developments interspersed with low-rise housing tracts and in many suburban areas, there are numerous slab-style residential highrises that were constructed in the 1970s and onward.
This is due to annexation and large geographic footprint within the city borders.
Improved sprawl systems, though retaining the car detours, possess cycle paths and footpaths connecting across the arms of the sprawl system, allowing a more direct route while still keeping the cars out of the residential and side streets.
* Compared to rural areas, suburbs usually have greater population density, higher standards of living, more complex road systems, more franchised stores and restaurants, and less farmland and wildlife.
In general, they have lower population densities than inner city neighborhoods within a metropolitan area, and most residents commute to central cities or other business districts; however, there are many exceptions, including industrial suburbs, planned communities, and satellite cities.
Many major city downtowns (such as Downtown Miami, Downtown Detroit, Center City Philadelphia or Downtown Los Angeles) are experiencing a renewal, with large population growth, residential apartment construction, and increased social, cultural, and infrastructural investments.
Canada is an urbanized nation where over 80% of the population live in urban areas (loosely defined), and roughly two-thirds live in one of Canada's 33 census metropolitan areas (CMAs) with a population of over 100,000.
An example in the developed world would be the ''banlieues'' of France, or the concrete suburbs of Sweden, even if the suburbs of these countries also include middle-class and upper-class neighborhoods that often consist of single-family houses.
Thus some of the suburbs of most of the developed world are comparable to several inner cities of the U.S. and Canada.
In 1912, it was suggested that a specially formed company should take over from the Surplus Lands Committee and develop suburban estates near the railway.
As the growth of middle-class and upper-class suburbs increased, low-class squatter areas have increased, most notably "lost cities" in Mexico, campamentos in Chile, barriadas in Peru, villa miserias in Argentina, asentamientos in Guatemala and favelas of Brazil.
During the 1930s, over 4 million new suburban houses were built, the 'suburban revolution' had made England the most heavily suburbanized country in the world, by a considerable margin.
The American photojournalist Bill Owens documented the culture of suburbia in the 1970s, most notably in his book ''Suburbia''.
Sometimes the notion of suburb may even refer to people in real misery, who are kept at the limit of the city borders for economic, social, and sometimes ethnic reasons.
As populations grew during the Early Modern Period in Europe, urban towns swelled with a steady influx of people from the countryside.
Suburbs, in this sense, can range from areas that seem more like residential areas of a city proper to areas separated by open countryside from the city centre.
Economic growth in the United States encouraged the suburbanization of American cities that required massive investments for the new infrastructure and homes.
This promoted the land served by the Met for the walker, visitor and later the house-hunter.
Zoning laws also contributed to the location of residential areas outside of the city center by creating wide areas or "zones" where only residential buildings were permitted.
Houses like these are called Cape Dutch Houses and can be found in the affluent suburbs of Constantia and Bishopscourt.
In the suburbs, where stand–alone houses are the rule, lots may be  wide by  deep, as in the Chicago suburb of Naperville.
Better public transit, proximity to work and cultural attractions, and frustration with suburban life and gridlock have attracted young Americans to the city centers.
In Cape Town there is a distinct European style which is due to the European influence during the mid-1600s when the Dutch conquered the area.
Today more companies settle down in suburbs because of low property costs.
In the UK, the government is seeking to impose minimum densities on newly approved housing schemes in parts of South East England.
It tells the story of a raccoon, turtle, a squirrel, and their friends who come to terms with their woodlands being taken over by suburbia, trying to survive the increasing flow of humanity and technology while becoming enticed by it at the same time.
Toward the end of the century, with the development of public transit systems such as the underground railways, trams and buses, it became possible for the majority of the city's population to reside outside the city and to commute into the center for work.
This encourages car trips even for distances as low as several hundreds of yards or meters (which may have become up to several miles or kilometers due to the road network).
The Metropolitan Railway, for example, was active in building and promoting its own housing estates in the north-west of London, consisting mostly of detached houses on large plots, which it then marketed as "Metro-land".
Suburbs in America have a prevalence of usually detached single-family homes.
A film adaptation of Over the Hedge was produced in 2006.
In rural areas in both countries, their equivalents are called localities (see suburbs and localities).
Large walled towns tended to be the focus around which smaller villages grew up in a symbiotic relationship with the market town.
Lomas de Chapultepec is an example of an affluent suburb, although it is located inside the city and by no means is today a suburb in the strict sense of the word.
A '''suburb''' is a residential area or a mixed use area, either existing as part of a city or urban area or as a separate residential community within commuting distance of a city.
In the U.S, the development of the skyscraper and the sharp inflation of downtown real estate prices also led to downtowns being more fully dedicated to businesses, thus pushing residents outside the city center.
* A road network designed to conform to a hierarchy, including culs-de-sac, leading to larger residential streets, in turn leading to large collector roads, in place of the grid pattern common to most central cities and pre-World War II suburbs.
Manufacturing and commercial buildings were segregated in other areas of the city.
Consumer patterns were also shifting at this time, as purchasing power was becoming stronger and more accessible to a wider range of families.
Within just a decade suburbs dramatically increased in size.
''Suburb The Musical,'' was written by Robert S. Cohen and David Javerbaum.
Many suburbs are based on a heterogeneous society of working-class and minority residents, many of whom want to own their own house.
In Mexico, suburbs are generally similar to their United States counterparts.
This trend is also beginning to take effect in Vancouver, and to a lesser extent, Montreal.
The first garden suburb was developed through the efforts of social reformer Henrietta Barnett and her husband; inspired by Ebenezer Howard and the model housing development movement (then exemplified by Letchworth garden city), as well as the desire to protect part of Hampstead Heath from development, they established trusts in 1904 which bought 243 acres of land along the newly opened Northern line extension to Golders Green and created the Hampstead Garden Suburb.
Suburbanisation in the interwar period was heavily influenced by the garden city movement of Ebenezer Howard and the creation of the first garden suburbs at the turn of the 20th century.
Due to the rapid migration of the rural poor to the industrialising cities of England in the late 18th century, a trend in the opposite direction began to develop; - newly rich members of the middle classes began to purchase estates and villas on the outskirts of London.
In certain cities, particularly Edmonton and Calgary, suburban growth takes place within the city boundaries as opposed to in bedroom communities.
The Australian and New Zealand usage came about as outer areas were quickly surrounded in fast-growing cities, but retained the appellation ''suburb''; the term was eventually applied to the original core as well.
Cleveland, Ohio is typical of many American central cities; its municipal borders have changed little since 1922, even though the Cleveland urbanized area has grown many times over.
This trend accelerated through the 19th century, especially in cities like London and Manchester that were experiencing tremendous growth, and the first suburban districts sprung up around the city centre to accommodate those who wanted to escape the squalid conditions of the industrial town.
The growth in the use of trains, and later automobiles and highways, increased the ease with which workers could have a job in the city while commuting in from the suburbs.
They are characterized by:
In most English-speaking regions, suburban areas are defined in contrast to central or inner city areas, but in Australian English, "suburb" has become largely synonymous with what is called a "neighborhood" in other countries and the term extends to inner city areas.
The peripheral areas on the outskirts of the city were generally inhabited by the very poorest.
However, of this metropolitan population, in 2001 nearly half lived in low-density neighborhoods, with only one in five living in a typical "urban" neighborhood.
In part, this was a response to the shocking lack of fitness amongst many recruits during World War One, attributed to poor living conditions; a belief summed up in a housing poster of the period "you cannot expect to get an A1 population out of C3 homes" - referring to military fitness classifications of the period.
Boston and New York spawned the first suburbs.
Federal subsidies for suburban development accelerated this process as did the practice of redlining by banks and other lending institutions.
In the United Kingdom and in Ireland, ''suburb'' merely refers to a residential area outside the city centre, regardless of administrative boundaries.
Terraced houses, semi-detached houses and shophouses are common concepts in suburbs.
However, commercial concerns tend to delay the opening of services until a large number of residents have occupied the new neighbourhood.
In the 20th century, many suburban areas began to see independence from the central city as an asset.
Often, Canadian suburbs are less automobile-centred and public transit use is encouraged but can be notably unused.
Only the traffic ''within'' the short streets themselves is less.
Mary Corbin Sies argues that it is necessary to examine how "suburb" is defined as well as the distinction made between cities and suburbs, geography, economic circumstances, and the interaction of numerous factors that move research beyond acceptance of stereotyping and its influence on scholarly assumptions.
Their arrival in Northern cities en masse, in addition to being followed by race riots in several large cities such as Detroit, Chicago, Washington, D.C., and Philadelphia, further stimulated white suburban migration.
Suburbs first emerged on a large scale in the 19th and 20th centuries as a result of improved rail and road transport, which led to an increase in commuting.
In Hong Kong, however, suburbs are mostly government-planned new towns containing numerous public housing estates.
In some cities such as Miami and San Francisco, the main city is much smaller than the surrounding suburban areas, leaving the city proper with a small portion of the metro area's population and land area.
Many people have assumed that early-20th-century suburbs were enclaves for middle-class whites, a concept that carries tremendous cultural influence yet is actually stereotypical.
The term "Metro-land" was coined by the Met's marketing department in 1915 when the ''Guide to the Extension Line'' became the ''Metro-land'' guide, priced at 1d.
No metropolitan area in the world was as well served by railroad commuter lines at the turn of the twentieth century as New York, and it was the rail lines to Westchester from the Grand Central Terminal commuter hub that enabled its development.
This practice gave rise to the term "bedroom community", meaning that most daytime business activity took place in the city, with the working population leaving the city at night for the purpose of going home to sleep.
The streetcar lines in Boston and the rail lines into Manhattan made daily commutes possible.
Suburbs tend to proliferate around cities that have an abundance of adjacent flat land.
The traditional "grown" grid, in turn, allows for a larger number of choices and alternate routes.
However, World War I delayed these plans and it was only in 1919, with expectation of a postwar housing boom, that Metropolitan Railway Country Estates Limited (MRCE) was formed.
At the same time, African Americans were rapidly moving north for better jobs and educational opportunities than were available to them in the segregated South.
Alongside suburbanization, many companies began locating their offices and other facilities in the outer areas of the cities, which resulted in the increased density of older suburbs and the growth of lower density suburbs even further from city centers.
Population and income growth in Canadian suburbs had tended to outpace growth in core urban or rural areas, but in many areas this trend has now reversed.
The growth of the suburbs was facilitated by the development of zoning laws, redlining and numerous innovations in transport.
The dream promoted was of a modern home in beautiful countryside with a fast railway service to central London.
Films such as ''The 'Burbs'', ''Disturbia'' and ''Hot Fuzz'', have brought this theme to the cinema.
By 2010 suburbs increasingly gained people in racial minority groups, as many members of minority groups became better educated, more affluent, and sought more favorable living conditions compared to inner city areas; many white Americans also moved back to city centers.
In the United Kingdom, as mentioned above, railways stimulated the first mass exodus to the suburbs.
In Japan, the construction of suburbs has boomed since the end of World War II and many cities are experiencing the urban sprawl effect.
In large cities such as London, suburbs include formerly separate towns and villages that have been gradually absorbed during a city's growth and expansion, such as Ealing or Bromley.
British television series such as ''The Good Life'', ''Butterflies'' and ''The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin'' have depicted suburbia as well-manicured but relentlessly boring, and its residents as either overly conforming or prone to going stir crazy.
Compared to the American counterpart, Canadian suburbs are more dense (mostly in major cities), with the Toronto suburb of Mississauga itself being Canada's 6th largest city.
The suburban population increased 87% between 1981 and 2001, well ahead of urban growth.
In the suburban system, most trips from one component to another component requires that cars enter a collector road, no matter how short or long the distance is.
Single family suburban homes tend to be similar to their Western equivalents; although primarily outside Beijing and Shanghai, also mimic Spanish and Italian architecture.
In much of Soweto, many houses are American in appearance, but are smaller, and often consist of a kitchen and living room, two or three bedrooms, and a bathroom.
A major catalyst in suburban growth came from the opening of the Metropolitan Railway in the 1860s.
The word 'suburbani' was first used by the Roman statesman Cicero in reference to the large villas and estates built by the wealthy patricians of Rome on the city's outskirts.
This act is intended to manage growth in Toronto's suburbs, including Pickering and Ajax, Markham, Richmond Hill, Thornhill, Vaughan, Bolton/Caledon, Brampton, Mississauga, and Oakville, among others.
During the First World War the Tudor Walters Committee was commissioned to make recommendations for the post war reconstruction and housebuilding.
The locality of Olympic Park was designated an official suburb in 2009.
In the rest of Latin America, the situation is similar to that of Mexico, with many suburbs being built, most notably in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, which have experienced a boom in the construction of suburbs since the late 1970s and early 80s.
The Act allowed for the building of large new housing estates in the suburbs after the First World War, and marked the start of a long 20th century tradition of state-owned housing, which would later evolve into council estates.
Some social reformers attempted to combine the best of both concepts in the garden city movement.
Inner suburbs, such as Te Aro in Wellington, Mt Eden in Auckland, Prahran in Melbourne and Ultimo in Sydney, are usually characterised by higher density apartment housing and greater integration between commercial and residential areas.
This is compounded by the hierarchy of streets, where entire neighborhoods and subdivisions are dependent on one or two collector roads.
According to struggling cities, this will help bring in a substantial revenue for the city which is a great way to tax the people who make the most use of the highways and repairs.
* Shopping malls and strip malls behind large parking lots instead of a classic downtown shopping district.
* Zoning patterns that separate residential and commercial development, as well as different intensities and densities of development.
In some areas, such as Australia, China, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and a few U.S. states, new suburbs are routinely annexed by adjacent cities.
In Australia and New Zealand, suburbs have become formalised as geographic subdivisions of a city and are used by postal services in addressing.
However, other new towns also contain private housing estates and low density developments for the upper classes.
By 1915, people from across London had flocked to live the new suburban dream in large newly built areas across North West London.
Harrow Weald went from just 1,500 to over 10,000 while Pinner jumped from 3,000 to over 20,000.
Those singers give a sunny festive, almost bucolic, image of the suburbs, yet still few urbanized.
In the illustrative case of Rome, Italy, in the 1920s and 1930s, suburbs were intentionally created ''ex novo'' in order to give lower classes a destination, in consideration of the actual and foreseen massive arrival of poor people from other areas of the country.
During this time commercial shopping malls were being developed near suburbs to satisfy consumers' needs and their car–dependent lifestyle.
In the older cities of the northeast U.S., streetcar suburbs originally developed along train or trolley lines that could shuttle workers into and out of city centers where the jobs were located.
Initially, the surplus land was managed by the Land Committee, and, from the 1880s, the land was developed and sold to domestic buyers in places like Willesden Park Estate, Cecil Park, near Pinner and at Wembley Park.
In Canada, densities are generally slightly higher than in Australia, but below typical European values.
In Australia, Sydney's urban sprawl has occurred predominantly in the Western Suburbs.
Suburbs typically have longer travel times to work than traditional neighborhoods.
Returning veterans wishing to start a settled life moved in masses to the suburbs.
This is due to three factors: almost-mandatory automobile ownership due to poor suburban bus systems, longer travel distances and the hierarchy system, which is less efficient at distributing traffic than the traditional grid of streets.
An alternative strategy is the deliberate design of "new towns" and the protection of green belts around cities.
Westchester's true importance in the history of American suburbanization derives from the upper-middle class development of villages including Scarsdale, New Rochelle and Rye serving thousands of businessmen and executives from Manhattan.
In Africa, since the beginning of the 1990s, the development of middle-class suburbs boomed.
Suburbs can be found in Guadalajara, Mexico City, Monterrey, and most major cities.
The term 'middle suburbs' is also used.
Harrow was reached in 1880, and the line eventually extended as far as  in Buckinghamshire, more than  from Baker Street and the centre of London.
* Subdivisions carved from previously rural land into multiple-home developments built by a single real estate company.
In Malaysia, suburbs are common, especially in areas surrounding the Klang Valley, which is the largest conurbation in the country.
According to ''Governing, Cities and Localities'' section More commonly, central cities seek ways to tax nonresidents working downtown – known as commuter taxes – as property tax bases dwindle.
MRCE went on to develop estates at Kingsbury Garden Village near Neasden, Wembley Park, Cecil Park and Grange Estate at Pinner and the Cedars Estate at Rickmansworth and create places such as Harrow Garden Village.
Due to the industrialization of many African countries, particularly in cities such as Cairo, Johannesburg and Lagos, the middle class has grown.
In Russia, the term suburb refers to high-rise residential apartments which usually consist of two bedrooms, one bathroom, a kitchen and a living room.
Daily needs are not within walking distance of most homes.
French songs like ''La Zone'' by Fréhel (1933), ''Aux quatre coins de la banlieue'' by Damia (1936), ''Ma banlieue'' by Reda Caire (1937), or ''Banlieue'' by Robert Lamoureux (1953), evoke the suburbs of Paris explicitly since the 1930s.
Throughout Canada, especially in Toronto and Vancouver, there are comprehensive plans in place to curb sprawl, such as Ontario's Places to Grow act.
These suburbs, however are usually not in poor neighborhoods, unlike the banlieuees.
Suburbs are also evident in other smaller conurbations including Ipoh, Johor Bahru, Kota Kinabalu, Kuching, Alor Setar and Penang.
On the other hand, the expected huge expansion of the town soon effectively covered the distance from the central town, and now those suburbs are completely engulfed by the main territory of the town.
The history of suburbia is part of the study of urban history, which focuses on the origins, growth, diverse typologies, culture, and politics of suburbs, as well as on the gendered and family-oriented nature of suburban space.
In some places, nearby settlements were swallowed up as the main city expanded.
In others, such as Arabia, Canada, France, and much of the United States, many suburbs remain separate municipalities or are governed as part of a larger local government area such as a county.
Other newer suburbs (called exurbs) were created at a further distance from them.
This trope was also used in the episode of ''The X-Files'' "Arcadia" and on one level of the video game ''Psychonauts''.
After World War II availability of FHA loans stimulated a housing boom in American suburbs.
The Report also legislated on the required, minimum standards necessary for further suburban construction; this included regulation on the maximum housing density and their arrangement and it even made recommendations on the ideal number of bedrooms and other rooms per house.
Also new town developments are extremely common.
Over the Hedge is a syndicated comic strip written and drawn by Michael Fry and T. Lewis.
However, Black suburbanization grew between 1970 and 1980 by 2.6% as a result of central city neighborhoods expanding into older neighborhoods vacated by whites.
The percentage living in low-density neighborhoods varied from a high of nearly two-thirds of Calgary CMA residents (67%), to a low of about one-third of Montreal CMA residents (34%).
Chinese suburbs mostly consist of rows upon rows of apartment blocks and condos that end abruptly into the countryside.
The English word is derived from the Old French ''subburbe'', which is in turn derived from the Latin ''suburbium'', formed from ''sub'' (meaning "under" or "below") and ''urbs'' ("city").
Several layers of suburban municipalities now surround cities like Boston, Cleveland, Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, Dallas, Denver, Fort Worth, Houston, New York City, San Francisco, Sacramento, Atlanta, Miami, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Washington, D.C..
Taken together, these two groups of taxpayers represent a largely untapped source of potential revenue that cities may begin to target more aggressively, particularly if they're struggling.
The line joined the capital's financial heart in the City to what were to become the suburbs of Middlesex.
The design of many of these houses, highly characteristic of the era, was heavily influenced by the Art Deco movement, taking influence from Tudor Revival, chalet style, and even ship design.
French cinema was although soon interested in urban changes in the suburbs, with such movies as ''Mon oncle'' by Jacques Tati (1958), ''L'Amour existe'' by Maurice Pialat (1961) or ''Two or Three Things I Know About Her'' by Jean-Luc Godard (1967).
In his one-act opera ''Trouble in Tahiti'' (1952), Leonard Bernstein skewers American suburbia, which produces misery instead of happiness.
Many critics have seen in this development pattern (which was circularly distributed in every direction) also a quick solution to a problem of public order (keeping the unwelcome poorest classes together with the criminals, in this way better controlled, comfortably remote from the elegant "official" town).
The 1962 song "Little Boxes" by Malvina Reynolds lampoons the development of suburbia and its perceived bourgeois and conformist values, while the 1982 song ''Subdivisions'' by the Canadian band Rush also discusses suburbia, as does Rocking the Suburbs by Ben Folds.
By the mid-19th century, the first major suburban areas were springing up around London as the city (then the largest in the world) became more overcrowded and unsanitary.
The latter one has been turned into a satellite city of Kuala Lumpur.
Published annually until 1932, the last full year of independence for the Met, the guide extolled the benefits of "The good air of the Chilterns", using language such as "Each lover of Metroland may well have his own favourite wood beech and coppice&nbsp;— all tremulous green loveliness in Spring and russet and gold in October".
