In the 2000s, several car audio manufacturers have produced subwoofers using non-circular shapes from manufacturers including Boston Acoustic, Kicker, Sony, Bazooka, and X-Tant.
Intersonics was nominated for a TEC Award for its Servo Drive Loudspeaker (SDL) design in 1986 and for the Bass Tech 7 model in 1990.
As well, critics have claimed that the bass shaker itself can rattle during loud sound effects, which can distract the listener.
Bass guitar players who may use subwoofer cabinets include performers who play with extended range basses that include a low "B" string (about 31&nbsp;Hz); bassists who play in styles where a very powerful sub-bass response is an important part of the sound (e.g., funk, Latin, gospel, R & B, etc.
Such delay shading can be used to virtually reshape a loudspeaker array.
Some car audio enthusiasts compete to produce very high sound pressure levels in the confines of their vehicle's cabin; sometimes dangerously high.
On the smaller end of the spectrum, subwoofer drivers as small as 4" (10&nbsp;cm) may be used.
This feature allows high power operation for extended periods of time.
An example of a subwoofer that uses a bass horn is the Bassmaxx B-Two, which loads an 18" (45&nbsp;cm) driver onto an  long folded horn.
Unfortunately, high excursion, at high power levels, tends to produce more distortion from inherent mechanical and magnetic effects in electro-dynamic drivers (the most common sort).
Starting in 1983, THX certification of the cinema sound experience quantified the parameters of good audio for watching films, including requirements for subwoofer performance levels and enough isolation from outside sounds so that noise did not interfere with the listening experience.
Some also include user-adjustable equalization that allows boosted or reduced output at particular frequencies; these vary from a simple "boost" switch, to fully parametric equalizers meant for detailed speaker and room correction.
More Sensurround systems were assembled and installed.
A large dance club may have a row of four or five twin 18-inch (45&nbsp;cm) subwoofer cabinets, or more).
It is not possible, in most circumstances, to fit such large drivers and enclosures into doors or dashboards, so subwoofers are installed in the trunk or back seat space.
* Sd to the cone area of the sub woofer (in m2).
The typical frequency range for a subwoofer is about 20–200&nbsp;Hz for consumer products, below 100&nbsp;Hz for professional live sound, and below 80&nbsp;Hz in THX-approved systems.
For owners of 33&nbsp;rpm LPs and 45&nbsp;singles, loud ''and'' deep bass was limited by the ability of the phonograph record stylus to track the groove.
Equalization is often unable to achieve flat frequency response at all listening locations in part because of the resonance (i.e., standing wave) patterns at low frequencies in nearly all rooms.
The designers assert that the floor mouths of the horns are additionally loaded acoustically by a vertical wooden horn expansion and the room's ceiling to create a 10&nbsp;Hz "full power" wave at the listening position.
Consumer applications (as in home use) are considerably less demanding due to much smaller listening space and lower playback levels.
With the advent of the compact cassette and the compact disc in the 1980s, the easy reproduction of deep ''and'' loud bass was no longer limited by the ability of a phonograph record stylus to track a groove, and producers could add more low frequency content to recordings.
Particularly among low cost "Home Theater in a Box" systems and with "boom boxes", however, inclusion of a subwoofer may be little more than a marketing device.
Still unfinished, the vehicle was entered in an SPL competition in 1997 at which a complaint was lodged against the computer control of the DC motor.
Another of the early subwoofers was developed during the late 1960s by Ken Kreisel, the former president of the Miller & Kreisel Sound Corporation in Los Angeles.
Instead of using the controller, two leads were touched together in the hope that the motor speed was set correctly.
Some such systems are even supplied with a calibrated microphone to measure the subwoofer's in-room response, so the automatic equalizer can correct the combination of subwoofer, subwoofer location, and room response to minimize effects of room modes and improve low frequency performance.
Automobiles are not well suited for the "hidden" subwoofer approach due to space limitations in the passenger compartments.
With varying measures upon which to base claims, several subwoofers have been said to be the world's largest, loudest or lowest.
A diesel generator is housed within the enclosure to supply electricity when external power is unavailable.
A single  diameter subwoofer driver was designed by Richard Clark and David Navone with the help of Dr. Eugene Patronis of the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Small subwoofer drivers in the 4" range are typically used in small computer speaker systems and compact home theatre subwoofer cabinets.
The crossover section may also include a high-pass "infrasonic" or "subsonic" filter which prevents the subwoofer driver from attempting to reproduce frequencies below its safe capabilities.
The Matterhorn is a subwoofer model completed in March 2007 by Danley Sound Labs in Gainesville, Georgia after a U.S. military request for a loudspeaker that could project infrasonic waves over a distance.
Each enclosure type has advantages and disadvantages in efficiency increase, bass extension, cabinet size, distortion, and cost.
Another cardioid subwoofer array pattern can be used horizontally, one which takes few channels of processing and no change in required physical space.
Further design modifications were made by Kreisel over the next ten years, and in the 1970s and 1980s by engineer John P. D'Arcy; record producer Daniel Levitin served as a consultant and "golden ears" for the design of the crossover network (used to partition the frequency spectrum so that the subwoofer would not attempt to reproduce frequencies too high for its effective range, and so that the main speakers would not need to handle frequencies too low for their effective range).
A subwoofer does not necessarily provide superior bass performance in comparison to large conventional loudspeakers on ordinary music recordings due to the typical lack of very low frequency content on such sources.
Top SPL cars are not able to play normal music, or perhaps even to drive normally as they are designed solely for competition.
Many multimedia "subwoofers" might better be termed "bass drivers" as they are too small to produce deep bass.
High sound levels can cause hearing loss and tinnitus if one is exposed to them for an extended period of time.
This helped provide guidelines for multiplex cinema owners who wanted to isolate each individual cinema from its neighbors, even as louder subwoofers were making isolation more difficult.
The arrival time of sound energy from all the subwoofers is near-simultaneous from the audience's perspective, but is canceled out to a large degree behind the subwoofers because of offset sound wave arrival times.
The positional technique of end-fire subwoofers came into widespread use in European live concert sound in 2006.
However, there are recordings with substantial low frequency content that most conventional loudspeakers are ill-equipped to handle without the help of a subwoofer, especially at high playback levels, such as music for pipe organs with 32' (9.75 meter) bass pipes (16&nbsp;Hz), very large bass drums on symphony orchestra recordings and electronic music with extremely low synth bass parts, such as bass tests or bass songs.
Specific cinema subwoofer models appeared from JBL, Electro-Voice, Eastern Acoustic Works, Kintek, Meyer Sound Laboratories and BGW Systems in the early 1990s.
Therefore, a decrease in box volume (i.e.
Touring subwoofer cabinets are typically designed with features that facilitate moving the enclosure (e.g., wheels, a "towel bar" handle and recessed handles), a protective grill for the speaker (in direct radiating-style cabinets), metal or plastic protection for the cabinets to protect the finish as the cabinets are being slid one on top of another, and hardware to facilitate stacking the cabinets (e.g., interlocking corners) and for "flying" the cabinets from stage rigging.
Sixteen enclosures in four rows were used in 2007 at one of the stages of the Ultra Music Festival, to reduce low frequency interference to neighboring stages.
Just as some electric guitarists add huge stacks of guitar cabinets mainly for show, some bassists will add immense subwoofer cabinets with 18" woofers mainly for show, and the extension sub cabinets will be operated at a lower volume than the main bass cabinets.
* Vd stands for volume of displacement (in m3)
'Passive subwoofers' have a subwoofer driver and enclosure, but they do not include an amplifier.
Similarly the F3 of a speaker is proportional to Fs:
The subwoofer was reviewed positively in ''Stereophile'' magazine's Winter 1968 issue as the SS-1 by Infinity.
Subwoofers received a great deal of publicity in 1974 with the movie ''Earthquake'' which was released in Sensurround.
An important factor in the "square sub vs round sub" argument is the effects of the enclosure used.
Touring subwoofers are typically built from 18–20&nbsp;mm thick void-free Baltic birch (Betula pendula or Betula pubescens) plywood from Finland, Estonia or Russia; such plywood affords greater strength for frequently transported enclosures.
This simplifies the signal sent to the subwoofers and makes for greater clarity and low punch.
This method reduces forward output relative to a tight-packed, flat-fronted array of subwoofers, but can solve problems of unwanted low frequency energy coming into microphones on stage.
Powerful noise energy and loud rumbling in the range of 17&nbsp;Hz to 120&nbsp;Hz was generated at the level of 110–120 decibels of sound pressure level, abbreviated dB(SPL).
With the popular introduction of the compact cassette and the CD, it became possible to add more low frequency content to recordings, and satisfy a larger number of consumers.
Each subwoofer is driven by eight 18-inch subwoofer drivers with  voice coils.
The first use of a subwoofer in a recording session was in 1973 for mixing the Steely Dan album ''Pretzel Logic'' when recording engineer Roger Nichols arranged for Kreisel to bring a prototype of his subwoofer to Village Recorders.
In addition, many amplifiers include an adjustable low-pass filter, which prevents undesired higher frequencies from reaching the subwoofer driver.
Deep low frequency extension is a common goal for a subwoofer and small box volumes are also considered desirable, to save space and reduce the size for ease of transportation (in the case of sound reinforcement and DJ subwoofers).
Higher upper limits for the subwoofer (e.g., 125&nbsp;Hz) are much more easily localized, making a single subwoofer impractical.
Such a system receives its signal from the main mono or stereo mixing console mix bus and amplifies all frequencies together in the desired balance.
They connect to an amplifier like a normal subwoofer.
The subwoofer has a flat frequency response from 15 to 80&nbsp;Hz, and is down 3&nbsp;dB at 12&nbsp;Hz.
The typical frequency range for a subwoofer is between 20–200&nbsp;Hz.
The driver was mounted in a stepvan owned by Tim Maynor but was too powerful for the amount of applied reinforcement and damaged the vehicle.
The output pattern suffers from comb-filtering off-axis, but can be further shaped by adjusting the frequency response of each row of subwoofers.
Several concert sound subwoofer manufacturers suggest that their subs can be used for bass instrument amplification.
They can be attached to a large flat surface (for instance a floor or platform) to create a large low frequency conduction area, although the transmission of low frequencies through the feet is not as efficient as the seat.
Specifications of frequency response depend wholly for relevance on an accompanying amplitude value—measurements taken with a wider amplitude tolerance will give any loudspeaker a wider frequency response.
Passive subwoofers have a subwoofer driver and enclosure and they are powered by an external amplifier.
Some users add a subwoofer because high levels of low bass are desired, even beyond what is in the original recording, as in the case of house music enthusiasts.
Mere use of the term "subwoofer" is no guarantee of good or extended bass performance.
The most common subwoofer driver sizes used for sound reinforcement in nightclubs, raves and pop/rock concerts are 10", 12", 15" and 18" models (25&nbsp;cm, 30&nbsp;cm, 40&nbsp;cm, and 45&nbsp;cm respectively).
In situations of limited mounting space they provide a greater cone area and assuming all other variables are constant, greater maximum output.
After the introduction of Sensurround, movie theater owners began installing permanent subwoofer systems.
As well, during the 1990s, DVDs were increasingly recorded with "surround sound" processes that included a Low-frequency effects (LFE) channel, which could be heard using the subwoofer in home theater systems.
The "SPL wars" have drawn much attention to subwoofers in general, but subjective competitions in sound quality ("SQ") have not gained equivalent popularity.
For example, the JBL 4688 TCB Subwoofer System, a now-discontinued system which was designed for movie theaters, had a frequency response of 23–350&nbsp;Hz when measured within a 10-decibel boundary (0&nbsp;dB to -10&nbsp;dB) and a narrower frequency response of 28–120&nbsp;Hz when measured within a six-decibel boundary (±3&nbsp;dB).
Subwoofers use speaker drivers (woofers) typically between 8" (20&nbsp;cm) and 21" (53&nbsp;cm) in diameter.
However, in some cases, performers wish to have extended sub-bass response that is not available from standard instrument speaker enclosures, so they use subwoofer cabinets.
The Jackhammer has been featured on the reality TV show ''Pimp My Ride''.
Some subwoofer enclosure designs rely on drivers facing to the sides or to the rear in order to achieve a degree of directionality.
* xmax to the amount of linear excursion the speaker is mechanically capable of (in m)
The usual source of the feedback signal is a few turns of voice coil attached to the cone or a microchip-based accelerometer placed on the cone itself.
This means that a person choosing a subwoofer needs to consider more than just the lowest pitch that the sub can reproduce.
Meyer Sound suggests that its 650-R2 Concert Series Subwoofer, a  enclosure with two 18-inch drivers (45&nbsp;cm), can be used for bass instrument amplification.
Nevertheless, even though the Abyss subwoofer can go down to 18&nbsp;Hz, its lowest frequency and maximum SPL with a limit of 10% distortion is 35.5&nbsp;Hz and 79.8&nbsp;dB at 2 meters.
The number of subwoofer enclosures used in a concert depends on a number of factors, including the size of the venue, whether it is indoors or outdoors, the amount of low-frequency content in the band's sound, the desired volume of the concert, and the design and construction of the enclosures (e.g., direct-radiating versus horn-loaded.
For example, if a listener's main speakers are usable down to 80&nbsp;Hz, then the subwoofer filter can be set so the subwoofer only works below 80.
The heaviest production subwoofer intended for use in automobiles is the MTX Jackhammer by MTX Audio, which features a  diameter cone.
The Octavium was utilized by several recording artists of that era, most notably the Grateful Dead, bassist Monk Montgomery, bassist Nathan East, and the Pointer Sisters.
In 1992, Dolby Digital's six-channel film sound format incorporated a single LFE channel, the "point one" in 5.1 surround sound.
The subwoofer phase can still be changed by moving the subwoofer closer to or further from the listening position, however this may not be always practical.
The Concept Design 60-inch was not shown in public after 1998.
Subwoofers can be flown or stacked on the ground near the stage.
The frequency response specification of a speaker describes the range of frequencies or musical tones a speaker can reproduce, measured in hertz (Hz).
Subwoofers are now almost universal in professional sound applications such as live concert sound, churches, nightclubs, and theme parks.
In September 1964, Raymon Dones, of El Cerrito, California, received a US Patent (numbered US3150739) which was the first patent for a subwoofer specifically designed to omni-directionally augment the low frequency range of modern stereo systems.
Drivers as small as 10" (25&nbsp;cm) are occasionally used, generally in horn loaded enclosures.
Folded horn-type subwoofers can typically produce a deeper range with greater efficiency than the same driver in an enclosure that lacks a horn.
The drive shaft broke after one positive stroke which created an interior pressure wave of 162&nbsp;dB.
Subwoofers vary in terms of the range of pitches that they can reproduce, depending on a number of factors such as the size of the cabinet and the construction and design of the enclosure and driver(s).
It is unlikely that a small woofer in an inexpensively-built compact plastic cabinet will have better bass performance than well-designed conventional (and typically larger) speakers in a plywood or MDF cabinet.
By the 2000s, subwoofers became almost universal in sound reinforcement systems in nightclubs and concert venues.
Unlike a typical subwoofer driver, which produces audible vibrations, tactile transducers produce low-frequency vibrations that are designed to be felt by individuals who are touching the transducer or indirectly through a piece of furniture or a wooden floor.
Some models have a metal-reinforced hole in which a speaker stand can be mounted for full-range cabinets.
In 1981, Altec introduced a dedicated cinema subwoofer model tuned to around 20&nbsp;Hz: the 8182.
While performers who use concert sound subwoofers for onstage monitoring may like the powerful sub-bass sound that they get onstage, sound engineers may find the use of large subwoofers (e.g., two 18" drivers (45&nbsp;cm)) for onstage instrument monitoring to be problematic, because it may interfere with the "Front of House" sub-bass sound.
Dolby Stereo 70 mm Six Track was a six channel film sound format introduced in 1976 that used two subwoofer channels for stereo reproduction of low frequencies.
Phase controls allow the listener to change the arrival time of the subwoofer sound waves relative to the same frequencies from the main speakers (i.e., at and around the crossover point to the subwoofer).
The first subwoofers were developed in the 1960s to add bass response to home stereo systems.
An advantage of a well-implemented servo subwoofer design is reduced distortion making smaller enclosure sizes possible.
The horn-loaded subwoofers each have a floor mouth that is , and a horn length that is , in a cavity  under the floor of the listening room.
Subwoofers also vary in regard to the sound pressure levels achievable and the distortion levels they can produce over their range.
It was capable of generating 5–20&nbsp;Hz sine waves at various DC motor speeds—not as a response to audio signal—it could not play music.
To keep low frequency sound focused on the audience area and not on the stage, and to keep low frequencies from bothering people outside of the event space, a variety of techniques have been developed in concert sound to turn the naturally omnidirectional radiation of subwoofers into a more directional pattern.
Active subwoofers include a built-in amplifier.
This helps reduce the amount of low frequency sound bouncing off the ceiling indoors and assists in mitigating external noise complaints outdoors.
The manufacturer claims that 53 13-ply 18&nbsp;mm  sheets of plywood were used in its construction, though one of the fabricators wrote that double-thickness 26-ply sheets were used for convenience.
Another early subwoofer enclosure made for home and studio use was the separate bass speaker for the Servo Statik 1 designed by New Technology Enterprises.
Since a regular electric bass has a low "E" (41&nbsp;Hz) as its lowest note, most standard bass guitar cabinets are only designed with a range that goes down to about 40&nbsp;Hz.
The cone diameter was  and was held in place with a  surround.
In the 2000s, many small-to mid-size subwoofers designed for  bands' live sound use and DJ applications are "powered subs"; that is, they have an integrated power amplifier.
When Kreisel's business partner, Jonas Miller, who owned a high-end audio store in Los Angeles, told Kreisel that some purchasers of the store's high-end electrostatic speakers had complained about a lack of bass response in the electrostatics, Kreisel designed a powered woofer that would reproduce only those frequencies that were too low for the electrostatic speakers to convey.
The intention in a system with a subwoofer is often to use small main speakers (of which there are two for stereo and five or more for surround sound or movie tracks) and to hide the subwoofer elsewhere (e.g.
Since large drivers require undesirably large cabinets, most subwoofer drivers have large excursions.
This is possible since low bass frequencies have a long wavelength; hence there is little difference between the information reaching a listener's left and right ears, and so they cannot be readily localized.
Other films to use the effect include the WW II naval battle epic ''Midway'' in 1976 and ''Rollercoaster'' in 1977.
Movie theatres certified to the THX standard for playback always include high capability subwoofers.
Hofmans's Iron Law (the efficiency of a woofer system is directly proportional to its cabinet volume and to the cube of its cutoff frequency) applies to subwoofers just as to all loudspeakers.
There can be more than 50 double-18-inch (45&nbsp;cm) cabinets in a typical concert system.
Just as consumer subwoofer enclosures can be made of Medium-density fibreboard (MDF), Oriented strand board (OSB), plywood, plastic or other dense material, professional subwoofer enclosures can be built from the same materials.
Deep bass speakers were once an exotic commodity owned by audiophiles.
Subwoofer output level can be increased by increasing cone surface area or by increasing cone excursion.
Instead of being incorporated into a full-range system, concert subwoofers can be supplied with their own signal from a separate mix bus on the mixing console; often one of the auxiliary sends ("aux" or "auxes") is used.
Subwoofers are made up of one or more woofers mounted in a loudspeaker enclosure—often made of wood—capable of withstanding air pressure while resisting deformation.
The Jackhammer has been known to take upwards of 6000 watts sent to a dual voice coil moving within a  strontium ferrite magnet.
Instead, using only a single 20 amp electrical circuit for safety, visitors were allowed to step inside the horn of the subwoofer for an "acoustic massage" as the fractionally powered Matterhorn reproduced low level 10–15&nbsp;Hz waves.
A long line of subwoofers placed horizontally along the front edge of the stage can be delayed such that the center subs fire several milliseconds prior to the ones flanking them, which fire several milliseconds prior to ''their'' neighbors, continuing in this fashion until the last subwoofers are reached at the outside ends of the subwoofer row (beamforming).
Some uncommon subwoofers use larger drivers, and single prototype subwoofers as large as 60" (152&nbsp;cm) have been fabricated.
Thus, subwoofers may be part of a package that includes satellite speakers, may be purchased separately, or may be built into the same cabinet as a conventional speaker system.
The physically separate subwoofer/satellite arrangement has been popularized by multimedia speaker systems such as Bose Acoustimass Home Entertainment Systems, Polk Audio RM2008 Series and Klipsch Audio Technologies ProMedia, among many others.
These are generally used with third-party power amplifiers, taking their inputs from active crossovers earlier in the signal chain.
This method is often called "cardioid subwoofer array" or "CSA" even though the pattern of ''all'' directional subwoofer methods is cardioid.
Subwoofers came into greater popular consciousness in the 1970s with the introduction of Sensurround in movies such as ''Earthquake'', which produced loud low-frequency sounds through large subwoofers.
A similar effect can be achieved with the delay control on many home theater receivers.
In the largest stadium venues, there may be a very large number of subwoofer enclosures.
The end-fire array trades a few decibels of output power for directionality, so it requires more enclosures for the same output power as a tight-packed, flat-fronted array of enclosures.
The largest available sound reinforcement subwoofers, 21" (53&nbsp;cm) drivers, are less commonly seen.
Designers of active subwoofers sometimes include a degree of corrective equalization to compensate for known performance issues (e.g., a steeper than desired low end roll-off rate).
For home cinema or video game use, bass shakers help the user avoid disturbing others in nearby apartments or rooms, because even powerful sound effects such as explosion sounds in a war video game or the simulated rumbling of an earthquake in an adventure film will not be heard by others.
The Octavium speaker and Dones' subwoofer technology was also utilized, in a few select theaters, to reproduce low pitch frequencies for the 1974 blockbuster movie "Earthquake".
Subwoofers are intended to augment the low frequency range of loudspeakers covering higher frequency bands.
Otherwise, a mono subwoofer channel can be derived within the crossover from a stereo mix, depending on the crossover make and model.
It was built in 1997, driven by DC motors connected to a rotary crankshaft somewhat like in a piston engine.
A second method of rear delay array combines end-fire topology with polarity reversal, using two subwoofers positioned front to back, the drivers spaced one-quarter wavelength apart, the rear enclosure inverted in polarity and delayed by a few milliseconds for maximum cancellation on stage of the target frequency.
Where the variables are Thiele/Small parameters.
This combination of factors accounts for the higher amplifier power required to drive subwoofers, and the requirement for greater power handling for subwoofer drivers.
The effect spans a range of slightly more than one octave.
However, some critics argue that the felt vibrations are disconnected from the auditory experience, and they claim that that music is less satisfying with the "butt shaker" than sound effects.
This can be done with separate subwoofer enclosures positioned front to back with a spacing between them of one-quarter wavelength of the target frequency, the frequency that is least wanted on stage or most desired in the audience.
Changing the relative phase of the subwoofer with respect to the woofers in other speakers may or may not help to minimize unwanted destructive acoustic interference in the frequency region covered by both subwoofer and main speakers.
Frequencies which are sufficiently low are not easily localized by humans, hence many stereo and multichannel audio systems feature only one subwoofer channel and a single subwoofer can be placed off-center without affecting the perceived sound stage, since the sound produced will be difficult to localize.
Another subwoofer claimed to be the world's biggest is a custom installation in Italy made by Royal Device primarily of bricks, concrete and sound-deadening material consisting of two subwoofers embedded in the foundation of a listening room.
In a sealed enclosure, the maximum displacement is determined by
Multiple subwoofers can manage a flatter general response since they can often be arranged to excite room modes more evenly than a single subwoofer, allowing equalization to be more effective.
In 1968, the two found outside investors and reorganized as Infinity.
End-fire drivers can be positioned within a single enclosure that houses more than one driver.
They are attached to a seat, for instance a drummer's stool ("throne") or gamer's chair, car seat or home theater seating, and the vibrations of the driver are transmitted to the body then to the ear in a manner similar to bone conduction.
The Jackhammer weighs in at  and has an aluminum heat sink.
Servo controlled subwoofers are not the same as Servodrive subwoofers whose primary mechanism of sound reproduction avoids the normal voice coil and magnet combination in favor of a high-speed belt-driven servomotor.
By the mid-1990s, they were much more popular and widely used,  with different sizes and capabilities of sound output.
The end-fire subwoofer method, also called "forward steered arrays", places subwoofer drivers co-axially in one or more rows, using destructive interference to reduce emissions to the sides and rear.
These are some of the Thiele/Small parameters which can either be measured or found with the driver specifications.
This helps the drummer in a rock music band to monitor his or her kick drum performance without filling the stage with powerful, loud low frequency sound from a 15" (40&nbsp;cm) subwoofer monitor and an amplifier, which can "leak" into other drum mics and lower the quality of the sound mix.
These models typically have a built-in crossover.
In professional concert sound system design, subwoofers can be incorporated seamlessly with the main speakers into a stereo or mono full-range system by using an active crossover.
Tactile transducers have recently emerged as a device class, called variously "bass shakers", "butt shakers" and "throne shakers".
These techniques include setting up subwoofers in a vertical array; using combinations of delay and polarity inversion; and setting up a delay-shaded system.
For greatest efficiency and best coupling to the room's air volume, subwoofers can be placed in a corner of the room, far from large room openings, and closer to the listener.
If the main sound system is stereo, the subwoofers can also be in stereo.
Tom Horral, a Boston-based acoustician, blames complaints about modern movies being too loud on subwoofers.
The advantage of tactile transducers used for low frequencies is that they allow a listening environment that is not filled with loud low frequency waves.
This configuration is called "aux-fed subwoofers", and has been observed to significantly reduce low frequency "muddiness" that can build up in a concert sound system which has on stage a number of microphones each picking up low frequencies and each having different phase relationships of those low frequencies.
Some experimental fixed-installation subwoofer horns have been constructed using brick and concrete to produce a very long horn that allows a very deep sub-bass extension.
This method has the least output power directed toward the audience, compared to other directional methods.
Designed as a prototype in 1966 by physicist Arnold Nudell and airline pilot Cary Christie in Nudell's garage, the design used a second winding around a custom Cerwin Vega 18-inch (45&nbsp;cm) driver to provide servo control information to the amplifier, and it was offered for sale at $1795, some 40% more expensive than any other complete loudspeaker listed at ''Stereo Review''.
Not naturally weatherproof, Baltic birch is coated with carpet, thick paint or spray-on truck bedliner to give the subwoofer enclosures greater durability.
It can generate a constant 15&nbsp;Hz sine wave tone at 140&nbsp;dB for 24 hours a day, seven days a week with extremely low harmonic distortion.
Infinity's full range electrostatic speaker system that was developed during the 1960s also used a woofer to cover the lower frequency range that its electrostatic arrays did not handle adequately.
This is usually due to poor crossover designs or choices (too high crossover point or insufficient crossover slope) used in many computer and home theater systems; localization also comes from port noise and from typically large amounts of harmonic distortion in the subwoofer design.
MDF is commonly used to construct subwoofers for permanent installations as its density is relatively high and weatherproofing is not a concern.
Phase control circuits may be a simple polarity reversal switch or a more complex continuously variable circuits.
Some systems use parametric equalization in an attempt to correct for room frequency response irregularities.
