Sudan is a party to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.
Even though most of the international organizations are substantially concentrated in both South Sudan and Darfur region, some of them are working in the northern part as well.
After the collapse of the Kushite empire several states emerged in its former territories, among them Nubia.
Although technically the Vali of Egypt under the Ottoman Empire, Muhammad Ali styled himself as Khedive of a virtually independent Egypt.
Since 2003, the foreign relations of Sudan had centered on the support for ending the Second Sudanese Civil War and condemnation of government support for militias in the war in Darfur.
Sudan has extensive economic relations with China.
For much of the 1990s, Uganda, Kenya and Ethiopia formed an ad-hoc alliance called the "Front Line States" with support from the United States to check the influence of the National Islamic Front government.
Rich mineral resources are available in Sudan including asbestos, chromite, cobalt, copper, gold, granite, gypsum, iron, kaolin, lead, manganese, mica, natural gas, nickel, petroleum, silver, tin, uranium and zinc.
The most linguistically diverse region in the country is the Nuba Hills area in Kordofan, inhabited by speakers of multiple language families, with Darfur and other border regions being second.
However, commodity prices declined throughout the 1970s causing economic problems for Sudan.
This process was furthered both by the spread of Islam and an emigration to Sudan of ethnic Arabs from the Arabian Peninsula, and their intermarriage with the Arabized indigenous peoples of the country.
In the east are the Red Sea Hills.
Today's northern Sudanese culture often combines Nubian and Arabic elements.
The failure of the Egyptian invasion broke the spell of the Ansar's invincibility.
In 1821, the Ottoman ruler of Egypt, Muhammad Ali, had invaded and conquered northern Sudan.
Egypt became an Assyrian colony; however, king Tantamani, after succeeding Taharqa, made a final determined attempt to regain Egypt.
Tewfik's corruption and mismanagement resulted in the ‘Urabi Revolt, which threatened the Khedive's survival.
Its dimensions make it the largest contemporary hydropower project in Africa.
Herbert Kitchener led military campaigns against the Mahdist Sudan from 1896 to 1898.
The British were keen to reverse the process, started under Muhammad Ali Pasha, of uniting the Nile Valley under Egyptian leadership, and sought to frustrate all efforts aimed at further uniting the two countries.
At the 2011 division which split off South Sudan, over 97% of the population in the remaining Sudan adheres to Islam.
The main purpose of the dam will be the generation of electricity.
Sudan's Personal Status law on marriage has been criticized for restricting women's rights and allowing child marriage.
Merowe is a city about  downstream from the dam's construction site.
The country also sells Sudan small arms, which have been used in military operations such as the conflicts in Darfur and South Kordofan.
At the same time, debt servicing costs, from the money spent mechanizing agriculture, rose.
There is also concern over soil erosion.
Until the early 1970s, Sudan's agricultural output was mostly dedicated to internal consumption.
Muslims who convert to Christianity can face the death penalty for apostasy, see Persecution of Christians in Sudan and the death sentence against Mariam Yahia Ibrahim Ishag (who actually was raised as Christian).
For example, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization is successfully operating in Khartoum, the capital.
Since the Darfur crisis in 2004, safe-keeping the central government from the armed resistance and rebellion of paramilitary rebel groups such as the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), the Sudanese Liberation Army (SLA) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) have been important priorities.
The United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) was established under the UN Security Council Resolution 1590 to support its implementation.
Sudan has 597 groups that speak over 400 different languages and dialects.
The Sudanese Government supported anti-Ugandan rebel groups such as the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the bicameral parliament—the National Legislature, with its National Assembly (lower chamber) and the Council of States (upper chamber).
The economy of Sudan has been steadily growing over the 2000s, and according to a World Bank report the overall growth in GDP in 2010 was 5.2 percent compared to 2009 growth of 4.2 percent.
After consolidating his power, Abdallahi ibn Muhammad assumed the title of ''Khalifa'' (successor) of the Mahdi, instituted an administration, and appointed Ansar (who were usually Baqqara) as emirs over each of the several provinces.
During the 1990s, Hassan al-Turabi, then Speaker of the National Assembly, reached out to Islamic fundamentalist groups, invited Osama bin Laden to the country.
Before the 2000 presidential election, al-Turabi introduced a bill to reduce the President's powers, prompting al-Bashir to dissolve parliament and declare a state of emergency.
Production has since recovered to hover around ) for 2014-15.
Its predominant religion is Islam.
When al-Turabi urged a boycott of the President's re-election campaign and signed an agreement with Sudan People's Liberation Army, al-Bashir suspected they were plotting to overthrow him and the government, which resulted in the  jailing of Hassan al-Turabi that same year.
The Blue Sultanate eventually became the keystone of the Funj Empire.
From his announcement of the Mahdiyya in June 1881 until the fall of Khartoum in January 1885, Muhammad Ahmad led a successful military campaign against the Turco-Egyptian government of the Sudan, known as the Turkiyah.
Sudanese football has a long history.
In order to export oil, South Sudan relies on a pipeline to Port Sudan on Sudan's Red Sea coast, as South Sudan is a landlocked country, as well as the oil refining facilities in Sudan.
They are almost entirely Muslims; while the majority speak Sudanese Arabic, some other Arab tribes speak different Arabic dialects like Awadia and Fadnia tribes and Bani Arak tribes who speak Najdi Arabic; and Rufa'a, Bani Hassan, Al-Ashraf, Kinanah and Rashaida who speak Hejazi Arabic.
The Niger-Congo family is represented by many of the Kordofanian languages, and Indo-European by Domari (Gypsy) and English.
The British on the other hand continued their political and financial support for the Mahdist successor, Abd al-Rahman al-Mahdi, who, they believed, could resist the Egyptian pressures for Sudanese independence.
On 16 October 1993, al-Bashir appointed himself "President" and disbanded the Revolutionary Command Council.
The dialect has borrowed much vocabulary from local Nilo-Saharan languages (Nobiin, Fur, Zaghawa, Mabang).
The judicial branch of the Sudanese government consists of a Constitutional Court of nine justices, the National Supreme Court, the Court of Cassation, and other national courts; the National Judicial Service Commission provides overall management for the judiciary.
The majority of Arabized and indigenous tribes like the Fur, Zaghawa, Borgo, Masalit and some Baggara ethnic groups, who speak Chadian Arabic, show less cultural integration because of cultural, linguistic and genealogical variations with other Arab and Arabized tribes.
The sunshine duration is very high all over the country but especially in deserts where it could soar to over 4,000 h per year.
The majority of this population came from Eritrea (240,400 persons), Chad (45,000), Ethiopia (49,300) and the Central African Republic (2,500).
A 2009 proposal for a unified Sudanese Sign Language had been worked out, but was not widely known.
Fur speakers inhabit the west (Darfur), with perhaps a million speakers.
However, Makuria was a Melkite Christian, unlike Nobatia and Alodia.
Agricultural production remains Sudan's most-important sector, employing 80 percent of the workforce and contributing 39 percent of GDP, but most farms remain rain-fed and susceptible to drought.
Between 2009 and 2012, several women were sentenced to death by stoning.
The vast majority of Arab tribes in Sudan migrated into the Sudan in the 12th century, intermarried with the indigenous Nubian and other African populations and introduced Islam.
Formed in 1925, the Sudan Defence Force (SDF) played an active part in responding to the early incursions (occupation by Italian troops of Kassala and other border areas) into the Sudan from Italian East Africa during 1940.
Sudan also has a territorial dispute with Egypt over the Hala'ib Triangle.
The primary language at all levels is Arabic.
Religious identity plays a role in the country's political divisions.
Education in Sudan is free and compulsory for children aged 6 to 13 years.
Officially, the politics of Sudan takes place in the framework of a federal presidential representative democratic republic, where the President of Sudan is head of state, head of government and commander-in-chief of the Sudan People's Armed Forces in a multi-party system.
According to the Global Hunger Index of 2013, Sudan has an GHI indicator value of 27.0 indicating that the nation has an 'Alarming Hunger Situation' and earning the nation the distinction of being the 5th hungriest nation in the world.
Recent evidence suggests that while most citizens of the country identify strongly with both Sudan and their religion, Arab and African supranational identities are much more polarising and contested.
Schools are concentrated in urban areas; many in the West have been damaged or destroyed by years of civil war.
Most individual Sudanese wear either traditional or western attire.
In December 2005, Sudan became one of the few states to recognize Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara.
The 2005 Naivasha Agreement, ending the civil war between north and south Sudan, established some protections for non-Muslims in Khartoum.
In the 1996 general election he was the only candidate by law to run for election.
Sudan hosted the first African Cup of Nations in 1956, and has won the African Cup Of Nations once, in 1970.
It has land borders with Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Chad, and Libya.
The Mahdiyah (Mahdist regime) imposed traditional Sharia Islamic laws.
Thus the parliament consists of 500 appointed members altogether, where all are indirectly elected by state legislatures to serve six-year terms.
By virtue of its proximity to Egypt, the Sudan participated in the wider history of the Near East inasmuch as it was Christianized by the 6th century, and Islamized in the 15th.
It is the only language from the Afroasiatic family's Cushitic branch that is today spoken in the territory.
The Nubian kingdom at Meroë persisted until the fourth century AD.
In August 2012, Sudan and South Sudan agreed a deal to transport South Sudanese oil through Sudanese pipelines to Port Sudan.
It is part of the Northern Africa grouping of the UN geoscheme.
In 1978, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) negotiated a Structural Adjustment Program with the government.
Sudan's application of Sharia law is geographically inconsistent.
According to a 2013 UNICEF report, 88% of women in Sudan had undergone female genital mutilation.
In July 2007 the country was hit by flooding, with over 400,000 people being directly affected.
The country's place name ''Sudan'' is a name given to a geographical region to the south of the Sahara, stretching from Western Africa to eastern Central Africa.
Agricultural expansion, both public and private, has proceeded without conservation measures.
These forces are under the command of the National Assembly and its strategic principles include defending Sudan's external borders and preserving internal security.
In 1972, the Sudanese government became more pro-Western, and made plans to export food and cash crops.
His forces accepted Sennar's surrender from the last Funj sultan, Badi VII.
Crucifixion is a legal punishment.
The two most important Arab tribes to emerge in Nubia were the Ja'alin and the Juhaynah.
According to the ''World Refugee Survey 2008'', published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, 310,500 refugees and asylum seekers lived in Sudan in 2007.
Its capital is Khartoum, the political, cultural and commercial centre of the nation.
Ethiopian and Eritrean Orthodox communities also exist in Khartoum and eastern Sudan, largely made up of refugees and migrants from the past few decades.
The construction of the dam was finished December 2008, supplying more than 90 percent of the population with electricity.
It is the third largest country in Africa.
Abd ar Rahman an Nujumi, the Khalifa's general, attempted an invasion of Egypt in 1889, but British-led Egyptian troops defeated the Ansar at Tushkah.
While historically agriculture remains the main source of income and employment hiring of over 80 percent of Sudanese, and makes up a third of the economic sector, oil production drove most of Sudan's post-2000 growth.
The former educational ladder 6 + 3 + 3 was changed in 1990.
The Egyptian authorities made significant improvements to the Sudanese infrastructure (mainly in the north), especially with regard to irrigation and cotton production.
The judiciary is independent and obtained by the Constitutional Court.
The name derives from the Arabic '''' (), or "the lands of the Blacks", an expression denoting West Africa and northern-Central Africa.
The River Nile divides the country into eastern and western halves.
The independence of oil-rich South Sudan, however, placed most major oilfields out of the Sudanese government's direct control and oil production in Sudan fell from around  to under .
Since 2009, a series of ongoing conflicts between rival nomadic tribes in Sudan and South Sudan have resulted in a large number of casualties.
The attention of NGOs shifted shortly after the war broke out in the western part of the Sudan known as Darfur.
The legal system in Sudan is based on Islamic Sharia law.
The military of Sudan has become a well-equipped fighting force, thanks to increasing local production of heavy and advanced arms.
In 1899, Britain and Egypt reached an agreement under which Sudan was run by a governor-general appointed by Egypt with British consent.
The U.S.-based Carter Center, which helped monitor the elections, described the vote tabulation process as "highly chaotic, non-transparent and vulnerable to electoral manipulation."
The Blue and White Nile rivers meet in Khartoum to form the River Nile, which flows northwards through Egypt to the Mediterranean Sea.
Stoning remains a judicial punishment in Sudan.
This caused great economic problems for the pastoralists of Sudan (See Nuba Peoples).
By the early 1890s, British, French and Belgian claims had converged at the Nile headwaters.
China obtains ten percent of its oil from Sudan.
During the 16th century, the Funj people under Amara Dunqus, appeared in southern Nubia and supplanted the remnants of the old Christian kingdom of Alodia, establishing ''as-Saltana az-Zarqa'' (the Blue Sultanate), also called Sennar.
Rahman was able to resist the pressures, but his regime was plagued with political ineptitude, which garnered him a loss of support in northern and central Sudan.
As the National Islamic Front regime in Khartoum gradually emerged as a real threat to the region and the world, the U.S. began to list Sudan on its list of State Sponsors of Terrorism.
According to UNICEF, in 2008, there were as many as 6,000 child soldiers in Darfur.
Sudan also has multiple regional sign languages, which are not mutually intelligible.
In the 2005 constitution, Sudan's official languages became Arabic and English.
Instability, adverse weather and weak world-agricultural prices ensures that much of the population will remain at or below the poverty line for years.
Since Sudan has experienced civil war for many years, many Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) are also involved in humanitarian efforts to help internally displaced people.
During Classical Antiquity, the Nubian capital was at Meroë.
On 5 May 2006, the Darfur Peace Agreement was signed, aiming at ending the three-year-long conflict.
The People's Republic of China is one of Sudan's major trading partners, China owns a 40 percent share in the Greater Nile Petroleum Operating Company.
A similar garment common to Sudan is the ''thobe'' or ''thawb''.
Seeking to add Sudan to his domains, he sent his third son Ismail (not to be confused with Isma'il Pasha mentioned later) to conquer the country, and subsequently incorporate it into Egypt.
In February 2003, the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army (SLM/A) and Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) groups in Darfur took up arms, accusing the Sudanese government of oppressing non-Arab Sudanese in favor of Sudanese Arabs, precipitating the War in Darfur.
It is mainly funded by the European Union and recently opened more vocational training.
According to a former Sudanese government minister, China is Sudan's largest supplier of arms.
The population that resulted from this cultural and genetic mixing developed social hierarchy over the next centuries become the Kingdom of Kush (with the capital at Kerma) at 1700 BC.
After the US listed Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism, the NIF decided to develop relations with Iraq, and later Iran, the two most controversial countries in the region.
The civilization of Kush was among the first in the world to use iron smelting technology.
Regional relations remained tense throughout much of the Mahdiyah period, largely because of the Khalifa's brutal methods to extend his rule throughout the country.
There is also Lake Nubia on the Sudanese-Egyptian border.
The central and the northern part have extremely dry desert areas such as the Nubian Desert to the northeast and the Bayuda Desert to the east; in the south there are swamps and rainforest.
Sudan worked to appease its critics by expelling members of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and encouraging bin Laden to leave.
Since 1997, Sudan has been implementing the macroeconomic reforms recommended by the International Monetary Fund.
The program has been in place since the early 1990s, and also work-out exchange rate and reserve of foreign exchange.
In 1820, Muhammad Ali of Egypt sent 4000 troops to invade Sudan.
Two years later, the Sudan National Football Team participated in the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich.
Significant, long-established groups of Coptic Orthodox and Greek Orthodox Christians exist in Khartoum and other northern cities.
It is situated on the River Nile, close to the Fourth Cataract where the river divides into multiple smaller branches with large islands in between.
The U.S. bombed Sudan in 1998, targeting the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory.
Over 2.8 million civilians have been displaced and the death toll is estimated at 300,000 killed.
The United States subsequently listed Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism.
Pharaoh Piye attempted to expand the empire into the Near East, but was thwarted by the Assyrian king Sargon II.
File:Piramidoj en Meroe (Sudano) 006.jpg|Sudanese tourists by the Meroë pyramids in various types of clothing.
Flogging is a legal punishment.
Sudan's rainy season lasts for about three months (July to September) in the north, and up to six months (June to November) in the south.
Sudanese Arabs of Northern and Eastern parts descend primarily from migrants from the Arabian Peninsula and intermarriages with the pre-existing indigenous populations of Sudan, especially the Nubian people, who also share a common history with Egypt.
In Sudan's 2008 census, the population of Northern, Western and Eastern Sudan was recorded to be over 30 million.
With an area of , it is the third largest country on the continent (after Algeria and Democratic Republic of the Congo) and the sixteenth largest in the world.
Evidence suggests that support for female genital mutilation remains high, especially among rural and less well educated groups, although it has been declining in recent years.
In the 1890s, the British sought to re-establish their control over Sudan, once more officially in the name of the Egyptian Khedive, but in actuality treating the country as a British colony.
The Kingdom of Kush is mentioned in the Bible as having saved the Israelites from the wrath of the Assyrians, although disease among the besiegers was the main reason for the failure to take the city.
Additionally, exemption from taxation in regions under Muslim rule were also a powerful incentive for conversion.
The NCP draws much of its support from Islamists, Salafis/Wahhabis and other conservative Arab Muslims in the north.
File:Leila Aboulela (2010).jpg|Sudanese author Leila Aboulela
Arabic-speaking nomads militias known as the Janjaweed have been accused of many atrocities.
The politics of Sudan is regulated by a parliamentary organization called the National Assembly.
Among them are the Sennar and Roseires Dams on the Blue Nile, and the Jebel Aulia Dam on the White Nile.
The march ''March Shulkawi No 1'', is an example, set to the sounds of the Shilluk.
This further promoted the mechanized export agriculture sector.
In addition Nasser knew it would be difficult for Egypt to govern the impoverished Sudan after independence.
Somewhere between 200,000 and 400,000 people have died in the violent struggles.
In March 1889, king Yohannes IV of Ethiopia marched on Metemma; however, after Yohannes fell in battle, the Ethiopian forces withdrew.
Sudanese football teams such as Al-Hilal and El-Merreikh are among the nation's strongest teams.
After a power struggle amongst his deputies, Abdallahi ibn Muhammad, with the help primarily of the Baggara of western Sudan, overcame the opposition of the others and emerged as unchallenged leader of the Mahdiyah.
In the build-up to the vote, Sudanese pro-democracy activists say they faced intimidation by the government and the International Crisis Group reported that the ruling party had gerrymandered electoral districts.
The Sudanese government UN High Commissioner for Refugees in 2007 forcibly deported at least 1,500 refugees and asylum seekers during the year.
Prior to 2005, Arabic was the nation's sole official language.
The population of Greater Khartoum (including Khartoum, Omdurman, and Khartoum North) is growing rapidly and was recorded to be 5.2 million.
Nearer the River Nile, there are well-irrigated farms growing cash crops.
Taharqa fled back to his homeland where he died two years later.
Sudan is divided into 18 states (''wilayat'', sing.
File:COSV - Darfur 2008 - Market.jpg|Sudanese women in Darfur
Additionally, a few pre-Islamic Arabian tribes existed in Sudan from earlier migrations into the region from Western Arabia, although most Arabs in Sudan are dated from migrations after the 12th century.
According to the new 2005 constitution, the bicameral National Legislature is the official Sudanese parliament and is divided between two chambers—the National Assembly, a lower house with 450 seats, and the Council of States, an upper house with 50 seats.
The Egyptian revolution of 1952 finally heralded the beginning of the march towards Sudanese independence.
In July 1977, President Nimeiry met with Ansar leader Sadiq al-Mahdi, opening the way for reconciliation.
Traditional music suffered too, with traditional Zār ceremonies being interrupted and drums confiscated .
Two popular divisions of Sufism, the Ansar and the Khatmia, are associated with the opposition Umma and Democratic Unionist parties, respectively.
There are several dams on the Blue and White Niles.
According to the Corruptions Perception Index, Sudan is one of the most corrupt nations in the world.
There are likewise various Nubian languages, with over 6 million speakers along the Nile in the north.
After many attempts at military conquest failed, the Arab commander in Egypt concluded the first in a series of regularly renewed treaties known as ''al-baqṭ'' (pactum) with the Nubians that governed relations between the two peoples for more than 678 years.
According to the  2015 Human Development Index (HDI) Sudan ranked the 167st place in Human Development, indicating Sudan still has one of the lowest human development in the world.
Later, al-Turabi's influence waned, in favor of more pragmatic leaders who focused on trying to change international isolation.
Al-Bashir was declared the winner of the election with sixty-eight percent of the vote.
As a result of Christianization, the Old Nubian language stands as the oldest recorded Nilo-Saharan language (earliest records dating to the 9th century).
Sympathizers of rebel groups are arbitrarily detained, as are foreign journalists, human-rights defenders, student activists and displaced people in and around Khartoum, some of whom face torture.
A peace agreement between the Sudanese government and the Eastern Front was signed on 14 October 2006, in Asmara.
In August 2014, several Sudanese men died in custody after being flogged.
The most visible organization in South Sudan is the Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS) consortium.
The terrain is generally flat plains, broken by several mountain ranges.
