In Pakistan several branches of owaisi silsila exist, notably the Silsila of Shams Ali Qalandar owaisi, qadri, noshahi with followers present all over the world, articles on tasawuf are given on order's official site.
At least as of 2010, the attacks have increased each year.
The Mevlevi Order is better known in the West as the "whirling dervishes".
Some have said that the translation means "related to the image-maker", some also consider it to mean "Pattern Maker" rather than "image maker", and interpret "Naqshbandi" to mean "Reformer of Patterns", and others consider it to mean "Way of the Chain" or "Silsilat al-dhahab".
Islamic Spirituality) and the negative stereotypes that were present in Britain about Islam.
Some Sufi adherents have been killed as well.
This state of affairs lasted for ten years but wherever I had some spare and congenial moments I resorted to my intrinsic proclivity.
Two origins of the word ''sufi'' have been suggested.
In August 2012 the United Nations cultural agency UNESCO urged Libyan authorities to protect Sufi mosques and shrines from attacks by Islamic hardliners "who consider the traditional mystical school of Islam heretical".
It is a customary dance performed within the ''sema'', through which dervishes (also called ''semazens'', from Persian ) aim to reach the source of all perfection, or kemal.
Furthermore, the emphasis on practices may obscure a far more important fact: The seeker is, in a sense, to become a broken person, stripped of all habits through the practice of (in the words of Imam Al-Ghazali) solitude, silence, sleeplessness, and hunger.
Other spiritualists, such as George Gurdjieff, may or may not conform to the tenets of Sufism as understood by orthodox Muslims.
Prominent Sufi leader Hasan of Basra is said to have castigated himself before her superior merits and sincere virtues.
Frager was a trained psychologist, born in the United States, who converted to Islam in the course of his practice of Sufism and wrote extensively on Sufism and psychology.
Abul Hasan ash-Shadhili (died 1258), the founder of the Shadhiliyya order, introduced ''dhikr jahri'' (the remembrance of God outloud, as opposed to the silent ''dhikr'').
Officials accused it of not having building permits and of narcotics possession—charges which the Sufis reject.
The Shadhili is a Sufi order founded by Abu-l-Hassan ash-Shadhili.
His manifold writings defined the practice of Sufism as the essence of Islam but also pointed to the universality of its message.
American rock band mewithoutYou draw heavily on all of the Abrahamic religions in their music, with a heavy focus on Sufism.
Ibn Taymiyya's Sufi inclinations and his reverence for Sufis like 'Abd al-Qadir Gilani can also be seen in his hundred-page commentary on Futuh al-ghayb, covering only five of the seventy-eight sermons of the book, but showing that he considered tasawwuf essential within the life of the Islamic community.
Others have suggested that the word comes from the term '''' ("the people of the bench"), who were a group of impoverished companions of Muhammad who held regular gatherings of dhikr.
Ja'far al-Sadiq (both an imam in the Shia tradition and a respected scholar and link in chains of Sufi transmission in all Islamic sects) held that human beings are dominated by a lower self called the nafs (soul), a faculty of spiritual intuition called the qalb (heart), and ruh (spirit).
File:The Rewards of the Enlightened for their Defense of the Status of God’s Chosen Saints WDL9663.pdf|A manuscript from Timbuktu belonging to Al-Mukhtar ibn Aḥmad ibn Abi Bakr al-Kunti al-Kabir
For example, the Afghan-Scottish teacher Idries Shah has been described as a neo-Sufi by the Gurdjieffian James Moore.
Sufism had a long history already before the subsequent institutionalization of Sufi teachings into devotional orders (''tarîqât'') in the early Middle Ages.
In this view, "it is absolutely necessary to be a Muslim" to be a true Sufi, because Sufism's "methods are inoperative without" Muslim "affiliation".
Ibn Arabi says, "When we see someone in this Community who claims to be able to guide others to God, but is remiss in but one rule of the Sacred Law—even if he manifests miracles that stagger the mind—asserting that his shortcoming is a special dispensation for him, we do not even turn to look at him, for such a person is not a sheikh, nor is he speaking the truth, for no one is entrusted with the secrets of God Most High save one in whom the ordinances of the Sacred Law are preserved.
There are several suborders in existence today, the most known and influential in the West following the lineage of Dr. Javad Nurbakhsh who brought the order to the West following the 1979 Revolution in Iran.
File:The Desire of the Aspirant WDL9677.pdf|A manuscript from Timbuktu belonging to Baba ibn Ahmad al-Alawi al-Maliki al-Maghribi al-Shingiti
Sufi orders largely follow one of the four madhhabs (jurisprudent schools of thought) of Sunni Islam and maintain a Sunni aqidah (creed).
The seeker must also, of necessity, turn away from sins, love of this world, the love of company and renown, obedience to satanic impulse, and the promptings of the lower self.
Commonly, the lexical root of the word is traced to '''' ''()'', which in Arabic means "purity".
He laid the groundwork for sober mysticism in contrast to that of God-intoxicated Sufis like al-Hallaj, Bayazid Bastami and Abusaeid Abolkheir.
Devotion to Muhammad is an exceptionally strong practice within Sufism.
The human being has been created with love in order to love.
Sufis regard Muhammad as their leader and prime spiritual guide.
Under the Al-Shabab rule in Somali, Sufi ceremonies were banned and shrines destroyed.
Sufi mysticism has long exercised a fascination upon the Western world, and especially its Orientalist scholars.
'''Sufism''' or '''Taṣawwuf''' () is defined as the inner mystical dimension of Islam.
Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon, the son of the Jewish philosopher Maimonides, believed that Sufi practices and doctrines continue the tradition of the Biblical prophets.
Another Sufi-oriented journal was published in Egypt between 1931 and 1934.
In the ninth gate, Baḥya directly quotes sayings of the Sufis, whom he calls ''Perushim''.
The rise of Islamic civilization coincides strongly with the spread of Sufi philosophy in Islam.
The Islamic Research Centre of Egypt, led by Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Ahmed El-Tayeb, has also renounced the attacks on the shrines.
Attar of Nishapur claimed that he praised Muhammad in such a manner that was not done before by any poet, in his book the ''Ilahi-nama''.
However, Islamic scholars themselves are not by any means in agreement about the meaning of the word "sufi".
The basic idea in this practice is to visualize the Allah as having been written on the disciple's heart.
In 2009, the moulid of al-Sayyida Zeinab, Muhammad's granddaughter, was banned ostensibly over concern over the spread of swine flu but also at the urging of Salafis.
By focusing on the more spiritual aspects of religion, Sufis strive to obtain direct experience of God by making use of "intuitive and emotional faculties" that one must be trained to use.
The vow of obedience to the Shaykh or Qutb which is taken by Sufis is considered incompatible with devotion to the Imam".
According to the late medieval mystic Jami, Abd-Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (died c. 716) was the first person to be called a "Sufi".
The Uwaysi Order is a Shi'i branch of the Kubrawiya.
In response, he issued this fatwa: "From the outward appearance he is to die and we judge according to the outward appearance and God knows better".
Abraham Maimuni's principal work is originally composed in Judeo-Arabic and entitled "כתאב כפאיה אלעאבדין" ''Kitāb Kifāyah al-'Ābidīn'' ("A Comprehensive Guide for the Servants of God").
A number of Westerners have embarked with varying degrees of success on the path of Sufism.
A considerable amount of Sufi ideas entered the Jewish mainstream through Bahya ibn Paquda's work, which remains one of the most popular ethical treatises in Judaism.
It is noteworthy that in the ethical writings of the Sufis Al-Kusajri and Al-Harawi there are sections which treat of the same subjects as those treated in the "Ḥovot ha-Lebabot" and which bear the same titles: e.g., "Bab al-Tawakkul"; "Bab al-Taubah"; "Bab al-Muḥasabah"; "Bab al-Tawaḍu'"; "Bab al-Zuhd".
In Gao and Kidal, as well as Timbuktu, Salafi Islamists have destroyed musical instruments and driven musicians (music is not Haraam under Sufi Islam) into "economic exile" away from Mali.
Clashes followed at Cairo's Al-Hussein Mosque and al-Sayyida Zeinab mosques between members of Sufi orders and security forces who forced them to evacuate the two shrines.
According to Dr. Alan Godlas of the University of Georgia's Department of Religion, a Sufi Order or tariqa known as the Uwaysi is "very active", having been introduced in the West by the 20th century Sufi, Shah Maghsoud Angha.
It is not a sect, rather it is considered as the part of Islamic teaching that deals with the purification of the inner self.
One proof traditional orders assert is that almost all the famous Sufi masters of the past Caliphates were experts in Sharia and were renowned as people with great Iman (faith) and excellent practice.
Running down the streets of Basra, Iraq, she proclaimed:
Sufis believe the sharia (exoteric "canon"), tariqa (esoteric "order") and haqiqa ("truth") are mutually interdependent.
This poem is still widely recited and sung amongst Sufi groups all over the world.
Then he brings to his heart the Name of the Essence—Allâh—and as it courses through his heart he remains attentive to its meaning, which is "Essence without likeness".
However, this belief puts Sufism in "direct conflict" with Shia Islam, since both the Qutb (who for most Sufi orders is the head of the order) and the Imam fulfill the role of "the purveyor of spiritual guidance and of Allah's grace to mankind".
Under the leadership of Abu Ahmad's descendants, the ''Chishtiyya'' as they are also known, flourished as a regional mystical order.
In his commentary, Ibn Taymiyya stresses that the primacy of the Shari`a forms the soundest tradition in tasawwuf, and to argue this point he lists over a dozen early masters, as well as more contemporary shaykhs like his fellow Hanbalis, al-Ansari al-Harawi and `Abd al-Qadir, and the latter's own shaykh, Hammad al-Dabbas:The upright among the followers of the Path—like the majority of the early shaykhs (shuyukh al-salaf) such as Fudayl ibn `Iyad, Ibrahim ibn Adham, Ma`ruf al-Karkhi, al-Sari al-Saqati, al-Junayd ibn Muhammad, and others of the early teachers, as well as Shaykh Abd al-Qadir, Shaykh Hammad, Shaykh Abu al-Bayan and others of the later masters—do not permit the followers of the Sufi path to depart from the divinely legislated command and prohibition
The initial spiritual chain or silsila of the Chishti order in India, comprising Moinuddin Chishti, Bakhtiyar Kaki, Baba Farid, Nizamuddin Auliya (each successive person being the disciple of the previous one), constitutes the great Sufi saints of Indian history.
Their 2009 album ''It's All Crazy!
Some teachers, especially when addressing more general audiences, or mixed groups of Muslims and non-Muslims, make extensive use of parable, allegory, and metaphor.
Idries Shah states that Sufism is universal in nature, its roots predating the rise of Islam and Christianity.
The Kubrawiya Sufi order was founded in the 13th century by Najmuddin Kubra in Bukhara in modern Uzbekistan.
In many places a person or group would endow a waqf to maintain a lodge (known variously as a ''zawiya'', ''khanqah'', or ''tekke'') to provide a gathering place for Sufi adepts, as well as lodging for itinerant seekers of knowledge.
Sufis themselves claim that Tasawwuf is an aspect of Islam similar to Sharia, inseparable from Islam and an integral part of Islamic belief and practice.
The Islamic Institute in Mannheim, Germany, which works towards the integration of Europe and Muslims, sees Sufism as particularly suited for interreligious dialogue and intercultural harmonisation in democratic and pluralist societies; it has described Sufism as a symbol of tolerance and humanism—nondogmatic, flexible and non-violent.
Furthermore, there is much emphasis on physical laws of the universe within the Quran, urging believers to study and understand the "signs" of God in the physical world (e.g.
It is also necessary for the seeker to have a correct creed (''Aqidah''), and to embrace with certainty its tenets.
The Golden Sufi Center exists in England, Switzerland and the United States.
Also see ibid., Chapter 10 ("Iqquḇim"), s.v.
Sufism leads the adept, called ''salik'' or "wayfarer", in his ''sulûk'' or "road" through different stations (''maqaam'') until he reaches his goal, the perfect tawhid, the existential confession that God is One.
Ahlu Sunna Waljama'a Sufi militants, backed by Ethiopia and the federal government, control parts of central Somalia and some cities in the southern regions of Gedo and Bakool.
Some Sufi orders stress and place extensive reliance upon Dhikr.
Ibn Arabi regards Muhammad as the greatest man and states, "Muhammad's wisdom is uniqueness (''fardiya'') because he is the most perfect existent creature of this human species.
Sufi orders include Ba 'Alawiyya, Badawiyya, Bektashi, Burhaniyya, Chishti, Khalwati, Mevlevi, Naqshbandi, Ni'matullāhī, Uwaisi, Qadiriyya, Qalandariyya, Rifa'i, Sarwari Qadiri, Shadhiliyya, Suhrawardiyya, Zinda Shah Madariya and others.
Sufis have historically stressed the importance of Muhammad's perfection and his ability to intercede.
The concept of the Sufi Qutb is similar to that of the Shi'i Imam.
During these turbulent years, numerous astonishing and indescribable secrets of life were unveiled to me.
The Sarwari Qadri order was founded by Sultan Bahu which branched out of the Qadiriyyah order.
Historically, Muslims have used the Arabic word ''taṣawwuf'' to identify the practice of Sufis.
Western Neo-Sufi practices may differ from traditional forms, for instance having mixed-gender meetings and less emphasis on the Qur'an.
He is still revered by Sufis for his willingness to embrace torture and death rather than recant.
For this reason, the command began with him and was sealed with him.
As he expressed the Way to one of his close disciples, his legacy is that 'you should never ever abandon your servant-hood (''ʿubudiyya''), and that there may never be in your soul a longing for any existing thing'.
One of the first to return to Europe as an official representative of a Sufi order, and with the specific purpose to spread Sufism in Western Europe, was the Swedish-born wandering Sufi Ivan Aguéli.
A great influence was exercised by Sufism upon the ethical writings of Jews in the Middle Ages.
Other Western Sufi organisations include the Sufi Foundation of America and the International Association of Sufism.
On the one hand there is the order from the signs to the Signifier (or from the arts to the Artisan).
Classical Sufis were characterised by their asceticism, especially by their attachment to dhikr, the practice of repeating the names of God, often performed after prayers.
Libyan Interior Minister Fawzi Abdel A'al, was quoted as saying, "If all shrines in Libya are destroyed so we can avoid the death of one person in clashes with security forces, then that is a price we are ready to pay."
Another origin is '''' ''()'', "wool" in Arabic, referring to the simple cloaks the early Muslim ascetics wore.
There are other such references in Rabbi Abraham's writings, as well.
The Owaisi ''(Uwaiysi)'' order claim to be founded 1,400 years ago by Uwais al-Qarni from Yemen.
Notable as well are the lives of Amadou Bamba and El Hadj Umar Tall in West Africa, and Sheikh Mansur and Imam Shamil in the Caucasus.
Moinuddin Chishtī practiced the Sufi Sulh-e-Kul (peace to all) concept to promote understanding between Muslims and non-Muslims
According to a 2005 article in ''The Guardian'':
No important domain in the civilization of Islam remained unaffected by Sufism in this period.
In the book, Maimuni evidences a great appreciation for, and affinity to, Sufism.
It was founded by Shah Ni'matullah Wali (died 1367), established and transformed from his inheritance of the Ma'rufiyyah circle.
In the weeks leading up to September 2012, "armed groups motivated by their religious views" attacked Sufi religious sites across the country, "destroying several mosques and tombs of Sufi religious leaders and scholars".
The order was formalized by his nephew, Shahab al-Din Abu Hafs Umar Suhrawardi.
Obadyah Maimonides wrote ''Al-Mawala Al Hawdiyya'' ("The Treatise of the Pool")—an ethico-mystical manual based on the typically Sufi comparison of the heart to a pool that must be cleansed before it can experience the Divine.
In the Safavid dynasty of Iran, "both the wandering dervishes of 'low' Sufism" and "the philosopher-ulama of 'high' Sufism came under relentless pressure" from powerful cleric Muhammad Baqir Majlisi (d1110/1699).
The arrangement of the book seems to have been inspired by Sufism.
Dhikr is the remembrance of Allah commanded in the Qur'an for all Muslims through a specific devotional act, such as the repetition of divine names, supplications and aphorisms from hadith literature and the Qur'an.
Singer/songwriter Loreena McKennitt's record ''The Mask and Mirror'' (1994) has a song called "The Mystic's Dream" that is influenced by Sufi music and poetry.
The Naqshbandi order is one of the major Sufi orders of Islam.
According to William Chittick, "In a broad sense, Sufism can be described as the interiorization, and intensification of Islamic faith and practice."
It was estimated that there were more than two million followers in Turkey in the early 1990s.
Idris bin Muhammad al-Mahdi as-Senussi was later recognized as Emir of Cyrenaica and eventually became King of Libya.
Practitioners of Sufism, referred to as Sufis ('''''') (; ), often belong to different ''ṭuruq'' or "orders"—congregations formed around a grand master referred to as a ''mawla'' who traces a direct chain of teachers back to the Islamic prophet, Muhammad.
In the twentieth century, some Muslims have called Sufism a superstitious religion that holds back Islamic achievement in the fields of science and technology.
Conversely, the Quran calls out monasticism as a human invention not prescribed by God in the verse 57:27: "monasticism, which they innovated; We did not prescribe it for them...".
The same system of endowments could also pay for a complex of buildings, such as that surrounding the Süleymaniye Mosque in Istanbul, including a lodge for Sufi seekers, a hospice with kitchens where these seekers could serve the poor and/or complete a period of initiation, a library, and other structures.
(The way in which this purification of the heart is achieved is outlined in certain books, but must be prescribed in detail by a Sufi master.)
Abraham Maimuni's two sons, Obadyah and David, continued to lead this Jewish-Sufi brotherhood.
All Sufi orders trace many of their original precepts from Muhammad through his cousin and son-in-law Ali with the notable exception of the Naqshbandi, who claim to trace their origins from Muhammad through the first Rashid Caliph, Abu Bakr.
These two ways are sometimes referred to as "Order of Patience" (Tariqus-Sabr), as opposed to the "Order of Gratitude" (Tariqush-Shukr).
Sufi cosmology and Sufi metaphysics are also noteworthy areas of intellectual accomplishment.
wa-halo yoḏeʾaʿ atta; in "The Way of Serving God", p.&nbsp;371.
In 2009 the mausoleum of the 19th century Sufi poet Nasir Ali and an adjoining Sufi prayer house were bulldozed.
Matthijs van den Bos discusses the status of Sufism in Iran in the 19th and 20th century.
He is the sun of creation, the moon of the celestial spheres, the all-seeing eye...The seven heavens and the eight gardens of paradise were created for him, he is both the eye and the light in the light of our eyes."
This includes dhikr as any activity in which the Muslim maintains awareness of Allah.
See Sefer Hammaspiq, "Happerishuth", Chapter 11 ("Ha-mmaʿaḇāq") s.v.
The "Noorbakshia" () also called ''' Nubakshia''' is an Islamic sect and the Sufi order and way that claims to trace its direct spiritual lineage and chain (silsilah) to the Islamic prophet Muhammad, through Ali, by way of Imam Ali Al-Ridha.
He is said to then have served several other teachers for lengthy periods of time.
Of note with regard to the spread of Sufi psychology in the West is Robert Frager, a Sufi teacher authorized in the Khalwati Jerrahi order.
Revolving from right to left around the heart, the semazen embraces all humanity with love.
The practice of magic intensified during the declining years of Sufism in India when the Sufi orders grew steadily in wealth and in political influence while their spirituality gradually declined and they concentrated on saint veneration, miracle working, magic and superstition.
Two of al-Ghazali's greatest treatises are the ''Revival of Religious Sciences'' and what he termed "its essence", the ''Kimiya-yi sa'ādat''.
Mansur Al-Hallaj (died 922) is renowned for his claim, ''Ana-l-Haqq'' ("I am The Truth").
Ahmed Ullah Maizbhanderi was born on January 15, 1826, corresponding to Magh 1, 1233 of the Bengali calendar year.
In 1843, the Senussi Sufi were forced to flee Mecca and Medina and head to Sudan and Libya.
For example, the Chinese and Russian governments openly favor Sufism as the best means of protecting against Islamist subversion.
Sheikh Nadjm ed-Din Kubra was among those killed by the Mongols.
Imam Ghazali narrates in Al-Munqidh min-al-dalal:
Dr. Angha and Dr. Kianfar went on to found another the International Association of Sufism (IAS) which operates in California and organizes international Sufi symposia.
This is sought through abandoning one's nafs, egos or personal desires, by listening to the music, focusing on God, and spinning one's body in repetitive circles, which has been seen as a symbolic imitation of planets in the Solar System orbiting the sun.
Other noteworthy Sufi teachers who have been active in the West in recent years include Bawa Muhaiyaddeen, Inayat Khan, Nazim Al-Haqqani, Javad Nurbakhsh, Bulent Rauf, Irina Tweedie, Idries Shah, Muzaffer Ozak, Nahid Angha, and Ali Kianfar.
Sunni dervish orders—such as the Qhaderi dervishes—in the Sunni-populated parts of the country are thought by some to be seen as allies of the government against Al-Qaeda.
Mbacke suggests that one reason Sufism has taken hold in Senegal is because it can accommodate local beliefs and customs, which tend toward the mystical.
Uways received the teachings of Islam inwardly through his heart and lived by the principles taught by him, although he had never physically met Muhammad.
René Guénon, the French scholar, became a Sufi in the early twentieth century and was known as Sheikh Abdul Wahid Yahya.
The purpose of such visitations is usually two-fold, first and foremost the aim is to receive spiritual guidance and blessings from the Saint who rests in the shrine, which helps the Seeker in his or her own path towards enlightenment.
While investigators have so far found no sign of arson, according to journalist Amir Rana the fires have occurred within the context of a surging Salafi movement which preaches that "Kashmiri tradition of venerating the tombs and relics of saints is outside the pale of Islam".
Its ten sections correspond to the ten stages through which the Sufi had to pass in order to attain that true and passionate love of God which is the aim and goal of all ethical self-discipline.
Abdul-Qadir Gilani (1077–1166) was a Persian Hanbali jurist and Sufi based in Baghdad.
The Suhrawardiyya order () is a Sufi order founded by Abu al-Najib al-Suhrawardi (1097–1168).
Rumi states, "I 'sewed' my two eyes shut from desires for this world and the next – this I learned from Muhammad."
Not all Sufis in Iran have been subject to government pressure.
Practitioners of Sufism hold that in its early stages of development Sufism effectively referred to nothing more than the internalization of Islam.
Perpetrators were described as "groups that have a strict Islamic ideology where they believe that graves and shrines must be desecrated."
Khālidīyyā Sufi Order is a branch of the Naqshbandiyya Sufi Silsilat al-dhahab.
Ruwaym, from the second generation of Sufis in Baghdad, was also an influential early figure, as was Junayd of Baghdad; a number of early practitioners of Sufism were disciples of one of the two.
Said Atsayev—also known as Sheikh Said Afandi al-Chirkavi—a prominent 74-year-old Sufi Muslim spiritual leader in Dagestan Russia, was killed by a suicide bombing August 28, 2012 along with six of his followers.
Ali Gomaa, a Sufi scholar and Grand Mufti of al-Azhar University, has criticized the destruction of shrines and public property as unacceptable.
Sufis maintain that the Prophet Muhammad is Al-Insān al-Kāmil.
In the 13th century, a Sufi poet from Egypt, Al-Busiri, wrote the ''al-Kawākib ad-Durrīya fī Madḥ Khayr al-Barīya'' (The Celestial Lights in Praise of the Best of Creation) commonly referred to as ''Qaṣīdat al-Burda'' ("Poem of the Mantle"), in which he extensively praised Muhammad.
Often these resist direct reference or description, with the consequence that the authors of various Sufi treatises took recourse to allegorical language.
The Turkish Republican state banned all Sufi orders and abolished their institutions in 1925 after Sufis opposed the new secular order.
The meanings of "Naqshbandi" is to follow the pattern of head of the former.
While all Muslims believe that they are on the pathway to Allah and hope to become close to God in Paradise—after death and after the Last Judgment—Sufis also believe that it is possible to draw closer to God and to more fully embrace the divine presence in this life.
Many have asserted Sufism to be unique within the confines of the Islamic religion and contend that Sufism developed from people like Bayazid Bastami, who, in his utmost reverence to the sunnah, refused to eat a watermelon because he did not find any proof that Muhammad ever ate it.
Gilani spent his early life in Na'if, the town of his birth.
The life of the Algerian Sufi master Abdelkader El Djezairi is instructive in this regard.
As a further example, the prospective adherent of the Mevlevi Order would have been ordered to serve in the kitchens of a hospice for the poor for 1001 days prior to being accepted for spiritual instruction, and a further 1,001 days in solitary retreat as a precondition of completing that instruction.
According to the Muslim Brotherhood website ikhwanweb.com, in 2011 "a memorandum was submitted to the Armed Forces" citing 20 "encroachments" on Sufi shrines.
Since March 2005, 209 people have been killed and 560 injured in 29 different terrorist attacks targeting shrines devoted to Sufi saints in Pakistan, according to data compiled by the Center for Islamic Research Collaboration and Learning (CIRCLe, a think-tank based in Rawalpindi).
Sufi whirling (or ''Sufi spinning'') is a form of Sama or physically active meditation which originated among Sufis, and which is still practiced by the Sufi Dervishes of the Mevlevi order.
Sufism is traditional in Morocco but has seen a growing revival with the renewal of Sufism under contemporary spiritual teachers such as Hamza al Qadiri al Boutchichi.
Since then the Ni'matullāhī order—Iran's largest Sufi order—has come under increasing state pressure.
Shah's views have however been rejected by modern scholars.
Important contributions in writing are attributed to Uwais al-Qarani, Hasan of Basra, Harith al-Muhasibi and Said ibn al-Musayyib.
Sufis have historically revered Muhammad as the prime personality of spiritual greatness.
Sufism is a mystical-ascetic aspect of Islam.
The Bektashi Order was founded in the 13th century by the Islamic saint Haji Bektash Veli, and greatly influenced during its fomulative period by the Hurufi Ali al-'Ala in the 15th century and reorganized by Balım Sultan in the 16th century.
The practice of ''muraqaba'' can be likened to the practices of meditation attested in many faith communities.
Others have held that Sufism is the strict emulation of the way of Muhammad, through which the heart's connection to the Divine is strengthened.
According to Sheikh Tarek El-Rifai, head of the Rifai Sufi Order, a number of Salafis have prevented Sufi prayers in Al-Haram.
Deobandi and Barelvi are the "two major sub-sects" of Sunni Muslims in South Asia that have clashed—sometimes violently—since the late 1970s in Pakistan.
Hence, it follows the same approach of the order but unlike most Sufi orders, it does not follow a specific dress code, seclusion, or other lengthy exercises.
These men and women who sat at al-Masjid an-Nabawi are considered by some to be the first Sufis.
:2. of ''Ṭariqah'', which is accessible only to a higher class of men who, while strictly adhering to the outward or ceremonial injunctions of religion, rise to an inward perception of mental power and virtue necessary for the nearer approach to the Divinity
Sufism Reoriented is an offshoot of it charted by the syncretistic teacher Meher Baba.
The traditional Sufi orders, which are in majority, emphasize the role of Sufism as a spiritual discipline within Islam.
The Amman Message, a detailed statement issued by 200 leading Islamic scholars in 2005 in Amman, and adopted by the Islamic world's political and temporal leaderships at the Organisation of the Islamic Conference summit at Mecca in December 2005, and by six other international Islamic scholarly assemblies including the International Islamic Fiqh Academy of Jeddah, in July 2006, specifically recognized the validity of Sufism as a part of Islam—however the definition of Sufism can vary drastically between different traditions (what may be intended is simple tazkiah as opposed to the various manifestations of Sufism around the Islamic world).
In most other Muslim countries, attacks on Sufis and especially their shrines have come from adherents of puritanical schools of thought who believe that practices such as celebration of the birthdays of Sufi saints, and dhikr ("remembrance" of God) ceremonies are bid‘ah or impure innovation, and polytheistic (Shirk).
The heavy odds confronted me and provided me with few moments for my pursuits.
