Robinson stated in his autobiography that one of the main considerations for his move up to middleweight was the increasing difficulty he was having in making the  welterweight weight limit.
Robinson got into trouble several times while in the military.
Robinson was efficient with both hands, and he displayed a variety of effective punches—according to a ''TIME'' magazine article in 1951, "Robinson's repertoire, thrown with equal speed and power by either hand, includes every standard punch from a bolo to a hook—and a few he makes up on the spur of the moment."
Robinson met his second wife Edna Mae Holly, a noted dancer who performed at the Cotton Club and toured Europe with Duke Ellington and Cab Calloway, in 1940.
The fight was a fiasco, with Morrison being knocked down twice in the first round and once in the second before the disgusted referee, who said "Henderson put up no fight", walked out of the ring.
After being controlled by Robinson in the early portions of the fight, LaMotta came back to take control in the later rounds.
Robinson was granted an honorable discharge on June 3, 1944.
Robinson's second no-contest bout came in September, 1965 in Norfolk, Virginia in a match with an opponent who turned out to be an impostor.
On December 3 of that year, Robinson and Fullmer fought a 15-round draw for the WBA middleweight title, which Fullmer retained.
Robinson was born Walker Smith Jr. in Ailey, Georgia, to Walker Smith Sr. and Leila Hurst.
Robinson then won four more fights, including two against Izzy Jannazzo, from October 19 to December 14.
Robinson even stated that the training he did in his attempts to establish a career as a dancer were harder than any he undertook during his boxing career.
An episode of ''Land of the Giants'' called "Giants and All That Jazz" had Sugar as a washed up boxer opening a nightclub.
He possessed tremendous versatility—according to boxing analyst Bert Sugar, "Robinson could deliver a knockout blow going backward."
In 1951, Robinson was named ''Ring Magazine's'' "Fighter of the Year" for the second time.
Robinson traveled with his flamingo-pink Cadillac, which caused quite a stir in Paris, and an entourage of 13 people, some included "just for laughs".
He retired in 1952, only to come back two and a half years later and regain the middleweight title in 1955.
In April 1959, Robinson's eldest sister Marie died of cancer at the age of 41.
In October 1950, Robinson knocked out Bobo Olson a future middleweight title holder.
"I haven't forgotten it to this day, and I never will", Robinson wrote in his autobiography.
Later that year, he lost his title to Basilio in a rugged 15 round fight in front of 38,000 at Yankee Stadium, but regained it for a record fifth time when he beat Basilio in the rematch.
In October 1961, Robinson defeated future world champion Denny Moyer via unanimous decision.
A year later, he defended his title against Paul Pender.
In 2003, ''The Ring'' magazine ranked him number 11 in the list of all-time greatest punchers.
In the late 1960s he acted in some television shows, like ''Mission: Impossible''.
In February 1963, Robinson lost via unanimous decision to former world champion and fellow Hall of Famer Joey Giardello.
Robinson had already beaten Bell once via decision in 1945.
However, Robinson had been hospitalized the day before his mother's death due to agitation which caused his blood pressure to rise.
According to his file, a stranger had found him in the street on 1  April and helped him to a hospital.
Robinson knocked him down in the ninth and tenth rounds before the referee stopped the fight.
He was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1990.
They planned to start a liquor distribution business in New York City, but were denied a license due to their race.
* Trickett, Alex, and Dirs, Ben.
But in the fifth, Robinson was able to win the title back for a fourth time by knocking out Fullmer with a lightning fast, powerful left hook.
Their son, Ronnie Smith, was born in 1939.
Although Robinson said he did not like the word's literal definition of "attendants", since he felt they were his friends, he liked the word itself and began to use it in regular conversation when referring to them.
p. 226*Anderson, Dave.
Robinson met President of France Vincent Auriol at a ceremony attended by France's social upper crust.
However, the move up would also prove beneficial financially, as the division then contained some of the biggest names in boxing.
Gavilán would have to wait two more years to begin his own historic reign as welterweight champion.
For his performances, Robinson was named "Fighter of the Year".
Robinson married Marjorie Joseph in 1938; the marriage was annulled the same year.
Robinson said that the impact of Doyle's death was "very trying".
He died in Los Angeles at the age of 67 and was interred in the Inglewood Park Cemetery, Inglewood, California.
Robinson struggled to make weight, and had to go without food for nearly 20 hours leading up to the bout.
Robinson, however, noticed that Fullmer was vulnerable to the left hook.
Boxer Neil Morrison, at the time a fugitive and accused robber, signed up for the fight as Bill Henderson, a capable club fighter.
Famed sports author Pete Hamill mentioned that one of the saddest experiences of his life was watching Robinson lose to Archer.
Renowned for his flamboyant lifestyle outside the ring, Robinson is credited with being the originator of the modern sports "entourage".
He won the Golden Gloves featherweight championship in 1939, and the organization's lightweight championship in 1940.
Robinson was 85–0 as an amateur with 69 of those victories coming by way of knockout, 40 in the first round.
Robinson initially backed out of the fight because he had a dream that he was going to kill Doyle.
He was a hero in France due to his recent defeat of LaMotta—the French hated LaMotta for defeating Marcel Cerdan in 1949 and taking his championship belt (Cerdan died in a plane crash en route to a rematch with LaMotta).
Among the fighters he defeated in those non-title bouts was future world champion Kid Gavilán in a close, controversial 10-round fight.
Despite Robinson's efforts, Pender won by decision in that rematch.
Robinson held the world welterweight title from 1946 to 1951, and won the world middleweight title in the latter year.
"I fought Sugar Ray so often, I almost got diabetes", LaMotta later said.
After about three years, the decline of his businesses and the lack of success in his performing career made him decide to return to boxing.
Robinson spent the rest of the 1960s fighting 10-round contests.
Robinson had a 15-month military career.
When he woke up on April 5 in Fort Jay Hospital on Governor's Island, he had missed his sailing for Europe and was under suspicion of deserting.
According to Robinson, he met her at a local pool he frequented after his boxing workouts.
Subsequently told that he was "sweet as sugar" by a lady in the audience at a fight in Watertown, New York, Smith Jr. became known as "Sugar" Ray Robinson.
In an attempt to get her attention he pushed her into the pool one day, and claimed it was an accident.
In his examination report, a doctor at Fort Jay concluded that Robinson's version of events was sincere.
In 2006, he was featured on a commemorative stamp by the United States Postal Service.
The phrase "pound for pound", was created by sportswriters for him during his career as a way to compare boxers irrespective of weight.
It marked the first time in 44 career fights that Fullmer had been knocked out, and when someone asked Robinson after the fight how far the left hook had travelled, Robinson replied: "I can't say.
A month after his last fight, Robinson was honored with a Sugar Ray Robinson Night on December 10, 1965 in New York's Madison Square Garden.
On June 25, 1947 Robinson dominated Doyle and scored a decisive knockout in the eighth round that knocked Doyle unconscious and resulted in Doyle's death later that night.
His father was a cotton, peanut, and corn farmer in Georgia, who moved the family to Detroit where he initially found work in construction.
He turned professional in 1940 at the age of 19 and by 1951 had a professional record of 128–1–2 with 84 knockouts.
* Review Joe and Teddy Pick Their Top Fighters, espn.com.
In 1957, Robinson lost his title to Gene Fullmer.
Fullmer used his aggressive, forward moving style to control Robinson, and knocked him down in the fight.
Robinson commented that once a fighter has trained to a certain level, their techniques and responses become almost reflexive.
The two fought for the title vacated by Servo, who had himself lost twice to Robinson in non-title bouts.
* Gene Fullmer, ibhof.com.
He then became the first boxer in history to win a divisional world championship five times, a feat he accomplished by defeating Carmen Basilio in 1958 to regain the middleweight championship.
He fought a very conventional way with a firm jab, but threw hooks and uppercuts in flurries in an unconventional way.
He rallied in the seventh and eight rounds, before struggling in the final two.
During the ceremony, he was honored with a massive trophy.
Following Robinson's victory, residents of Harlem danced in the streets.
After his boxing career ended, Robinson attempted a career as an entertainer, but it was not successful.
1, aolsports.com, May 13, 2007.
The knockout loss was only the second of Zivic's career in more than 150 fights.
The fast-moving Robinson was the heat's next victim – at the end of round 13, he collapsed and failed to answer the bell for the next round, suffering the only knockout of his career.
Boxing critics have referred to the left-hook which knocked out Fullmer as "the perfect punch".
Robinson built a record of 40–0 before losing for the first time to LaMotta in a 10-round re-match.
ESPN Greatest Boxers List: Sugar Ray Robinson No.
Robinson was elected to the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1967, two years after he retired.
Retrieved June 6, 2007. with charisma, and a flair for the dramatic: He drove a flamingo-pink Cadillac, and was an accomplished singer and dancer, who once pursued a career in the entertainment industry.
On February 27, 1943, Robinson was inducted into the United States Army, where he was again referred to as Walker Smith.
Retrieved June 6, 2007.
Robinson knocked out Bob Young in the second round in Boston in his only fight in 1959.
Robinson originally aspired to be a doctor, but after dropping out of De Witt Clinton High school in ninth grade he switched his goal to boxing.
During his fight in Berlin against Gerhard Hecht, Robinson was disqualified when he knocked his opponent with a punch to the kidney: a punch legal in the US, but not Europe.
However, there was not a piece of furniture in his small Manhattan apartment with legs strong enough to support it.
In the Yankee Stadium bout with Maxim, Robinson built a lead on all three judges' scorecards, but the  temperature in the ring took its toll.
In 1942, Robinson knocked out Zivic in the tenth round in a January rematch.
After a close tenth round, Robinson was announced as the winner on all three scorecards.
He did just that and outlasted the aging Robinson, who, despite opening a cut over Pender's eye in the eighth round, was largely ineffective in the later rounds.
On February 14, 1951, Robinson and LaMotta met for the sixth time.
When he was 15, he attempted to enter his first boxing tournament but was told he needed to first obtain an AAU membership card.
'''Sugar Ray Robinson''' (born '''Walker Smith Jr.'''; May 3, 1921 – April 12, 1989) was an American professional boxer.
He was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus that was treated with insulin.
He combined striking good looks,* Sammons.
After winning his second world title, he embarked on a European tour which took him all over the Continent.
"He had to get up at six in the morning and he'd get home close to midnight.
In the first two rounds Robinson followed Fullmer around the ring, however in the third round he changed tactics and made Fullmer come to him.
Robinson served with Joe Louis, and the pair went on tours where they performed exhibition bouts in front of US troops.
However, the title went to welterweight Carmen Basilio.
The fight took place in Robinson's former home town of Detroit, and attracted a record crowd.
On June 25, 1952 after the Maxim bout, Robinson gave up his title and retired with a record of 131–3–1–1.
He badly damaged Basilio's eye early the fight, and by the seventh round it was swollen shut.
A priest and a minister convinced him to fight.
After learning of Doyle's intentions of using the bout's money to buy his mother a house, Robinson gave Doyle's mother the money from his next four bouts so she could purchase herself a home, fulfilling her son's intention.
After this attempt was met with disdain, he appeared at the nightclub she danced at and introduced himself.
His glamorous restaurant, Sugar Ray's, hosted stars such as Frank Sinatra, Jackie Gleason, Nat King Cole, Joe Louis, and Lena Horne among others.
They fought for the last time in 1956, and Robinson closed the four fight series with a fourth-round knockout.
The two judges gave the fight to Robinson by wide margins: 72–64 and 71–64.
In 1955, Robinson returned to the ring.
They had one son, Ray Robinson Jr. (born 1949) and divorced in 1960.
Robinson was also nearly knocked down in the sixth round, but was saved by the bell.
Robinson's 50-second, first-round knockout of Basora set a record that would stand for 38 years.
Robinson was initially given a TKO in 1:20 of the second round after the "obviously frightened" Morrison laid himself down on the canvas.
He began a career in show business, singing and tap dancing.
A 12–5 favorite, the 41-year-old Robinson defeated the 22-year-old Moyer by staying on the outside, rather than engaging him.
With the fight in jeopardy, Robinson let loose on Turpin, knocking him down, then getting him to the ropes and unleashing a series of punches that caused the referee to stop the bout.
On November 11, 1965, Robinson announced his retirement from boxing, saying: "I hate to go too long campaigning for another chance."
In the fight, Robinson, who only a month before had been involved in a 10-round brawl with Artie Levine, was knocked down by Bell.
In late March, 1944, Robinson was stationed at Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn, waiting to ship out to Europe, where he was scheduled to perform more exhibition matches.
However, that fight was later ruled to have been fixed and LaMotta was sanctioned for letting Fox win.
LaMotta, who had a  weight advantage over Robinson, knocked Robinson out of the ring in the eighth round, and won the fight by decision.
The only day I really saw him was Sunday...I always wanted to be with him more."
He next defeated former champion Rocky Graziano by a third-round knockout, then challenged world light heavyweight champion Joey Maxim.
Robinson idolized Henry Armstrong and Joe Louis as a youth, and actually lived on the same block as Louis in Detroit when Robinson was 11 and Louis was 17.
In that bout Robinson was leading on the cards but was cut by Turpin.
Soon the couple were dating and they married in 1943.
He also appeared in a few films including the Frank Sinatra cop movie ''The Detective'' (1968), the cult classic ''Candy'' (1968), and the thriller ''The Todd Killings'' (1971) as a police officer.
p. xii* The Man Who Comes Back, ''TIME'', April 7, 1958, available via time.com.
Robinson was known as a flamboyant personality outside the ring.
He defeated LaMotta via unanimous decision, although he failed to get Jake down.
But he got the message."
* Smith, Michael David.
The first half of the bout was very close, but Robinson took control in the second half.
Robinson fought Armstrong only because Armstrong was in need of money.
In their rematch four months later, Moyer defeated Robinson on points, as he pressed the action and made Robinson back up throughout the fight.
Robinson also possessed great speed and knockout power.
Robinson outboxed LaMotta for the first 10 rounds, then unleashed a series of savage combinations on LaMotta for three rounds, finally stopping the champion for the first time in their legendary six-bout series—and dealing LaMotta his first legitimate knockout loss in 95 professional bouts.
At the start of the fourth round Robinson came out on the attack and stunned Fullmer, and when Fullmer returned with his own punches, Robinson traded with him, as opposed to clinching as he had done in their earlier fight.
Hall of Fame fighters such as Muhammad Ali, Joe Louis, Roberto Durán and Sugar Ray Leonard have ranked Robinson as the greatest pound for pound boxer in history.
He struggled financially until his death in 1989.
He resumed training in 1954.
The crowd of 9,023 at the Civic Arena in Pittsburgh gave Robinson several standing ovations, even while he was being thoroughly outperformed by Archer.
He won five fights in 1955, before losing a decision to Ralph 'Tiger' Jones.
By now Armstrong was an old fighter, and Robinson later stated that he carried Armstrong.
He lost via unanimous decision to Joey Archer.
Robinson controlled the next two rounds, and had Zivic wobbly in the ninth.
In 1952, he fought a rematch with Olson, winning by a decision.
Retrieved June 6, 2007.
That bout, and some of the other bouts in the six-fight Robinson-LaMotta rivalry, was depicted in the Martin Scorsese film ''Raging Bull''.
He was able to fight almost any style: he could come out one round brawling, the next counter punching, and the next fighting on the outside.
In that title fight, a rematch with Gavilán, Robinson again won via decision.
Vying for the Pennsylvania state middleweight title in 1950, Robinson defeated Robert Villemain.
In 2007, ESPN.com featured the piece "50 Greatest Boxers of All Time", in which it named Robinson the top boxer in history.
Robinson lost twice more in 1962, before winning six consecutive fights against mostly lesser opposition.
Retrieved April 10, 2008.
Who is the greatest of them all?, bbc.co.uk, June 13, 2005.
Robinson Jr. and Edna Mae also claimed that they were kept away from Robinson by Millie during the last years of his life.
Robinson inspired several other fighters who took the nickname "Sugar" in homage to him such as Sugar Ray Leonard, Sugar Shane Mosley, and MMA fighter "Suga" Rashad Evans.
In Robinson's last years, he was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.
But on March 29, Robinson disappeared from his barracks.
Robinson won the first five rounds according to ''The New York Times'' Joseph C. Nichols, before Zivic came back to land several punches to Robinson's head in the sixth and seventh rounds.
The couple had one son, Ronnie, and divorced when Robinson was 19.
According to ESPN.com's Ron Flatter: "He was the pioneer of boxing's bigger-than-life entourages, including a secretary, barber, masseur, voice coach, a coterie of trainers, beautiful women, a dwarf mascot and lifelong manager George Gainford."
Basilio's handlers had lobbied heavily for it on the basis that he had never won the award, and Robinson later described this as the biggest disappointment of his professional career.
Gavilán hurt Robinson several times in the fight, but Robinson controlled the final rounds with a series of jabs and left hooks.
Fullmer headed into their May rematch as a 3–1 favorite.
The first fight won the "Fight of the Year" award from ''The Ring'' magazine for 1957 and the second fight won the "Fight of the Year" award for 1958.
Robinson entered the fight as a 5–1 favorite, but lost a split decision in front of 10,608 at Boston Garden.
The fight would be Robinson's last title bout.
Later that year, in defense of that crown, he defeated Jose Basora, with whom he had previously drawn.
In 1941, he defeated world champion Sammy Angott, future champion Marty Servo and former champion Fritzie Zivic.
In his autobiography, Robinson states that by 1965 he was broke, having spent all of the $4 million in earnings he made inside and out of the ring in his career.
He successfully defended his welterweight title for the last time against Charley Fusari.
Giardello knocked Robinson down in the fourth round, and the 43-year-old took until the count of nine to rise to his feet.
Zivic and his corner protested the stoppage; James P. Dawson of ''The New York Times'' stated "they were criticizing a humane act.
After his death, criminal charges were threatened against Robinson in Cleveland, up to and including manslaughter, though none actually materialized.
Robinson was named "fighter of the year" twice: first for his performances in 1942, then nine years and over 90 fights later, for his efforts in 1951.
When Robinson first traveled to Paris, a steward referred to his companions as his "''entourage''".
Robinson won a lopsided 15 round decision, knocking Fusari down once.
Robinson won the undisputed world middleweight title with a 13th round technical knockout.
In 1949, he boxed 16 times, but again only defended his title once.
Outside the ring, Robinson got into trouble frequently as a youth, and was involved with a violent street gang.
He bounced back, however, and defeated Rocky Castellani by a split decision, then challenged Bobo Olson for the world middleweight title.
Robinson then embarked on an 18-month boxing tour of Europe.
After winning three more fights, Robinson faced Jake LaMotta, who would become one of his more prominent rivals, for the first time in October.
Frequently cited as the greatest boxer of all time, Robinson's performances in the welterweight and middleweight divisions prompted sportswriters to create "pound for pound" rankings, where they compared fighters regardless of weight.
The battle had been a slaughter, for want of a more delicate word."
