While the physical character is of secondary importance, as generous crops are grown in sandy soil as well as in heavy loams, still the ideal soil is a sandy loam, i.e., a mixture of organic matter, clay and sand.
This was because the tax assessed the value of the sugar beet crop based on the unprocessed weight of the sugar beet rather than the refined sugar produced from them.
To limit (thermophilic) bacterial action, the feed water may be dosed with formaldehyde and control of the feed water pH is also practiced.
Diffusers are long vessels of many metres in which the beet slices go in one direction while hot water goes in the opposite direction.
The sugar industry in the EU came under bureaucratic pressure in 2006 and ultimately resulted in the loss of 20,000 jobs, although many factories, as detailed in a later 2010 EU audit, were found to have been mistakenly shut-down, as they were profitable without government intervention.
Before entering the next stage, the thin juice may receive soda ash to modify the pH and sulphitation with a sulfur-based compound to reduce colour formation due to decomposition of monosaccharides under heat.
In the UK, loads may be hand examined at the factory gate before being accepted.
During diffusion, a portion of the sucrose breaks down into invert sugars.
In the absence of adequate irrigation,  of rainfall are necessary to raise an average crop.
In the 1850s, an attempt was made in Utah by the LDS Church-owned Deseret Manufacturing Company to grow and process sugar beets, that failed for several reasons.
Harvesting also required many workers.
By 1840 about 5% of the world's sugar was derived from sugar beets, and by 1880 this number had risen more than tenfold to over 50%.
Crop rotation is recommended and necessary.
The chalk particles entrap some impurities and absorb others.
The beets are dumped into trucks as the harvester rolls down the field, and then delivered to the factory.
Twelve years later, in 1927, they succeeded.
The root of the beet contains 75% water, about 20% sugar, and 5% pulp (the exact sugar contents can vary between 12 and 21% sugar, depending on the cultivar and growing conditions).
The resulting sugar crystal and syrup mix is called a ''massecuite'', from "cooked mass" in French.
In 2009, sugar beets accounted for 20% of the world's sugar production.
It allows the plant to grow in tropical and subtropical regions.
The number was down to 382 in 1842, producing about 22.5 million kilos of sugar during that year.
If the beets are to be left for later delivery, they are formed into clamps.
An unrefined sugary syrup can be produced directly from sugar beet.
Some beets were carried by rail in the Republic of Ireland, until the complete shutdown of Irish Sugar beet production in 2006.
The ground should be fairly level and well-drained, especially where irrigation is practiced.
After planting sugar beet seed, weeds emerge in fields and growers apply glyphosate to control them.
Imperial Valley farms benefit from high intensities of incident sunlight and intensive use of irrigation and fertilizers.
Under the Soviet government, the agricultural production of Russia was fairly stagnant; however, the sugar beet saw small increases in production.
In the United States, genetically modified sugar beets, engineered for resistance to glyphosate, a herbicide marketed as Roundup, was developed by Monsanto as a genetically modified crop.
The protection provided to the sugar beet industry by these bounties caused drastic damage to the cane sugar industry and their grip on the British sugar market.
This recovers additional sucrose in the liquid pressed out of the pulp, and reduces the energy needed to dry the pulp.
Thick juice can be stored in tanks for later processing, reducing the load on the crystallization plant.
Continual research looks for varieties with resistance, as well as increased sugar yield.
Under the patronage of Frederick William III of Prussia, he opened the world's first beet sugar factory in 1801, at Cunern (Polish: Konary) in Silesia.
Some is also sold in bulk tankers.
The sugar beet was introduced to North America after 1830 with the first commercial production starting in 1879 at a farm in Alvarado, California.
Modern tower extraction plants have a processing capacity of up to  per day.
In many of the regions where new sugar beet farms were started during the war, farmers were unfamiliar with beet sugar cultivation, so they hired Japanese workers from internment camps who were familiar with sugar beet production to work on the farms.
That is until after the Civil War, when these associations would become irrelevant and only the economic feasibility of the industry remained.
Western Europe, and Eastern Europe did not produce enough sugar from sugar beets to meet overall demand for sugar in 2010–2011, and were net importers of sugar.
The factory survived on subsidies it gained, since the abolitionist stigma that had held back the development of a sugar beet industry had been erased with the Civil War.
The sugar beet, like sugarcane, needs a peculiar soil and a unique climate for its successful cultivation.
This thick, dark syrup is produced by cooking shredded sugar beet for several hours, then pressing the resulting mash and concentrating the juice produced until it has the consistency similar to that of honey.
By 1914, the sugar beet industry in the United States matched the production of its European counterparts.
The world's largest producer was Russia, with a  harvest.
About 95% of sugar beet acres in the US were planted with glyphosate-resistant seed in 2011.
Imperial Valley (California) farmers have achieved yields of about 160 tonnes per hectare and over 26 tonnes sugar per hectare.
A recycling process builds up the size of chalk particles and a natural flocculation occurs where the heavy particles settle out in tanks (clarifiers).
A temperature ranging from  during the growing months is most favorable.
The sugar beet’s popularity also stemmed from the fact that it allowed for a domestic market in sugar.
However, this movement failed since the connection which the sugar beet gained with the abolitionist movement and the reputation it developed as an opposition to slave production within the United States.
Climatic conditions, temperature, sunshine, rainfall and winds have an important bearing upon the success of sugar beet agriculture.
Thus, when two events, the blockade of Europe by the British Navy and the Haitian Revolution against his brother-in-law, made the importation of cane sugar untenable, Napoleon seized the opportunity offered by beet sugar to address the shortage.
In Michigan, the long summer days from the relatively high latitude (the Lower Peninsula, where production is concentrated, lies between the 41st and 46th parallels North) and the influence of the Great Lakes result in satisfactory climatic conditions for sugar beet culture.
It is also susceptible to the beet leaf curl virus, which causes crinkling and stunting of the leaves.
This sugar ("raw") is of lower quality with more colour and impurities, and is the main source of the sugar dissolved again into the mother liquor.
Typically, cossettes take about 90 minutes to pass through the diffuser, the water only 45 minutes.
In all cases, the flow rates of cossettes and water are in the ratio one to two.
However, because crystallized cane sugar was already available and provided a better taste, this process never caught on.
A subsoil of gravel, or the presence of hard-pan, is not desirable, as cultivation to a depth of from  is necessary to produce the best results.
To cultivate beets successfully, the land must be properly prepared.
It is a plant whose root contains a high concentration of sucrose and it is grown commercially for sugar production.
The high green syrup is fed to a raw sugar vacuum pan from which a second batch of sugar is produced.
The price of imported cane sugar was particularly high in Russia and because of this high price, the Russian beet sugar industry did not need subsidies to match or even beat the cane sugar prices.
Railways and boats are no longer used.
The work of Achard soon attracted the attention of Napoleon Bonaparte, who appointed a commission of scientists to go to Silesia to investigate Achard's factory.
In July 2012, after completing an environmental impact assessment and a plant pest risk assessment the USDA deregulated Monsanto's Roundup Ready sugar beets.
A certain amount of alkali is not necessarily detrimental, as sugar beets are not especially susceptible to injury by some alkali.
The harvest and processing of the beet is referred to as "the campaign", reflecting the organization required to deliver the crop at a steady rate to processing factories that run 24 hours a day for the duration of the harvest and processing (for the UK, the campaign lasts about five months).
The sugar beet has a conical, white, fleshy root (a taproot) with a flat crown.
This selection is the progenitor of all modern sugar beets.
He also ordered that  be devoted to growing the new sugar beet.
Sunshine of long duration but not of great intensity is the most important factor in the successful cultivation of sugar beets.
A final addition of more carbon dioxide precipitates more calcium from solution; this is filtered off, leaving a cleaner, golden light-brown sugar solution called '''thin juice'''.
After this first success in Alvarado, the sugar beet industry expanded rapidly.
Sugar beets and other beet cultivars, such as beetroot and chard, are members of ''Beta vulgaris'' subsp.
The centrifuge then spins at very high speed to partially dry the crystals the machine then slows down and a plough shaped arm is deployed which ploughs out the sugar from the sides of the centrifuge from the top to the bottom onto conveying plant underneath where it is transported into a rotating granulator where it is dried using warm air.
These countercurrent exchange methods extract more sugar from the cossettes using less water than if they merely sat in a hot water tank.
Sebewaing, Michigan lies in the Thumb region of Michigan; both the region and state are major sugar beet producers.
In Germany, particularly the Rhineland area, this sugar beet syrup (called ''Zuckerrüben-Sirup'' or ''Zapp'' in German) is used as a spread for sandwiches, as well as for sweetening sauces, cakes and desserts.
A new tax levied in Germany in 1810 prompted the experimentation to increase the sugar content of the beet.
The “Beet Sugar Society of Philadelphia” was founded in 1836 and promoted home-produced beet sugar as an alternative to the slave-produced cane sugar from the West Indies or sugar imported from Asia (called "free sugar" because it was grown without using slavery) but which tasted "awful".
His student, Franz Karl Achard, evaluated 23 varieties of mangelwurzel for sugar content and selected a local strain from Halberstadt in modern-day Saxony-Anhalt, Germany.
No other ingredients are used.
The syrup from the raw (Low green syrup) is boiled for a long time in AP Pans and sent to slowly flow around a series of about eight crystallisers.
In the US, the fall harvest begins with the first hard frost, which arrests photosynthesis and the further growth of the root.
The beet sample is checked for
The best results are obtained along the coast of southern California, where warm, sunny days succeeded by cool, foggy nights seem to meet sugar beet's favored growth conditions.
It should also be capable of retaining moisture and at the same time admit of a free circulation of air and good drainage.
A hard subsoil is impervious to water and prevents proper drainage.
The world harvested  of sugar beets in 2013.
By 1812, Frenchman Jean-Baptiste Quéruel, working for the industrialist Benjamin Delessert, devised a process of sugar extraction suitable for industrial application.
The leaves are numerous and broad and grow in a tuft from the crown of the beet, which is usually level with or just above the ground surface.
In 2011, France, the United States, Germany, Russia, and Ukraine were the world's five largest sugar beet producers by mass, whilst by value Turkey takes the place of Ukraine.
The conveyor then removes more soil.
time, water is then sprayed into the centrifuge via a spray bar to wash the sugar crystals which produces Low Green syrup.
The beet is moved from the heaps into a central channel or gulley, where it is washed towards the processing plant.
The byproducts of the sugar beet crop, such as pulp and molasses, add another 10% to the value of the harvest.
A second worker equipped with a beet hook (a short-handled tool  between a billhook and a sickle) followed behind, and would lift the beet and swiftly chop the crown and leaves from the root with a single action.
This treatment precipitates a number of impurities, including multivalent anions such as sulfate, phosphate, citrate and oxalate, which precipitate as their calcium salts and large organic molecules such as proteins, saponins and pectins, which aggregate in the presence of multivalent cations.
The used cossettes, or '''pulp''', exit the diffuser at about 95% moisture, but low sucrose content.
The sugar beet was also introduced to Chile via German settlers around 1850.
The first attempts at sugar beet cultivation were pursued by abolitionists in New England.
This was in response to British blockades of cane sugar during the Napoleonic Wars, which ultimately stimulated the rapid growth of a European sugar beet industry.
First, the juice is mixed with hot milk of lime (a suspension of calcium hydroxide in water).
Straw bales are used to shield the beets from the weather.
After reception at the processing plant, the beet roots are washed, mechanically sliced into thin strips called '''cossettes''', and passed to a machine called a diffuser to extract the sugar content into a water solution.
Second, the cost of importing the beet seed from France ate up any possibility for profit.
Actual procedures may vary from the above description, with different recycling and crystallisation processes.
Despite the low rate of growth in production during the Soviet period, some particularly impressive advancements were made in seed development, of which the most useful was the development of a frost-resistant sugar beet, further expanding the growing range of the sugar beet.
He also demonstrated that sugar could be extracted from beets that was the same as that produced from sugarcane.
Modern sugar beets date back to mid-18th century Silesia where the king of Prussia subsidised experiments aimed at processes for sugar extraction.
Using screw presses, the wet pulp is then pressed down to 75% moisture.
Depending on the local climate, it may be carried out over the course of a few weeks or be prolonged throughout the winter months.
Beets are planted from a small seed;  of beet seed comprises 100,000 seeds and will plant over  of ground ( will plant about .
Thick juice is fed to the crystallizers.
This story characterizes the history of the sugar beet.
''vulgaris'' and share a common wild ancestor, the Sea beet (''Beta vulgaris'' subsp.
* soil tare – the amount of nonbeet delivered
Deep ploughing is the first principle of beet culture.
“The beet-root, when being boiled, yields a juice similar to syrup of sugar, which is beautiful to look at on account of its vermilion color.” This was written by 16th-century scientist, Olivier de Serres, who discovered a process for preparing sugar syrup from the common red beet.
Finally, none of the people running the factory knew how to properly use the chemicals to separate the sugar from the beet pulp.
Other economically important members of the Chenopodioideae subfamily:
In most temperate climates, beets are planted in the spring and harvested in the autumn.
However, by 1880, Germany became the largest sugar beet to sugar producer in the world, since the German factories processed most of the sugar beets grown in eastern France.
Sugar beet breeding research in the United States is most prominently conducted at various USDA Agricultural Research Stations, including one in Fort Collins, Colorado, headed by Linda Hanson and Leonard Panella; one in Fargo, North Dakota, headed by John Wieland; and one at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan, headed by J. Mitchell McGrath.
The syrup separated is molasses, which still contains sugar, but contains too much impurity to undergo further processing economically.
The sugar beet industry in the United Kingdom was finally subsidized providing stability to the domestic industry that had experienced volatile shifts in profits and losses in the years since 1915.
In recent years, Syngenta has developed the so-called tropical sugar beet.
However, in 2010–2011, North America, Western Europe, and Eastern Europe did not produce enough sugar from sugar beets to meet overall demand for sugar, and were all net importers of sugar.
Sugar beet foliage has a rich, brilliant green color and grows to a height of about .
Sugar beets grow exclusively in the temperate zone, in contrast to sugarcane, which grows exclusively in the tropical and subtropical zones.
The Silesian sugar beet was soon introduced to France where Napoleon opened schools specifically for studying the plant.
The competition between beet sugar and sugar cane for control of the sugar market plays out from the first extraction of a sugar syrup from a garden beet into the modern day.
In the Netherlands, this period is known as ''de bietencampagne'', a time to be careful when driving on local roads in the area while the beets are being grown, because the naturally high clay content of the soil tends to cause slippery roads when soil falls from the trailers during transport.
Attempts at operating diffusion under alkaline conditions have been made, but the process has proven problematic.
In some European countries, especially in the Czech Republic and Germany, beet sugar is also used to make rectified spirit and vodka.
One laborer grabbed the beets by their leaves, knocked them together to shake free loose soil, and then laid them in a row, root to one side, greens to the other.
The feedstock-to-yield ratio for sugarbeet is 56:9.
Next, carbon dioxide is bubbled through the alkaline sugar solution, precipitating the lime as calcium carbonate (chalk).
In 2011, a federal appeals court for the Northern district of California in San Francisco overturned the ruling.
Although these factories were not altogether a success, the results attained greatly interested Napoleon.
A recent development has been the introduction of genetically modified (GM) seed varieties.
It should not be too loose, however, as this allows the water to pass through more freely than is desirable.
In 1811, Napoleon issued a decree appropriating one million francs for the establishment of sugar schools, and compelling the farmers to plant a large acreage to sugar beets the following year.
After deregulation in 2005, glyphosate-resistant sugar beets were extensively adopted in the United States.
These breakdown products are not only losses of sucrose, but also have knock-on effects reducing the final output of processed sugar from the factory.
The average weight of sugar beet ranges between .
The addition of the liquid to rock salt has the additional benefits that it reduces the bounce and scatter of the rock salt, keeping it where it is needed, and reduces the activation time of the salt to begin the melting process.
This meant it would never receive the federal subsidization that a sugar beet industry needed to survive.
It allows the roots to penetrate the subsoil without much obstruction, thereby preventing the beet from growing out of the ground, besides enabling it to extract considerable nourishment and moisture from the lower soil.
U.S. District Judge Jeffrey S. White, US District Court for the Northern District of California, revoked the deregulation of glyphosate-resistant sugar beets and declared it unlawful for growers to plant glyphosate-resistant sugar beets in the spring of 2011.
Many road authorities in North America use desugared beet molasses as de-icing or anti-icing products in winter control operations.
In warmer climates, such as in California's Imperial Valley, sugar beets are a winter crop, planted in the autumn and harvested in the spring.
If the latter is too hard, the roots will not penetrate it readily and, as a result, the plant will be pushed up and out of the earth during the process of growth.
The introduction of glyphosate-resistant sugar beets may contribute to the growing number of glyphosate-resistant weeds, so Monsanto has developed a program to encourage growers to use different herbicide modes of action to control their weeds.
The result was a reduction in the production of cane sugar, molasses and rum until 1915.
High winds are harmful, as they generally crust the land and prevent the young beets from coming through the ground.
Despite Marggraf’s success in isolating pure sugar from beets, their commercial manufacture for sugar did not take off until the early 19th century.
Sugar beets were not grown on a large scale in the United Kingdom until the mid-1920s, when 17 processing factories were built, following war-time shortages of imported cane sugar.
* crown tare – the amount of low-sugar beet delivered
After a predetermined
'''Sugar beet''' is the Altissima Group of cultivars of the common beet (''Beta vulgaris'').
were Japanese Americans; when they were interned during World War II, California's beet sugar production also shifted inland to states such as Idaho, Montana, North Dakota, and Utah.
However, World War I had created a shortage in sugar, prompting the development of a domestic market.
By the beginning of the 19th century, his beet was about 5–6% sucrose by (dry) weight, compared to around 20% in modern varieties.
Until the latter half of the 20th century, sugar beet production was highly labor-intensive, as weed control was managed by densely planting the crop, which then had to be manually thinned two or three times with a hoe during the growing season.
After they are harvested, beets are typically transported to a factory.
* ''Mangelwurzel'' or fodder beet.
The pressed pulp is dried and sold as animal feed, while the liquid pressed out of the pulp is combined with the raw juice, or more often introduced into the diffuser at the appropriate point in the countercurrent process.
The Dutch built the first successful factory at Cantley in Norfolk in 1912, and it was moderately successful since, because of its Dutch backing, it received Dutch bounties.
The colour of raw juice varies from black to a dark red depending on the amount of oxidation, which is itself dependent on diffuser design.
The liquor is concentrated further by boiling under a vacuum in large vessels (the so-called vacuum pans) and seeded with fine sugar crystals.
First, the beet seeds they imported from France were not able to produce much sugar in the heavily salinized soil of Utah.
BP and Associated British Foods plan to use agricultural surpluses of sugar beet to produce biobutanol in East Anglia in the United Kingdom.
Provided the clamp is well built with the right amount of ventilation, the beets do not significantly deteriorate.
As a result of the French advances in sugar beet production and processing made during the Napoleonic Wars, the beet sugar industry in Europe developed rapidly.
Although the roots could be lifted by a plough-like device which could be pulled by a horse team, the rest of the preparation was by hand.
He found the best of these vegetable sources for the extraction of sugar was the white beet.
The sugar beet arrived in Russia in the 1850s as part of the general expansion east.
The thin juice is concentrated via multiple-effect evaporation to make a '''thick juice''', roughly 60% sucrose by weight and similar in appearance to pancake syrup.
Today, mechanical sowing, herbicide application for weed control, and mechanical harvesting have displaced this reliance on manual farm work.
Moritz Baron von Koppy and his son further selected from this strain for white, conical tubers.
Molasses can be more advantageous than road salt alone because it reduces corrosion and lowers the freezing point of the salt-brine mix, so the de-icers remain effective at lower temperatures.
Sugar beet seed from France was listed in the annual catalogues of Gartons Agricultural Plant Breeders from that firm's inception in 1898 until the first of their own varieties was introduced in 1909.
Before World War I, with its far-flung empire, the United Kingdom simply imported the sugar from the cheapest market.
The average yield of sugar beet crops worldwide was 58.2 tonnes per hectare.
Sugar from glyphosate-resistant sugar beets has been approved for human and animal consumption in multiple countries, but commercial production of biotech beets has been approved only in the United States and Canada.
In high elevation regions such as those of Colorado and Utah, where the temperature is high during the daytime, but where the nights are cool, the quality of the sugar beet is excellent.
A royal decree led to the first factory devoted to sugar extraction from beetroots being opened in Kunern, Silesia (now Konary, Poland) in 1801.
Left untreated, these sugars and amines would eventually frustrate crystallization of the sucrose.
Glyphosate is commonly used in field crops because it controls a broad spectrum of weed species and has a low toxicity.
A less-common design uses a moving belt of cossettes, with water pumped onto the top of the belt and poured through.
A root beater uses a series of blades to chop the leaf and crown (which is high in nonsugar impurities) from the root.
Beets that freeze and then defrost, produce complex carbohydrates that cause severe production problems in the factory.
Therefore, it takes 6.22&nbsp;kg of sugar beet to produce 1&nbsp;kg of ethanol (approximately 1.27 l at room temperature).
In the 2009/10 crop year, GM varieties accounted for about 95 percent of planted area, up from about 60 percent in 2008/09.
Marggraf's student and successor Franz Karl Achard began selectively breeding sugar beet from the 'White Silesian' fodder beet in 1784.
The largest producers of beet sugar in the United States would remain California, Utah, and Nebraska until the outbreak of World War II.
Each load is weighed and sampled before it gets tipped onto the reception area, typically a "flat pad" of concrete, where it is moved into large heaps.
