By 1879, English law began to distinguish between suicide and homicide, although suicide still resulted in forfeiture of estate.
England and Wales decriminalized suicide via the Suicide Act 1961 and the Republic of Ireland in 1993.
Post-mortem studies have found reduced levels of BDNF in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, in those with and without psychiatric conditions.
In Japan, self-disembowelment known as seppuku (or hara-kiri) still occurs; however, hanging and jumping are the most common.
Muslims, among religious people, appear to have a lower rate of suicide; however the data supporting this is not strong.
In Ancient Rome, while suicide was initially permitted, it was later deemed a crime against the state due to its economic costs.
Japanese society as a whole has been described as "suicide tolerant" (see Suicide in Japan).
The cause of death was recorded by the coroner as "starvation, self-imposed" rather than suicide; this was modified to simply "starvation" on the death certificates after protest from the dead strikers' families.
As a percentage of deaths in 2008 it was: Africa 0.5%, South-East Asia 1.9%, Americas 1.2% and Europe 1.4%.
Some have proposed reducing access to alcohol as a preventative strategy (such as reducing the number of bars).
Suicide resulted in 842,000 deaths globally in 2013 (up from 712,000 deaths in 1990).
Antidepressants of the SSRI type appear to increase the risk of suicide in children but do not change the risk in adults.
As there is a high rate of people who test positive via these tools that are not at risk of suicide, there are concerns that screening may significantly increase mental health care resource utilization.
Countries that have higher rates of alcohol use and a greater density of bars generally also have higher rates of suicide.
This difference is even more pronounced in those over the age of 65, with tenfold more males than females dying by suicide.
Between 12 and 24% pathological gamblers attempt suicide.
In Japan, health problems are listed as the primary justification for suicide.
Internet searches for information on suicide return webpages that 10-30% of the time encourage or facilitate suicide attempts.
For example, suicide rates have been found to be greater in households with firearms than those without them.
This risk is greater in adolescents who may romanticize death.
In older persons however they might decrease the risk.
The Qu'ran forbids it by stating "do not kill or destroy yourself".
Canadians who have attempted suicide may be barred from entering the US.
The Abrahamic religions traditionally consider suicide an offense towards God due to the belief in the sanctity of life.
Kamikaze missions were carried out as a duty to a higher cause or moral obligation.
In the Western world, males die three to four times more often by means of suicide than do females.
During World War II, Erwin Rommel was found to have foreknowledge of the July 20 Plot on Hitler's life; he was threatened with public trial, execution and reprisals on his family unless he took his own life.
A review of 56 countries found that hanging was the most common method in most of the countries, accounting for 53% of the male suicides and 39% of the female suicides.
The media, which includes the Internet, plays an important role.
The most common attempted methods of suicide differ from the most common successful methods; up to 85% of attempts are via drug overdose in the developed world.
When detailed descriptions of how to kill oneself by a specific means are portrayed, this method of suicide may increase in the population as a whole.
There has been little scientific study of animal suicide.
Although suicide remained illegal during this period, it increasingly became the target of satirical comment, such as the Gilbert and Sullivan musical ''The Mikado'' that satirised the idea of executing someone who had already killed himself.
It, however, was in most Western European countries from the Middle Ages until at least the 1800s.
Evidence however has not found a decrease in completed suicides.
Sexual abuse is believed to contribute to about 20% of the overall risk.
The countries with the greatest absolute numbers of suicides are China and India, accounting for over half the total.
Suicide prevention is a term used for the collective efforts to reduce the incidence of suicide through preventative measures.
There is growing consensus that it is more appropriate to use "completed suicide," "died by suicide" or simply "killed him/herself" to describe the act of suicide, and this is reflected in mental health organisations' media guidance.
Views on suicide have been influenced by broad existential themes such as religion, honor, and the meaning of life.
There is tentative evidence that psychotherapy, specifically, dialectical behaviour therapy reduces suicidality in adolescents as well as in those with borderline personality disorder.
Clozapine may decrease the thoughts of suicide in some people with schizophrenia.
Suicide prevention efforts include limiting access to method of suicide, such as firearms and poisons, treating mental disorders and substance misuse, proper media reporting of suicide, and improving economic conditions.
Being religious may reduce one's risk of suicide.
Recent life stresses such as a loss of a family member or friend, loss of a job, or social isolation (such as living alone) increase the risk.
Some who self-harm, however, do still end their life by suicide, and risk for self-harm and suicide may overlap.
The highest rate of female suicide is found in South Korea at 22 per 100,000, with high rates in South-East Asia and the Western Pacific generally.
In people with more than one medical condition the risk was particularly high.
Suicide came to be regarded as a sin in Christian Europe and was condemned at the Council of Arles in 452 as the work of the Devil.
Stigma is often associated with suicide in Islamic countries.
The most commonly used method of suicide varies between countries, and is partly related to the availability of effective means.
The death rate varies by method: firearms 80-90%, drowning 65-80%, hanging 60-85%, car exhaust 40-60%, jumping 35-60%, charcoal burning 40-50%, pesticides 6-75%, and medication overdose 1.5-4%.
Despite these efforts, "committed suicide" and similar descriptions remain common in both scholarly research and journalism.
Increasing relative poverty compared to those around a person increases suicide risk.
The hadiths also state individual suicide to be unlawful and a sin.
Substance misuse is also associated with mental health disorders.
If a person is at low risk, outpatient mental health treatment may be arranged.
'''Suicide''' is the act of intentionally causing one's own death.
Suicidal ideation is thoughts of ending one's life but not taking any active efforts to do so.
There are an estimated 10 to 20&nbsp;million non-fatal attempted suicides every year.
Suicide in some Inuit cultures has been seen as an act of respect, courage, or wisdom.
In adolescents who misuse alcohol, neurological and psychological dysfunctions may contribute to the increased risk of suicide.
In Switzerland, firearms are the most frequent suicides method in young males, however this method has decreased relatively since guns have become less common.
Attitudes towards suicide slowly began to shift during the Renaissance.
Alcoholics who attempt suicide are usually male, older, and have tried to take their own lives in the past.
In Australia suicide is not a crime.
However, it is believed that mental illness or grave fear of suffering diminishes the responsibility of the one completing suicide.
Mental disorders and substance misuse frequently co-exist.
In the Eastern Mediterranean, suicide rates are nearly equivalent between males and females.
Rates of suicide appear to decrease around Christmas.
Sati, or self-immolation by widows, was prevalent in Hindu society during the Middle Ages.
Judaism focuses on the importance of valuing this life, and as such, suicide is tantamount to denying God's goodness in the world.
In the developing world rates are similar, but it makes up a smaller proportion of overall deaths due to higher rates of death from other types of trauma.
In those who use cocaine the risk is greatest during the withdrawal phase.
Most people are under the influence of sedative-hypnotic drugs (such as alcohol or benzodiazepines) when they die by suicide with alcoholism present in between 15% and 61% of cases.
Socio-economic problems such as unemployment, poverty, homelessness, and discrimination may trigger suicidal thoughts.
An evolutionary explanation for suicide is that it may improve inclusive fitness.
There is an association between suicidality and physical health problems such as chronic pain, traumatic brain injury, cancer, kidney failure (requiring hemodialysis), HIV, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
A number of psychological states increase the risk of suicide including: hopelessness, loss of pleasure in life, depression and anxiousness.
It remains a criminal offense in most Muslim-majority nations.
In those with mental health problems a number of treatments may reduce the risk of suicide.
Other risk factors include having previously attempted suicide, the ready availability of a means to take one's life, a family history of suicide, or the presence of traumatic brain injury.
Switzerland has recently taken steps to legalize assisted suicide for the chronically mentally ill.
Some people form suicide pacts online, either with pre-existing friends or people they have recently encountered in chat rooms or message boards.
When media follows recommended reporting guidelines the risk of suicides can be decreased.
Getting buy-in from industry, however, can be difficult, especially in the long term.
Despite these disputes and occasional official rulings, Catholic doctrine was not entirely settled on the subject of suicide until the later 17th century.
Lithium appears effective at lowering the risk in those with bipolar disorder and unipolar depression to nearly the same levels as the general population.
Globally, /2009, suicide is the tenth leading cause of death.
There is little evidence as to why this association exists; however it has been hypothesized that those who are predisposed to smoking are also predisposed to suicide, that smoking causes health problems which subsequently make people want to end their life, and that smoking affects brain chemistry causing a propensity for suicide.
In most forms of Christianity, suicide is considered a sin, based mainly on the writings of influential Christian thinkers of the Middle Ages, such as St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas, but suicide was not considered a sin under the Byzantine Christian code of Justinian, for instance.
Others estimate that about half of people who complete suicide could be diagnosed with a personality disorder with borderline personality disorder being the most common.
The Japanese military during World War II encouraged and glorified kamikaze attacks, which were suicide attacks by military aviators from the Empire of Japan against Allied naval vessels in the closing stages of the Pacific theatre of World War II.
Although crisis hotlines are common there is little evidence to support or refute their effectiveness.
However, Hinduism accepts a man's right to end one's life through the non-violent practice of fasting to death, termed ''Prayopavesa''.
In many countries the rate of suicide is highest in the middle-aged or elderly.
In some instances the sleep disturbances may be a risk factor independent of depression.
Genetics appears to account for between 38% and 55% of suicidal behaviors.
The next most common cause was hanging in males and self-poisoning in females.
The secularisation of society that began during The Enlightenment questioned traditional religious attitudes toward suicide and brought a more modern perspective to the issue.
As suicide requires a willful attempt to die, some feel it therefore cannot be said to occur in non-human animals.
It however is a crime to counsel, incite, or aid and abet another in attempting to die by suicide, and the law explicitly allows any person to use "such force as may reasonably be necessary" to prevent another from taking their own life.
The leading method of suicide varies among countries.
Approximately 0.5% to 1.4% of people die by suicide, a mortality rate of 11.6 per 100,000 persons per year.
Direct evidence is however hard to gather.
When combined with personal grief, such as bereavement, the risk is further increased.
The Internet, however, may also help prevent suicide by providing a social group for those who are isolated.
Others view suicide as a legitimate matter of personal choice.
A poor ability to solve problems, the loss of abilities one used to have, and poor impulse control also play a role.
A number of other medical conditions may present with symptoms similar to mood disorders, including hypothyroidism, Alzheimer's, brain tumors, systemic lupus erythematosus, and adverse effects from a number of medications (such as beta blockers and steroids).
Other factors that increase the risk in problem gamblers include mental illness, alcohol and drug misuse.
Mass suicides are often performed under social pressure where members give up autonomy to a leader.
Suicide and attempted suicide, while previously illegal, are no longer in most Western countries.
A history of childhood sexual abuse and time spent in foster care are also risk factors.
Suicide in which the reason is that the person feels that they are not part of society is known as egoistic suicide.
Adaptation to a very different ancestral environment may be maladaptive in the current one.
It was ranked as the 10th leading cause of death in the United States in 2009 at about 36,000 cases a year, with about 650,000 people seen in emergency departments yearly due to attempting suicide.
By the 19th-century, the act of suicide had shifted from being viewed as caused by sin to being caused by insanity in Europe.
Mass suicides can take place with as few as two people, often referred to as a suicide pact.
John Donne's work ''Biathanatos'', contained one of the first modern defences of suicide, bringing proof from the conduct of Biblical figures, such as Jesus, Samson and Saul, and presenting arguments on grounds of reason and nature to sanction suicide in certain circumstances.
In China, the consumption of pesticides is the most common method.
There is little data on the effects of screening the general population on the ultimate rate of suicide.
The word is from the Latin ''suicidium'', which means "the killing of oneself".
In the 20th and 21st centuries, suicide has been used on rare occasions as a form of protest, and kamikaze and suicide bombings have been used as a military or terrorist tactic.
In Catholic doctrine, the argument is based on the commandment "Thou shalt not kill" (made applicable under the New Covenant by Jesus in Matthew 19:18), as well as the idea that life is a gift given by God which should not be spurned, and that suicide is against the "natural order" and thus interferes with God's master plan for the world.
, a barrier is being constructed for the Golden Gate Bridge.
Notable supporters of this school of thought include Scottish empiricist David Hume and American bioethicist Jacob Appel.
In the Western world, attempts are more common in young people and females.
Some researchers have attributed this to males using more lethal means to end their lives.
However, it was deemed to be an acceptable method to deal with military defeat.
The rate of suicide among their spouses is three times greater than that of the general population.
Hindu Scriptures state that one who dies by suicide will become part of the spirit world, wandering earth until the time one would have otherwise died, had one not taken one's own life.
Some inmates in Nazi concentration camps are known to have killed themselves by deliberately touching the electrified fences.
In Oregon, people with terminal diseases may request medications to help end their life.
Opponents to suicide include Christian philosophers such as Augustine of Hippo, Thomas Aquinas, Immanuel Kant and, arguably, John Stuart Mill – Mill's focus on the importance of liberty and autonomy meant that he rejected choices which would prevent a person from making future autonomous decisions.
This may occur if the person dying by suicide cannot have more children and takes resources away from relatives by staying alive.
There have been anecdotal reports of dogs, horses and dolphins killing themselves, though with little conclusive evidence.
Supporters of this position maintain that no one should be forced to suffer against their will, particularly from conditions such as incurable disease, mental illness, and old age, with no possibility of improvement.
Those who have previously attempted suicide are at higher risk for future attempts.
Despite this, under extreme circumstances when there has seemed no choice but to either be killed or forced to betray their religion, Jews have committed individual suicide or mass suicide (see Masada, First French persecution of the Jews, and York Castle for examples) and as a grim reminder there is even a prayer in the Jewish liturgy for "when the knife is at the throat", for those dying "to sanctify God's Name" (see Martyrdom).
The leading methods in different regions include hanging, pesticide poisoning, and firearms.
In his 1777 ''Essays on Suicide and the Immortality of the Soul'' he rhetorically asked, "Why should I prolong a miserable existence, because of some frivolous advantage which the public may perhaps receive from me?"
Smoking cigarettes is associated with the risk of suicide.
Other measures include reducing access to charcoal and barriers on bridges and subway platforms.
Others are impulsive acts due to stress such as from financial difficulties, troubles with relationships, or from bullying.
In South-East Asia in contrast to other areas of the world, deaths from suicide occur at a greater rate in young females than elderly females.
The diagnosis of cancer approximately doubles the subsequent risk of suicide.
Acts of self-harm are not usually suicide attempts and most who self-harm are not at high risk of suicide.
Common methods include hanging, pesticide poisoning, and firearms.
In many countries, drug overdoses account for approximately 60% of suicides among women and 30% among men.
In young males in the developed world it is the cause of nearly 30% of mortality.
Physician-assisted suicide is legal in the state of Washington for people with terminal diseases.
Those who object to the use of ''commit'' argue that it carries with it implications that suicide is a criminal, sinful or morally wrong act.
About 15–40% of people leave a suicide note.
Those who used inhalants are also at significant risk with around 20% attempting suicide at some point and more than 65% considering it.
The high court in Lausanne, in a 2006 ruling, granted an anonymous individual with longstanding psychiatric difficulties the right to end his own life.
Additionally, all of the person's property was confiscated.
Many are unplanned and occur during an acute period of ambivalence.
An example of this is an elder ending his or her life to leave greater amounts of food for the younger people in the community.
The opposite of the Werther effect is the proposed Papageno effect, in which coverage of effective coping mechanisms may have a protective effect.
Asking about suicidality does not appear to increase the risk.
Young women in the Middle East may have higher rates.
David Hume denied that suicide was a crime as it affected no one and was potentially to the advantage of the individual.
In Hinduism, suicide is generally frowned upon and is considered equally sinful as murdering another in contemporary Hindu society.
In Germany, active euthanasia is illegal and anyone present during suicide may be prosecuted for failure to render aid in an emergency.
The term is based upon a character in Mozart's opera ''The Magic Flute'', who (fearing the loss of a loved one) had planned to kill himself until his friends helped him out.
Other evidence includes reduced levels of a breakdown product of serotonin, 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid, in the cerebral spinal fluid.
Serotonin, a brain neurotransmitter, is believed to be low in those who die by suicide.
In ancient Athens, a person who committed suicide without the approval of the state was denied the honours of a normal burial.
Treatment of drug and alcohol addiction, depression, and those who have attempted suicide in the past may also be effective.
Due in part to social stigmatisation and the resulting depression, people whose gender identity does not align with their assigned sex are at a high risk of suicide.
About 2.2–3.4% of those who have been treated for alcoholism at some point in their life die by suicide.
It appears that while news media has a significant effect, that of the entertainment media is equivocal.
Assessing those at high risk however is recommended.
Risk factors include mental disorders such as depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, personality disorders, alcoholism, or substance misuse.
In the United States it is greatest in Caucasian men older than 80 years, even though younger people more frequently attempt suicide.
Lithuania, Japan and Hungary have the highest rates.
It is also common in Latin America due to easy access within the farming populations.
This makes it the 10th leading cause of death worldwide.
In young persons, the newer antidepressants such as SSRIs appear to increase the risk of suicidality from 25 per 1000 to 40 per 1000.
Suicide, also known as completed suicide, is the "act of taking one's own life".
However, separating intentional suicide attempts, from non-suicidal self-harm, is not currently done in the United States, when gathering statistics at the national level.
Many locations where suicide is common have constructed barriers to prevent it; this includes the Luminous Veil in Toronto, the Eiffel Tower in Paris and Empire State Building in New York City.
An objection is that deaths by healthy adolescents likely does not increase inclusive fitness.
Advocacy of suicide has occurred in many cultures and subcultures.
Poverty is associated with the risk of suicide.
Jainism has a similar practice named ''Santhara''.
In India, suicide used to be illegal and surviving family could face legal difficulties.
Of those who have been admitted to a psychiatric unit, their lifetime risk of completed suicide is about 8.6%.
Jumping to one's death is common in both Hong Kong and Singapore at 50% and 80% respectively.
Those who have never married are also at greater risk.
Some suicide bombers are motivated by a desire to obtain martyrdoms.
Evidence however does not support a significant effect from this practice.
Assisted suicide is when one individual helps another bring about their own death indirectly via providing either advice or the means to the end.
They reject the belief that suicide is always irrational, arguing instead that it can be a valid last resort for those enduring major pain or trauma.
The World Suicide Prevention Day is observed annually on September 10 with the support of the International Association for Suicide Prevention and the World Health Organization.
In the United States, suicide is not illegal but may be associated with penalties for those who attempt it.
There does not appear to be a difference in rates of attempted suicide rates.
In Asia, rates of mental disorders appear to be lower than in Western countries.
The 1981 hunger strikes, led by Bobby Sands, resulted in 10 deaths.
