Methanogenesis, the route to most of the world's methane, is a multistep biochemical transformation of carbon dioxide.
The mineral galena (PbS) was the first demonstrated semiconductor and was used as a signal rectifier in the cat's whiskers of early crystal radios.
Compounds with carbon-sulfur multiple bonds are uncommon, an exception being carbon disulfide, a volatile colorless liquid that is structurally similar to carbon dioxide.
The δC-13 and δS-34 of coexisting carbonate minerals and sulfides can be used to determine the pH and oxygen fugacity of the ore-bearing fluid during ore formation.
He mentions its use for fumigation, medicine, and bleaching cloth.
As a mineral, native sulfur under salt domes is thought to be a fossil mineral resource, produced by the action of ancient bacteria on sulfate deposits.
A Song dynasty military treatise of 1044 AD described different formulas for Chinese black powder, which is a mixture of potassium nitrate (), charcoal, and sulfur.
The point group of cyclo-S8 is D4d and its dipole moment is 0 D. Octasulfur is a soft, bright-yellow solid with only a faint odor, similar to that of matches.
Bucholz, but the cause of the color and the structure of the polycations involved was only determined in the late 1960s.
In intracellular chemistry, sulfur operates as a carrier of reducing hydrogen and its electrons for cellular repair of oxidation.
It acts as a keratolytic agent and also kills bacteria, fungi, scabies mites and other parasites.
Sulfur is increasingly used as a component of fertilizers.
The photosynthetic green sulfur bacteria and purple sulfur bacteria and some lithotrophs use elemental oxygen to carry out such oxidization of hydrogen sulfide to produce elemental sulfur (S0), oxidation state = 0.
:SO42− → SO32− → H2S → cysteine → methionine
Small amounts of sulfur dioxide gas addition (or equivalent potassium metabisulfite addition) to fermented wine to produce traces of sulfurous acid (produced when SO2 reacts with water) and its sulfite salts in the mixture, has been called "the most powerful tool in winemaking."
In the rasaśāstra tradition, sulfur is called "the smelly" (sanskrit gandhaka, गन्धक).
The IUPAC adopted the spelling ''sulfur'' in 1990, as did the Nomenclature Committee of the Royal Society of Chemistry in 1992, restoring the spelling ''sulfur'' to Britain.
In coal-fired power plants, flue gases are sometimes purified.
Some of those reactions need elevated temperatures.
Because atmospheric inputs of sulfur continue to decrease, the deficit in the sulfur input/output is likely to increase unless sulfur fertilizers are used.
Sulfur dichloride and disulfur dichloride are important industrial chemicals.
Common naturally occurring sulfur compounds include the sulfide minerals, such as pyrite (iron sulfide), cinnabar (mercury sulfide), galena (lead sulfide), sphalerite (zinc sulfide) and stibnite (antimony sulfide); and the sulfates, such as gypsum (calcium sulfate), alunite (potassium aluminium sulfate), and barite (barium sulfate).
The practice has declined since reports of an allergy-like reaction of some persons to sulfites in foods.
Indian alchemists, practitioners of "the science of mercury" (sanskrit rasaśāstra, रसशास्त्र), wrote extensively about the use of sulfur in alchemical operations with mercury, from the eighth century AD onwards.
Many drugs contain sulfur, early examples being antibacterial sulfonamides, known as ''sulfa drugs''.
The greatest commercial use of the element is the production of sulfuric acid for sulfate and phosphate fertilizers, and other chemical processes.
Rocky Mountain lakes thought to be dominated by atmospheric sources of sulfate have been found to have different δ34S values from lakes believed to be dominated by watershed sources of sulfate.
Sulfur is absorbed by plants roots from soil as sulfate and transported as a phosphate ester.
A natural form of sulfur known as ''shiliuhuang'' (石硫黄) was known in China since the 6th century BC and found in Hanzhong.
Sulfur deficiency has become widespread in many countries in Europe.
Most pervasive are the ferrodoxins, which serve as electron shuttles in cells.
In the 1880s, while studying Beggiatoa (a bacterium living in a sulfur rich environment), Sergei Winogradsky found that it oxidized hydrogen sulfide (H2S) as an energy source, forming intracellular sulfur droplets.
Oxidation of thiocyanate gives thiocyanogen, (SCN)2 with the connectivity NCS-SCN.
They use organic compounds or molecular hydrogen as the energy source.
Under normal conditions, sulfur atoms form cyclic octatomic molecules with chemical formula S8.
Elemental sulfur powder is used as an "organic" (i.e.
However, save for the vitamins biotin and thiamine, cysteine and all sulfur-containing compounds in the human body can be synthesized from methionine.
Sulfur corrodes many metals through tarnishing.
Three amino acids (cysteine, cystine, and methionine) and two vitamins (biotin and thiamine) are organosulfur compounds.
Disulfide bonds (S-S bonds) between cysteine residues in peptide chains are very important in protein assembly and structure.
This reaction highlights a distinctive property of sulfur: its ability to catenate (bind to itself by formation of chains).
Protonation of these polysulfide anions produces the polysulfanes, H2Sx where x = 2, 3, and 4.
sodium lauryl sulfate) are sulfate derivatives.
In organic production, sulfur is the most important fungicide.
By the 3rd century, the Chinese discovered that sulfur could be extracted from pyrite.
The parallel ''f~ph'' spellings continued in Britain until the 19th century, when the word was standardized as ''sulphur''.
The interconversion of these species is exploited in the sodium-sulfur battery.
X-ray crystallography studies show that the amorphous form may have a helical structure with eight atoms per turn.
Ordinary chondrites contain on average 2.1% sulfur, and carbonaceous chondrites may contain as much as 6.6%.
Significant deposits in salt domes occur along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico, and in evaporites in eastern Europe and western Asia.
Standard-formulation dusting sulfur is applied to crops with a sulfur duster or from a dusting plane.
Sulfur tetrafluoride is rarely used organic reagent that and is highly toxic.
Large quantities of sulfites are used to bleach paper and to preserve dried fruit.
Sulfur polycations, S82+, S42+ and S162+ are produced when sulfur is reacted with mild oxidising agents in a strongly acidic solution.
Today, sulfur is produced from petroleum, natural gas, and related fossil resources, from which it is obtained mainly as hydrogen sulfide.
On Earth, elemental sulfur can be found near hot springs and volcanic regions in many parts of the world, especially along the Pacific Ring of Fire; such volcanic deposits are currently mined in Indonesia, Chile, and Japan.
Two of the 13 classical vitamins, biotin and thiamine, contain sulfur, with the latter being named for its sulfur content.
Thiosulfate salts (), sometimes referred as "hyposulfites", used in photographic fixing (hypo) and as reducing agents, feature sulfur in two oxidation states.
A diluted solution of lime sulfur (made by combining calcium hydroxide with elemental sulfur in water) is used as a dip for pets to destroy ringworm (fungus), mange, and other dermatoses and parasites.
In the Bible, sulfur is called  ''brimstone''.
Fuel standards increasingly require that fuel producers extract sulfur from fossil fuels to prevent acid rain formation.
Native sulfur is synthesised by anaerobic bacteria acting on sulfate minerals such as gypsum in salt domes.
The resulting hydrogen sulfide from this process, and also as it occurs in natural gas, is converted into elemental sulfur by the Claus process.
When sulfide minerals are precipitated, isotopic equilibration among solids and liquid may cause small differences in the δS-34 values of co-genetic minerals.
In most forest ecosystems, sulfate is derived mostly from the atmosphere; weathering of ore minerals and evaporites contribute some sulfur.
The thioredoxins, a class of small proteins essential to all known life, use neighboring pairs of reduced cysteines to work as general protein reducing agents, with similar effect.
Sulfur forms over 30 solid allotropes, more than any other element.
Sulfur hexafluoride is a dense gas used as an insulator gas in high voltage transformers; it is also a nonreactive and nontoxic propellant for pressurized containers.
Most β-lactam antibiotics, including the penicillins, cephalosporins and monolactams contain sulfur.
:SO2 + 2 H2S → 3 S + 2 H2O
Sulfuric acid is a strong dehydrating agent that can strip available water molecules and water components from sugar and organic tissue.
It is an essential nutrient for plant growth, root nodule formation of legumes, and immunity and defense systems.
English translations of the Bible commonly referred to burning sulfur as "brimstone", giving rise to the term "fire-and-brimstone" sermons, in which listeners are reminded of the fate of eternal damnation that await the unbelieving and unrepentant.
This process happens within a matter of hours to days, but can be rapidly catalyzed.
Calcium sulfate, gypsum, (CaSO4·2H2O) is mined on the scale of 100 million tons each year for use in Portland cement and fertilizers.
Sulfur trioxide (made by catalysis from sulfur dioxide) and sulfuric acid are similarly highly acidic and corrosive in the presence of water.
The root has been traced back to reconstructed proto-Indo-European  (genitive ), a nominal derivative of  'to burn', a lineage also preserved in the Germanic languages, where it is found as the modern German ''Schwefel'', Dutch ''zwavel'', and Swedish ''svavel'', and as Old English ''swefl''.
Then, some sulfur was pulverized, spread over the stacked ore and ignited, causing the free sulfur to melt down the hills.
The spelling ''sulfur'' appears toward the end of the Classical period.
Common oxidation states of sulfur range from −2 to +6.
thiosulfates, thionates, polysulfides, sulfites).
A  human body contains about 140&nbsp;grams of sulfur.
It has similar applications and is used as a fungicide against mildew and other mold-related problems with plants and soil.
Processing these ores, usually by roasting, is costly and environmentally hazardous.
Sulfur-sulfur bonds are a structural component used to stiffen rubber, similar to the disulfide bridges that rigidify proteins (see biological below).
The world production of sulfur in 2011 amounted to 69 million tonnes (Mt), with more than 15 countries contributing more than 1 Mt each.
Sulfur forms stable compounds with all elements except the noble gases.
Hydrogen sulfide quickly deadens the sense of smell and a victim may breathe increasing quantities without noticing the increase until severe symptoms cause death.
The hydrogen sulfide produced by these bacteria is responsible for some of the smell of intestinal gases (flatus) and decomposition products.
Sulfur was used for fumigation in preclassical Greece; this is mentioned in the ''Odyssey''.
Sulfur candles of almost pure sulfur are burned to fumigate structures and wine barrels, but are now considered too toxic for residences.
In bacteria, the important nitrogenase enzymes contains an Fe-Mo-S cluster, is a catalyst that performs the important function of nitrogen fixation, converting atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia that can be used by microorganisms and plants to make proteins, DNA, RNA, alkaloids, and the other organic nitrogen compounds necessary for life.
These acids are components of acid rain, lowering the pH of soil and freshwater bodies, sometimes resulting in substantial damage to the environment and chemical weathering of statues and structures.
Disulfides, S–S bonds, confer mechanical strength and insolubility of the protein keratin, found in outer skin, hair, and feathers.
'''Sulfur''' or '''sulphur''' (see spelling differences) is a chemical element with symbol&nbsp;'''S''' and atomic number&nbsp;16.
Elemental sulfur occurs naturally as the element (native sulfur), but most commonly occurs in combined forms as sulfide and sulfate minerals.
Fossil-based sulfur deposits from salt domes were until recently the basis for commercial production in the United States, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine.
Eggs are high in sulfur to nourish feather formation in chicks, and the characteristic odor of rotting eggs is due to hydrogen sulfide.
Historically, Sicily was a major source of sulfur in the Industrial Revolution.
The conditions in Sicilian sulfur mines were horrific, prompting Booker T. Washington to write "I am not prepared just now to say to what extent I believe in a physical hell in the next world, but a sulphur mine in Sicily is about the nearest thing to hell that I expect to see in this life."
Other applications of sulfuric acid include oil refining, wastewater processing, and mineral extraction.
Due to a limited number of such sulfur deposits and the high cost of working them, this process for mining sulfur has not been employed in a major way anywhere in the world since 2002.
Primitive bacteria that live around deep ocean volcanic vents oxidize hydrogen sulfide in this way with oxygen; the giant tube worm is an example of a large organism that uses hydrogen sulfide (via bacteria) as food to be oxidized.
In volcanic regions in Sicily, in ancient times, it was found on the surface of the Earth, and the ''"Sicilian process"'' was used: sulfur deposits were piled and stacked in brick kilns built on sloping hillsides, with airspaces between them.
It is an abundant, multivalent non-metal.
The so-called sulfate-reducing bacteria, by contrast, "breathe sulfate" instead of oxygen.
It is normally present as troilite (FeS), but there are exceptions, with carbonaceous chondrites containing free sulfur, sulfates and other sulfur compounds.
The density of sulfur is about 2 g·cm−3, depending on the allotrope; all of the stable allotropes are excellent electrical insulators.
Elemental sulfur is hydrophobic (not soluble in water) and cannot be used directly by plants.
Pliny the Elder discusses sulfur in book 35 of his ''Natural History'', saying that its best-known source is the island of Melos.
Sulfur is converted to hydrogen sulfide (H2S) through reduction, partly by bacteria.
Larger rings have been prepared, including S12 and S18.
Because of its importance, sulfuric acid was considered an excellent indicator of a country's industrial well-being.
According to the Ebers Papyrus, a sulfur ointment was used in ancient Egypt to treat granular eyelids.
The Spanish and Portuguese words are prefixed with the Arabic article, despite not being Arabic words.
Magnesium sulfate, known as Epsom salts when in hydrated crystal form, can be used as a laxative, a bath additive, an exfoliant, magnesium supplement for plants, or (when in dehydrated form) as a desiccant.
In 12th-century Anglo-French, it was ''sulfre''; in the 14th century the Latin ''ph'' was restored, for ''sulphre''; and by the 15th century the full Latin spelling was restored, for ''sulfur, sulphur''.
Throughout the 20th century this procedure produced elemental sulfur that required no further purification.
This conversion requires several organosulfur cofactors.
Mining was unmechanized and labor-intensive, with pickmen freeing the ore from the rock, and mine-boys or ''carusi'' carrying baskets of ore to the surface, often through a mile or more of tunnels.
When silver-based photography was widespread, sodium and ammonium thiosulfate were widely used as "fixing agents."
Currently, commercial production is still carried out in the Osiek mine in Poland.
Sulfur improves the efficiency of other essential plant nutrients, particularly nitrogen and phosphorus.
Ultimately, reduction of sulfur produces sulfide salts:
Another way of storing sulfur is as a binder for concrete, the resulting product having many desirable properties (see sulfur concrete).
When sulfur burns in air, it produces sulfur dioxide.
Because of the sulfur dioxide produced during the process of melting sulfur, the craft of sulfur inlays was soon abandoned.
When injected parenterally, they are freely filtered by the kidneys and eliminated with very little toxicity in multi-gram amounts.
They are widely known as the odorant in domestic natural gas, garlic odor, and skunk spray.
Many surfactants and detergents (e.g.
The iron sulfide called pyrite, the so-called "fool's gold," has the formula FeS2.
Soluble sulfate salts are poorly absorbed and laxative.
"Dusting sulfur," elemental sulfur in powdered form, is a common fungicide for grapes, strawberry, many vegetables and several other crops.
Sulfur is a part of many bacterial defense molecules.
Winogradsky referred to this form of metabolism as inorgoxidation (oxidation of inorganic compounds).
Biosulfur (biologically produced elemental sulfur with hydrophilic characteristics) can also be used for these applications.
Hydrogen sulfide is as toxic as hydrogen cyanide, and kills by the same mechanism (inhibition of the respiratory enzyme cytochrome oxidase), though hydrogen sulfide is less likely to cause surprise poisonings from small inhaled amounts because of its disagreeable odor.
For example, with 32.5 million tonnes in 2010, the United States produces more sulfuric acid every year than any other inorganic industrial chemical.
In water, this gas produces sulfurous acid and sulfites; sulfites are antioxidants that inhibit growth of aerobic bacteria and a useful food additive in small amounts.
Molten sulfur is sometimes still used for setting steel bolts into drilled concrete holes where high shock resistance is desired for floor-mounted equipment attachment points.
Countries producing more than 5 Mt are China (9.6), US (8.8), Canada (7.1) and Russia (7.1).
Removing one atom from the crown gives S7, which is more deeply yellow than S8.
For example, the high strength of feathers and hair is due in part to the high content of S-S bonds with cysteine and sulfur.
The increasing British control and exploitation of the mining, refining, and transportation of the sulfur, coupled with the failure of this lucrative export to transform Sicily's backward and impoverished economy, led to the 'Sulfur Crisis' of 1840, when King Ferdinand II gave a monopoly of the sulfur industry to a French firm, violating an earlier 1816 trade agreement with Britain.
Being abundant in native form, sulfur was known in ancient times, being mentioned for its uses in ancient India, ancient Greece, China, and Egypt.
This form is metastable at room temperature and gradually reverts to crystalline molecular allotrope, which is no longer elastic.
:3 O2 + 2 H2S → 2 SO2 + 2 H2O
Thiocyanates contain the SCN− group.
Organosulfur compounds are responsible for some of the unpleasant odors of decaying organic matter.
The practice is used by large industrial wine producers and small organic wine producers alike.
Early European alchemists gave sulfur a unique alchemical symbol, a triangle at the top of a cross () a mild reducing and antibacterial agent.
It is the seventh or eighth most abundant element in the human body by weight, about equal in abundance to potassium, and slightly greater than sodium and chlorine.
Being abundantly available in native form, sulfur was known in ancient times and is referred to in the Torah (Genesis).
Similar methods go back into antiquity but modern historical mentions of the practice go to the fifteenth century.
Reduced glutathione, a sulfur-containing tripeptide, is a reducing agent through its sulfhydryl (-SH) moiety derived from cysteine.
Owing to the high sulfur content of the Athabasca Oil Sands, stockpiles of elemental sulfur from this process now exist throughout Alberta, Canada.
Sulfur is an essential component of all living cells.
Many cofactors also contain sulfur including glutathione and thioredoxin and iron–sulfur proteins.
Amorphous or "plastic" sulfur is produced by rapid cooling of molten sulfur—for example, by pouring it into cold water.
Sulfur forms polyatomic molecules with different chemical formulas, the best-known allotrope being octasulfur, cyclo-S8.
Such deposits are polycrystalline, with the largest documented single crystal measuring 22×16×11&nbsp;cm.
The first and second ionization energies of sulfur are 999.6 and 2252 kJ·mol−1, respectively.
The sulfur cycle was the first of the biogeochemical cycles to be discovered.
It has a good efficacy against a wide range of powdery mildew diseases as well as black spot.
Dissolved sulfide and hydrosulfide salts are toxic by the same mechanism.
In 1867, sulfur was discovered in underground deposits in Louisiana and Texas.
Sodium dithionite (), contains the more highly reducing dithionite anion ().
He continued to study it together with Selman Waksman until the 1950s.
Many important cellular enzymes use prosthetic groups ending with -SH moieties to handle reactions involving acyl-containing biochemicals: two common examples from basic metabolism are coenzyme A and alpha-lipoic acid.
The enzyme sulfite oxidase is needed for the metabolism of methionine and cysteine in humans and animals.
After the yeast-fermentation stage in winemaking, sulfites absorb oxygen and inhibit aerobic bacterial growth that otherwise would turn ethanol into acetic acid, souring the wine.
Biologically produced sulfur particles are naturally hydrophilic due to a biopolymer coating and are easier to disperse over the land in a spray of diluted slurry, resulting in a faster update.
Production has been slowly increasing from 1900 to 2010; the price was unstable in the 1980s and around 2010.
In humans, methionine is an essential amino acid that must be ingested.
Sulfur reacts directly with methane to give carbon disulfide, used to manufacture cellophane and rayon.
''Sulfur'' was the form chosen in the United States, whereas Canada uses both.
"green") insecticide (actually an acaricide) against ticks and mites.
In this method, superheated water was pumped into a native sulfur deposit to melt the sulfur, and then compressed air returned the 99.5% pure melted product to the surface.
Sulfur is still mined from surface deposits in poorer nations with volcanoes, such as Indonesia, and worker conditions have not improved much since Booker T. Washington's days.
The radical anion S3− gives the blue color of the mineral lapis lazuli.
HPLC analysis of "elemental sulfur" reveals an equilibrium mixture of mainly S8, but with S7 and small amounts of S6.
Sulfur with a distinctive isotopic composition has been used to identify pollution sources, and enriched sulfur has been added as a tracer in hydrologic studies.
Sulfur is insoluble in water but soluble in carbon disulfide and, to a lesser extent, in other nonpolar organic solvents, such as benzene and toluene.
With the advent of the contact process, the majority of sulfur today is used to make sulfuric acid for a wide range of uses, particularly fertilizer.
In plants and animals, the amino acids cysteine and methionine contain most of the sulfur, and the element is present in all polypeptides, proteins, and enzymes that contain these amino acids.
Common adverse effects include irritation of the skin at the application site, such as dryness, stinging, itching and peeling.
Between its melting and boiling temperatures, octasulfur changes its allotrope again, turning from β-octasulfur to γ-sulfur, again accompanied by a lower density but increased viscosity due to the formation of polymers.
On Earth, just as upon Jupiter's moon Io, elemental sulfur occurs naturally in volcanic emissions, including emissions from hydrothermal vents.
They depend on enzymes such as sulfur oxygenase and sulfite oxidase to oxidize sulfur to sulfate.
Because of the heat and sulfur, the process was named vulcanization, after the Roman god of the forge and volcanism.
Over time, soil bacteria can convert it to soluble derivatives, which can then be used by plants.
Inorganic sulfur forms a part of iron-sulfur clusters as well as many copper, nickel, and iron proteins.
Sulfur oxidizers can use as energy sources reduced sulfur compounds, including hydrogen sulfide, elemental sulfur, sulfite, thiosulfate, and various polythionates (e.g., tetrathionate).
Sulfur may be found by itself and historically was usually obtained in this form; pyrite has also been a source of sulfur.
Sulfate is reduced to sulfide via sulfite before it is incorporated into cysteine and other organosulfur compounds.
The burning of coal and/or petroleum by industry and power plants generates sulfur dioxide (SO2) that reacts with atmospheric water and oxygen to produce sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and sulfurous acid (H2SO3).
This process entails oxidation of some hydrogen sulfide to sulfur dioxide and then the comproportionation of the two:
Organosulfur compounds, undesirable impurities in petroleum, may be upgraded by subjecting them to hydrodesulfurization, which cleaves the C–S bonds:
Not all organic sulfur compounds smell unpleasant at all concentrations: the sulfur-containing monoterpenoid (grapefruit mercaptan) in small concentrations is the characteristic scent of grapefruit, but has a generic thiol odor at larger concentrations.
The distinctive colors of Jupiter's volcanic moon Io are attributed to various forms of molten, solid and gaseous sulfur.
