These machinations caused calls for Metellus's removal; despite delaying tactics by Metellus, in 107 BC Marius returned to Rome to stand for the consulship.
The latter was the husband of Claudia Antonia, daughter of the emperor Claudius.
In consequence, most allied against Rome, leading to the outbreak of the Social War.
During his period of exile Marius became determined that he would hold a seventh consulship, as foretold by the Sibyl decades earlier.
Sulla, himself a patrician and thus ineligible for election to the office of Plebeian Tribune, thoroughly disliked the office.
Victorious at Vercellae, Marius and Catulus were both granted triumphs as the co-commanding generals.
Archelaus advanced across the fords and tried to outflank Sulla’s men, only to have his right wing hurled back, causing great confusion in the Pontic army.
Subjects of the Roman Republic, these Italian provincials might be called to arms in its defence or might be subjected to extraordinary taxes, but they had no say in the expenditure of these taxes or in the uses of the armies that might be raised in their territories.
The Gracchi, Tiberius and Gaius, were successively killed by optimate supporters who sought to maintain the status quo.
Sulla then increased the number of magistrates elected in any given year, and required that all newly elected quaestors gain automatic membership in the Senate.
The battle was a huge and desperate final struggle with both sides certainly believing their own victory would save Rome.
Sulla let Asiagenus leave the camp, firmly believing him to be a supporter.
In the meantime, Sulla moved to intercept the new Pontic army.
Regardless, the war would continue on with Asiagenus raising another army in defence.
Sulla then advanced on Athens.
The Senate re-elected Cinna's old co-Consul, Papirius Carbo, to his third term, and Gaius Marius the Younger, the 26-year-old son of the dead consul, to his first.
Fimbria quickly won a decisive victory over remaining Mithridatic forces and moved on the capital of Pergamum.
In an harangue to the people, he said, with reference to these measures, that he had proscribed all he could think of, and as to those who now escaped his memory, he would proscribe them at some future time."
The Samnites and the Marian forces were folded up and broke.
As Marius was the best general Rome had, the Senate allowed him to lead the campaign against them.
Sulla, however, patiently bided his time.
In 89 BC Sulla captured Aeclanum, the chief town of the Hirpini, by setting the wooden breastwork on fire.
The battle turned into a rout, with slaughter on an immense scale.
He was said to have a duality between being charming and easily approachable, able to joke and cavort with the most simple of people while also assuming a dictatorial stern demeanor when he was leading armies and as dictator.
By the end of 87 BC Marius returned to Rome with the support of Lucius Cornelius Cinna and, in Sulla's absence, took control of the city.
Nine hundred feet of wall was brought down between the Sacred and Piraeic gates on the southwest side of the city.
Sulla had not only been digging trenches but also dikes, and before long he had the Pontic army in deep trouble.
At Nola he was awarded a ''Corona Obsidionalis'' (Obsidional or Blockade Crown), also known as a ''Corona Graminea'' (Grass Crown).
Soon Sulla's camp was to fill with refugees from Rome, fleeing the massacres of Marius and Cinna.
Sulla’s chief of staff was Lucullus, who went ahead of him to scout the way and negotiate with Bruttius Sura, the existing Roman commander in Greece.
The urban praetor L. Junius Brutus Damasippus led a slaughter of those senators who seemed to lean towards the invading forces, yet one more incident of murder in a growing spiral of violence as a political tool in the late Republic.
Sulla was a skillful general, achieving numerous successes in wars against different opponents, both foreign and Roman.
It soon dawned on Archelaus what Sulla was up to.
On the second day, Archelaus made a determined effort to escape Sulla’s web of dikes—the entire Pontic army was hurled at the Romans—but the Roman legionaries were pressed together so tightly that their short swords were like an impenetrable barrier, through which the enemy could not escape.
Sulla followed his defeated adversary and won another victory in a very short time.
In the end, over 50,000 combatants lost their lives and Sulla stood alone as the master of Rome.
Seriously defeated, Norbanus was forced to retreat to Capua where there was no respite.
Sulla's dictatorship came during a high point in the struggle between optimates and populares, the former seeking to maintain the Senate's oligarchy, and the latter espousing populism.
Archelaus’s chariots then charged the Roman centre, only to be destroyed on the palisades.
Sulla justified his actions on the grounds that the Senate had been neutered and the ''mos maiorum'' ("the way of the elders"/"the traditional way", which amounted to a Roman constitution though none of it was codified as such) had been offended by the Senate's negation of the rights of the year's consuls to fight the year's wars.
'''Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix''' (; c. 138 BC – 78 BC), known commonly as '''Sulla''', was a Roman general and statesman.
An example of the extent of his charming side was that his soldiers would sing a ditty about Sulla's one testicle, although without truth, to which he allowed as being "fond of a jest."
It was a dangerous operation from the first, with King Bocchus weighing up the advantages of handing Jugurtha over to Sulla or Sulla over to Jugurtha.
But he would leave trouble behind him.
Plutarch notes that two hundred years later, armour and weapons from the battle were still being found.
Flaccus' second in command was Gaius Flavius Fimbria, who had few virtues.
Unlike all other Roman military honours, it was awarded by acclamation of the soldiers of the rescued army, and consequently very few were ever awarded.
Fimbria, however, soon found that his men wanted nothing to do with opposing Sulla and many deserted or refused to fight in the coming battle.
It seems certain that Sulla received a good education.
Sulla, who opposed the Gracchian ''popularis'' reforms, was an optimate; though his coming to the side of the traditional Senate originally could be described as more reactionary when dealing with the Tribunate and legislative bodies, while more visionary when reforming the court system, governorships and membership of the Senate.
In 104 BC, the migrating Germanic-Celtic alliance headed by the Cimbri and the Teutones seemed to be heading for Italy.
He wanted to develop easy terms and get the ordeal over as quickly as possible.
Sulla got his men digging, and occupied the ruined city of Parapotamii, which was impregnable and commanded the fords on the road to Chaeronea.
Asiagenus or his army, however, seemed to have little motivation to fight.
Sensing all was lost, Fimbria took his own life, while his army went over to Sulla.
The slaughter was terrible, and some reports estimate that only 10,000 men of Mithridates' original army survived.
The means by which Sulla attained the fortune which later would enable him to ascend the ladder of Roman politics, the ''Cursus honorum'', are not clear, although Plutarch refers to two inheritances; one from his stepmother and the other from a low-born, but rich, unmarried lady.
The army preferred Fimbria (not surprising considering his leniency in regard to plunder) and a general revolt ensued.
He dismissed his lictors and walked unguarded in the Forum, offering to give account of his actions to any citizen.
Indecisive battles were fought between Carbo and Sulla's forces but Carbo knew that his cause was lost.
Then Archelaus flung his right wing at the Roman left; Sulla, seeing the danger of this manoeuvre, raced over from the Roman right wing to help.
The government of Rome (''i.e.,'' Cinna) then sent out Lucius Valerius Flaccus with an army to relieve Sulla of command in the east.
Blood was said to have literally flowed in the streets, it was only after the entreaties of a couple of his Greek friends (Midias and Calliphon) and the pleas of the Roman Senators in his camp that Sulla decided enough was enough.
Proscribing or outlawing every one of those whom he perceived to have acted against the best interests of the Republic while he was in the East, Sulla ordered some 1,500 nobles (''i.e.,'' senators and equites) executed, although it is estimated that as many as 9,000 people were killed.
The purge went on for several months.
Sulla, the son of Lucius Cornelius Sulla and the grandson of Publius Cornelius Sulla, was born into a branch of the patrician ''gens Cornelia'', but his family had fallen to an impoverished condition at the time of his birth.
The old enemy of Marius, and assuredly of Cinna as well, led an open revolt against the Marian forces in Africa.
Mithridates was forced to give up all his conquests (which Sulla and Fimbria had already managed to take back by force), surrender any Roman prisoners, provide a 70 ship fleet to Sulla along with supplies, and pay a tribute of 2,000 to 3,000 gold talents.
While Sulla's laws such as those concerning qualification for admittance to the Senate and reform of the legal system and regulations of governorships remained on Rome's statutes long into the Principate, much of his legislation was repealed less than a decade after his death.
Meanwhile, Asiagenus was also on the march south with an army of his own.
After speaking with Lucullus, Sura handed over the command of his troops to Sulla.
Returning to Rome, Sulla was ''Praetor urbanus'' for 97 BC.
Conveniently the source of the disturbance was located directly between Sulla and another march on Rome.
While seemingly minor enough to not cause immediate repercussions in the field, Fimbria was relieved of his duty and ordered back to Rome.
He was possibly expected to deliver terms to the Senate, but immediately rescinded any thought of supporting Sulla upon being set free.
With Sulla out of Rome, Marius plotted his return.
Plutarch mentions that "although Metrobius was past the age of youthful bloom, Sulla remained to the end of his life in love with him, and made no secret of the fact".
Next came the phalanxes: they too found the palisades impassable, and received withering fire from the Roman field artillery.
At the age of 23, and never having held a senatorial office, Pompey forced himself into the political scene with an army at his back.
The Parthian ambassador, Orobazus, was executed upon his return to Parthia for allowing this humiliation.
To this end he reaffirmed the requirement that any individual wait for ten years before being reelected to any office.
Sulla's goal now was to write his memoirs, which he finished in 78 BC, just before his death.
In a dispute over the eastern army command (initially awarded to Sulla by the Senate but reneged at Gaius Marius's intrigues) Sulla unconstitutionally marched his armies into Rome and defeated Marius in battle.
A Samnite force under Pontius Telesinus joined in the relief effort but the combined armies were still unable to break Sulla.
With this in mind, Lucullus and his navy refused to help Fimbria, and Mithridates 'escaped' to Lesbos.
The currency minted from this treasure was to remain in circulation for centuries and was prized for its quality.
Sulla moved southeast, picking up supplies and reinforcements as he went.
The army of Archelaus, presently commanded by Taxiles, had to approach from the north and proceed along the valley towards Chaeronea.
His funeral in Rome (at Roman Forum, in the presence of the whole city) was on a scale unmatched until that of Augustus in AD 14.
Rome declared war on Jugurtha in 111 BC, but for five years Roman legions under Quintus Caecilius Metellus were unsuccessful.
At the time Archelaus had command of the sea, so Sulla sent Lucullus to raise a fleet from the remaining Roman allies in the eastern Mediterranean.
Marius was elected consul  and took over the campaign while Sulla was nominated quaestor to him.
In the end, many of Marius' men switched sides over to Sulla and he had no choice but to retreat to Praeneste.
Behind the palisade were the field artillery from the siege of Athens.
Further, Sulla failed to frame a settlement whereby the army (following the Marian reforms allowing non-landowning soldiery) remained loyal to the Senate rather than to generals such as himself.
He was saved through the efforts of his relatives, many of whom were Sulla's supporters, but Sulla noted in his memoirs that he regretted sparing Caesar's life, because of the young man's notorious ambition.
Sulla's descendants continued to be prominent in Roman politics into the imperial period.
While in the East, Sulla was the first Roman magistrate to meet a Parthian ambassador, Orobazus, and by taking the seat between the Parthian ambassador and the ambassador from Cappadocia he, perhaps unintentionally, slighted the Parthian king by portraying the Parthians and the Cappadocians as equals.
In the spring of that year, Sulla crossed the Adriatic with a large fleet from Patrae, west of Corinth, to Brundisium and Tarentum in the heel of Italy.
Later leaders like Julius Caesar would follow his precedent in attaining political power through force.
Before leaving Athens, he burnt the port to the ground.
At the town of Teanum Sidicinum, Sulla and Asiagenus met face to face to negotiate and Asiagenus surrendered without a fight.
The veto power of the tribunes and their legislating authority were soon reinstated, ironically during the consulships of Pompey and Crassus.
Sulla later made it publicly known that not only would Asiagenus suffer for opposing him, but that any man who continued to oppose him after this betrayal would suffer bitter consequences.
This duality, or inconsistency, made him very unpredictable and "at the slightest pretext he might have a man crucified, but on another occasion would make light of the most appalling crimes; or he might happily forgive the most unpardonable offenses and then punish trivial, insignificant misdemeanors with death and confiscation of property."
Archelaus was in favour of a policy of attrition with the Roman forces, but Taxiles had orders from Mithridates to attack at once.
Cicero comments that Pompey once said "If Sulla could, why can't I?".
It was at this meeting he was told by a Chaldean seer that he would die at the height of his fame and fortune.
As Sulla viewed the office, the Tribunate was especially dangerous and his intention was to not only deprive the Tribunate of power, but also of prestige.
His descendants among the Cornelii Sullae would hold four consulships during the imperial period: Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 5 BC, Faustus Cornelius Sulla in AD 31, Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix in AD 33, and Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix (the son of the consul of 31) in AD 52.
The historian Suetonius records that when agreeing to spare Caesar, Sulla warned those who were pleading his case that he would become a danger to them in the future, saying: "In this Caesar there are many Mariuses."
The ''Socii'' were old enemies of Rome that submitted (such as the Samnites) whereas the Latins were confederates of longer standing with Rome; therefore the Latins were given more respect and better treatment.
Perhaps in an attempt to gain experience for an army to act as a counter to Sulla's forces, or to show Sulla that the Senate also had some strength of its own, Cinna raised an army to deal with this Illyrian problem.
Finally, with those of his colleague, proconsul Quintus Lutatius Catulus, Marius' forces faced the enemy tribes at the Battle of Vercellae in 101 BC.
Sulla dashed back to his own right wing and ordered the general advance.
Hoping to inspire Marian supporters throughout the Roman world, recruiting began in earnest among the Italian tribes who had always been loyal to Marius.
The Social War (91–88 BC) resulted from Rome's intransigence regarding the civil liberties of the ''Socii'', Rome's Italian allies.
Sulla returned to Rome from the siege at Nola to meet with Pompeius Rufus; however, Sulpicius' followers attacked the meeting, forcing Sulla to take refuge in Marius' house, who then forced him to support Sulpicius' pro-Italian legislation.
Flaccus attempted to flee, but was captured shortly after and the Consular commander was executed.
After his second consulship, he withdrew to his country villa near Puteoli to be with family.
The circumstances of his relative poverty as a young man left him removed from his patrician brethren, enabling him to consort with revelers and experience the baser side of human nature.
Possibly to protect himself from future political retribution, Sulla had the sons and grandsons of the proscribed banned from running for political office, a restriction not removed for over 30 years.
Sulla served on Marius' staff as ''tribunus militum'' during the first half of this campaign.
Most of his commanders (with the exception of his kinsman through marriage Lucullus) refused to accompany him.
This unusual appointment (used hitherto only in times of extreme danger to the city, such as during the Second Punic War, and then only for 6-month periods) represented an exception to Rome's policy of not giving total power to a single individual.
This was the highest Roman military honour, awarded for personal bravery to a commander who saves a Roman legion or army in the field.
He had persuaded Jugurtha's father-in-law, King Bocchus I of Mauretania (a nearby kingdom), to betray Jugurtha who had fled to Mauretania for refuge.
With all vestige of hope crumbling for Mithridates, he fled Pergamum to the coastal city of Pitane.
Gaius Marius, a lieutenant of Metellus, saw an opportunity to usurp his commander and fed rumors of incompetence and delay to the publicani (tax gatherers) in the region.
Sulla then established a system where all consuls and praetors served in Rome during their year in office, and then commanded a provincial army as a governor for the year after they left office.
In the South, young Marius gathered a large host of Samnites who assuredly would lose influence with the anti-popular Sulla in charge of Rome.
Armed gladiators were unable to resist organized Roman soldiers; and although Marius offered freedom to any slave that would fight with him against Sulla (an offer which Plutarch says only three slaves accepted) he and his followers were forced to flee the city.
Sulla received news of this at the camp of his victorious Social War veterans, waiting in the south of Italy to cross to Greece.
But things in the east weren't yet settled.
The proceeds from auctioned property more than made up for the cost of rewarding those who killed the proscribed, making Sulla even wealthier.
On November 1 of 82 BC, the two forces met at the battle of the Colline Gate, just outside Rome.
This time the Pontic army was in excess of 150,000, and it encamped itself in front of the busy Roman army, next to a large lake.
A gilded equestrian statue of Sulla donated by King Bocchus was erected in the Forum to commemorate his accomplishment.
The return trip included a stop at the port city of Byzantium, however, and here Fimbria took command of the garrison, rather than continue home.
Sallust declares him well-read and intelligent, and he was fluent in Greek, which was a sign of education in Rome.
Flaccus was a fairly strict disciplinarian and the behaviour of his lieutenant led to discord between the two.
The army sent to stop Sulla wavered in the face of battle against experienced veterans, and certainly along with the prodding of Sulla's operatives, gave up the cause, going over to Sulla's side as a result.
Over 120,000 strong, it outnumbered Sulla's forces by at least 3 to 1.
The majority of the proscribed had not been enemies of Sulla, but instead were killed for their property, which was confiscated and auctioned off.
Many of those in a position of power, who had not yet taken a clear side, now chose to support Sulla.
In exchange, Mithridates was able to keep his original kingdom and territory and regain his title of "friend of the Roman people."
At some point as this army crossed the Hellespont while giving chase to Mithridates' forces, Fimbria seems to have started a rebellion against Flaccus.
This "first hand" understanding of human motivations and the ordinary Roman citizen may explain why he was able to succeed as a general despite lacking any significant military experience before his 30s.
His execution in AD 62 on the orders of emperor Nero would make him the last of the Cornelii Sullae.
When Sulpicius found an ally in Marius who would support the bill, he had his supporters riot.
Sulla can be seen as setting the precedent for Julius Caesar's dictatorship, and for the eventual end of the Republic under Augustus.
Marcus Licinius Crassus marched with an army from Spain, and would later play a pivotal role at the Colline Gates.
He abandoned the fords and moved in behind an entrenched palisade.
Sulla's reforms both looked to the past (often re-passing former laws) and regulated for the future, particularly in his redefinition of maiestas (treason) laws and in his reform of the Senate.
Sulla lost no time in intercepting the Pontic army, occupying a hill called Philoboetus that branched off Mount Parnassus, overlooking the Elatean plain, with plentiful supplies of wood and water.
To further solidify the prestige and authority of the Senate, Sulla transferred the control of the courts from the equites, who had held control since the Gracchi reforms, to the senators.
Many deserted to Sulla before Flaccus packed up and moved on north to threaten Mithridates’ northern dominions.
(He was to eventually agitate against his commanding officer and incite the troops to murder Flaccus).
He then made a move that looked to Archelaus like a retreat.
Sulla was pushed hard on his left flank with the situation so dangerous that he and his men were pushed right up against the city walls.
The "Assembly of the People" subsequently ratified the decision, with no limit set on his time in office.
In c. 95 BC he was appointed ''pro consule'' to the province of Cilicia (in Anatolia).
Sulla then prohibited ex-tribunes from ever holding any other office, so ambitious individuals would no longer seek election to the Tribunate, since such an election would end their political career.
Lacking ready money, Sulla spent his youth amongst Rome’s comics, actors, lute-players, and dancers.
With Fimbria re-establishing Roman hegemony over the cities of Asia Minor, Mithridates position was completely untenable.
The second Roman army under the command of Flaccus meanwhile moved through Macedonia and into Asia Minor.
Sulla is generally seen to having set the precedent for Caesar's march on Rome and dictatorship.
Sulla then advanced into Boeotia to take on Archelaus's armies and remove them from Greece.
From this distance, Sulla remained out of the day-to-day political activities in Rome, intervening only a few times when his policies were involved (''e.g.,'' The execution of Granius shortly before his own death).
Marius was now an old man, but he still wanted to lead the Roman armies against King Mithridates VI of Pontus.
His life was habitually included in the ancient biographical collections of leading generals and politicians, originating in the biographical compendium of famous Romans published by Marcus Terentius Varro.
Although Sulla had engineered this move, as Sulla was serving under Marius at the time, Marius took credit for this feat.
After Sulla left Rome again for Nola, Sulpicius (after receiving a promise from Marius to wipe out his enormous debts) called an assembly to reverse the Senate's decision granting Sulla command, transferring it to Marius.
Inside the city, the population was reduced to eating shoe leather and grass.
The proscriptions are widely perceived as a response to similar killings which Marius and Cinna had implemented while they controlled the Republic during Sulla's absence.
Two of the three future triumvirs joined Sulla's cause in his bid to take control.
As this caused a general murmur, he let one day pass, and then proscribed two hundred and twenty more, and again on the third day as many.
At the end of 82 BC or the beginning of 81 BC, the Senate appointed Sulla ''dictator legibus faciendis et reipublicae constituendae causa'' ("dictator for the making of laws and for the settling of the constitution").
As a result, "husbands were butchered in the arms of their wives, sons in the arms of their mothers".
Marius died a fortnight after, and Cinna was left in sole control of Rome.
Cinna pushed his men hard to move to position in Illyria, and forced marches through snow-covered mountains did little to endear Cinna to his army.
This is a Hellenism, like ''sylva'' for classical Latin ''silva'', reinforced by the fact that our two major sources, Plutarch and Appian, wrote in Greek, and call him Σύλλα.
This also removed the need for the censor to draw up a list of senators, since there were always more than enough former magistrates to fill the senate.
A delegation from Athens was sent to treat with Sulla, but instead of serious negotiations they expounded on the glory of their city.
Accounts were also written that he had an infestation of worms, caused by the ulcers, which led to his death.
Sulla then took six of his most loyal legions and marched on Rome.
Sulla had defeated a vastly superior force in terms of numbers.
After restructuring the city's politics and strengthening the Senate's power, Sulla returned to his camp and proceeded with the original plan of fighting Mithridates in Pontus.
He pursued Fimbria to his camp at Thyatira where Fimbria was confident in his ability to repulse an attack.
It determined that the fate of Asia Minor lay with Rome and her successors for the next millennium.
Sulla himself moved north to push Carbo, who had withdrawn to Etruria to stand between Rome and the forces of Pompey and Metellus.
The Social War was, in part, caused by the continued rebuttal of those who sought to extend Roman citizenship to the Socii and to address various injustices inherent in the Roman system.
After his second march on Rome, he revived the office of dictator which had been inactive since the Second Punic War over a century before, and used his powers to enact a series of reforms to the Roman Constitution, meant to restore the primacy of the Senate and limit tribune power.
He stood for office (with Metellus Pius) and won election as consul for the following year, 80 BC.
The assassination of Marcus Livius Drusus the Younger, whose reforms were intended not only to strengthen the position of the Senate but also to grant Roman Citizenship to the allies, greatly angered the Socii.
With Flaccus out of the way, Fimbria took complete command.
Before leaving for the East, Sulla and his colleague Quintus Pompeius Rufus blocked legislation of the tribune Publius Sulpicius Rufus to ensure the rapid organisation of the Italian Allies within the Roman citizenship.
Violence in the Forum ensued, some nobles tried to lynch Sulpicius (as had been done to the brothers Gracchi, and to Saturninus) but failed in the face of his bodyguard of gladiators.
Marius and Cinna were elected consuls for the year 86 BC.
No general before him had ever crossed the city limits, the ''pomoerium'', with his army.
