As the Epic of Gilgamesh shows, this period was associated with increased war.
The term "Sumerian" is the common name given to the ancient non-Semitic-speaking inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Sumer, by the East Semitic-speaking Akkadians.
They developed the first known codified legal and administrative systems, complete with courts, jails, and government records.
*"Pottery was very plentiful, and the forms of the vases, bowls and dishes were manifold; there were special jars for honey, butter, oil and wine, which was probably made from dates.
in the center of the design is a reconstruction.
He drank the beer-seven jugs!
It shows the king of Lagash leading a Sumerian army consisting mostly of infantry.
Enki was the god of beneficence, ruler of the freshwater depths beneath the earth, a healer and friend to humanity who in Sumerian myth was thought to have given humans the arts and sciences, the industries and manners of civilization; the first law-book was considered his creation,
and became expansive and sang with joy!"
Many transactions involved debt, for example goods consigned to merchants by temple and beer advanced by "ale women".
The first war recorded in any detail was between Lagash and Umma in c. 2525 BC on a stele called the Stele of the Vultures.
The Sumerians used slaves, although they were not a major part of the economy.
Brick was the ordinary building material, and with it cities, forts, temples and houses were constructed.
Vases and dishes of stone were made in imitation of those of clay."
Poorly drained irrigated soils, in an arid climate with high levels of evaporation, led to the buildup of dissolved salts in the soil, eventually reducing agricultural yields severely.
Soil salinity in this region had been long recognized as a major problem.
The Sumerians also developed the arch, which enabled them to develop a strong type of dome.
The spearmen are shown arranged in what resembles the phalanx formation, which requires training and discipline; this implies that the Sumerians may have made use of professional soldiers.
Hebrew ''Shinar'', Egyptian ''Sngr'', and Hittite ''Šanhar(a)'', all referring to southern Mesopotamia, could be western variants of ''Shumer''.
Sumerian writing, while proven to be not the oldest example of writing on earth, is considered to be a great milestone in the development of humanity's ability to not only create historical records but also in creating pieces of literature both in the form of poetic epics and stories as well as prayers and laws.
The products of that union, Lahm and Lahmu, "the muddy ones", were titles given to the gate keepers of the E-Abzu temple of Enki, in Eridu, the first Sumerian city.
During the 3rd millennium BC a cultural symbiosis developed between the Sumerians and the Akkadians, which included widespread bilingualism.
Describing the way that muddy islands emerge from the confluence of fresh and salty water at the mouth of the Euphrates, where the river deposited its load of silt, a second hieros gamos supposedly created Anshar and Kishar, the "sky-pivot" or axle, and the "earth pivot", parents in turn of Anu (the sky) and Ki (the earth).
Thorkild Jacobsen has argued that there is little break in historical continuity between the pre- and post-Sargon periods, and that too much emphasis has been placed on the perception of a "Semitic vs. Sumerian" conflict.
After a time the Sumerians began to place the temples on top of multi-layered square constructions built as a series of rising terraces, giving rise to the Ziggurat style.
The first true city-states arose in Sumer, roughly contemporaneously with similar entities in what are now Syria and Lebanon.
Cities became walled, and increased in size as undefended villages in southern Mesopotamia disappeared.
The Sumerian language continued as a sacerdotal language taught in schools in Babylonia and Assyria, much as Latin was used in the Medieval period, for as long as cuneiform was utilized.
Though women were protected by late Sumerian law and were able to achieve a higher status in Sumer than in other contemporary civilizations, the culture was male-dominated.
Gelb and Westenholz differentiate three stages of Old Akkadian: that of the pre-Sargonic era, that of the Akkadian empire, and that of the "Neo-Sumerian Renaissance" that followed it.
Evidence of wheeled vehicles appeared in the mid 4th millennium BC, near-simultaneously in Mesopotamia, the Northern Caucasus (Maykop culture) and Central Europe.
*Ubaid period: 6500 – 4100 BC (Pottery Neolithic to Chalcolithic)
The Sumerians adopted an agricultural lifestyle perhaps as early as c. 5000 BC – 4500 BC.
It appears that this culture was derived from the Samarran culture from northern Mesopotamia.
This continued to influence the whole Mesopotamian mythos.
*"Time was reckoned in lunar months."
The earliest traces of the Babylonian numerals also date back to this period.
... By the side of the house was an enclosed garden planted with trees and other plants; wheat and probably other cereals were sown in the fields, and the ''shaduf'' was already employed for the purpose of irrigation.
During this period Uruk became the most urbanized city in the world, surpassing for the first time 50,000 inhabitants.
Later, Lugal-Zage-Si, the priest-king of Umma, overthrew the primacy of the Lagash dynasty in the area, then conquered Uruk, making it his capital, and claimed an empire extending from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean.
They used oxen as their primary beasts of burden and donkeys or equids as their primary transport animal and "woollen clothing as well as rugs were made from the wool or hair of the animals.
The earliest king authenticated through archaeological evidence is Enmebaragesi of Kish (c. 26th century BC), whose name is also mentioned in the Gilgamesh epic—leading to the suggestion that Gilgamesh himself might have been a historical king of Uruk.
The gods were said to have created human beings from clay for the purpose of serving them.
Many texts survive in multiple copies because they were repeatedly transcribed by scribes-in-training.
In the early Sumerian Uruk period, the primitive pictograms suggest that sheep, goats, cattle, and pigs were domesticated.
*Uruk period: 4100 – 2900 BC (Late Chalcolithic to Early Bronze Age I)
(Gilgamesh is credited with having built the walls of Uruk).
They then dragged the fields with pickaxes.
Sumerian masons and jewelers knew and made use of alabaster (calcite),  ivory, iron, gold, silver, carnelian, and lapis lazuli.
Henceforth Sumerian would remain only a literary and liturgical language, similar to the position occupied by Latin in medieval Europe.
The cities of Sumer could not maintain remote, long-distance colonies by military force.
Sumerian gods could thus have associations with different cities, and their religious importance often waxed and waned with those cities' political power.
*Enlil, god of the north wind, in Nippur, husband of Ninlil, the south wind.
During the Akkadian and Ur III phases, there was a shift from the cultivation of wheat to the more salt-tolerant barley, but this was insufficient, and during the period from 2100 BC to 1700 BC, it is estimated that the population in this area declined by nearly three fifths.
A large body of hundreds of thousands of texts in the Sumerian language have survived, such as personal or business letters, receipts, lexical lists, laws, hymns, prayers, stories, daily records, and even libraries full of clay tablets.
The Sumerian chariot comprised a four or two-wheeled device manned by a crew of two and harnessed to four onagers.
Eannatum's Stele of the Vultures depicts vultures pecking at the severed heads and other body parts of his enemies.
These early chariots functioned less effectively in combat than did later designs, and some have suggested that these chariots served primarily as transports, though the crew carried battle-axes and lances.
Another important Sumerian hieros gamos was that between Ki, here known as Ninhursag or "Lady of the Mountains", and Enki of Eridu, the god of fresh water which brought forth greenery and pasture.
Artifacts, and even colonies of this Uruk civilization have been found over a wide area—from the Taurus Mountains in Turkey, to the Mediterranean Sea in the west, and as far east as central Iran.
The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and ''vice versa'') is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence.
During the 3rd millennium BC, a close cultural symbiosis developed between the Sumerians, who spoke a language isolate, and Akkadian-speakers, which included widespread bilingualism.
This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the 3rd millennium BC as a ''Sprachbund''.
Periodically "clean slate" decrees were signed by rulers which cancelled all the rural (but not commercial) debt and allowed bondservants to return to their homes.
Sumerian cylinder seals also depict houses built from reeds not unlike those built by the Marsh Arabs of Southern Iraq until as recently as 400 CE.
*"Tablets were used for writing purposes.
Sumerian cities during the Uruk period were probably theocratic and were most likely headed by a priest-king (''ensi''), assisted by a council of elders, including both men and women.
Some authors have proposed that there may be evidence of a substratum or adstratum language for geographic features and various crafts and agricultural activities, called variously Proto-Euphratean or Proto Tigrean, but this is disputed by others.
Sumerian continued to be the language of religion and law in Mesopotamia long after Semitic speakers had become dominant.
The finding of resin in the tomb of Queen Puabi at Ur, indicates it was traded from as far away as Mozambique.
The Tigris-Euphrates plain lacked minerals and trees.
The Epic of Gilgamesh refers to trade with far lands for goods such as wood that were scarce in Mesopotamia.
These deities formed a core pantheon; there were additionally hundreds of minor ones.
There was little evidence of organized warfare or professional soldiers during the Uruk period, and towns were generally unwalled.
Most difficult are the earliest texts, which in many cases do not give the full grammatical structure of the language and seem to have been used as an "aide memoire" for knowledgeable scribes.
Next they made oxen stomp the ground and kill weeds.
*"A feathered head-dress was worn.
Sumerian temples and palaces made use of more advanced materials and techniques, such as buttresses, recesses, half columns, and clay nails.
The most impressive and famous of Sumerian buildings are the ziggurats, large layered platforms which supported temples.
The almost constant wars among the Sumerian city-states for 2000 years helped to develop the military technology and techniques of Sumer to a high level.
They were also aware of the five planets that are easily visible to the naked eye.
There is also anecdotal evidence the Sumerians may have used a type of slide rule in astronomical calculations.
Sumerians caught many fish and hunted fowl and gazelle.
The Sumerians were eventually absorbed into the Akkadian (Assyro-Babylonian) population.
Triangular or wedge-shaped reeds were used to write on moist clay.
Apart from Mari, which lies full 330 kilometres (205 miles) north-west of Agade, but which is credited in the king list as having “exercised kingship” in the Early Dynastic II period, and Nagar, an outpost, these cities are all in the Euphrates-Tigris alluvial plain, south of Baghdad in what are now the Bābil, Diyala, Wāsit, Dhi Qar, Basra, Al-Muthannā and Al-Qādisiyyah governorates of Iraq.
According to this theory, farming peoples spread down into southern Mesopotamia because they had developed a temple-centered social organization for mobilizing labor and technology for water control, enabling them to survive and prosper in a difficult environment.
They may have invented military formations and introduced the basic divisions between infantry, cavalry, and archers.
The city was provided with towers and stood on an artificial platform; the house also had a tower-like appearance.
** Early Dynastic IIIb period: c. 2500–2334 BC
** Early Dynastic II period: 2800–2600 BC (Gilgamesh)
There were fire-places and fire-altars."
Inscriptions describing the reforms of king Urukagina of Lagash (c. 2300 BC) say that he abolished the former custom of polyandry in his country, prescribing that a woman who took multiple husbands be stoned with rocks upon which her crime had been written.
It is also said that the Sumerians invented the first oboe-like instrument, and used them at royal funerals.
Sumerian civilization took form in the Uruk period (4th millennium BC), continuing into the Jemdet Nasr and Early Dynastic periods.
Sumerian speakers were among the earliest people to record their beliefs in writing, and were a major inspiration in later Mesopotamian mythology, religion, and astrology.
Sumerian written history reaches back to the 27th century BC and before, but the historical record remains obscure until the Early Dynastic III period, c. the 23rd century BC, when a now deciphered syllabary writing system was developed, which has allowed archaeologists to read contemporary records and inscriptions.
The most important archaeological discoveries in Sumer are a large number of clay tablets written in cuneiform script.
These early names may be fictional, and include some legendary and mythological figures, such as Alulim and Dumizid.
** Early Dynastic IIIa period: 2600–2500 BC
According to Archibald Sayce, the primitive pictograms of the early Sumerian (i.e.
Ecologically, the agricultural productivity of the Sumerian lands was being compromised as a result of rising salinity.
Use of Old Akkadian was at its peak during the rule of Sargon the Great (c. 2270–2215 BC), but even then most administrative tablets continued to be written in Sumerian, the language used by the scribes.
The gods of one city were often acknowledged elsewhere.
The oil-jars, and probably others also, were sealed with clay, precisely as in early Egypt.
Sumerians believed in an anthropomorphic polytheism, or the belief in many gods in human form.
Sumer was conquered by the Semitic-speaking kings of the Akkadian Empire around 2270 BC (short chronology), but Sumerian continued as a sacred language.
During this time, the first settlement in southern Mesopotamia was established at Eridu (Cuneiform: ), c. 6500 BC, by farmers who brought with them the Hadji Muhammed culture, which first pioneered irrigation agriculture.
Classical Sumer ends with the rise of the Akkadian Empire in the 23rd century BC.
*The sun-god Utu at Larsa in the south and Sippar in the north,
Human sacrifice was found in the death pits at the Ur royal cemetery where Queen Puabi was accompanied in death by her servants.
The Sumerians were the first to use a place value numeral system.
They built this by constructing and linking several arches.
A woman (''munus'') went from being a daughter (''dumu-mi''), to a wife (''dam''), then if she outlived her husband, a widow (''numasu'') and she could then remarry.
Reliable historical records begin much later; there are none in Sumer of any kind that have been dated before Enmebaragesi (c. 26th century BC).
The obligations, loans and prices in general were usually denominated in one of them.
Discoveries of obsidian from far-away locations in Anatolia and lapis lazuli from Badakhshan in northeastern Afghanistan, beads from Dilmun (modern Bahrain), and several seals inscribed with the Indus Valley script suggest a remarkably wide-ranging network of ancient trade centered on the Persian Gulf.
*"Knives, drills, wedges and an instrument which looks like a saw were all known, while spears, bows, arrows and daggers (but not swords) were employed in war."
In particular, cedar from Lebanon was prized.
The earliest dynastic king on the Sumerian king list whose name is known from any other legendary source is Etana, 13th king of the first dynasty of Kish.
According to Hudson, the purpose of these decrees was to prevent debts mounting to a degree that they threatened fighting force which could happen if peasants lost the subsistence land or became bondservants due to the inability to repay the debt.
The dead were buried outside the city walls in graveyards where a small mound covered the corpse, along with offerings to monsters and a small amount of food.
The Sumerian language is generally regarded as a language isolate in linguistics because it belongs to no known language family; Akkadian, by contrast, belongs to the Semitic branch of the Afroasiatic languages.
The Eastern Semitic Akkadian language is first attested in proper names of the kings of Kish c. 2800 BC, preserved in later king lists.
They invented and developed arithmetic by using several different number systems including a mixed radix system with an alternating base 10 and base 6.
The ancient Sumerian king list includes the early dynasties of several prominent cities from this period.
The Sumerian city-states rose to power during the prehistoric Ubaid and Uruk periods.
This mutual influence has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian of the 3rd millennium BC as a ''Sprachbund''.
Rural loans commonly arose as a result of unpaid obligations due to an institution (such as a temple), in this case the arrears were considered to be lent to the debtor.
The Akkadian word ''Shumer'' may represent the geographical name in dialect, but the phonological development leading to the Akkadian term ''šumerû'' is uncertain.
Others have suggested a continuity of Sumerians, from the indigenous hunter-fisherfolk traditions, associated with the Arabian bifacial assemblages found on the Arabian littoral.
Juris Zarins believes the Sumerians were settled along the coast of Eastern Arabia, today's Persian Gulf region, before it flooded at the end of the Ice Age.
By the Ur III period, farmers had switched from wheat to the more salt-tolerant barley as their principal crop.
Akkadian and Sumerian coexisted as vernacular languages for about one thousand years, but by around 1800 BC, Sumerian was becoming more of a literary language familiar mainly only to scholars and scribes.
There are texts written entirely in Old Akkadian dating from c. 2500 BC.
The first set of names on the list is of kings said to have reigned before a major flood occurred.
Following the Gutian period, there is a brief Sumerian Renaissance in the 21st century BC, cut short in the 20th century BC by invasions by the Amorites.
was introduced to the food and beer of Gilgamesh's people: "Drink the beer, as is the custom of the land...
The Sumerian city of Eridu, on the coast of the Persian Gulf, is considered to have been the world's first city, where three separate cultures may have fused — that of peasant Ubaidian farmers, living in mud-brick huts and practicing irrigation; that of mobile nomadic Semitic pastoralists living in black tents and following herds of sheep and goats; and that of fisher folk, living in reed huts in the marshlands, who may have been the ancestors of the Sumerians.
The Sumerians practiced similar irrigation techniques as those used in Egypt.
Daggers with metal blades and wooden handles were worn, and copper was hammered into plates, while necklaces or collars were made of gold."
The Sumerians referred to themselves as ''ùĝ saĝ gíg-ga'' (cuneiform:    ), phonetically /uŋ saŋ giga/, literally meaning "the black-headed people", and to their land as ''ki-en-gi(-r)'' ('place' + 'lords' + 'noble'), meaning "place of the noble lords".
This advanced metrology resulted in the creation of arithmetic, geometry, and algebra.
At one end would stand the podium and a mudbrick table for animal and vegetable sacrifices.
They then winnowed the grain/chaff mixture.
Beneath the ''lu-gal'' ("great man" or king), all members of society belonged to one of two basic strata: The "''lu''" or free person, and the slave (male, ''arad''; female ''geme'').
They were the first to find the area of a triangle and the volume of a cube.
Those who could afford it sought burial at Dilmun.
** Uruk IV period: 3300 – 3100 BC
American anthropologist Robert McCormick Adams says that irrigation development was associated with urbanization, and that 89% of the population lived in the cities.
* Gutian period: c. 2218–2047 BC (Early Bronze Age IV)
Lyres were popular in Sumer, among the best-known examples being the Lyres of Ur.
The Sumerian people who settled here farmed the lands in this region that were made fertile by silt deposited by the Tigris and the Euphrates.
This sexagesimal system became the standard number system in Sumer and Babylonia.
The Sumerian military used carts harnessed to onagers.
Sumerian cities were surrounded by defensive walls.
The independent Amorite states of the 20th to 18th centuries are summarized as the "Dynasty of Isin" in the Sumerian king list, ending with the rise of Babylonia under Hammurabi c. 1700 BC.
He was the last ethnically Sumerian king before Sargon of Akkad.
There have been many failed attempts to connect Sumerian to other language families.
Mud-brick buildings eventually deteriorate, so they were periodically destroyed, leveled, and rebuilt on the same spot.
Flanking the aisles would be rooms for the priests.
*Inanna, goddess of love and war, the deification of Venus, the morning (eastern) and evening (western) star, at the temple (shared with An) at Uruk.
* Ur III period: c. 2047–1940 BC
Granaries and storehouses were usually located near the temples.
Nippur retained this status throughout the Sumerian period.
By the time of the Uruk period (c. 4100–2900 BC calibrated), the volume of trade goods transported along the canals and rivers of southern Mesopotamia facilitated the rise of many large, stratified, temple-centered cities (with populations of over 10,000 people) where centralized administrations employed specialized workers.
In particular, the metals of all types had to be imported.
The Ubaid period is marked by a distinctive style of fine quality painted pottery which spread throughout Mesopotamia and the Persian Gulf.
This constant rebuilding gradually raised the level of cities, which thus came to be elevated above the surrounding plain.
Customarily rulers did it at the beginning of the first full year of their reign, but they could also be proclaimed at times of military conflict or crop failure.
** Jemdet Nasr period (Uruk III): 3100 – 2900 BC
The cart was composed of a woven basket and the wheels had a solid three-piece design.
The influences between Sumerian on Akkadian are evident in all areas including lexical borrowing on a massive scale—and syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence.
Juris Zarins believes the Sumerians may have been the people living in the Persian Gulf region before it flooded at the end of the last Ice Age.
As is known from the "''Sumerian Farmer's Almanac''", after the flood season and after the Spring Equinox and the ''Akitu'' or New Year Festival, using the canals, farmers would flood their fields and then drain the water.
Unfortunately the high evaporation rate resulted in a gradual increase in the salinity of the fields.
This greatly upset the balance of power within the region, weakening the areas where Sumerian was spoken, and comparatively strengthening those where Akkadian was the major language.
The Uruk period civilization, exported by Sumerian traders and colonists (like that found at Tell Brak), had an effect on all surrounding peoples, who gradually evolved their own comparable, competing economies and cultures.
The Sumerians' cuneiform script is the oldest (or second oldest after the Egyptian hieroglyphs) which has been deciphered (the status of even older inscriptions such as the Jiahu symbols and Tartaria tablets is controversial).
Emmer wheat, barley, sheep (starting as mouflon), and cattle (starting as aurochs) were foremost among the species cultivated and raised for the first time on a grand scale.
The trade credit was usually extended by temples in order to finance trade expeditions and was nominated in silver.
Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as a spoken language somewhere around the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BC, but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary, and scientific language in Babylonia and Assyria until the 1st century CE.
The frequent violent floods of the Tigris, and less so, of the Euphrates, meant that canals required frequent repair and continual removal of silt, and survey markers and boundary stones needed to be continually replaced.
The Ubaid period pottery of southern Mesopotamia has been connected via Choga Mami transitional ware to the pottery of the Samarra period culture (c. 5700 – 4900 BC C-14) in the north, who were the first to practice a primitive form of irrigation agriculture along the middle Tigris River and its tributaries.
The infantrymen carried spears, wore copper helmets, and carried rectangular shields.
Sumerian culture seems to have appeared as a fully formed civilization, with no pre-history.
There is considerable evidence that the Sumerians loved music, which seems to have been an important part of religious and civic life in Sumer.
It has been suggested by them and others, that the Sumerian language was originally that of the hunter and fisher peoples, who lived in the marshland and the Eastern Arabia littoral region, and were part of the Arabian bifacial culture.
There was no common set of gods; each city-state had its own patrons, temples, and priest-kings, however they were not exclusive.
The interest rate was set at 1/60 a month (one shekel per mina) some time before 2000 BC and it remained at that level for about two thousand years.
Large institutions kept their accounts in barley and silver, often with a fixed rate between them.
The Sumerians developed a complex system of metrology c. 4000 BC.
The Sumerians were among the first astronomers, mapping the stars into sets of constellations, many of which survived in the zodiac and were also recognized by the ancient Greeks.
The potters used a bow drill to produce the fire needed for baking the pottery.
Thus in the later Akkadian Enuma Elish the creation was seen as the union of fresh and salt water; as male Abzu, and female Tiamat.
The first known ones were made by Enmetena and Urukagina of Lagash in 2400-2350 BC.
Finally, the Sumerians ushered in domestication with intensive agriculture and irrigation.
Native Sumerian rule re-emerged for about a century in the Neo-Sumerian Empire or Third Dynasty of Ur (Sumerian Renaissance) approximately 2100-2000 BC, but the Akkadian language also remained in use.
The irrigation was accomplished by the use of ''shaduf'', canals,  channels, dykes, weirs, and reservoirs.
The foundation stones — or rather bricks — of a house were consecrated by certain objects that were deposited under them."
