Earlier extended minima have been discovered through analysis of tree rings and appear to have coincided with lower-than-average global temperatures.
Many ancient monuments were constructed with solar phenomena in mind; for example, stone megaliths accurately mark the summer or winter solstice (some of the most prominent megaliths are located in Nabta Playa, Egypt; Mnajdra, Malta and at Stonehenge, England); Newgrange, a prehistoric human-built mount in Ireland, was designed to detect the winter solstice; the pyramid of El Castillo at Chichén Itzá in Mexico is designed to cast shadows in the shape of serpents climbing the pyramid at the vernal and autumnal equinoxes.
This process speeds up as the core gradually becomes denser.
Cognates to English ''sun'' appear in other Germanic languages, including Old Frisian ''sunne'', ''sonne'', Old Saxon ''sunna'', Middle Dutch ''sonne'', modern Dutch ''zon'', Old High German ''sunna'', modern German ''Sonne'', Old Norse ''sunna'', and Gothic ''sunnō''.
The fluid motion of the convection zone above, slowly disappears from the top of this layer to its bottom where it matches that of the radiative zone.
Those that do appear are at high solar latitudes.
Arabic astronomical contributions include Albatenius' discovery that the direction of the Sun's apogee (the place in the Sun's orbit against the fixed stars where it seems to be moving slowest) is changing.
Kelvin and Hermann von Helmholtz then proposed a gravitational contraction mechanism to explain the energy output, but the resulting age estimate was only 20 million years, well short of the time span of at least 300 million years suggested by some geological discoveries of that time.
The Sun does not have a definite boundary, and in its outer parts its density decreases exponentially with increasing distance from its center.
This age is estimated using computer models of stellar evolution and through nucleocosmochronology.
The Sun's magnetic field leads to many effects that are collectively called solar activity.
Mission data allowed scientists to identify several different types of flares, and demonstrated that the corona away from regions of peak activity was much more dynamic and active than had previously been supposed.
The central mass became so hot and dense that it eventually initiated nuclear fusion in its core.
Observations of sunspots were recorded during the Han Dynasty (206 BC–AD 220) by Chinese astronomers, who maintained records of these observations for centuries.
The Sun's dipole magnetic field of 50–400&nbsp;μT (at the photosphere) reduces with the inverse-cube of the distance to about 0.1&nbsp;nT at the distance of Earth.
Regarding the fixed stars, the Sun appears from Earth to revolve once a year along the ecliptic through the zodiac, and so Greek astronomers considered it to be one of the seven planets (Greek ''planetes'', “wanderer”), after which the seven days of the week are named in some languages.
At this speed, it takes around 1,190 years for the Solar System to travel a distance of 1 light-year, or 7 days to travel 1 AU.
It also delivers about 4&nbsp;milliwatts of sunlight to the retina, slightly heating it and potentially causing damage in eyes that cannot respond properly to the brightness.
The orbital speed of the Solar System about the center of the Milky Way is approximately 251&nbsp;km/s (156&nbsp;mi/s).
The proton–proton chain occurs around  times each second in the core, converting about 3.7 protons into alpha particles (helium nuclei) every second (out of a total of ~8.9 free protons in the Sun), or about 6.2 kg/s.
Looking directly at the Sun causes phosphene visual artifacts and temporary partial blindness.
Once the core hydrogen is exhausted in 5.4 billion years, the Sun will expand into a subgiant phase and slowly double in size over about half a billion years.
In the form of the Sun disc Aten, the Sun had a brief resurgence during the Amarna Period when it again became the preeminent, if not only, divinity for the Pharaoh Akhenaton.
The effects of solar activity on Earth include auroras at moderate to high latitudes and the disruption of radio communications and electric power.
This indicates that one or more supernovae must have occurred near the location where the Sun formed.
Current research focus has therefore shifted towards flare heating mechanisms.
Neutrinos are also released by the fusion reactions in the core, but, unlike photons, they rarely interact with matter, so almost all are able to escape the Sun immediately.
The luminosity stays approximately constant as the temperature increases, with the ejected half of the Sun's mass becoming ionised into a planetary nebula as the exposed core reaches 30,000 K. The final naked core, a white dwarf, will have a temperature of over 100,000 K, and contain an estimated 54.05% of the Sun's present day mass.
Its diameter is about 109 times that of Earth, and its mass is about 330,000 times that of Earth, accounting for about 99.86% of the total mass of the Solar System.
The average temperature of the corona and solar wind is about 1,000,000–2,000,000 K; however, in the hottest regions it is 8,000,000–20,000,000 K. Although no complete theory yet exists to account for the temperature of the corona, at least some of its heat is known to be from magnetic reconnection.
The average luminance of the Sun is about 1.88&nbsp;giga&nbsp;candela per square metre, but as viewed through Earth's atmosphere, this is lowered to about 1.44&nbsp;Gcd/m2.
Ions of hydrogen and helium emit photons, which travel only a brief distance before being reabsorbed by other ions.
This spacecraft was designed to observe gamma rays, X-rays and UV radiation from solar flares during a time of high solar activity and solar luminosity.
The planetary nebula will disperse in about 10,000 years, but the white dwarf will survive for trillions of years before fading to a hypothetical black.
At solar-cycle minimum, the toroidal field is, correspondingly, at minimum strength, sunspots are relatively rare, and the poloidal field is at its maximum strength.
For a simple dipolar solar magnetic field, with opposite hemispherical polarities on either side of the solar magnetic equator, a thin current sheet is formed in the solar wind.
It will then have reached the red clump or horizontal branch, but a star of the Sun's mass does not evolve blueward along the horizontal branch.
The photosphere is not fully ionized—the extent of ionization is about 3%, leaving almost all of the hydrogen in atomic form.
About three quarters of the Sun's mass consists of hydrogen; the rest is mostly helium, with much smaller quantities of heavier elements, including oxygen, carbon, neon, and iron.
Yohkoh observed an entire solar cycle but went into standby mode when an annular eclipse in 2001 caused it to lose its lock on the Sun.
In the upper part of the chromosphere helium becomes partially ionized.
In a frame of reference defined by the stars, the rotational period is approximately 25.6 days at the equator and 33.5 days at the poles.
At solar-cycle maximum, the external poloidal dipolar magnetic field is near its dynamo-cycle minimum strength, but an internal toroidal quadrupolar field, generated through differential rotation within the tachocline, is near its maximum strength.
The hazard is insidious for inexperienced observers and for children, because there is no perception of pain: it is not immediately obvious that one's vision is being destroyed.
It will then expand more rapidly over about half a billion years until it is over two hundred times larger than today and a couple of thousand times more luminous.
It is thought that almost all stars form by this process.
From the core out to about 0.7 solar radii, thermal radiation is the primary means of energy transfer.
All these satellites have observed the Sun from the plane of the ecliptic, and so have only observed its equatorial regions in detail.
Long-duration viewing of the direct Sun with the naked eye can begin to cause UV-induced, sunburn-like lesions on the retina after about 100 seconds, particularly under conditions where the UV light from the Sun is intense and well focused; conditions are worsened by young eyes or new lens implants (which admit more UV than aging natural eyes), Sun angles near the zenith, and observing locations at high altitude.
The ''Apex of the Sun's Way'', or the solar apex, is the direction that the Sun travels relative to other nearby stars.
The theoretical concept of fusion was developed in the 1930s by the astrophysicists Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar and Hans Bethe.
It has been argued that the Sun's passage through the higher density spiral arms often coincides with mass extinctions on Earth, perhaps due to increased impact events.
An optical phenomenon, known as a green flash, can sometimes be seen shortly after sunset or before sunrise.
In the 1st century AD, Ptolemy estimated the distance as 1,210 times the radius of Earth, approximately .
UV exposure gradually yellows the lens of the eye over a period of years, and is thought to contribute to the formation of cataracts, but this depends on general exposure to solar UV, and not whether one looks directly at the Sun.
A shock wave from a nearby supernova would have triggered the formation of the Sun by compressing the matter within the molecular cloud and causing certain regions to collapse under their own gravity.
Only a very small fraction of the incident light is reflected.
Just a few months after launch, however, an electronics failure caused the probe to go into standby mode, and it spent the next three years in this inactive state.
From an observation of a  transit of Venus in 1032, the Persian astronomer and polymath Avicenna concluded that Venus is closer to Earth than the Sun.
A flow of plasma outward from the Sun into interplanetary space is the solar wind.
A recent theory claims that there are magnetic instabilities in the core of the Sun that cause fluctuations with periods of either 41,000 or 100,000 years.
Solar ultraviolet radiation ionizes Earth's dayside upper atmosphere, creating the electrically conducting ionosphere.
This discrepancy was resolved in 2001 through the discovery of the effects of neutrino oscillation: the Sun emits the number of neutrinos predicted by the theory, but neutrino detectors were missing  of them because the neutrinos had changed flavor by the time they were detected.
The invention of the telescope in the early 17th century permitted detailed observations of sunspots by Thomas Harriot, Galileo Galilei and other astronomers.
This motion is towards a point in the constellation Hercules, near the star Vega.
The Sun today is roughly halfway through the most stable part of its life.
Lord Kelvin suggested that the Sun is a gradually cooling liquid body that is radiating an internal store of heat.
Skylab made the first time-resolved observations of the solar transition region and of ultraviolet emissions from the solar corona.
However, since the Sun formed, some of the helium and heavy elements have gravitationally settled from the photosphere.
In ancient Roman culture, Sunday was the day of the Sun god.
Some improvised filters that pass UV or IR rays, can actually harm the eye at high brightness levels.
With the rise of the next 11-year sunspot cycle, differential rotation shifts magnetic energy back from the poloidal to the toroidal field, but with a polarity that is opposite to the previous cycle.
The thermal pulses become larger each time, with the later pulses pushing the luminosity to as much as 5,000 times the current level and the radius to over 1 AU.
Above the photosphere visible sunlight is free to propagate into space, and its energy escapes the Sun entirely.
The corona is the extended atmosphere of the Sun, which has a volume much larger than the volume enclosed by the Sun's photosphere.
Of the 50 nearest stellar systems within 17 light-years from Earth (the closest being the red dwarf Proxima Centauri at approximately 4.2 light-years), the Sun ranks fourth in mass.
From at least the 4th Dynasty of Ancient Egypt, the Sun was worshipped as the god Ra, portrayed as a falcon-headed divinity surmounted by the solar disk, and surrounded by a serpent.
Solar flares and coronal-mass ejections tend to occur at sunspot groups.
These probes orbited the Sun at a distance similar to that of Earth, and made the first detailed measurements of the solar wind and the solar magnetic field.
Christian churches were built with an orientation so that the congregation faced toward the sunrise in the East.
The core is therefore shrinking, allowing the outer layers of the Sun to move closer to the centre and experience a stronger gravitational force, according to the inverse-square law.
In 1800, William Herschel discovered infrared radiation beyond the red part of the solar spectrum.
This is about 13 billion times brighter than the next brightest star, Sirius, which has an apparent magnitude of −1.46.
The solar heavy-element abundances described above are typically measured both using spectroscopy of the Sun's photosphere and by measuring abundances in meteorites that have never been heated to melting temperatures.
However, the geological record demonstrates that Earth has remained at a fairly constant temperature throughout its history, and that the young Earth was somewhat warmer than it is today.
It is estimated that the Sun has become 30% brighter in the last 4.5 billion years.
In paganism, the Sun was a source of life, giving warmth and illumination to mankind.
Each second, more than four million tonnes of matter are converted into energy within the Sun's core, producing neutrinos and solar radiation.
The fusion rate in the core is in a self-correcting equilibrium: a slightly higher rate of fusion would cause the core to heat up more and expand slightly against the weight of the outer layers, reducing the density and hence the fusion rate and correcting the perturbation; and a slightly lower rate would cause the core to cool and shrink slightly, increasing the density and increasing the fusion rate and again reverting it to its present rate.
The reactive core zone of "hydrogen burning", where hydrogen is converted into helium, is starting to surround an inner core of "helium ash".
The Sun has been an object of veneration in many cultures throughout human history.
The Latin name for the Sun, ''Sol'', is not common in general English language use; the adjectival form is the related word ''solar''.
From the reign of Elagabalus in the late Roman Empire the Sun's birthday was a holiday celebrated as Sol Invictus (literally "Unconquered Sun") soon after the winter solstice, which may have been an antecedent to Christmas.
The radiative zone and the convective zone are separated by a transition layer, the tachocline.
As a red giant, the Sun will grow so large that it will engulf Mercury, Venus, and probably Earth.
Most of this matter gathered in the center, whereas the rest flattened into an orbiting disk that became the Solar System.
With this sequence of emissions and absorptions, it takes a long time for radiation to reach the Sun's surface.
The Sun is a Population I, or heavy-element-rich, star.
The temperature of the chromosphere increases gradually with altitude, ranging up to around  near the top.
The Ulysses probe was launched in 1990 to study the Sun's polar regions.
The transition region does not occur at a well-defined altitude.
Such a weak star would not have been able to sustain liquid water on Earth's surface, and thus life should not have been able to develop.
Only 0.8% of the energy generated in the Sun comes from the CNO cycle, though this proportion is expected to increase as the Sun becomes older.
The theory that the Sun is the center around which the planets orbit was first proposed by the ancient Greek Aristarchus of Samos in the 3rd century BC, and later adopted by Seleucus of Seleucia (see Heliocentrism).
This enables stereoscopic imaging of the Sun and solar phenomena, such as coronal mass ejections.
Solar activity is thought to have played a large role in the formation and evolution of the Solar System.
For example, in the 17th century, the solar cycle appeared to have stopped entirely for several decades; few sunspots were observed during a period known as the Maunder minimum.
As a result, sunspots are slightly cooler than the surrounding photosphere, and, so, they appear dark.
The solar constant is the amount of power that the Sun deposits per unit area that is directly exposed to sunlight.
Above the chromosphere, in a thin (about 200&nbsp;km) transition region, the temperature rises rapidly from around 20,000 K in the upper chromosphere to coronal temperatures closer to 1,000,000 K. The temperature increase is facilitated by the full ionization of helium in the transition region, which significantly reduces radiative cooling of the plasma.
All waves except Alfvén waves have been found to dissipate or refract before reaching the corona.
As the solar cycle progresses towards its maximum, sunspots tend form closer to the solar equator, a phenomenon known as Spörer's law.
The atmosphere in particular filters out over 70% of solar ultraviolet, especially at the shorter wavelengths.
The '''Sun''' is the star at the center of the Solar System.
Above the temperature minimum layer is a layer about  thick, dominated by a spectrum of emission and absorption lines.
The enormous effect of the Sun on Earth has been recognized since prehistoric times, and the Sun has been regarded by some cultures as a deity.
Once Ulysses was in its scheduled orbit, it began observing the solar wind and magnetic field strength at high solar latitudes, finding that the solar wind from high latitudes was moving at about 750&nbsp;km/s, which was slower than expected, and that there were large magnetic waves emerging from high latitudes that scattered galactic cosmic rays.
The enormous effect of the Sun on Earth has been recognized since prehistoric times, and the Sun has been regarded by some cultures as a deity.
The photosphere has a particle density of ~1023&nbsp;m−3 (about 0.37% of the particle number per volume of Earth's atmosphere at sea level).
At this point in the dynamo cycle, buoyant upwelling within the convective zone forces emergence of toroidal magnetic field through the photosphere, giving rise to pairs of sunspots, roughly aligned east–west and having footprints with opposite magnetic polarities.
In the early years of the modern scientific era, the source of the Sun's energy was a significant puzzle.
For the purpose of measurement, however, the Sun's radius is considered to be the distance from its center to the edge of the photosphere, the apparent visible surface of the Sun.
Light of shorter wavelengths (violet, blue, green) is bent more than that of longer wavelengths (yellow, orange, red) but the violet and blue light is scattered more, leaving light that is perceived as green.
This can damage or kill those cells, resulting in small permanent blind spots for the viewer.
The interplanetary magnetic field is much stronger than the dipole component of the solar magnetic field.
After about 20 million years on the early asymptotic giant branch, the Sun becomes increasingly unstable, with rapid mass loss and thermal pulses that increase the size and luminosity for a few hundred years every 100,000 years or so.
The Skylab space station, launched by NASA in 1973, included a solar observatory module called the Apollo Telescope Mount that was operated by astronauts resident on the station.
Elemental abundances in the photosphere are well known from spectroscopic studies, but the composition of the interior of the Sun is more poorly understood.
During sunrise and sunset, sunlight is attenuated because of Rayleigh scattering and Mie scattering from a particularly long passage through Earth's atmosphere, and the Sun is sometimes faint enough to be viewed comfortably with the naked eye or safely with optics (provided there is no risk of bright sunlight suddenly appearing through a break between clouds).
The tidal effect of the planets is weak and does not significantly affect the shape of the Sun.
The rest passes through the glass and leaves the instrument.
In the overall gloom, the pupil expands from ~2&nbsp;mm to ~6&nbsp;mm, and each retinal cell exposed to the solar image receives up to ten times more light than it would looking at the non-eclipsed Sun.
The other is magnetic heating, in which magnetic energy is continuously built up by photospheric motion and released through magnetic reconnection in the form of large solar flares and myriad similar but smaller events—nanoflares.
The remainder of the Sun is heated by this energy as it is transferred outwards through many successive layers, finally to the solar photosphere where it escapes into space as sunlight or the kinetic energy of particles.
The Sun rotates faster at its equator than at its poles.
Despite its typical whiteness, most people mentally picture the Sun as yellow; the reasons for this are the subject of debate.
Simple filters made of darkened glass allow the full intensity of sunlight to pass through if they break, endangering the observer's eyesight.
The Solar Maximum Mission subsequently acquired thousands of images of the solar corona before re-entering Earth's atmosphere in June 1989.
For the Sun, four thermal pulses are predicted before it completely loses its outer envelope and starts to make a planetary nebula.
It has a density of up to  (about 150 times the density of water) and a temperature of close to 15.7 million kelvins (K).
Hans Bethe calculated the details of the two main energy-producing nuclear reactions that power the Sun.
In many prehistoric and ancient cultures, the Sun was thought to be a solar deity or other supernatural entity.
However, the luminance is not constant across the disk of the Sun (limb darkening).
One of the most important solar missions to date has been the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, jointly built by the European Space Agency and NASA and launched on 2 December 1995.
However, after hydrogen fusion in its core has stopped, the Sun will undergo severe changes, both internally and externally.
Ibn Yunus observed more than 10,000 entries for the Sun's position for many years using a large astrolabe.
The process carries on continuously, and in an idealized, simplified scenario, each 11-year sunspot cycle corresponds to a change, then, in the overall polarity of the Sun's large-scale magnetic field.
In December 2004, the Voyager 1 probe passed through a shock front that is thought to be part of the heliopause.
Conversely, the visible light we see is produced as electrons react with hydrogen atoms to produce H− ions.
Eratosthenes estimated the distance between Earth and the Sun in the 3rd century BC as "of stadia myriads 400 and 80000", the translation of which is ambiguous, implying either 4,080,000 stadia (755,000&nbsp;km) or 804,000,000 stadia (148 to 153 million kilometers or 0.99 to 1.02 AU); the latter value is correct to within a few percent.
After the red-giant branch the Sun has approximately 120 million years of active life left, but much happens.
The largest sunspots can be tens of thousands of kilometers across.
Unfiltered binoculars can deliver hundreds of times as much energy as using the naked eye, possibly causing immediate damage.
This temperature gradient is less than the value of the adiabatic lapse rate and hence cannot drive convection, hence, energy is transferred by radiation.
Galileo posited that sunspots were on the surface of the Sun rather than small objects passing between Earth and the Sun.
Although significant research was done, until 1978 it was difficult to determine the abundances of some iron-group elements (e.g.
This is suggested by a high abundance of heavy elements in the Solar System, such as gold and uranium, relative to the abundances of these elements in so-called Population II, heavy-element-poor, stars.
Theoretical models of the Sun's interior indicate a power density of approximately 276.5 W/m3, a value that more nearly approximates reptile metabolism than a thermonuclear bomb.
Averroes also provided a description of sunspots in the 12th century.
The change in opacity is due to the decreasing amount of H− ions, which absorb visible light easily.
In late 2012 Voyager 1 recorded a marked increase in cosmic ray collisions and a sharp drop in lower energy particles from the solar wind, which suggested that the probe had passed through the heliopause and entered the interstellar medium.
In 1978, the abundances of singly ionized elements of the iron group were derived.
In contrast, it takes only 2.3 seconds for the neutrinos, which account for about 2% of the total energy production of the Sun, to reach the surface.
Hazy conditions, atmospheric dust, and high humidity contribute to this atmospheric attenuation.
For many years measurements of the number of neutrinos produced in the Sun were lower than theories predicted by a factor of 3.
The energy of this sunlight supports almost all life on Earth by photosynthesis, and drives Earth's climate and weather.
In addition the Sun oscillates up and down relative to the galactic plane approximately 2.7 times per orbit.
The Sun formed about 4.6 billion years ago from the collapse of part of a giant molecular cloud that consisted mostly of hydrogen and helium and that probably gave birth to many other stars.
Today, nuclear fusion in the Sun's core has modified the composition by converting hydrogen into helium, so the innermost portion of the Sun is now roughly 60% helium, with the abundance of heavier elements unchanged.
Pioneer 9 operated for a particularly long time, transmitting data until May 1983.
The Sun will spend a total of approximately 10 billion years as a main-sequence star.
The celebration of the winter solstice (which influenced Christmas) was part of the Roman cult of the unconquered Sun (Sol Invictus).
These waves travel upward and dissipate in the corona, depositing their energy in the ambient matter in the form of heat.
In 1920, Sir Arthur Eddington proposed that the pressures and temperatures at the core of the Sun could produce a nuclear fusion reaction that merged hydrogen (protons) into helium nuclei, resulting in a production of energy from the net change in mass.
Theoretical models of the Sun's development suggest that 3.8 to 2.5 billion years ago, during the Archean period, the Sun was only about 75% as bright as it is today.
The first is wave heating, in which sound, gravitational or magnetohydrodynamic waves are produced by turbulence in the convection zone.
With solar-cycle modulation of sunspot number comes a corresponding modulation of space weather conditions, including those surrounding Earth where technological systems can be affected.
As a result, an orderly motion of the mass develops into thermal cells that carry the majority of the heat outward to the Sun's photosphere above.
In addition, Alfvén waves do not easily dissipate in the corona.
For teaching this heresy, he was imprisoned by the authorities and sentenced to death, though he was later released through the intervention of Pericles.
The distance between the local arm and the next arm out, the Perseus Arm, is about 6,500 light-years.
In 1890 Joseph Lockyer, who discovered helium in the solar spectrum, proposed a meteoritic hypothesis for the formation and evolution of the Sun.
Estimates of the photon travel time range between 10,000 and 170,000&nbsp;years.
It is claimed that even brief glances at the midday Sun through an unfiltered telescope can cause permanent damage.
Humanity's most fundamental understanding of the Sun is as the luminous disk in the sky, whose presence above the horizon creates day and whose absence causes night.
It is a nearly perfect sphere of hot plasma, with internal convective motion that generates a magnetic field via a dynamo process.
The magnetic polarity of sunspot pairs alternates every solar cycle, a phenomenon known as the Hale cycle.
In 1666, Isaac Newton observed the Sun's light using a prism, and showed that it is made up of light of many colors.
Gravity and pressure within the core of the cloud generated a lot of heat as it accreted more matter from the surrounding disk, eventually triggering nuclear fusion.
The Egyptians portrayed the god Ra as being carried across the sky in a solar barque, accompanied by lesser gods, and to the Greeks, he was Helios, carried by a chariot drawn by fiery horses.
Twenty-five years later, helium was isolated on Earth.
When the Sun is low in the sky, atmospheric scattering renders the Sun yellow, red, orange, or magenta.
By contrast, the Sun's surface temperature is approximately 5,800&nbsp;K. Recent analysis of SOHO mission data favors a faster rotation rate in the core than in the radiative zone above.
The transition region is not easily visible from Earth's surface, but is readily observable from space by instruments sensitive to the extreme ultraviolet portion of the spectrum.
The first largely complete set of oscillator strengths of singly ionized iron-group elements were made available in the 1960s, and these were subsequently improved.
At this average distance, light travels from the Sun's horizon to Earth's horizon in about 8 minutes and 19 seconds, while light from the closest points of the Sun and Earth takes about two seconds less.
According to a 2008 model, Earth's orbit is shrinking due to tidal forces (and, eventually, drag from the lower chromosphere), so that it is engulfed by the Sun near the end of the asymptotic-giant-branch phase.
Even before it becomes a red giant, the luminosity of the Sun will have nearly doubled, and Earth will be hotter than Venus is today.
An 11-year sunspot cycle is half of a 22-year Babcock–Leighton dynamo cycle, which corresponds to an oscillatory exchange of energy between toroidal and poloidal solar magnetic fields.
In the New Empire period, the Sun became identified with the dung beetle, whose spherical ball of dung was identified with the Sun.
