In the United States it sponsored educational conferences for Christian leaders as well as seminars and conferences for Senate staffers and other activists.
News World Communications, is an international news media corporation founded by Moon in 1976.
Among Tongil Group’s chief holdings are:  The Ilwha Company, which produces ginseng and related products; Ilshin Stone, building materials; and Tongil Heavy Industries, machine parts including hardware for the South Korean military.
His business interests included News World Communications, an international news media corporation known for its American subsidiary ''The Washington Times'', and Tongil Group, a South Korean business group (chaebol), as well as various affiliated organizations.
'''Sun Myung Moon''' (Korean 문선명 '''Mun Seon-myeong'''; born '''Mun Yong-myeong'''; 25 February 1920 – 3 September 2012) was a Korean religious leader, businessman, and political activist.
Meant to highlight the church's emphasis on traditional morality, they brought Moon both fame and notoriety.
In 2004, at event in the Dirksen Senate Office Building, in Washington, D.C., Moon was honored as the Messiah.
The purpose of human existence is to return joy to God.
He served 13 months of the sentence at the Federal Correctional Institution, Danbury before being released on good behavior to a halfway house.
People should marry across national and cultural boundaries with people from countries they consider to be their enemies so that the world of peace can come that much more quickly."
Moon's family rejected the Shinto faith pushed by the country’s Japanese rulers and followed Confucianist beliefs until he was around 10 years old, when they converted to Christianity and joined the Presbyterian Church.
Sung went on a hunger strike to protest their separation.
Gays will be eliminated, the 3 Israels will unite.
It was not successful critically or financially, and was criticized for its unfair treatment of the North Korean government.
He trod a bloody path of suffering in search of the truth, passing through tribulations that God alone remembers.
On the first anniversary of Moon's death, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un expressed condolences to Han and the family saying: "Kim Jong-un prayed for the repose of Moon, who worked hard for national concord, prosperity and reunification and world peace."
In 1990, Moon founded the $8-million Universal Ballet project, with Soviet-born Oleg Vinogradov as its art director and Moon's daughter-in-law Julia as its prima ballerina.
In 2012 Moon was posthumously awarded North Korea's National Reunification Prize.
For several decades he wandered through the spirit world so vast as to be beyond imagining.
Following World War II, Korea was divided along the 38th parallel into two trusteeships: the United States and the Soviet Union.
This brought the church into widespread public and media attention.
Critics labeled Moon a cult leader, who made high demands on his followers.
In 1980 Sociologist Irving Louis Horowitz commented: "The Reverend Moon is a fundamentalist with a vengeance.
In 1977 the Subcommittee on International Organizations of the Committee on International Relations, of the United States House of Representatives, while investigating the Koreagate scandal found that the South Korean National Intelligence Service (KCIA) had worked with the Unification Church to gain political influence within the United States, with some members working as volunteers in Congressional offices.
Said to be the inspiration of Gimm-Young CEO Eun Ju Park, a devout Buddhist, the book focused more on Moon's role as a Korean patriot and an international peace advocate than as a religious figure.
In his 2009 autobiography Moon himself wrote that he did not originally intend on founding a separate denomination at all.
In 1947 Moon was convicted by the North Korean government of spying for South Korea and given a five-year sentence to the Hŭngnam labor camp.
A messiah claimant, he was the founder of the  Unification Church (members of which called him their True Father, and have themselves sometimes been called "Moonies"), and of its widely noted "Blessing" or mass wedding ceremony, and the author of its unique theology the ''Divine Principle''.
In 2009, Moon's autobiography, ''As a Peace-Loving Global Citizen'' (), was published by Gimm-Young Publishers in South Korea.
In 1971, he moved to the United States and became well-known after giving a series of public speeches on his beliefs.
On 8 January 1957, Moon and Choi divorced.
On 2 April 1946 their son, Sung Jin Moon was born.
In April 2008, Moon appointed his youngest son, Hyung Jin Moon, to be the new leader of the Unification Church and the worldwide Unification Movement, saying, "I hope everyone helps him so that he may fulfil his duty as the successor of the True Parents."
36 couples participated in the first ceremony in 1961 for members of the early church in Seoul, South Korea.
In the 1980s, it was active in 21 countries.
If not then they will be burned."
On 14 August 2012, after suffering from pneumonia earlier in the month, Moon was admitted to Saint Mary's Hospital at The Catholic University of Korea in Seoul.
In this sense the concept underwriting the Unification church is apt, for its primary drive and appeal is unity, urging a paradigm of essence in an overly complicated world of existence.
Since he understood that no one can find the ultimate truth to save humanity without first passing through the bitterest of trials, he fought alone against millions of devils, both in the spiritual and physical worlds, and triumphed over them all.
In 1997 he said: "Homosexuals and fornicators are like dirty dung eating dogs."
The ''Divine Principle'' or ''Exposition of the Divine Principle'' (Korean 원리강론/原理講論, translit.
In 1998, journalist Peter Maass reported that some Unification Church members were dismayed and grumbled when Moon extended the Blessing to non-members because they had not gone through the same course that members had.
It was named "The Party for God, Peace, Unification, and Home."
Therefore, now is the time for people who are studying communism to abandon it."
There are similarities in both books related to the Principles of Creation, the Fall, and Restoration.
During the event Pelé, widely regarded as the best soccer player of all time and former Brazilian Sports Minister, met with Moon.
In 1985, he and his wife received Doctor of Divinity degrees from Shaw University.
In 1982 ''The Washington Times'' was founded  by News World Communications, an international media conglomerate associated with Moon which also owned newspapers in South Korea, Japan, and South America, as well as the news agency United Press International.
''The Washington Times'' is said to have played a major role in introducing right wing propaganda into the United States news media, with links to Rush Limbaugh and Glenn Beck.
It is a ready-made doctrine for impatient young people and all those for whom the pursuit of the complex has become a tiresome and fruitless venture."
Moon held honorary degrees from more than ten universities and colleges worldwide; at least one of which, the University of Bridgeport, received significant funding from  his organizations.
The FIFA itself has funded more than $2m for the Peace Cup since 2003.
In 1972 Moon predicted the decline of communism, based on the teachings of the ''Divine Principle'': "After 7,000 biblical years — 6,000 years of restoration history plus the millennium, the time of completion — communism will fall in its 70th year.
He was a member of the Honorary Committee of the Unification Ministry of the Republic of Korea.
Moon was a member of the Honorary Committee of the Unification Ministry of the Republic of Korea.
Milingo is now an advocate of the removal of the requirement for celibacy by  priests in the Catholic Church.
I am here today only because my skin is yellow and my religion is Unification Church.
In 1954, he founded the Unification Church in Seoul, South Korea based on conservative, family-oriented teachings from new interpretations of the Bible.
In 1950, during the Korean War United Nations troops had raided Hŭngnam and the guards fled.
In 1974, Moon asked church members in the United States to support President Richard Nixon during the Watergate scandal when Nixon was being pressured to resign his office.
Commentators have criticized the ''Divine Principle'' for saying that the First World War, the Second World War, the Holocaust, and the Cold War served as indemnity conditions to prepare the world for the establishment of the Kingdom of God.
Han is called "Mother" or "True Mother".
In any level of community, we must become like a family."
He was also criticized for his relationships with political and religious figures, including Presidents of the United States Richard Nixon, George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, North Korean President Kim Il Sung, and Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan.
In the 1990s when Moon began to offer the Unification Church marriage blessing ceremony to members of other churches and religions he was criticized for creating possible confusion.
His wedding ceremonies also drew criticism, especially after they involved members of other churches, including Roman Catholic archbishop Emmanuel Milingo.
In 2011, construction of $18 million Yeosu Expo Hotel was completed; the hotel located at Moon-owned The Ocean Resort in Yeosu, the venue of the Expo 2012.
CAUSA supported the Nicaraguan Contras and also reportedly helped finance a Bolivian military coup with connections to cocaine cartels which successfully overthrew a democratically elected government.
In the United States it was rejected by ecumenical organizations as being non-Christian.
In 1982, Moon sponsored the film ''Inchon'', an historical drama about the Battle of Inchon during the Korean War.
On 31 August 2012, Moon was transferred to a church-owned hospital near his home in Gapyeong, northeast of Seoul, after suffering multiple organ failure.
The book became a best-seller in Korea and Japan.
Moon's dreams and visions of the new age and his role in it, we ask?
Moon was posthumously awarded North Korea's National Reunification Prize in 2012 and a meritorious award by K-League.
"Give-and-take action" (reciprocal interaction) and "subject and object position" (initiator and responder) are "key interpretive concepts", and the self is designed to be God's object.
In 1991, he met with Kim Il Sung, the North Korean President, to discuss ways to achieve peace on the Korean peninsula, as well as on international relations, tourism, etc.
Another one, The Ocean Hotel, was completed in February 2012.
There's no question there.
In 1986, it produced the anti-communist documentary film ''Nicaragua Was Our Home''.
The ''Times'' was read by many Washington DC insiders, including Ronald Reagan.
Some of the political figures who had attended the event later told reporters that they had been misled as to its nature.
Moon later said that Kim was a "John the Baptist figure".
Moon emerged from his years in the labor camp as a staunch anti-communist.
Moon's daughter-in-law Nan Sook Hong wrote that this was explained to her by Han as having “providential” significance.
Human beings and the universe reflect God's personality, nature, and purpose.
He was criticized for a 2004 speech in which he predicted that: "There will be a purge on God's orders, and evil will be eliminated like shadows.
A religious leader whom they respect and whose theology they believe, yes; the messiah, perhaps not."
In 2001, Moon came into conflict with the Roman Catholic Church when Catholic archbishop Emmanuel Milingo and Maria Sung, a 43-year-old Korean acupuncturist, married in a Unification Church Blessing ceremony, presided over by Rev.
In 1994, Moon was officially invited to the funeral of Kim Il Sung, in spite of the absence of diplomatic relations between North Korea and South Korea.
It has also been criticized for its coverage of Middle East events.
His writings exhibit a holistic concern for the person, society, nature, and all things embraced by the human vision.
Moon has held dialogues between members of the Israeli Knesset and the Palestinian Parliament as part of his Middle East Peace Initiatives.
It was co-written by Moon and early disciple Hyo Won Eu and first published in 1966.
At his new church, he preached a conservative, family-oriented value system and his interpretation of the Bible.
A translation entitled ''Divine Principle'' was published in English in 1973.
Moon took a strong stance against racism and racial discrimination.
In August 1985, seven years before the fall of Soviet Union, the Professors World Peace Academy, an organization founded by Moon, sponsored a conference in Geneva to debate the theme "The situation in the world after the fall of the communist empire."
In 2003, George D. Chryssides of the University of Wolverhampton criticized Moon for introducing doctrines which tended to divide the Christian church rather than uniting it, which was his stated purpose in founding the Unification Church (originally named the Holy Spirit Association for the Unification of World Christianity).
Charisma, as traditionally understood, seems hardly applicable here.
In 1941, Moon began studying electrical engineering at Waseda University in Japan.
By 2002 Moon had invested roughly $1.7 billion to support the ''Times'', which he called "the instrument in spreading the truth about God to the world".
Many notable clergy, including Jerry Falwell and Joseph Lowery, signed petitions protesting the government's case and spoke out in defense of Moon.
Even on important issues, like Moon's claiming to be the messiah, there are church members whom I met, including a close aide to Moon, who demur.
The ceremonies continued to grow in scale; over 2,000 couples participated in the 1982 one at New York's Madison Square Garden, the first outside South Korea.
Moon also managed the FIFA-accredited Peace Cup.
In 1943, he returned to Seoul and married Sun Kil Choi on 28 April 1945.
Tongil Group is a South Korean business group (chaebol "Tongil" is Korean for "unification,"  the name of the Unification Church in Korean is "Tongilgyo.
This attracted much public attention and was criticized by ''The New York Times'' and ''The Washington Post'' as a possible violation of the principle of separation of church and state in the United States.
Pyongyang was the center of Christian activity in Korea until 1945.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, some American conservatives criticized Moon for his softening of his previous anti-communist stance.
What will you do if I say so?
Following the format of systematic theology, it includes (1) God's purpose in creating human beings, (2) the fall of man, and (3) restoration – the process through history by which God is working to remove the ill effects of the fall and restore humanity back to the relationship and position that God originally intended.
He was an ardent anti-communist and advocate for Korean reunification, for which he was recognized by the governments of both South and North Korea.
The church owns the only automobile manufacturing plant in North Korea, Pyeonghwa Motors, and is the second largest exporter of Korean goods.
Communism, begun in 1917, could maintain itself approximately 60 years and reach its peak.
In 1981 he said that he himself was a victim of racial prejudice in the United States (concerning his prosecution on tax charges in United States v. Sun Myung Moon),  saying:  "I would not be standing here today if my skin were white or my religion were Presbyterian.
The Los Angeles Galaxy, which competes in Major League Soccer, played in South Korea in the Peace Cup.
In 1989, Moon founded Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma, the most successful soccer club in Korean football, having won a record 7 league titles, 2 FA Cups, 3 League Cups, and 2 AFC Champions League titles.
He is the founder of Married Priests Now!.
In 1947 he was convicted by the North Korean government of spying for South Korea and given a five-year sentence to the Hŭngnam labor camp.
Rather, Moon provides a model.
In 1972, Moon founded the International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences, a series of scientific conferences.
The largest were a rally in 1975 against North Korean aggression in Seoul and a speech at an event organized by the Unification Church in Washington D.C.
Most converts actually have had minimal contact with him.
This attracted much media attention.
Through intimate spiritual communion with God and by meeting with Jesus and many saints in Paradise, he brought to light all the secrets of Heaven."
That task was left to the "True Parents" - Moon and Han - who would link married couples and their families to God.
Its core focus was manufacturing but in the 1970s and 1980s it expanded by founding or acquiring businesses in pharmaceuticals, tourism, and publishing.
He quickly drew young acolytes who helped to build the foundations of church affiliated business and cultural organizations.
He said that this was to project a positive image of South Korea to the world.
The case was the center of national freedom of religion and free speech debates.
Moon escaped and traveled to Busan, South Korea.
Kim said that he had been approached by Jesus on Gangsan mountain, and was given the mission to spread the message of a "new Israel” throughout the world.
In 2006 investigative reporter Robert Parry criticized Moon's financial support for the government of North Korea and the Bush family in the United States, including presidents George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush.
In a later controversy over the use of the word "Moonie" by the American news media, which was said to be offensive, Moon's position was supported by  civil rights activists Ralph Abernathy  and  James Bevel.
His name is Sun Myung Moon.
Prof. Laurence H. Tribe of the Harvard University Law School argued that the trial by jury had "doomed (Moon) to conviction based on religious prejudice."
In 1982, Moon was convicted in the United States of filing false federal income tax returns and conspiracy.
Eugene Wigner (Physics 1963).
We must never forget that we are brothers and sisters in a huge human family.
In 2012, the South Korean press reported that Moon traveled worldwide in his private jet which cost $50 million.
Together they founded the Korean Cultural Freedom Foundation, a nonprofit organization which undertook public diplomacy for the Republic of Korea.
He suffered valiantly, he knows confidently, he prays assuredly, he lives lovingly, say his followers.
Moon and his church are known for their efforts to promote Korean unification.
Protestant commentators have also criticized Unification Church teachings as being contrary to the Protestant doctrine of salvation by faith alone.
Moon's practice of matching couples for marriage was very unusual in both Christian tradition and in modern Western culture and attracted much attention and controversy.
''wonli ganglon'') is the main theological textbook of the Unification Church.
Jesus was divine but not God; he was supposed to be the second Adam who would create a perfect family by joining with the ideal wife and creating a pure family that would have begun humanity's liberation from its sinful condition.
His conviction was upheld on appeal in a split decision.
In 2010, Moon and a group of former executives purchased the paper from News World Communications, which was then controlled by Preston Moon.
In his keynote speech Farrakhan called for racial harmony.
''wonli ganglon'').
The opening ceremony was attended by the governor of the province.
In 1974 he urged Unification Church members to support an African American president of the United States:  "We have had enough of white presidents.
The first conference had 20 participants, while the largest conference in Seoul in 1982, had 808 participants from over 100 countries.
Moon matched couples from differing races and nationalities as part of his belief that all of humanity should be united: "International and intercultural marriages are the quickest way to bring about an ideal world of peace.
The committee also investigated possible KCIA influence on the Moon's campaign in support of Nixon.
On 2 November 2010, Sun Myung Moon and a group of former ''Times'' editors purchased the ''Times'' from News World.
Church members prayed and fasted in support of Nixon for three days in front of the United States Capitol, under the motto: "Forgive, Love and Unite."
In 2000 Moon and The Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan got together to sponsor the Million Family March, a rally in Washington D.C to celebrate family unity and racial and religious harmony; as well as to address other issues, including abortion, capital punishment, health care, education, welfare and Social Security reform, substance abuse prevention, and overhaul of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
Moon's claims to be the Messiah and the Second Coming of Christ have been disputed by both Christian and Jewish scholars.The ''Divine Principle''  was labeled as heretical by Protestant churches in South Korea, including Moon’s own Presbyterian Church.
Moon was criticized by both the mainstream media and the alternative media for his anti-communist activism, which many said could lead to World War Three and a nuclear holocaust.
The church is the largest owner of U.S. sushi restaurants and in the Kodiak region of Alaska, is the area's largest employer.
Sun Myung Moon was born Mun Yong-myeong on 25 February 1920, in modern-day North P'yŏng'an Province, North Korea, at a time when Korea was under Japanese rule.
Moon-owned Yeongpyeong Resort, The Ocean Resort and Pineridge Resort are scheduled to host the Expo 2012, 2018 Winter Olympics and Formula 1.
The Divine Principle is not an unrealizable ideal; it is incarnate in a man, it lives, it is imitable.
It owns United Press International, ''The World and I'', ''Tiempos del Mundo'' (Latin America), ''The Segye Ilbo'' (South Korea), ''The Sekai Nippo'' (Japan), the ''Zambezi Times'' (South Africa), ''The Middle East Times'' (Egypt).
His teachings viewed the Cold War  between democracy and communism as the final conflict between God and Satan, with divided Korea as its primary front line.
Moon expressed support for the political and economic transformations under way in the Soviet Union.
He remained a citizen of the Republic of Korea and maintained a residence in South Korea.
By 2010, Moon had given much of the responsibility for the Unification Church's religious and business activities to his children, who were then in their 30s and 40s.
In April 1990, Moon visited the Soviet Union and met with President Mikhail Gorbachev.
In 1962, Moon and other church members founded the Little Angels Children’s Folk Ballet of Korea, a children's dance troop which presents traditional Korean folk dances.
Several African American organizations and individuals spoke out in defense of Moon at this time including the National Black Catholic Clergy Caucus, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the National Conference of Black Mayors, and Joseph Lowery who was then the head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
When Jesus was crucified  before marrying, he redeemed mankind spiritually but not physically.
After his death in 2012 Moon was criticized for a lack of transparency concerning the relationships between his religious and secular activities and projects.
In 1997, about 30,000 couples took part in a ceremony in Washington, DC.
In 1998 investigative journalist Peter Maass wrote in an article in ''The New Yorker'': "There are, certainly, differing degrees of devotion among Moon's followers; the fact that they bow at the right moment or shout ''Mansei!''
Here is the meaning of the year 1978.
In his 2004 book ''The New Religious Movement Experience in America''  religious scholar Eugene V. Gallagher wrote: "The ''Divine Principle's'' analysis of the Fall sets the stage for the mission of Rev.
In 1971, Moon moved to the United States, which he had first visited in 1965.
So, let's this time elect a president from the Negro race.
Moon died on the morning of 3 September 2012 (1:54 am KST) at the age of 92.
"), founded in 1963 by  Moon as a nonprofit organization to provide revenue for the church.
On 1 February 1974 Nixon publicly thanked them for their support and officially received Moon.
In the 1982 case ''United States v. Sun Myung Moon'' he was found guilty of willfully filing false federal income tax returns and sentenced to 18 months in federal prison.
From the late forties 166 priests and other religious figures were killed or disappeared in concentration camps, including Francis Hong Yong-ho, bishop of Pyongyang and all monks of Tokwon abbey.
Some couples are already married and those that are engaged are later legally married according to the laws of their own countries.
In the 1970s, Moon, who had seldom before spoken to the general public, gave a series of public speeches to audiences in the United States, Japan, and South Korea.
Participants  included Nobel laureates John Eccles (Physiology or Medicine 1963, who chaired the 1976 conference),
His truth is experienced to be their truth.
Moon was given an 18-month sentence and a $15,000 fine.
In 2000 Moon was criticized, including by some members of his church, for his support of controversial Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan's Million Family March project.
The account in the ''Divine Principle'' offers Unificationists a comprehensive context for understanding human suffering."
Moon's projects have been lobbied in the National Congress of Brazil by Brazilian MPs.
Around this time he changed his given name to Seon-myeong.
However, in most cases the Blessing ceremony is not a legal wedding ceremony.
So 1978 is the border line and afterward communism will decline; in the 70th year it will be altogether ruined.
At that time the ''New Republic'' criticized Moon for appointing his own children and in-laws to leadership positions in the church and related businesses, for misusing the church for personal gain at the expense of his own followers, and for making millions by the selling of trinkets that were said to cause the liberation of customers' ancestors from hell.
Moon has said that when he was 15 Jesus Christ had anointed him to carry out his unfinished work by becoming parent to all of humanity.
