In fact Superman had become popular to the extent that in 1942, with sales of the character's three titles standing at a combined total of over 1.5&nbsp;million, ''Time'' was reporting that "the Navy Department (had) ruled that Superman comic books should be included among essential supplies destined for the Marine garrison at Midway Islands."
The visual design of Superman came from multiple influences.
Discovered and adopted by a Kansas farmer and his wife, the child is raised as '''Clark Kent''' and imbued with a strong moral compass.
Superman resides and operates in the fictional American city of Metropolis.
Weisinger also introduced letters columns in 1958 to encourage feedback and build intimacy with readers.
This came to an end in late 1940 when new editor Whitney Ellsworth instituted a code of conduct for his characters to follow, banning Superman from ever killing.
From 1988 to 1993, American composer Michael Daugherty composed "Metropolis Symphony", a five-movement orchestral work inspired by Superman comics.
David Jenemann has offered a contrasting view.
I was up late one night, and more and more ideas kept coming to me, and I kept writing out several weeks of syndicate strips for the proposed newspaper strip.
This was soon amended, with the source for the powers now based upon the establishment of Krypton's gravity as having been stronger than that of the Earth.
I approached Joe about it, and he was enthusiastic about the possibility.
Detective then fired Siegel and Shuster.
Detective had re-hired Siegel as a writer in 1957, but fired him again when he filed this second lawsuit.
Both groups accepted.
It ran through 1951.
In 2013, director Zack Snyder rebooted the film franchise with ''Man of Steel'', starring Henry Cavill.
Like other characters in the DC Universe, several alternate versions of Superman have been depicted over the years.
''Superman'' #75 (Nov 1992) sold over 6 million copies, making it the best-selling issue of a comic book of all time, thanks to a media sensation over the possibly permanent death of the character in that issue.
The popularity of such merchandise increased when Superman was licensed to appear in other media, and Les Daniels has written that this represents "the start of the process that media moguls of later decades would describe as 'synergy.'"
Later developments, such as his power of "heat vision" (introduced in 1949), may persist under copyright until the works they were introduced in enter the public domain themselves.
In the earlier decades of Superman comics, artists were expected to conform to a certain "house style".
Joe Shuster defined the aesthetic style of Superman in the 1940s, and not just in the comics: he also provided character model sheets for the Fleischer & Famous animated serial of the 1940s.
When Siegel told Shuster what he was doing, Shuster reacted by burning their rejected Superman comic, sparing only the cover.
Clarke viewed the comics characters as having to continuously update in order to maintain relevance, and thus representing the mood of the nation.
While the character swiftly took on a life of its own, moving beyond parody, other animated characters soon took their turn to parody the character.
Superman was the best-selling comic book character of the 1960s.
Lead is also the only known substance that Superman cannot see through with his x-ray vision.
Creators have discussed the idea of whether Superman pretends to be Clark Kent or vice versa, and at differing times in the publication either approach has been adopted.
Aldo Regalado saw the character as pushing the boundaries of acceptance in America.
Fawcett Comics introduced Captain Marvel in 1940 and for some years that character outsold Superman, but after protracted legal battles Fawcett was forced to cease publishing Captain Marvel in 1953.
The left-leaning perspective of creators Shuster and Siegel is reflected in early storylines.
Robert Maxwell was later hired to produce the TV show starring George Reeves.
''Doc Savage Magazine''.
In the original Siegel and Shuster stories, Superman's personality is rough and aggressive.
Simcha Weinstein notes that Superman's story has some parallels to that of Moses.
, ''Science Fiction''.
DC Comics offered Shuster's heirs a stipend in exchange for never challenging ownership of Superman, which they accepted for some years.
In his first appearances, Superman was considered a vigilante by the authorities, being fired upon by the National Guard as he razed a slum so that the government would create better housing conditions for the poor.
Siegel and Shuster read pulp science-fiction and adventure magazines, and many stories featured characters with extraordinary powers such as telepathy, clairvoyance, and superhuman strength.
Cavill will reprise his role as Superman in the 2017 film ''Justice League''.
Andrew Arnold, writing in the early 21st century, has noted Superman's partial role in exploring assimilation, the character's alien status allowing the reader to explore attempts to fit in on a somewhat superficial level.
It was originally stated that Superman's abilities derived from his Kryptonian heritage, which made him eons more evolved than humans.
And here he is, the down-home clean-cut boy in the blue tights and red cape".
For instance, in the 1960s, the Superman of "Earth-One" would occasionally star in stories alongside the Superman of "Earth-Two", the latter of whom resembled Superman as he was portrayed in the 1940s.
Through his benign, controlled authority, Superman renders the city open, modernist and democratic; he furthers a sense that Le Corbusier described in 1925, namely, that 'Everything is known to us'."
A representative of Humor Publishing was due to visit Cleveland on a business trip and so Siegel and Shuster hastily put together a comic story titled "The Superman" and presented it to the publisher.
Superman's appearance is distinctive and iconic; he usually wears a blue costume with a red-and-yellow emblem on the chest, consisting of the letter ''S'' in a shield shape, and a red cape.
Initially, Siegel was allowed to write Superman more or less as he saw fit, because nobody had anticipated the success and rapid expansion of the franchise.
Siegel and his fellow writers had developed the character with little thought of building a coherent mythology, but as the number of Superman titles and the pool of writers grew, Weisinger demanded a more disciplined approach.
Siegel understood that Superman's invulnerability diminished his appeal as an action hero, and so wrote a story introducing "K-metal", whose radiation harms Superman.
For most of his existence, Superman's famous arsenal of powers has included flight, super-strength, invulnerability to non-magical attacks, super-speed, vision powers (including x-ray, heat-emitting, telescopic, infra-red, and microscopic vision), super-hearing, super-intelligence, and super-breath, which enables him to blow out air at freezing temperatures, as well as exert the propulsive force of high-speed winds.
Team-ups with fellow comics icon Batman are common, inspiring many stories over the years.
Previous encounters with people he thought to be fellow Kryptonians, Power Girl (who is, in fact from the Krypton of the Earth-Two universe) and Mon-El, have led to disappointment.
Both in that series and in the 1996 comic book special ''Superman: The Wedding Album'', Clark and Lois marry.
These changes would eventually be reversed by later writers.
However, this would only apply to the character as he is depicted in ''Action Comics'' #1 (1938).
Will Eisner created a character called Wonder Man in 1939, but a lawsuit from Detective Comics forced its cancellation after just one issue.
Clark is romantically attracted to her, but she rejects the mild-mannered Clark and is infatuated with the bold and mighty Superman.
The pre-''New 52'' version of Superman was re-introduced in the comic book series ''Superman: Lois and Clark''  and for a time Earth had two superheroes each called Superman.
This aggressiveness has since faded with subsequent creators restoring the mild mannerisms traditional to the character.
DC Comics (then known as National Comics Publications) felt that the first season was too violent for what they expected to be a children's show, so they removed Maxwell and replaced him with Whitney Ellsworth, a veteran writer and editor at National Comics...."In May of 1953, script conferences began for the second season of ''Adventures of Superman''.
In ''Superman'' vol.
DC Comics has not developed a consistent and universal system to classify all versions of the character.
Siegel and Shuster settled out-of-court with Detective, which paid the pair $94,000 ($ when adjusted for inflation) in exchange for the full rights to both Superman and Superboy.
Superman's first alien villain, Brainiac, debuted in ''Action Comics'' #242 (July 1958).
It is named Smallville in ''Superboy'' #2 (June 1949).
The Nazis also thought Superman was a Jew and in 1940 Joseph Goebbels publicly denounced Superman and his creator Siegel.
The couple's biological child, Jonathan Samuel Kent, was born in ''Convergence: Superman'' #2 (July 2015).
He redrew Superman taller and more detailed.
He tosses villainous characters in such a manner that fatalities would presumably occur, although these are seldom shown explicitly on the page.
Elements such as Bizarro, Supergirl, the Phantom Zone, alternate varieties of kryptonite, robot doppelgangers, and Krypto were introduced.
The details Superman's story vary across his large body of fiction published since 1938.
Writer John Byrne rewrote the Superman mythos, again reducing Superman's powers, which writers had slowly re-strengthened, and revised many supporting characters, such as making Lex Luthor a billionaire industrialist rather than a mad scientist, and making Supergirl an artificial shapeshifting organism because DC wanted Superman to be the sole surviving Kryptonian.
Robert Maxwell was out, National Comics' editorial director Whitney Ellsworth was in."
In 1969, Siegel and Shuster attempted to regain rights to Superman using the renewal option in the Copyright Act of 1909, but the court ruled Siegel and Shuster had transferred the renewal rights to Detective Comics in 1938.
DC Comics negotiated an agreement wherein it would pay the Siegel heirs several million dollars and a yearly stipend of $500,000 in exchange for permanently granting DC the rights to Superman.
''New Adventures of Superboy'' #22 (Oct. 1981) places it in Maryland.
The inclusion of a romantic subplot with Lois Lane was inspired by Siegel's own awkwardness with girls.
A feature shared by several supporting characters is alliterative names, especially with the initials "LL", including Lex Luthor, Lois Lane, Linda Lee, Lana Lang, Lori Lemaris, and Lucy Lane, alliteration being common in early comics.
With this success, Superman helped to create the superhero archetype and establish its primacy within the American comic book.
Shuster based Superman's stance and devil-may-care attitude on that of Douglas Fairbanks, who starred in adventure films such as ''The Mark of Zorro'' and ''Robin Hood''.
Weisinger favored lighthearted stories over serious drama, and avoided sensitive subjects such as the Vietnam War and the Civil Rights Movement because he feared his right-wing views would alienate his writing staff and readers.
As originally conceived and presented in his early stories, Superman's powers were relatively limited, consisting of superhuman strength that allowed him to lift a car over his head, run at amazing speeds and leap one-eighth of a mile, as well as an incredibly dense body structure that could be pierced by nothing less than an exploding artillery shell.
Superman's love interest is generally Lois Lane, and his archenemy is supervillain Lex Luthor.
''Action Comics'' eventually became dedicated to Superman stories too, and both it and ''Superman'' have been published without interruption since 1938 (ignoring changes to the titles and numbering).
Then&nbsp;... he shoots fire from the skies, and it is difficult not to think of him as a god.
Other adversaries include the odd Superman-doppelgänger Bizarro, and the Kryptonian criminal General Zod.
The first adaptation was a daily newspaper comic strip, launched on January 16, 1939, and running through May 1966; Siegel and Shuster used the first strips to establish Superman's background, adding details such as the planet Krypton and Superman's father, Jor-El, concepts not yet established in the comic books.
Also on the BBC was the sitcom ''My Hero'', which presented Thermoman as a slightly dense Superman pastiche, attempting to save the world and pursue romantic aspirations.
He argues that Superman's early stories portray a threat: "the possibility that the exile would overwhelm the country."
The source of Superman's powers has changed subtly over the course of his history.
In 1943, Bugs Bunny was featured in a short, ''Super-Rabbit'', which sees the character gaining powers through eating fortified carrots.
In later Superman radio programs the character continued to take on such issues, tackling a version of the Ku Klux Klan in a 1946 broadcast, as well as combating  anti-semitism and veteran discrimination.
Max Gaines, who worked at McClure Newspaper Syndicate, suggested they show their work to Detective Comics (which had recently bought out National Allied).
Schwartz allowed stories with serious drama, as in "For the Man Who Has Everything" (''Superman Annual'' #11), in which the villain Mongul torments Superman with an illusion of happy family life on a living Krypton.
In the United Kingdom Monty Python created the character Bicycle Repairman, who fixes bicycles on a world full of Supermen, for a sketch in series of their BBC show.
Clark creates the costumed identity of Superman so as to protect his personal privacy and the safety of his loved ones.
DC Comics re-established the pre-''New 52'' Superman as the protagonist of the new comic books, with Lois Lane as his wife once more.
The most significant attempt, John Byrne's 1986 rewrite, established several hard limits on his abilities: He barely survives a nuclear blast, and his space flights are limited by how long he can hold his breath.
From 1949 to 1956, the newspaper strips were drawn by Win Mortimer.
He has fascinated scholars, with cultural theorists, commentators, and critics alike exploring the character's impact and role in the United States and worldwide.
(This was the story that appeared in ''Action Comics'' #1, June, 1938, the first published appearance of ''Superman''.)
Tyler Hoechlin is set to play Superman in the second season of the ''Supergirl'' TV series.
Gabriel, Ariel), who are airborne humanoid agents of good with superhuman powers.
He argues that Superman allowed the superhero genre to take over from the Western as the expression of immigrant sensibilities.
Shuster drew the early strips, then passed the job to Wayne Boring.
Following the 1980s editorial-revamp DC called ''Crisis on Infinite Earths'', Kent's birthday is given as February 29.
Stories making reference to the possibility of Superman siring children have been featured both in and out of mainstream continuity.
Comics scholar Roger Sabin sees this as a reflection of "the liberal idealism of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal", with Shuster and Siegel initially portraying Superman as champion to a variety of social causes.
X-ray vision is introduced in ''Action Comics'' #11 (April 1939) and heat vision in ''Superman'' #59 (Aug. 1949).
Siegel and Shuster often compared this version to Slam Bradley, a comics character they created in 1936.
Shuster taught himself to draw by tracing over the art in the strips and magazines they collected.
Clark Kent, Superman's secret identity, was based partly on Harold Lloyd and named after Clark Gable and Kent Taylor.
DC Comics sued the Shuster heirs in 2010, and the court ruled in DC's favor on the grounds that the 1992 agreement with the Shuster heirs barred them from terminating the grant.
The strip ended in May 1966, but was revived from 1977 to 1983 to coincide with a series of movies released by Warner Bros.
Several actors have portrayed Superman in motion pictures and TV series including Kirk Alyn, George Reeves, Christopher Reeve, Tom Welling, Brandon Routh and Henry Cavill.
Fleischer Studios also depicted Superman flying in a theatrical animated series they produced that same decade, because this required fewer frames of animation, and their animation tests of Superman leaping looked "silly" anyway.
Although National expressed  interest in Superman, Siegel and Shuster wanted to sell Superman as a syndicated comic strip, but the newspaper syndicates all turned them down.
In part to counter this, the Superman writers established that Kryptonians, whose native star Rao had been red, possessed superpowers only under the light of a yellow sun.
These movies influenced future stories, with the Salkinds insisting Clark Kent be a newspaper journalist, in order to appeal to older fans.
Jules Feiffer has argued that Superman's real innovation lay in the creation of the Clark Kent persona, noting that what "made Superman extraordinary was his point of origin: Clark Kent."
Superman became popular very quickly, with an additional title, ''Superman Quarterly'', rapidly added.
Siegel and Shuster were also avid moviegoers.
DC Comics had approval rights over all creative aspects of the ''Superboy'' TV series (1988-1992), from scripts to casting to shooting revisions.
Superman debuted as the cover feature of the anthology ''Action Comics'' #1 (cover-dated June 1938 and published on April 18, 1938).
Booster Gold had an initial icy relationship with the Man of Steel but grew to respect him.
Scott Bukatman has discussed Superman, and the superhero in general, noting the ways in which they humanize large urban areas through their use of the space, especially in Superman's ability to soar over the large skyscrapers of Metropolis.
The program was now under the supervision of a new producer.
''Superman'' (1978) made $134,218,018 in North American theaters, which is about $ when adjusted for inflation.
Superman's face was based on Johnny Weissmuller's.
Clark Kent, meanwhile, would celebrate his birthday on June 18, the date the Kents first found Clark;  June 18 is also the birthdate of Superman voice actor Bud Collyer.
He redrew Superman taller and more detailed.
Warner Brothers agreed to give Siegel and Shuster a yearly stipend, full medical benefits, and credit their names in all future Superman productions in exchange for never contesting ownership of Superman.
Siegel's fanzine did not sell well.
The first live-action film was a 15-part serial released in 1948.
This was most notable with Wonder Woman, one of his closest friends, after she killed Maxwell Lord.
The commercial aired during the 1998 NFL Playoffs and Super Bowl, Superman animated in the style of artist Curt Swan, again at the request of Seinfeld.
Sexuality was banned, and colorfully outlandish villains such as Ultra-Humanite and Toyman were thought to be less nightmarish for young readers...."The Prankster, the Toyman, the Puzzler, and J. Wilbur Wolngham, a W. C. Fields lookalike, used tricks and gags instead of a bow and arrows in their bids to conquer Superman.
In January 2013, Superman was featured in ScrewAttack's web series ''Death Battle'', where he fought a hypothetical battle with the character Son Goku and won.
The series was an immediate success, and reader feedback showed that Superman was responsible.
Beginning in January 1939, a ''Superman'' daily comic strip appeared in newspapers, syndicated through the McClure Syndicate.
''-''Why, he's flying!
The earliest newspaper strips name the planet "Krypton", the baby "Kal-L", and his biological parents "Jor-L" and "Lora"; their names become "Jor-el", and "Lara" in a 1942 spinoff novel by George Lowther.
"NEMO: When you first conceived Superman, did you have the dual-identity theme in mind?
Siegel and Shuster upheld this bargain.
The complicated universe built under Weisinger was beguiling to devoted readers but alienating to casuals.
Although typically a newspaper reporter, during the 1970s the character left the ''Daily Planet'' for a time to work for television, whilst the 1980s revamp by John Byrne saw the character become somewhat more aggressive.
Innovations such as John Barry's crystalline set designs for Krypton and the Fortress of Solitude, Superman's chest emblem being his family crest, and screenwriter Mario Puzo's messianic themes were also adopted by the comics' writers.
... Of course, Joe had worked on that earlier version of ''Superman'', and when I came to him with this new version of it, he was immediately sold."
Superman was voiced during the battle simulations by the voice actor ItsJustSomeRandomGuy.
They sold Superman to Detective Comics, the future DC Comics, in 1938.
Early episodes each had a budget of $50,000 ($ when adjusted for inflation), which was exceptional for the time.
''Action Comics'' #1 introduced Clark's colleague Lois Lane.
This draft was never published since the story had Superman reveal his secret identity to Lois, but the writers of the radio serial took inspiration and introduced the green mineral kryptonite in a 1943 episode.
He is typically a member of the Justice League and close ally of Batman and Wonder Woman.
The persona of Clark Kent was inspired by slapstick comedian Harold Lloyd.
In 1944, the magical imp Mister Mxyzptlk, Superman's first recurring super-powered adversary, was introduced.
It was the company's policy to buy the full rights to the characters it published.
The suffix "el", meaning "(of) God", is also found in the name of angels (e.g.
It occasionally appeared in pulp fiction stories as well, such as "The Superman of Dr. Jukes" and Doc Savage.-Robeson, Kenneth (September 1933).
The manga and anime series ''Dr.
The character became an alien from the planet Krypton with the now-familiar costume: tights with an "S" on the chest, over-shorts, and a cape.
Slump'' featured the character ''Suppaman''; a short, fat, pompous man who changes into a thinly veiled Superman-like alter-ego by eating a sour-tasting umeboshi.
The Siegels accepted DC's offer in an October 2001 letter.
This same loss, combined with the pressure of using his powers responsibly, has caused Superman to feel lonely on Earth, despite having his friends and parents.
Superman's appeal to licensees rests upon the character's continuing popularity, cross market appeal and the status of the "S" shield, the stylized magenta and gold "S" emblem Superman wears on his chest, as a fashion symbol.
The monstrous Doomsday, introduced in ''Superman: The Man of Steel'' #17-18 (Nov.-Dec. 1992), was the first villain to evidently kill Superman in physical combat.
Ian Gordon suggests that the many incarnations of Superman across media use nostalgia to link the character to an ideology of the American Way.
By the release of ''Superman Returns'', Warner Bros. had arranged a cross promotion with Burger King, and licensed many other products for sale.
A.C. Grayling, writing in ''The Spectator'', traces Superman's stances through the decades, from his 1930s campaign against crime being relevant to a nation under the influence of Al Capone, through the 1940s and World War II, a period in which Superman helped sell war bonds, and into the 1950s, where Superman explored the new technological threats.
Clark works as a newspaper journalist.
The origin story of Superman relates that he was born '''Kal-El''' on the alien planet Krypton, before being rocketed to Earth as an infant by his scientist father Jor-El, moments before Krypton's destruction.
Some see Judaic themes in Superman.
In ''Action Comics'' #1 (April 1938), Superman is born on an alien world to a technologically advanced species that resembles humans.
In comics published between the early 1970s and early 1990s, his age was usually cited as 29 years old.
Following DC Comic's The New 52 line-wide relaunch, Superman established a romantic relationship with Wonder Woman.
The arrival of Supergirl, who has been confirmed to be not only from Krypton but also his cousin, has relieved this loneliness somewhat.
Folk singer/songwriter Jim Croce sung about the character in a list of warnings in the chorus of his song "You Don't Mess Around with Jim", introducing the phrase "you don't tug on Superman's cape" into popular lexicon.
Carlin was promoted to Executive Editor for the DC Universe books in 1996, a position he held until 2002.
The older, more mature Superman remained on Earth after the younger Superman died in ''Superman'' vol.
The judge ruled that the March 1938 sale of Superman was binding, but that Superboy was a separate entity that rightfully belonged to Siegel.
They made Clark Kent a journalist who pretends to be timid, and introduced his colleague Lois Lane, who is attracted to the bold and mighty Superman but does not realize he and Kent are the same person.
Siegel solicited multiple artists and in 1934 Russell Keaton, who worked on the ''Buck Rogers'' comic strip, responded.
Superman returned to movie theaters in 1978 with director Richard Donner's ''Superman'', starring Christopher Reeve, which spawned three sequels and was the most successful Superman feature film.
Superman is due to enter the public domain in 2033.
Weisinger retired in 1970 and Julius Schwartz took over.
Around 1955, Curt Swan in turn succeeded Boring.
Superman is often thought of as the first superhero.
In this new version of events, Clark's parents are now dead at the hands of a drunk driver when he was a teenager, and he is not married to Lois.
After Shuster left National, Wayne Boring succeeded him as the principal artist on Superman comic books.
Superman is also mentioned in several films, including Joel Schumacher's ''Batman & Robin'', in which Batman states, "That's why Superman works alone&nbsp;..." in reference to the many troubles caused by his partner Robin, and also in Sam Raimi's ''Spider-Man'', in which Aunt May gives her nephew Peter Parker a word of advice not to strain himself too much because, "You're not Superman, you know", among many others.
The villains Superman faced in the earliest stories were ordinary humans, such as gangsters, corrupt politicians, and violent husbands, but they soon grew more outlandish.
The Sunday strips had a narrative continuity separate from the daily strips, possibly because Siegel had to delegate the Sunday strips to ghostwriters.
In the earliest comics, Superman travels by running and leaping.
As a boy, Shuster was obsessed with fitness culture and a fan of strongmen such as Siegmund Breitbart and Joseph Greenstein.
Superman's Fortress of Solitude acts as a place of solace for him in times of loneliness and despair.
The earliest paraphernalia appeared in 1939, a button proclaiming membership in the Supermen of America club.
Writers developed Superman's powers gradually.
Other main supporting characters include ''Daily Planet'' coworkers such as photographer Jimmy Olsen and editor Perry White, Clark Kent's adoptive parents Jonathan and Martha Kent, childhood sweetheart Lana Lang and best friend Pete Ross, associates like Professor Hamilton and John Henry Irons who often provide scientific advice and tech support, and former college love interest Lori Lemaris (a mermaid).
Quoted in  ''Siegel and Shuster's Funnyman'' by Tom Andrae and Mel Gordon on page 49.
