Seagren however kept competing strongly and his victory in the swimming and second place in the gym tests saw him take a 33 points to 30 lead over Snell and Isaksson into the final event: the obstacle course.
Because this was his third consecutive championship, he was not allowed to participate in any more Superstars competitions.
Over the next fifteen years, though the US version continued unabated, Superstars in the UK existed solely as a nostalgic memory for sporting clip shows, usually focussing on Kevin Keegan falling off his bike, Stan Bowles shooting the table instead of a target, or Brian Jacks eating oranges.
The New York Yankees advanced to the World Series in 1977, 1978, and 1981, and was eligible to participate in these events held the early in the following year, however Yankees owner George Steinbrenner refused to allow his players to compete, as he had several of his top players under lucrative long term guaranteed contracts that required players to get ownership permission to participate in outside athletic activities, which in this case Steinbrenner refused to grant.
His performances duly improved, and even though 1976 Olympic Judoka David Starbrook took his parallel bar dips record in the gym tests, Hemery had become Britain's top competitor.
As only the two fastest heat winners ran in the final, Hooper could not add to his tally.
The curse of the European champions seemed to be holding strong.
Even now he still won the kayaking and came second in golf, almost making the final, beaten only in the end by an agonising uphill bike race.
Fielding was given a time of 9.97 seconds; Pruitt had officially run 9.96.
In a change of format, the competitors were split into four teams, captained by Kelly Holmes, Steve Redgrave, Roger Black and Mike Catt.
This proved to make Superstars a major hit, achieving large audiences across the continent and paving the way for the International and World Superstars editions to follow.
A companion competition, this event would pit the two World Series teams and the two Super Bowl teams in a playoff-type match using all the Superstars events, with some team events added such as Hawaiian rowing and the Tug-of-War.
Jacks had enormous upper body strength and quickly came to dominate the gym tests, setting records in squat thrusts and, in particular, the parallel bar dips.
He was however 10 3/4 points clear entering the final event (and thus guaranteed to win the title) and coasted through his obstacle course heat.
Completing the line-up were two invited challengers – not Hemery, Isaksson, Fielding or Kyle Rote though.
He first came to prominence in the 1979 Superteams final, failing to be able to jump onto a balance beam in the obstacle course event, and by 1982 he had blossomed into a fine, all-round performer.
They would meet a year later.
Several athletes won the event two or more times.
This event was not held in Europe, and therefore Isaksson was attempting it for the first time.
In the end only two points separated second to fourth, with Grimditch beating Pruitt for second on count-back, and Davies two points back in fourth.
Jacks succumbed to shingles in late 1979 so was unable to travel to The Bahamas for the World Championship.
Neither could the best European, Lynn Davies, who finished second in four events but disappointed in the weightlifting and gym tests.
The event was an overwhelming success, and it inspired the BBC to create a new UK Championship series in 2003.
The idea was developed by 1948 and 1952 Olympic figure skating champion Dick Button.
Charging through powerfully and fairly, Hooper finished comfortably in the lead, but was then faced with official protests, claiming he either took a short-cut off the track or otherwise acted illegally.
Representing Great Britain instead at the Ahoy final was Rugby League player Keith Fielding, who finished a close second, matching Hemery's best ever performance by a British Superstar.
The final series of ''Superteams'' was duly won by 'Watersports' (a team representing swimming, water-skiing and diving) which was led by Olympic swimmer Robin Brew who excelled at running events and also in the gym tests, where the bar jump became his speciality.
Points are awarded for the position in which the competitor places in each event.
In those years, loser of the ALCS in those years took the Yankees place, and in all three years that team ultimately won the competition.
In the final 600m Steeplechase event Hemery made up a 100m handicap on his rivals in order to finish in overall second, after again falling badly at the water jump and running the last 100m with badly torn ankle ligaments.
That was not the case for Budd, who dominated again, winning three events comprehensively, setting new records in the swimming and half-mile run in the process.
Spin-offs included a women's version of the show, and a ''Superteams'' version, where the two World Series and Super Bowl teams each faced off (except that the owner of the New York Yankees at the time prohibited his players from competing, so in years where the Yankees were in the World Series, their league's runner-up competed instead), with the winners competing in the finals.
The team that won the most events in each semi-final advanced to the SuperTeams finals where an ultimate champions would be crowned.
He would go on to win his next five straight Superstars events, becoming two time British Superstar, three-time International Superstar, and the 1982 World Superstar Champion.
The ABC version in the 1970s and 1980s also used an instrumental version of ''Superstar'' (from ''Jesus Christ Superstar'') as its theme.
Recorded at Crystal Palace in August and promoted as a challenge between Britain's seven best sportsmen, the contest was won by David Hemery, the 1968 Olympic champion in the 400 metres hurdles, defeating Jackie Stewart, Bobby Moore, Joe Bugner, Roger Taylor, Tony Jacklin and Barry John.
During the 1990s BBC programmes (such as ''Fantasy Football League'') regularly made use of this footage – and kept the show in the public spotlight – while Sky Sports began to show full-length programmes on its ''Sky Sports Classic'' channel.
Stephanie Cook was the other stand-out performer, finishing joint second with Olympic cycling champion Chris Boardman, and finishing runner-up in two events.
In the World, International, European and British versions of the contest, athletes would compete in 8 out of 10 events, with no one generally allowed to take part in their own sport, although some handicapping rules did apply.
His consistent performances won him a clear second place, but he was still 14 points behind Budd.
The top Europeans Kruize and Jacks were not present, and with Jacks in particular even more dominant in the gym tests than Budd there were questions asked about what he could have achieved.
Jacks usually dominated in the gym and weightlifting, and almost always also won the cycling and canoeing.
He beat all of the major British Superstars of his era except Brian Jacks, who had previously retired through injury.
Again, Fielding would never win another Superstars event.
In the 1979 UK national final Jacks comprehensively beat the field, and then went on to compete in Rotterdam for the European title.
The first Superstars competition was held in Rotonda West, Florida in March 1973 and was won by pole vaulter Bob Seagren.
For the 2009 "elimination event" version, contestants have to climb a rope wall, duck under four rope hurdles (2 sets side-by-side) (this was changed mid-season to a balance beam just over 3-inches wide), cleanly step through a bungee grid, ascend and descend a large ramp, push through a large door-like block, jump two sets of hurdles, run through a cargo net and cross the FINISH line.
There was only one caveat to this victory.
This, together with a new generation of television executives and sports presenters who grew up as fans of the show created interest in a revival, which finally happened as part of the 2002 Sport Relief charity event.
However, it was Sherwood's two second-places in the football and 800 metres that propelled him into second place, with the cycling coming at Jacks' expense, and winning him $15,000 in the process.
That gave him a nominal 40 point head start on his rivals, but if this sequence could be disrupted, then Jacks was relying on picking up more points elsewhere.
In the 1984 final Garry Cook was pushed very close by professional stunt performer and motorcycle racer, Eddie Kidd, but he held on against a weaker field than usual to become champion.
There was no UK national or European Superstars contest in 1978, but both events returned in 1979, along with a new "Past Masters" event for competitors over 35, which was won by Lynn Davies, the 1964 Olympic Long Jump champion.
In the 1978 final, the Dallas Cowboys and Kansas City Royals split the first six events, so the tug-of-war would decide the winner.
He was far and away the best multi-disciplined athlete in the field, and he would prove just as unbeatable in the following two years.
In the heats Isaksson ran a time of 25.81 seconds, while Snell was far behind with 29.2 seconds.
His loss in the final to record holder Lynn Swann was irrelevant; the seven points for second place made him the first World Superstars Champion, and won him $37,000 in the process.
Fielding believed he had won, as did the BBC commentators covering the final.
The European challenge was again restricted by injury and conflicting commitments, and was restricted to three competitors: UK runner-ups Lynn Davies and Dave Boy Green and Irish Superstars champion Pat Spillane.
Against Jacks in 1980 was Daley Thompson, globally recognised as the top multi-sports athlete after his victory in the 1980 Olympic Games decathlon competition.
In International Superstars in Israel Jacks defeated both of the other European Superstars champions Ties Kruize and Kjell Isaksson, as well as 1980 Tour de France winner Joop Zoetemelk to claim the new title.
The 1979 European Superstars final had finished with Ties Kruize and Brian Jacks joint-winners, but both had missed out on The Bahamas through injury.
The contest started with Rowing, where Peter Snell capitalised on a mistake from fellow athlete Frank Nusse to win the first ten points, then the penalty shoot-out.
in the 1981 World Final.
The running, swimming, and cycling events were relays, with the cycling done on tandem bikes; the obstacle course (which had its blocking sleds replaced by monkey bars similar to those used in the women's competition, as it was felt that the football teams would have too much of an advantage over the baseball teams) was decided by best combined time.
Penalty seconds were added for missing tires, stepping in the water hazard and knocking down the high bar and/or hurdles.
Fielding had entered the event hoping to take the Superstars 100m record first and foremost, and then to put up a good showing against Jacks.
An exhausted Fielding then told BBC TV that the loss was "a damn, bloody shame", but both qualified for the 1978 World Championship.
By now the BBC had decided that the programme was in need of 'freshening up' and had altered the format several times, changing the format of the gym tests to include bar jumps and adding computerised scoring to stop the trend of sliding squat thrusts.
The BBC covered the competition and aired their own programme, featuring British athletes on 31 December 1973, which was won by 400 metre hurdles Olympic champion David Hemery.
He shopped the idea to all three U.S. television networks, and ABC bought it as a special for the winter of 1973.
On the original ABC version, an athlete could compete in up to seven events, but no athlete was permitted to compete in the sport(s) of his or her profession.
If Europe was perhaps under represented, then the US challenge was as formidable as ever, with Pruitt, Wayne Grimditch, Jim Taylor and Joe Theismann all qualifying.
The third World Championship was held in March 1979, again in the sweltering heat of Freeport, Bahamas.
The original course had the contestants climb a 12' rope wall, run through a tubular tunnel, push a blocking sled (or traverse across monkey bars in the Women's and ''Superteams'' versions), cleanly step through a dozen tires (2 rows of 6), jump over a water hazard (rectangular pool of water), clear a 4'6" high bar, jump two sets of hurdles and cross the FINISH line.
In the UK national Superstars, rower Tim Crooks beat future World's Strongest Man Geoff Capes in a tight contest, but failed to qualify for the European final, losing by one point to François Tracanelli in the Spanish heat.
The 1983 championship was also notable for the record breaking performances of Des Drummond in the 100m, with the agile Leigh Rugby League player managing to lower the mark down to only 10.85 seconds, in itself a time comparable with many full-time track and field athletes who would compete in the 1984 Summer Olympics.
They did however represent Brazil and Mexico respectively, and thus increase the media interest in the contest in Latin America.
Controversially, Seagren (by nature of being retired from IAAF competition) was allowed to run in the track and field events, while Isaksson was not.
Television broadcasts of the competitions were popular both in Europe and North America in the 1970s and 1980s.
With only seven events (as opposed to the usual eight or ten) and being only part of a larger event instead of being a stand-alone series, the contest was different from those of the earlier era.
The participants in the inaugural "World Superstars Championship" were to be the competitors from across the various national and continental versions of the show with the best records in the previous years, and as such the US was to be represented by its previous national champions Bob Seagren, O. J. Simpson, and three time reigning current champion Kyle Rote, Jr..
With Coche having completed his events Fielding needed to win the final race, with Kruize finishing no better than third.
A new period of Superstars dominance could have evolved for Brew, but with the UK version being the only surviving national championship outside the United States, and no prospect of World Superstars being revived, once TWI decided to halt production of International Superstars the BBC version was soon cancelled as well.
Leading the 1982 Athletes team to Superteams victory, Hooper was trailed by the BBC as the new challenger to watch in that season's UK final.
The competitions were held in different areas of Cancun Palace and Melia Cancun hotels.
By now Hemery was a "professional Superstar", competing in Britain, Europe and the US, and devising his own training regime.
The Canadian had joked and fooled his way through the contest, but it was all a very good act.
Returning to the event age 50 in 2004, Hooper competed ably despite a torn pectoral muscle, finishing fourth against rivals at least 15 years younger than himself.
Basketball player Ann Meyers matched that feat in 1981 through 1983.
After this it became a two-way contest between the two pole-vaulters, Isaksson and Seagren.
There were also brief runs of versions for celebrities and for juniors, where each state's Department of Education was asked to nominate one high school, and those schools each sent one boy and one girl to qualifying rounds, with the final aired on TV.
Lofton on the other hand had $10000 to fight for, and bested Renaldo Nehemiah in the final event, and duly took second place, something again he was virtually guaranteed before the event.
To ensure that he was able to finish second Sherwood had to turn professional part-way through the competition in order to compete in the 100m (as his status as an amateur track and field athlete would normally have barred him from competing in this event).
Budd had set new standards, and most viewers thought him unbeatable.
Jacks won the gym tests and set a new record time in the cycling.
The final also saw Hooper beat Vic Charles (the only man ever to finish above him in any Superstars competition at that point).
However, it was heavyweight champion boxer Joe Frazier who nearly stole the show.
The rules for European Superstars allowed athletes to compete in "near specialist" events with a handicap, meaning that both Hemery and Isaksson were allowed to run in the 100m and Steeplechase, but only after giving the other finalists a head start.
Following the success of the first two standalone UK competitions, in 1975 the British national Superstars contest was suspended, and the event was widened to include participants from continental Europe.
The rest of the participants were to be drawn from the top six finishers from the 1976 European Superstars final, the top six from the US version in 1977, and the winner of the 1976 Canadian Superstars event.
Five preliminary heats were held, followed by a final at the Ahoy indoor arena in Rotterdam, famous for its banked, wooden cycling track.
Kruize accumulated enough points in the steeplechase to join Jacks in a tie for first place.
Although popular in the UK, US, Ireland, New Zealand, Sweden, the Netherlands and Australia, Superstars reached its peak at the turn of the decade, and one by one (starting in Europe) the participating nations fell away.
In The Bahamas both Britons won events: Jacks in the weightlifting and the gym tests&mdash;after an epic struggle against Brian Budd&mdash;and Sherwood in the cycle race.
Volleyball player Linda Fernandez won two straight events in 1979 and 1980.
Brian Budd won by the largest margin ever in the World Championship, winning three of the sports and finishing second in four.
He was a strong swimmer, almost unbeatable in the canoeing and gym tests, and competitive in all his other events.
At start of the final event, the  steeplechase, Jacks had a small lead, but was out of events.
In 1976 national competitions were resumed and Hemery again became UK Superstar, beating Conteh and Formula 1 World Champion James Hunt easily.
And he was nearly unbeatable in the gym, half-mile race and the swimming, and more than competent in cycling and rowing.
Had he paddled his Kayak 0.4 seconds faster or scored two more points in the pistol shooting he would have made the final, and with other strong European challengers (like Ties Kruize, Kevin Keegan and Björn Borg) also absent, the European challenge was significantly poorer.
Since 1978, the BBC had also produced an equally popular British Superteams event, which was dominated from the start by the "Athletes" – a team of Track and Field stars, who won every series but the final one in 1985.
By now a professional Superstar (he won $37000 for the 1982 World Championship), Brian Hooper dominated British and International Superstars until he retired in 1984.
Before the final in Rotterdam, Kruize was badly injured in a car accident and was replaced by Hemery, who finished second.
'''''Superstars''''' is an all-around sports competition that pits elite athletes from different sports against one another in a series of athletic events resembling a decathlon.
Speed skater Anne Henning won three straight women's competitions (1976–78).
He also understood that the key to winning Superstars was to win as many points as possible in the events you were good at, and to hold on for as many points as possible in the others.
The top eight finishers were also guaranteed a place at the inaugural World Superstars competition, to be held in the US the following year.
Budd returned as reigning World and Canadian champion (and strong favourite) with Pruitt back as well, but this time as US National Champion.
Canadian soccer player Brian Budd was unbeaten in Superstars contests, winning the World Championship three times from 1978 to 1980, making him the most successful Superstar of all time.
When a reporter asked him why he tried the race, Frazier replied, "How was I to know I couldn't unless I tried it?".
CBS Sports picked up the show the next year.
During that period former great NFL players Frank Gifford, Dan Dierdorf and Lynn Swann worked as commentators of the Superstars Tournament.
Conteh credited the highly competitive nature of the competition with increasing his abilities as a boxer, the inception of this cross-sport contest quickly encouraged many top athletes to push themselves further, introducing the idea that the winner could claim to be the country's "top sportsman" and also provided an arena where recently retired champions (such as Hemery and Lynn Davies) could extend their careers.
* Kyle Rote, Jr., Soccer, 1974, 1976, 1977
He never competed in the two running events and was a weaker shot that his rivals, so he was then faced with winning the basketball or swimming which were much more equal events.
He also famously opined, "That Mark Spitz," (who had won several gold medals for swimming at the 1972 Olympics) "is a tough muthafucker!"
The winner of 1977 European Superstars was the returning Ties Kruize, who was now fully recovered from his car crash.
However, Charles was unable to compete in the 1982 final, and Hooper was his replacement.
* Herschel Walker, American football, 1987–88
He also finished third in every other event he competed in, winning the title by thirteen points this time.
Now he was the ultimate champion.
Cook also competed in the now more popular ''Superteams'' series, as part of the never-defeated 'Athletes' team, who were only finally beaten during the last season of the show in 1985.
With no tie-breaking system in operation both men were crowned European Superstar, making Jacks the most successful British Superstar ever.
Victories in the rowing and second place in the gym test and swimming saw him win by just 3/4 of a point from talented runner Lofton.
In 1978 he won 44 points from these five events alone, ten points more than he needed to become World Champion.
* Renaldo Nehemiah, track and field/American football, 1981–83, 1986
While the participants were no less able, the event was less 'competitive', with no prize money at stake and no European, World or International contest to qualify for.
Isaksson countered with a win in the gym tests and two second-place finishes in the bike race and weightlifting.
In the gym tests Jacks scored 80 in the dips and 73 in the squat thrusts, and finished 18 points ahead of Sherwood in second place.
In the very first event, the 50 meter swimming heats, Frazier nearly drowned, and only after he was retrieved from the pool did he admit to commentators that he didn't know how to swim.
Thompson finished third.
And in the Challenge of the Champions Keith Fielding was able to disrupt Jacks' strategy by enough to beat him.
The key had been his ability to score well throughout – he was second in the steeplechase for instance – and even losing his 'banker' (the 100m to David Hemery) was not a problem.
The key to winning Superstars had become to gain maximum points in your best events and then to place as highly in the others – simple in theory, but appallingly hard in practice.
The Men's Championship was won comfortably by Olympic Super-heavyweight Boxing Champion Anthony Joshua, while the Women's Championship was won even more convincingly by women's coxless pairs Olympic champion Helen Glover.
Fielding eventually battled on bravely to finish fifth (and top European), but it was Bob Seagren who again gave the strongest challenge.
Competitors participate in a range of different sporting events, including a 100 yard dash/100m sprint, half mile (800 m) run, obstacle course or steeplechase, weightlifting, soccer skills, rowing, tennis, basketball, bicycle racing, shooting and swimming.
Memorable events in the first year of European Superstars included Malcolm Macdonald winning the 100m sprint in a Superstars record time of 10.9 seconds (after being made to run the race twice following the false start of another competitor), David Hemery being beaten by Dutch field hockey player Ties Kruize following a fall in the 600m Steeplechase, Swedish Discus thrower Ricky Bruch setting records in the weight lifting and medicine ball throw section of the gym tests and the first appearance of pole vaulter Kjell Isaksson, who dominated the final heat in Sweden, scoring a then record 69 (out of a possible 80) points.
He clearly had not, and was quickly declared the legitimate winner.
Produced by TWI and held in La Manga in Spain, this time it was a full event with heats and a final, something that had not been part of the series since 1983.
Shown on New Year's Eve, the programme was a major success and was repeated the following year.
It was produced by TWI with eight one-hour shows.
With just the indoor steeplechase left, Kruize was one point behind Jean-Paul Coche but five ahead of Fielding.
* Jason Sehorn, American football, 1998–2000
The programme was also moved to Portsmouth and took on a naval theme, adding a field gun competition in a bid to boost flagging ratings.
Although many amateur athletes (most notably Kjell Isaksson) had competed in Superstars since its inception, they had never been able to retain any prize money, with this instead going to their sport.
In reality, as was always an issue for Superstars, several competitors withdrew in the weeks before the contest, with Rote and Simpson pulling out just a week before taping, leaving a slightly weakened field headed by Seagren, double European champion Kjell Isaksson, Canadian champion Tony Gabriel and the joint runners-up from the US final Guy Drut and Dave Casper.
With Brian Budd in attendance for the UK National final, Brian Jacks took on Thompson, Steve Assinder from Basketball, pentathlete Danny Nightingale and the new "Past Master", former 400m hurdler John Sherwood, who won all his events in the heats, setting a new record.
Fielding's challenge was teetering, and in the half-mile run the searing Caribbean heat and a crazy pace he had attempted to catch up with Budd cost him physically; he collapsed of heat exhaustion and had to receive first aid and oxygen from Ron Pickering at track-side.
Keegan then easily won the steeplechase, but like many of the highest profile performers, his schedule was too full to allow him to compete as regularly as the Superstars format demanded.
Continuing this success, Brew reached the final of the 1985 UK national championship where he narrowly beat a strong field, including Rugby League player Joe Lydon, Olympic silver medallist Judoka Neil Adams and then only a one-time Olympic gold medal winning rower, Steve Redgrave.
Joshua won with an event to spare, while Glover won her final event (the Gym Tests) to win the Women's Superstars title by 14 points.
The sports have varied over time and between the various national and international competitions; in the first competition there was no obstacle course, but table tennis and baseball hitting were included, while the European versions featured a 600m Steeplechase, indoor cycling on a highly banked velodrome, and the infamous 'Gym Tests'.
The RAF officer then completed a successful first year in Superstars by becoming the last ever International champion, this time much more comfortably.
The show remained popular in the 1970s, but ratings declined and the last edition produced by ABC came in 1984.
Partly because of this, less renowned athletes like Isaksson came to dominate and be recognised outside their specialisms.
He was officially now Britain's best ever Superstar, although he had still finished 26 points behind Budd.
''The Superstars'' paired athletes and celebrities to compete as a team.
Instead the organisers had asked both Emerson Fittipaldi and Rafael Septien to 'make up the numbers', even though only Fittipaldi had ever entered Superstars before, both in the US and Europe, but neither time with any success.
While Grimditch and Pruitt won multiple events, they could not match Budd's consistency.
Without photo-finish equipment the result had to be called from hand-timing only.
In 2009 the franchise was revived for ABC.
During a three-year period (1991–1993) the event was held in Cancun, Mexico.
Kjell Isaksson dominated the event again, winning four of his eight events and finished second or third in three others, winning the title with an event to spare.
For Fielding, the forgotten man of 1978, this was a new dawn that he followed up by a second convincing win in the UK final.
Though Brian Hooper continued to compete in (and dominate) Superstars events until he retired in 1984, he stopped competing in the UK national contest after 1983, and he was succeeded as national champion in 1984 by athlete Garry Cook.
John Sherwood in finishing in second place gained a place in the World Championships and with it the possibility of big prize money.
1979 saw the first appearances of judoka Brian Jacks, who became Britain's most famous Superstar.
For Sherwood – a PE teacher from Sheffield at this time, and not a full-time sportsman – the World Championship proved to be a success, but not for Jacks, aiming to become the first European to win the title.
Here Gareth Edwards was one kick away from winning nearly $5000, but he fluffed his final shot and had to settle for a five-way tie for second place, while Guy Drut easily won the play-off, and took the money.
Superstars also expanded again in 1980, adding International Superstars to its list of programmes, though this was as a direct replacement for the European event.
footballer was expected to withdraw, but with a large crowd present to watch him he said "These people here in the stands have come here to see me make a fool of myself and they've got a right to it!
Early on Jacks was looking good, beating Fielding in a record time to win the canoeing, but once Fielding had won the cycling Jacks was beaten.
No Briton had ever won this title, but Jacks was a strong favourite against defending champion Ties Kruize.
Further events featuring European athletes started from 1975, with six World Superstars championships taking place from 1977 to 1982.
From 1979 a stand-out performer in this team was Brian Hooper, a pole-vaulter with an immense will to win.
Only Brian Budd has a better record in the competition.
With Fielding already finished (and celebrating) Kruize passed speed skater Hans van Helden on the final straight to win by 2.5 points.
In 2002, the BBC held a one-off, but truncated, UK Championship as a major feature of its biannual Sport Relief charity telethon.
* Dave Johnson, decathlon, 1993–94
There was no American version for three years (1995–1997) then ABC revived the show in 1998 and broadcast it through 2002.
Kristi Leskinen (Freestyle Skiing) and Maksim Chmerkovskiy (Ballroom Dancing) won the competition.
Budd got off to a blistering start – according to the UK commentator Ron Pickering it was 'a flyer' – and led in the first 30 yards, but Pruitt, then Fielding accelerated, and the two had a large lead over the rest of the field.
In the Ahoy final, Isaksson won five events and finished 20 points ahead of his nearest rival.
Bob Seagren, an Olympic pole vault gold medalist, was the first winner.
As they approached the finish line, Fielding pulled onto Pruitt's shoulder, then leaned as the two crossed the line together.
On 29 April 2008, it was announced that the show would be returning on Five for the summer of 2008.
The competitor with the most points at the end of all ten events is declared the champion.
