Indeed, federal judges and justices on the Supreme Court are not required to stand for election by virtue of their tenure "during good behavior", and their pay may "not be diminished" while they hold their position (Section 1 of Article Three).
More recently, many feared that President Nixon would refuse to comply with the Court's order in ''United States v. Nixon'' (1974) to surrender the Watergate tapes.
Associate justices are allowed four clerks.
From the Reagan administration to the present, however, the process has taken much longer.
At one pole are those who view the Federal Judiciary and especially the Supreme Court as being "the most separated and least checked of all branches of government."
The proposal was ostensibly to ease the burden of the docket on elderly judges, but the actual purpose was widely understood as an effort to pack the Court with justices who would support Roosevelt's New Deal.
Next, several opinions and lists of the court's orders are bound together in paperback form, called a preliminary print of ''United States Reports'', the official series of books in which the final version of the Court's opinions appears.
However, in fourteen of the sixteen 5–4 decisions, the Court divided along the traditional ideological lines (with Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan on the liberal side, and Roberts, Scalia, Thomas, and Alito on the conservative, and Kennedy providing the "swing vote").
Clerks hired by each of the justices of the Supreme Court are often given considerable leeway in the opinions they draft.
From 1882 to 1940, 62% of law clerks were graduates of Harvard Law School.
The mootness exception is not absolute.
At the conclusion of oral argument, the Justices retire to another conference at which the preliminary votes are tallied, and the most senior Justice in the majority assigns the initial draft of the Court's opinion to a Justice on his or her side.
This represents 87% of those 16 cases, the highest rate in the past 10 years.
In explaining the power of judicial review, Chief Justice John Marshall stated that the authority to interpret the law was the particular province of the courts, part of the ''duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.''
Over that period, the conservative bloc has been in the majority about 62% of the time that the Court has divided along ideological lines, which represents about 44% of all the 5–4 decisions.
This practice encountered opposition from many justices, who cited the difficulty of travel.
Examples of such cases include ''United States v. Texas'', a case to determine whether a parcel of land belonged to the United States or to Texas, and ''Virginia v. Tennessee'', a case turning on whether an incorrectly drawn boundary between two states can be changed by a state court, and whether the setting of the correct boundary requires Congressional approval.
Once appointed, justices have life tenure unless they resign, retire, or are removed after impeachment (though no justice has ever been removed).
This has only occurred once in U.S. history, in the case of ''United States v. Alcoa'' (1945).
First, a slip opinion is made available on the Court's web site and through other outlets.
Sometimes a great length of time passes between nominations, such as the eleven years between Stephen Breyer's nomination in 1994 to succeed Harry Blackmun and the nomination of John Roberts in 2005 to fill the seat of Sandra Day O'Connor (though Roberts' nomination was withdrawn and resubmitted for the role of Chief Justice after Rehnquist died).
The conservative bloc, joined by Kennedy, formed the majority in 63% of the 5–4 decisions, the highest cohesion rate of that bloc in the Roberts court.
Circuit riding was abolished in 1891.
Some of its major rulings have concerned federal preemption (''Wyeth v. Levine''), civil procedure (''Twombly-Iqbal''), abortion (''Gonzales v. Carhart''), climate change (''Massachusetts v. EPA''), same-sex marriage (''United States v. Windsor'' and ''Obergefell v. Hodges''), and the Bill of Rights, prominently ''Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission'' (First Amendment), ''Heller-McDonald'' (Second Amendment), and ''Baze v. Rees'' (Eighth Amendment).
District of Columbia Circuit
If a quorum is not available to hear a case and a majority of qualified justices believes that the case cannot be heard and determined in the next term, then the judgment of the court below is affirmed as if the Court had been evenly divided.
Chief Justice Roberts
38 out of the 78 decisions (representing 49% of the decisions) were unanimous in judgement, with 24 decisions being completely unanimous (a single opinion with every justice that participated joining it).
Nevertheless, it is primarily remembered for its ruling in ''Dred Scott v. Sandford'', which helped precipitate the Civil War.
The Roberts Court (2005–present) is regarded by some as more conservative than the Rehnquist Court.
Each associate justice is assigned to one or two judicial circuits.
Currently, all justices except for Justice Alito participate in the cert pool.
Likewise, Zachary Taylor died early in his term, but his successor (Millard Fillmore) also made a Supreme Court nomination before the end of that term.
Three cases were decided by an interesting alignment of justices, with Chief Justice Roberts joined by Justices Kennedy, Thomas, Breyer and Alito in the majority, with Justices Scalia, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan in the minority.
"Supreme Court clerkship appeared to be a nonpartisan institution from the 1940s into the 1980s", according to a study published in 2009 by the law review of Vanderbilt University Law School.
The Court holds two-week oral argument sessions each month from October through April.
Therefore, the current court sits as follows from left to right, from the perspective of those facing the Court: Kagan, Alito, Ginsburg, Kennedy (most senior Associate Justice), Roberts (Chief Justice), Thomas, Breyer, Sotomayor.
Reports'' are numbered so that users may cite this set of reports—or a competing version published by another commercial legal publisher but containing parallel citations—to allow those who read their pleadings and other briefs to find the cases quickly and easily.
The Court's decision in ''Bush v. Gore'', which ended the electoral recount during the presidential election of 2000, was controversial.
Since Article Three of the United States Constitution stipulates that federal courts may only entertain "cases" or "controversies", the Supreme Court avoids deciding cases that are moot and does not render advisory opinions, as the supreme courts of some states may do.
Once the committee reports out the nomination, the full Senate considers it.
Optionally,  is used to "pinpoint" to a specific page number within the opinion.
For the years 2009 through 2012, associate justices were paid $213,900 and the chief justice $223,500.
By the end of 1941, Roosevelt had appointed seven justices and elevated Harlan Fiske Stone to Chief Justice.
Four justices are from the state of New York, two from California, one from New Jersey, and one from Georgia.
From mid-May until the end of June, the court releases orders and opinions beginning at 10&nbsp;am, and these 15 to 30-minute sessions are open to the public on a similar basis.
The fear of mental decline and death often motivates justices to step down.
Once a justice meets age and service requirements, the justice may retire.
The Taney Court (1836–64) made several important rulings, such as ''Sheldon v. Sill'', which held that while Congress may not limit the subjects the Supreme Court may hear, it may limit the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts to prevent ''them'' from hearing cases dealing with certain subjects.
In order to plead before the court, an attorney must first be admitted to the court's bar.
For cases brought to the Supreme Court by direct appeal from a United States District Court, the Chief Justice may order the case remanded to the appropriate U.S. Court of Appeals for a final decision there.
Of the latter 15, the Court divided along the perceived ideological lines 10 times, with Justice Kennedy siding with the conservative justices (Roberts, Scalia, Thomas, and Alito) five times, and with the liberal justices (Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan) five times.
Five of them were decided in unsigned opinions.
The '''Supreme Court of the United States'''  is the highest federal court of the United States.
With the consent of the parties or approval of the Court, ''amici curiae'', or "friends of the court", may also file briefs.
His contention was not that the Court had privileged insight into constitutional requirements, but that it was the constitutional duty of the judiciary, as well as the other branches of government, to read and obey the dictates of the Constitution.
Three presidents have appointed justices who collectively served more than 100 years: Franklin D. Roosevelt, Andrew Jackson and Abraham Lincoln.
Moreover, there was a potential for a conflict of interest on the Court if a justice had previously decided the same case while riding circuit.
The Court sanctioned such congressional action in the Reconstruction case ''ex parte McCardle'' (1869), though it rejected Congress' power to dictate how particular cases must be decided in ''United States v. Klein'' (1871).
However, the justice may elect to write an opinion—referred to as an in-chambers opinion—in such matters if he or she wishes.
On the other hand, through its power of judicial review, the Supreme Court has defined the scope and nature of the powers and separation between the legislative and executive branches of the federal government; for example, in ''United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp.'' (1936), ''Dames & Moore v. Regan'' (1981), and notably in ''Goldwater v. Carter'' (1979), (where it effectively gave the Presidency the power to terminate ratified treaties without the consent of Congress or the Senate).
In the October 2010 term, the Court decided 86 cases, including 75 signed opinions and 5 summary reversals (where the Court reverses a lower court without arguments and without issuing an opinion on the case).
In modern discourse, the justices are often categorized as having conservative, moderate, or liberal philosophies of law and of judicial interpretation.
The final seat is reserved for the next appointee, who will be the most junior member.
A term of the Supreme Court commences on the first Monday of each October, and continues until June or early July of the following year.
and that traditional legislative district boundaries violated the right to vote (''Reynolds v. Sims'').
Jimmy Carter is the only president to complete at least one term in office without making any appointments to the Court.
Most justices have been Protestants, including 35 Episcopalians, 19 Presbyterians, 10 Unitarians, 5 Methodists, and 3 Baptists.
Exercise of this power can become controversial (see jurisdiction stripping).
Justice Kagan recused herself from 26 of the cases due to her prior role as United States Solicitor General.
Article III, Section 1 of the U.S. Constitution prohibits Congress from reducing the pay for incumbent justices.
*''Chisholm v. Georgia'' (1793) – overturned by the Eleventh Amendment (1795)
Cases are decided by majority vote of the Justices.
Jurists are, however, informally categorized in legal and political circles as being judicial conservatives, moderates, or liberals.
Under the White and Taft Courts (1910–30), the Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment had incorporated some guarantees of the Bill of Rights against the states (''Gitlow v. New York''),
78, Alexander Hamilton wrote: "A Constitution is, in fact, and must be regarded by the judges, as a fundamental law.
However, states may waive this immunity, and Congress may abrogate the states' immunity in certain circumstances (see Sovereign immunity).
Consequently, one seat was removed in 1866 and a second in 1867.
Andrew Johnson, who became president after the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, was denied the opportunity to appoint a justice by a reduction in the size of the Court.
One estimate is there are about 250 seats available.
The Senate must confirm the nominee for them to continue serving; of the two chief justices and six associate justices who have received recess appointments, only Chief Justice John Rutledge was not subsequently confirmed.
*''Dred Scott v. Sandford'' (1857) – overturned by the Thirteenth Amendment (1865) and the Fourteenth Amendment (1868)
Nevertheless, the Court's balance began to shift within months when Justice van Devanter retired and was replaced by Senator Hugo Black.
The power of judicial review, in fact, is nowhere mentioned in it.
All case names before the Court are styled ''petitioner'' v. ''respondent'', regardless of which party initiated the lawsuit in the trial court.
The term "good behavior" is understood to mean justices may serve for the remainder of their lives, unless they are impeached and convicted by Congress, resign or retire.
Also during Marshall's tenure, although beyond the Court's control, the impeachment and acquittal of Justice Samuel Chase in 1804–05 helped cement the principle of judicial independence.
The bar contains an estimated 230,000 members.
The Court may review any case in the federal courts of appeals "by writ of ''certiorari'' granted upon the petition of any party to any civil or criminal case."
'''Sandra Day O'Connor'''
It therefore belongs to them to ascertain its meaning, as well as the meaning of any particular act proceeding from the legislative body.
Barely one in ten cases involved the narrow liberal/conservative divide (fewer if the cases where Sotomayor recused herself are not included).
"; however, this alleged quotation has been disputed.
Three-quarters said the justices' decisions are sometimes influenced by their political or personal views.
It is popularly accepted that Chief Justice Roberts and justices Thomas and Alito (appointed by Republican presidents) comprise the Court's conservative wing.
For example, , as amended by the Detainee Treatment Act, provides that "No court, justice, or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider an application for a writ of habeas corpus filed by or on behalf of an alien detained by the United States who has been determined by the United States to have been properly detained as an enemy combatant or is awaiting such determination."
Nevertheless, the power of judiciary to overturn laws and executive actions it determines are unlawful or unconstitutional is a well-established precedent.
A circuit justice sitting with the Court of Appeals has seniority over the chief judge of the circuit.
Also, the Supreme Court is not immune from political and institutional consideration: lower federal courts and state courts sometimes resist doctrinal innovations, as do law enforcement officials.
*''Oregon v. Mitchell'' (1970) – overturned by the Twenty-sixth Amendment (1971)
Attorneys can be admitted as either individuals or as groups.
Approximately 4,000 lawyers join the bar each year.
After O'Connor's retirement Ginsburg was joined in 2009 by Sonia Sotomayor, the first Latina justice, and in 2010 by Elena Kagan, for a total of four female justices in the Court's history.
In the 19th century, every justice was a man of European descent (usually Northern European), and almost always Protestant.
If the court votes to deny a cert petition, as it does in the vast majority of such petitions that come before it, it does so typically without comment.
For instance, the citation for ''Roe v. Wade'' is 410 U.S. 113 (1973), which means the case was decided in 1973 and appears on page 113 of volume 410 of ''U.S.
These include applications for emergency stays (including stays of execution in death-penalty cases) and injunctions pursuant to the All Writs Act arising from cases within that circuit, as well as routine requests such as requests for extensions of time.
As retired justices, they no longer participate in the work of the Supreme Court, but may be designated for temporary assignments to sit on lower federal courts, usually the United States Courts of Appeals.
When the Court rules on matters involving the interpretation of laws rather than of the Constitution, simple legislative action can reverse the decisions (for example, in 2009 Congress passed the Lilly Ledbetter act, superseding the limitations given in ''Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.'' in 2007).
The Court's opinions are published in three stages.
After a week of inactivity, they adjourned until September, and everyone went home."
A cert petition is voted on at a session of the court called a ''conference''.
Nevertheless, not every nominee has received a floor vote in the Senate.
Since the founding of the republic, there has been a tension between the practice of judicial review and the democratic ideals of egalitarianism, self-government, self-determination and freedom of conscience.
The Supreme Court building is within the ambit of the Architect of the Capitol, but maintains its own police force separate from the Capitol Police.
In the October 2012 term, the Court decided 78 cases.
The Warren Court (1953–69) dramatically expanded the force of Constitutional civil liberties.
Before 1981, the approval process of justices was usually rapid.
During World War II, the Court continued to favor government power, upholding the internment of Japanese citizens (''Korematsu v. United States'') and the mandatory pledge of allegiance (''Minersville School District v. Gobitis'').
Supreme Court decisions can be (and have been) purposefully overturned by constitutional amendment, which has happened on five occasions:
He also pointed to several cases that defied the popular conception of the ideological lines of the Court.
To manage the high volume of cert petitions received by the Court each year (of the more than 7,000 petitions the Court receives each year, it will usually request briefing and hear oral argument in 100 or fewer), the Court employs an internal case management tool known as the "cert pool."
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. and Louis Brandeis were the first Supreme Court justices to use recent law school graduates as clerks, rather than hiring a "stenographer-secretary".
There is a cafeteria, a gift shop, exhibits, and a half-hour informational film.
Opinions are also collected and published in two unofficial, parallel reporters: ''Supreme Court Reporter'', published by West (now a part of Thomson Reuters), and ''United States Supreme Court Reports, Lawyers' Edition'' (simply known as ''Lawyers' Edition''), published by LexisNexis.
Some state governments in the South also resisted the desegregation of public schools after the 1954 judgment ''Brown v. Board of Education''.
Chief Justice Roberts
Ordinarily, a justice will resolve such an application by simply endorsing it "granted" or "denied" or entering a standard form of order.
For example, in ''DeFunis v. Odegaard'', , the Court dismissed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of a law school affirmative action policy because the plaintiff student had graduated since he began the lawsuit, and a decision from the Court on his claim would not be able to redress any injury he had suffered.
Located across the street from the United States Capitol at One First Street NE and Maryland Avenue, the building is open to the public from 9&nbsp;am to 4:30&nbsp;pm weekdays but closed on weekends and holidays.
Except in death penalty cases and other cases in which the Court orders briefing from the respondent, the respondent may, but is not required to, file a response to the cert petition.
Because the full Court had only six members, every decision that it made by a majority was also made by two-thirds (voting four to two).
For opinions or orders that have not yet been published in the preliminary print, the volume and page numbers may be replaced with "___".
Nevertheless, ''Gobitis'' was soon repudiated (''West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette''), and the ''Steel Seizure Case'' restricted the pro-government trend.
The Supreme Court is sometimes colloquially referred to as "'''SCOTUS'''", in analogy to other acronyms such as POTUS.
The four-story building was designed by Cass Gilbert in a classical style sympathetic to the surrounding buildings of the Capitol and Library of Congress, and is clad in marble.
Such leanings, however, generally refer to legal outlook rather than a political or legislative one.
"Each side is putting forward only ideological purists."
Although it has not happened since 1794 in the case of ''Georgia v. Brailsford'', parties in an action at law in which the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction may request that a jury determine issues of fact.
representing the ''Lawyers' Edition''.
Such resolutions are not legally binding but are an expression of Congress's views in the hope of guiding executive action.
Members of the Supreme Court Bar are also granted access to the collections of the Supreme Court Library.
The average age is .
Likewise, Goldstein stated that the critique that the liberal justices are more likely to invalidate acts of Congress, show inadequate deference to the political process, and be disrespectful of precedent, also lacked merit: Thomas has most often called for overruling prior precedent (even if long standing) that he views as having been wrongly decided, and during the 2009 term Scalia and Thomas voted most often to invalidate legislation.
The Rehnquist Court (1986–2005) was noted for its revival of judicial enforcement of federalism, emphasizing the limits of the Constitution's affirmative grants of power (''United States v. Lopez'') and the force of its restrictions on those powers (''Seminole Tribe v. Florida'', ''City of Boerne v. Flores'').
If an issue is "capable of repetition yet evading review", the Court will address it even though the party before the Court would not himself be made whole by a favorable result.
The Constitution provides that justices "shall hold their offices during good behavior" (unless appointed during a Senate recess).
grappled with the new antitrust statutes (''Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States''), upheld the constitutionality of military conscription (''Selective Draft Law Cases'') and brought the substantive due process doctrine to its first apogee (''Adkins v. Children's Hospital'').
When the Senate is in recess, a president may make temporary appointments to fill vacancies.
In recent times, clerking previously for a judge in a federal circuit court has been a prerequisite to clerking for a Supreme Court justice.
The desire to maximize the Court's strength and legitimacy through one retirement at a time, when the Court is in recess, and during non-presidential election years suggests a concern for institutional health.
"We are getting a composition of the clerk workforce that is getting to be like the House of Representatives", Professor Garrow said.
Most presidents nominate candidates who broadly share their ideological views, although a justice's decisions may end up being contrary to a president's expectations.
The committee's practice of personally interviewing nominees is relatively recent.
After the government moved to Washington, D.C., the Court occupied various spaces in the United States Capitol building until 1935, when it moved into its own purpose-built home.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt attempted to expand the Court in 1937.
They also receive access to better seating if they wish to attend an oral argument.
*''Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co.'' (1895) – overturned by the Sixteenth Amendment (1913)
The chief justice is allowed five clerks, but Chief Justice Rehnquist hired only three per year, and Chief Justice Roberts usually hires only four.
This figure does not reflect the number of cases the Court has taken up, as several cases can be addressed by a single opinion (see, for example, ''Parents v. Seattle'', where ''Meredith v. Jefferson County Board of Education'' was also decided in the same opinion; by a similar logic, ''Miranda v. Arizona'' actually decided not only ''Miranda'' but also three other cases: ''Vignera v. New York'', ''Westover v. United States,'' and ''California v. Stewart'').
One justice is African American, one is Latina, and the remaining six are non-Hispanic white; five justices are Roman Catholics, and three are Jewish.
A denial of a cert petition is not a judgment on the merits of a case, and the decision of the lower court stands as the final ruling in the case.
Justice Stephen Breyer follows close behind, with 4,199 days when Samuel Alito joined the court on January 31, 2006.
''Amici curiae'' may also present oral argument on behalf of one party if that party agrees.
When the Court is not in session, lectures about the courtroom are held hourly from 9:30&nbsp;am to 3:30&nbsp;pm and reservations are not necessary.
It also expanded ''Griswold'''s right to privacy to strike down abortion laws (''Roe v. Wade''), but divided deeply on affirmative action (''Regents of the University of California v. Bakke'') and campaign finance regulation (''Buckley v. Valeo''), and dithered on the death penalty, ruling first that most applications were defective (''Furman v. Georgia''), then that the death penalty itself was ''not'' unconstitutional (''Gregg v. Georgia'').
Justices sometimes strategically plan their decisions to leave the bench, with personal, institutional, and partisan factors playing a role.
Visitors are seated on a first-come first-served basis.
Justice Joseph Story served the longest as the junior justice, from February 3, 1812, to September 1, 1823, for a total of 4,228 days.
* Correcting an egregious departure from the accepted and usual course of judicial proceedings
Because justices have indefinite tenure, timing of vacancies can be unpredictable.
Impressively bewigged and swathed in their robes of office, Chief Justice Jay and three associate justices— William Cushing of Massachusetts, James Wilson of Pennsylvania, and John Blair of Virginia— sat augustly before a throng of spectators and waited for something to happen.
The Federal court system and the judicial authority to interpret the Constitution received little attention in the debates over the drafting and ratification of the Constitution.
Moves to impeach sitting justices have occurred more recently (for example, William O. Douglas was the subject of hearings twice, in 1953 and again in 1970; and Abe Fortas resigned while hearings were being organized), but they did not reach a vote in the House.
Several Catholic and Jewish justices have since been appointed, and in recent years the situation has reversed: after the retirement of Justice Stevens in 2010, the Court is without a Protestant for the first time.
Some believe this is because Congress sees justices as playing a more political role than in the past.
It is the Court's practice to issue decisions in all cases argued in a particular Term by the end of that Term.
Those chosen to be Supreme Court law clerks usually have graduated in the top of their law school class and were often an editor of the law review or a member of the moot court board.
Each term consists of alternating periods of approximately two weeks known as "sittings" and "recesses."
The party that appealed to the Court is the ''petitioner'' and the non-mover is the ''respondent''.
Lawyers use an abbreviated format to cite cases, in the form " U.S. ,  ()", where  is the volume number,  is the page number on which the opinion begins, and  is the year in which the case was decided.
Although justices are nominated by the President in power, justices do not represent or receive official endorsements from political parties, as is accepted practice in the legislative and executive branches.
The Court currently has five male and three female justices.
The chief justice has traditionally been assigned to the District of Columbia Circuit, the Fourth Circuit (which includes Maryland and Virginia, the states surrounding the District of Columbia), and since it was established, the Federal Circuit.
Congress can increase the number of justices, giving the President power to influence future decisions by appointments (as in Roosevelt's Court Packing Plan discussed above).
Once the Senate confirms a nomination, the president must prepare and sign a commission, to which the Seal of the Department of Justice must be affixed, before the new justice can take office.
* Resolving a conflict in the interpretation of a federal law or a provision of the federal Constitution
The Supreme Court firmly established its power to declare laws unconstitutional in ''Marbury v. Madison'' (1803), consummating the American system of checks and balances.
Justice Kennedy (appointed by President Reagan) is generally considered "a conservative who has occasionally voted with liberals", and up until Justice Scalia's death, was often the swing vote that determined the outcome of cases divided between the conservative and liberal wings.
Concerns about diversity focused on geography, to represent all regions of the country, rather than religious, ethnic, or gender diversity.
It is possible that, through recusals or vacancies, the Court divides evenly on a case.
In modern times, the confirmation process has attracted considerable attention from the press and advocacy groups, which lobby senators to confirm or to reject a nominee depending on whether their track record aligns with the group's views.
The group admission is held before the current justices of the Supreme Court, wherein the Chief Justice approves a motion to admit the new attorneys.
(age )in Melrose, Massachusetts
The first nominee to appear before the committee was Harlan Fiske Stone in 1925, who sought to quell concerns about his links to Wall Street, and the modern practice of questioning began with John Marshall Harlan II in 1955.
Many of the justices have also clerked in the federal Courts of Appeals.
In addition, the other two branches can restrain the Court through other mechanisms.
Because the Constitution sets no qualifications for service as a justice, a president may nominate anyone to serve, subject to Senate confirmation.
Every current justice has an Ivy League background.
The Supreme Court is the only court specifically established by the Constitution, and all the others were created by Congress.
