The little fishing town of Peniche is probably the most renowned surfing area in Portugal.
Cyclops, Western Australia, for example is one of the biggest and thickest reef breaks in the world, with waves measuring up to 10 metres high, but the reef below is only about  below the surface of the water.
The surfer must pop up quickly as soon as the wave starts pushing the board forward.
This jetty was built to make a deep channel in the river.
Wave section length can be hard to measure because local winds, non-linear wave interactions, island sheltering, and swell interactions can cause multifarious wave configurations in the surf zone.
Bells Beach is visited in the 1966 documentary film The Endless Summer.
In July 1885, three teenage Hawaiian princes took a break from their boarding school, St. Mathew’s Hall in San Mateo, and came to cool off in Santa Cruz, California.
Deep-water waves have no bottom interaction and the orbits of these water molecules are circular; their wavelength is short relative to water depth and the velocity decays before the reaching the bottom of the water basin.
However, even world-class surfers have drowned in extremely challenging conditions.
Snapper Rocks is a sand bottom point break considered as a world-renowned surfing spot on the Gold Coast.
Artificial surfing reefs can be built with durable sandbags or concrete, and resemble a submerged breakwater.
The south side of the pier is where the annual U.S. surfing championship is held.
Bingin; Padang Padang, Bali
The coastline beginning just north of Port Macquarie through to Crescent Head is accessed via Point Plomer Road, which ribbons the coast for 25&nbsp;km.
The competition was first held in January 1961 and then at Easter every year since although occasionally, when conditions at Bells are unsuitable, the competition has been transferred to other breaks such as Johanna.
It has been divided up into several sections, including, from the top of the point, Kitchen Windows, Magna tubes, Boneyards, Supertubes, Impossibles, Tubes, the Point, and Albatross.
The International Surf Center is based in Caparica.
Lighthouse Beach and Treachery Beach at Seal Rocks are south-facing and known for generating epic waves when a south swell rolls in.
When Mark Twain visited Hawaii in 1866 he wrote,
"Discovered" in the early 1970s, the point break at Angourie remained relatively unheralded for the next two decades, but it’s world-famous nowadays as home break of Aussie surfing legend Nat Young.
Many surfers claim to have a spiritual connection with the ocean, describing surfing, the surfing experience, both in and out of the water, as a type of spiritual experience or a religion.
However, the reef failed to produce any quality waves and was removed in 2008.
This phenomenon happens because the velocity of the top of the wave is greater than the velocity of the bottom of the wave.
:"It is the happy medium of mediocrity," writes Steven Kotler.
A surfer must know how to react and paddle quickly to match the speed of the wave to catch it.
These waves are large and increase in size as they pass over the sediment wedge formation.
Therefore, surfers should spread their fingers 0.2 to 0.4 diameters to most efficiently paddle in the water.
The Glossary of surfing includes some of the extensive vocabulary used to describe various aspects of the sport of surfing as described in literature on the subject.
Sea life can sometimes cause injuries and even fatalities.
Three major subdivisions within standing-up surfing are long boarding and short boarding and these two have several major differences, including the board design and length, the riding style, and the kind of wave that is ridden.
The wave size at "The Poles" depends on the direction of the incoming water.
It is located approximately one-half mile (0.8&nbsp;km) from shore in Pillar Point Harbor, just North of Half Moon Bay at the village of Princeton-By-The-Sea.
The drag interaction pulls on the bottom of the wave, causes refraction, increases the height, decreases the celerity (or the speed of the wave form), and the top (crest) falls over.
There are also various niche styles, such as the ''Egg'', a longboard-style short board targeted for people who want to ride a shortboard but need more paddle power.
Wave breaking intensity measures the force of the wave as it breaks, spills, or plunges (a plunging wave is termed by surfers as a “barrel wave”).
The value of good surf in attracting surf tourism has prompted the construction of artificial reefs and sand bars.
Other types of surfing include knee boarding, surf matting (riding inflatable mats), and using foils.
The different sections on the long cape don't link up, and the longest rides are usually only up to about 1&nbsp;km.
The waves are created from  reefs in the surf zone.
Measurements done by surfers were 1.36 to 2.58 times higher than the measurements done by scientists.
Lefts, Rights, and A-frames could be directed from this pump design providing for rippable surf and barrel rides.
When easterly waters (from 55°) interact with the jetty, they create waves larger than southern waters (from 100°).
'''Varberg (Sweden)'''
Thus, balance training exercises are a good preparation.
The modern-day definition of surfing, however, most often refers to a surfer riding a wave standing up on a surfboard; this is also referred to as stand-up surfing.
Different locations offer different types of surfing conditions for each skill level.
Bells Beach is the home of the world's longest-running surfing competition – the Rip Curl Pro Surf & Music Festival.
In the Nordics every decade or so there are some big storms.
Nearby surf breaks include "Southside", "Centreside", "Rincon", "Winki Pop", (Uppers and Lowers), Boobs and Steps.
Swells arrive in pulses, each lasting for a couple of days, with a few days between each swell.
The Boundary Interaction Model assumes that the topography of the sea bottom causes nearshore circulation and longshore transport; the result of both models is a rip current.
The spot is notorious and famous for its huge waves breaking in shallow water just above its sharp and cavernous reef, forming large, hollow and thick curls of water that surfers can ride inside of.
The wave features a relatively easy takeoff with long, fast, powerful walls, with longer hollow barrels on the best days.
By keeping the surfboard close to the surfer during a wipeout, a leash also increases the chances that the board may strike the rider, which could knock him or her unconscious and lead to drowning.
Further south, Prevelly Park is the heart of serious Margaret River surfing territory, where swells up to six metres get spun into perfect barrels across the treacherous offshore reef.
Jetties are added to bodies of water to regulate erosion, preserve navigation channels, and make harbors.
This study has implications in surfing for the paddling technique to reach the same velocity as the incoming wave.
The softboard is considered the ideal surfboard for learning, due to the fact it is safer, and has more paddling speed and stability than shorter boards.
The vorticity and inertia of rip currents were studied.
A leash, attached to the ankle or knee, can keep a board from being swept away, but does not keep a rider on the board or above water.
Reef breaks are present in Padang Padang (Indonesia) and Pipeline (Hawaii).
It is known for its heavy, glassy waves, often reaching  and higher.
The surf waves happen north of the jetty, are longer waves, and are powerful.
Wave section creation has microscale factors of peel angle and wave breaking intensity.
Most surf lessons begin with instruction and a safety briefing on land, followed by instructors helping students into waves on longboards or "softboards".
When the surfer is at wave speed, the surfer must quickly pop up, stay low, and stay toward the front of the wave to become stable and prevent falling as the wave steepens.
The Caparica Coast, with part of the ''Protected Landscape of the Ancient Beach of Costa da Caparica'', is visible the Convent of the Capuchos.
Due to its photogenic nature, where the waves break close to the beach, hollow surf and fast rides, 54th St has been a mainstay for surfers both local and traveling.
Different onshore and off shore wind patterns in the surf zone create different types of waves.
The west side beach offers a long left when the wind and swell conditions are working in your favour.
Following a tsunami in 2004, most of the hotels in Arugam Bay were destroyed.
Fins can cause deep lacerations and cuts, as well as bruising.
This allowed the waves to be directed as they approach the artificial sea floor.
In England, construction is nearing completion on the Wave, situated near Bristol, which will enable people unable to get to the coast to enjoy the waves in a controlled environment, set in the heart of nature.
Rip currents can be extremely strong and narrow as they extend out of the surf zone into deeper water, reaching speeds of 1–2 feet per second to 8 feet per second.
They are designed to take new surfers and help them become proficient riders.
Each break is popular depending on swell direction, season, and each surfer's preferred riding style.
Cutback: Generating speed down the line and then turning back to reverse direction.
Surfing may have first been observed by British explorers at Tahiti in 1767.
The consistent swell; shark-free, permanently warm (), clear water; and budget accommodation brought Arugam Bay to the attention of international surfers.
Local wind conditions affect wave quality, since the surface of a wave can become choppy in blustery conditions.
He is thought to have been the first modern surfer.
Ledge breaks create difficult surfing conditions, sometimes only allowing body surfing as the only feasible way to confront the waves.
Located on the Atlantic coast, it has long sandy beaches (considered by some to be among the best beaches in Portugal), with lots of tourists in the summer.
It is a fast and tubular wave which breaks on a hollow sand bank.
A type 4 jetty is one that no longer functions nor traps sediment.
Even with artificial reefs in place, a tourist's vacation time may coincide with a "flat spell", when no waves are available.
The results showed an ideal separation of 0.2 diameters to 0.4 diameters of a human digit between each digit for maximal velocity and minimal friction.
Table 1 shows a relationship of smaller peel angles correlating with a higher skill level of surfer.
The modern shortboard began life in the late 1960s and has evolved into today's common ''thruster'' style, defined by its three fins, usually around  in length.
Since 1988 they have met monthly to revegetate the reserve in an effort to bring it back to its original state.
Surfing can be done on various equipment, including surfboards, longboards, Stand Up Paddle boards (SUP's), bodyboards, wave skis, skimboards, kneeboards, surf mats and macca's trays.
The availability of free model data from the NOAA has allowed the creation of several surf forecasting websites.
The famous annual U.S. Open of Surfing is the largest surfing competition in the world.
Many other board sports have been invented over the years, but all can trace their heritage back to surfing.
One of the best and most photogenic long-board breaks in the world, the point at Noosa is capable of producing a genuine 200 metre ride on its best days.
The break is regarded as one of the best right-hand point breaks in the entire world, in both consistency and quality, in season.
In Kovalam, South West India, an artificial reef has, however, successfully provided the local community with a quality lefthander, stabilized coastal soil erosion, and provided good habitat for marine life.
At reef breaks and beach breaks, surfers have been seriously injured and even killed because of a violent collision with the sea bed, the water above which can sometimes be very shallow, especially at beach breaks or reef breaks during low tide.
Bells Beach, Australia; New Zealand
The thruster was invented by Australian shaper Simon Anderson.
Smaller wave peel angles increase the velocities of waves.
Located at the northern end of San Diego County and named for a nearby railroad bridge, Trestles is a series of breaks known for their unique quality (wave shape), particularly Lowers (also called Lower Trestles).
+ Table 1: Wave Type and Surfer Skill Level
When available, a sandy seabed is generally safer.
Deep-water waves travel to shore and become shallow water waves.
'''Teahupoʻo''' (pronounced cho-po) is a world-renowned surf spot off the South West of the island of Tahiti, French Polynesia, southern Pacific Ocean.
Snapper Rocks hosts elite international surfing events such as the Quiksilver and Roxy Pro, Rip Curl Masters, and MP Classic.
This speed is relative because local onshore winds can cause waves to break.
Manly itself has playful beach breaks and punchy barrels, plus the offshore Queenscliff "Bommie" (bombora), joy for big wave riders.
The main takeoff is close to a dangerous rock which often sticks out of the water, and has caused injuries.
The most important influence on wave shape is the topography of the seabed directly behind and immediately beneath the breaking wave.
In a decent swell especially there’s always a big crew of locals riding it who really know how to "walk the plank", but when it’s smaller it’s perfect for beginners – a long, easy-rolling cruise.
A newer introduction is a rash vest with a thin layer of titanium to provide maximum warmth without compromising mobility.
However, an endless train of mid-latitude cyclones cause the isobars to become undulated, redirecting swells at regular intervals toward the tropics.
The rip head of the rip current has long shore movement.
The term ''surfing'' refers to the act of riding a wave, regardless of whether the wave is ridden with a board or without a board, and regardless of the stance used.
Montanita has been the venue of many diverse international surfing competitions in recent years.
Synchronised surfing, Manly Beach, New South Wales, 1938–46
Waves increase in energy and speed, and then become longer and stronger.
Due to Sri Lanka's long-running civil war, this remote half-moon-shaped bay was mostly unknown to visitors and tourists.
Lowers is frequently the venue of world-class surfing events, including the top-level of professional surfing.
Also, to increase the length of the ride of the wave, the surfer should travel parallel to the wave crest.
Wind caused ripples and eddies form waves that gradually gain speed and distance (fetch).
An example of a Type 1 jetty is Mission Beach, San Diego, California.
At beach breaks, sandbanks change shape from week to week.
The southwest coast of Nicaragua is famous for surfing.
While many surfers find that funboards live up to their name, providing the best of both surfing modes, others are critical.
Typical surfing instruction is best performed one-on-one, but can also be done in a group setting.
This is known as a tube ride.
A number of international competitions such as the ESPN X Games, and the MexPipe Challenge have taken place.
Rip currents are water channels that flow away from the shore.
Weak swell is made from surface gravity forces and has long wavelengths.
A headland or point break interacts with the water by causing refraction around the point or headland.
For example, there are Beach breaks, Reef breaks and Point breaks.
Another nearby right-hand point wave at St Francis Bay (Bruce's Beauty) was first idolised and promoted in the cult classic surf movie ''The Endless Summer'' in the 1960s (although both Jeffreys Bay and St. Francis Bay had probably been surfed much earlier).
Due to the softness of the surfboard the chance of getting injured is substantially minimized.
Most famous is Supertubos, regarded by many as one of Europe’s best beach breaks, but there are plenty of other barrels to pull into around Peniche.
Section speed (meters/second)
'''Surfing''' is a surface water sport in which the wave rider, referred to as a surfer, rides on the forward or deep face of a moving wave, which is usually carrying the surfer towards the shore.
To the delight of visitors, Freeth exhibited his surfing skills twice a day in front of the Hotel Redondo.
Other names for the tube include "the barrel", and "the pit".
Surfers represent a diverse culture based on riding the waves.
Therefore, the surfer should lean forward to gain more speed, and lean on back foot to brake.
Surfers should be careful to remain in smaller surf until they have acquired the advanced skills and experience necessary to handle bigger waves and more challenging conditions.
Modern longboards, generally  in length, are reminiscent of the earliest surfboards, but now benefit from modern innovations in surfboard shaping and fin design.
Ships such as Seli 1 that have accidentally stranded on sandy bottoms, can create sandbanks that give rise to good waves.
Various airs include ollies, lien airs, method airs, and other skateboard-like maneuvers.
Surf forecasting is aided by advances in information technology.
Body surfing, where the wave is surfed without a board, using the surfer's own body to catch and ride the wave, is very common and is considered by some to be the purest form of surfing.
The predominantly Westerly winds generate swells that advance Eastward, so waves tend to be largest on West coasts during winter months.
Pipeline, Hawaii; Shark Island, Australia
During winter, heavy swells are generated in the mid-latitudes, when the North and South polar fronts shift toward the Equator.
Therefore, more experience is required to catch a low peel angle waves.
The initial discovery and promotion of the wave is curious.
Surfers' skills are tested by their ability to control their board in difficult conditions, riding challenging waves, and executing maneuvers such as strong turns and cutbacks (turning board back to the breaking wave) and ''carving'' (a series of strong back-to-back maneuvers).
Since a rip current appears to be an area of flat water, tired or inexperienced swimmers or surfers may enter one and be carried out beyond the breaking waves.
Top-Turn: Turn off the top of the wave.
This beach has something for everyone, offering several places for jumps and long rides.
Their movements are unpredictable.
This is one of the longest waves in the world with up to 4&nbsp;km of left waves over more than 3 separate sections of surf.
When practicing the sport of surfing, the surfer paddles out past the wave break to wait for a wave.
As a wave breaks, if the conditions are ideal, the wave will break in an orderly line from the middle to the shoulder, enabling the experienced surfer to position themselves inside the wave as it is breaking.
Air / Aerial: Launching the board off the wave entirely, then re-entering the wave.
An ideal estuary entrance bar exists in Whangamata Bar, New Zealand.
Andy Irons, Kelly Slater and Mick Fanning made frequent appearances in the WSL Supertubos surf competitions.
It is also a favourite surfing spot of local world champs, Mick Fanning, Joel Parkinson and Stephanie Gilmore, who enjoy nothing more than surfing their own ‘local’ break when they’re at home.
Most modern surfboards are made of fiberglass foam (PU), with one or more wooden strips or "stringers", fiberglass cloth, and polyester resin (PE).
Costco's alaia design Wavestorm surfboard is a cheap and cost efficient option; unlike many surfboards, this one comes with rubber fins, stock leash, pre-installed traction.
Surf camps for beginners and intermediates are multi-day lessons that focus on surfing fundamentals.
No place for beginners or the faint-of-heart, "Surfers Point" at Prevelly even attracts the big-name big-wave lunatics from the US, and it’s one of the few places in Australia where board-riders wear helmets and nobody laughs at them.
Jetties are classified into four different types and have two main controlling variables: the type of delta and the size of the jetty.
Paddling out requires strength, but also the mastery of techniques to break through oncoming waves (''duck diving'', ''eskimo roll'').
In 1975, professional contests started.
The speed of the wave is an addition of the propagation velocity vector (Vw) and peel velocity vector (Vp), which results in the overall velocity of the wave (Vs).
Lighter balsa wood surfboards (first made in the late 1940s and early 1950s) were a significant improvement, not only in portability, but also in increasing maneuverability.
A type 3 jetty is in an ebb tidal area with an unchanging seabed that has naturally created waves.
Rip currents are common on beaches with mild slopes that experience sizable and frequent oceanic swell.
Competitive longboard surfers need to be competent at traditional ''walking'' manoeuvres, as well as the short-radius turns normally associated with shortboard surfing.
Nazaré has become a popular tourist attraction, advertising itself, internationally, as a picturesque seaside village.
The study analyzed evolutionary advancement from the palms and feet of aquatic animals and reptiles and compared them to humans’ hands.
Westerly, south-westerly and north-westerly winds all work, and swell holds up to roughly 8&nbsp;ft.
The World Surf League (WSL) runs the championship tour, hosting top competitors in some of the best surf spots around the globe.
Surfing, like all water sports, carries the inherent danger of drowning.
Another candidate is the botanist Joseph Banks being part of the first voyage of James Cook on the HMS ''Endeavour'', who arrived on Tahiti on 10 April 1769.
Some of the world's best known waves for tube riding include Pipeline on the North shore of Oahu, Teahupoo in Tahiti and G-Land in Java.
After a strong winter storm in the Northern Pacific Ocean, waves can routinely crest at over  and top out at over .
Section Length (meters)
The microscale components influence wave height and variations on wave crests.
Other equipment includes a leash (to stop the board from drifting away after a wipeout, and to prevent it from hitting other surfers), surf wax, traction pads (to keep a surfer's feet from slipping off the deck of the board), and fins (also known as ''skegs'') which can either be permanently attached (''glassed-on'') or interchangeable.
The seabed can pose dangers for surfers.
Practicing with a Balance board or swing boarding helps novices master the art.
There is no longer an actual ride-able wave on the point, its glory days only living on in the memory of local surfers.
A newer addition to surfing is the progression of the ''air'' whereby a surfer propels off the wave entirely up into the air, and then successfully lands the board back on the wave.
The acceleration is less toward the front than toward the back.
Falling off a surfboard or colliding with others is commonly referred to as a ''wipeout''.
Alternatively, some surfers actually ride on a rip current because it is a fast and effortless way to get out beyond the zone of breaking waves.
Wind forces waves to break in the deep sea.
These dresses can still occasionally be seen.
Off shore winds produce non-surfable conditions by flattening a weak swell.
