The southernmost borders with French Guiana and Guyana are disputed by these countries along the Marowijne and Corantijn rivers, respectively, while a part of the disputed maritime boundary with Guyana was arbitrated by a tribunal convened under the rules set out in Annex VII of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on 20 September 2007.
One of the major sports in Suriname is football.
The two main mountain ranges are the Bakhuys Mountains and the Van Asch Van Wijck Mountains.
It was strained because of the coup and the Netherlands no longer maintains Suriname as a member of its development program.
Among them are the Saramaka, the Paramaka, the Ndyuka or Aukan, the Kwinti, the Aluku or Boni, and the Matawai.
In the interior are many Maroon and Amerindian villages, many of which have their own reserves that are generally open to visitors.
Suriname is one of the few countries in the world where at least one of each biome that the state possesses has been declared a wildlife reserve.
The first attempt was led by Fred Ormskerk, the second by Marxist-Leninists, the third by Wilfred Hawker and the fourth by Surendre Rambocus.
In 2012, Suriname was ranked joint 22nd with Japan in the worldwide Press Freedom Index by the organization Reporters Without Borders.
All winning medals for Suriname at the Carebaco Caribbean Championships, the Central American and Caribbean Games (CACSO Games) and also at the South American Games, better known as the ODESUR Games.
Members are appointed for life by the president in consultation with the National Assembly, the State Advisory Council and the National Order of Private Attorneys.
Also listened to is mArt, a broadcaster from Amsterdam founded by people from Suriname.
President Dési Bouterse was sentenced in the Netherlands to 11 years of imprisonment for drug trafficking.
At the second meeting, several areas of mutual interest were reviewed including: agriculture, trade, investment, as well as international transport.
Another famous player is André Kamperveen, who captained Suriname in the 1940s and was the first Surinamese to play professionally in the Netherlands.
The government sought to cover this deficit through monetary expansion, which led to a dramatic increase in inflation.
The vast majority of Suriname's inhabitants (about 90 percent) live in Paramaribo or on the coast.
Public expenditure was at 3.6% of the GDP in 2004, whereas private expenditure was at 4.2%.
Every year the length of them is compared, and high praises are given for the company that has imported the largest ribbon.
As head of government, the president appoints a sixteen-minister cabinet.
Most municipalities are located within the capital's metropolitan area, or along the densely populated coastline.
Planters' treatment of the slaves was notoriously bad, and many slaves escaped the plantations.
* Natural resources: Bauxite, gold, oil, iron ore, other minerals; forests; hydroelectric potential; fish and shrimp.
The colonists also mounted armed campaigns against the Maroons, who generally escaped through the rainforest which they knew much better than did the colonists.
A popular newspaper is ''De Ware Tijd'', however ''Times of Suriname'' surpassed ''De Ware Tijd'' as most read newspaper.
Involving the sport of tennis, historic national champions include Gerard van der Schroeff (men's single national champion for 10 consecutive years between the years 1931–41, plus champion of multiple future titles).
Muslims constitute 13.9 percent of the population, which is proportionally the largest in the Americas, and are found mostly among those of Javanese and to a lesser degree Indian descent.
Member countries include Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Switzerland, UK, United States and the European Commission.
As a plantation colony, Suriname was still heavily dependent on manual labour, and to make up for the shortfall, the Dutch brought in contract labourers from the Dutch East Indies (modern Indonesia) and India (through an arrangement with the British).
** Imports (2012): $1.782 billion: capital equipment, petroleum, foodstuffs, cotton, consumer goods.
A much smaller number, important for coalition-building, went to the "A&#8209;combinatie" and to the "Volksalliantie".
This migration continued in the period immediately after independence and during military rule in the 1980s and for largely economic reasons extended throughout the 1990s.
Suriname's democracy gained some strength after the turbulent 1990s, and its economy became more diversified and less dependent on Dutch financial assistance.
On 25 February 1980, a military coup overthrew Arron's government.
Disputes arose between the Dutch and the English.
Before it became a cathedral it was a theatre.
Suriname is one of the few countries in the world where a synagogue is located next to a mosque.
Suriname and Argentina are the only ICC associates in South America, although Guyana is represented on the West Indies Cricket Board, a full member.
The recognition of ''"Surinaams-Nederlands"'' (''"Surinamese Dutch"'') as a national dialect equal to ''"Nederlands-Nederlands"'' (''"Dutch Dutch"'') and ''"Vlaams-Nederlands"'' (''"Flemish Dutch"'') was expressed in 2009 by the publication of the ''Woordenboek Surinaams Nederlands'' (''Surinamese–Dutch Dictionary'').
In the sport of badminton the local heroes are Virgil Soeroredjo & Mitchel Wongsodikromo and also Crystal Leefmans.
They settled in Galibi (Kupali Yumï, meaning "tree of the forefathers") on the mouth of the Marowijne River.
Surinamese Hindi or Sarnami, a dialect of Bhojpuri, is the third-most used language, spoken by the descendants of South Asian contract workers from then British India.
In addition, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, small numbers of labourers, mostly men, were brought in from China and the Middle East.
The only fully English online newspaper is Devsur: Development of Suriname.
A relatively new landmark is the Hindu Arya Dewaker temple in the Johan Adolf Pengelstraat in Wanica, Paramaribo, which was inaugurated in 2001.
In Dutch, the official language of Suriname, the pronunciation is , with the main stress on the third syllable and a schwa terminal vowel.
They were executed over the next three days, along with Rambocus and Jiwansingh Sheombar (who was involved in the fourth counter-coup attempt).
Hindus formed the second-largest religious group in Suriname, comprising 22.3 percent of the population, the largest proportion of any country in the Western Hemisphere, besides Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago.
The day is usually filled with laughter, dance, music, and drinking.
Peter and Paul Cathedral started on 13 January 1883.
In 1954, Suriname became one of the constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, along with the Netherlands Antilles and the Netherlands.
The army set up a separate ''Troepenmacht in Suriname'' (Forces in Suriname, TRIS).
Settlement of Suriname dates back to 3,000 BC.
Due to Suriname's Dutch colonial history, Suriname had a long-standing special relationship with the Netherlands.
Herman Tjin-A-Djie (men's national champion 1941 and 1945, plus men's national double champion for 10 consecutive years with his brother Leo).
The purpose of the bridge was to facilitate and promote the development of the eastern part of Suriname.
As soon as they became truly free, the slaves largely abandoned the plantations where they had worked for several generations in favour of the city, Paramaribo.
A special characteristic of the temple is that it does not have images of the Hindu divinities, as they are forbidden in the Arya Samaj, the Hindu movement to which the people who built the temple belong.
Also are the Blanche Marie Falls on the Nickerie River and the Wonotobo Falls.
This was ahead of the US (47th), the UK (28th), and France (38th).
In addition, she also won a bronze medal at the 2001 World Championships and won several medals in the 800 and 1500 metres at the Pan-American Games and Central American and Caribbean Games.
The bridge consists of two lanes (one lane each way) and is not accessible to pedestrians.
Since 1991, the United States has maintained positive relations with Suriname.
Subsequently, the SKM was rebranded as ''Nationaal Leger'' (NL), National Army.
The Surinaamse Cricket Bond is an associate member of the International Cricket Council (ICC).
* Inflation (2007): 6.4%.
MMA and kickboxing champions Melvin Manhoef and Gilbert Yvel were born in Suriname or are of Surinamese descent.
* Annual growth rate real GDP (2010 est.
Economic growth slowed in 1998, with decline in the mining, construction, and utility sectors.
The first President of the country was Johan Ferrier, the former governor, with Henck Arron (the then leader of the NPS) as Prime Minister.
Suriname has recently started exploiting some of its sizeable oil and gold reserves.
Sranan, a local creole language originally spoken by the creole population group, is the most widely used language in the streets and is often used interchangeably with Dutch depending on the formality of the setting.
In April 2005, the regional Caribbean Court of Justice, based in Trinidad, was inaugurated.
The Maroons have learned that colorful and ornate pangis are popular with tourists.
He won gold in the 100-meter butterfly at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul and he won bronze in the same discipline at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona.
Bouterse, among other defendants, was tried for the murders, but the Suriname parliament extended an amnesty law in 2012 that granted Bouterse amnesty for the alleged violations before the trial was concluded.
It is during this period that the Surinamese population goes to the city's commercial district to watch "demonstrational fireworks".
There are many national parks in the country: Galibi National Reserve, Coppename Manding National Park, and Wia Wia National Reserve along the coast; Brownsberg Nature Park, Raleighvallen/Voltzeberg Natural Reserve, Tafelberg Nature Reserve, and Eilerts de Haan Nature Park in central Suriname; and the Sipaliwani Nature Reserve on the Brazilian border.
On 17 February 2005, the leaders of Barbados and Suriname signed the "Agreement for the deepening of bilateral cooperation between the Government of Barbados and the Government of the Republic of Suriname."
It is the only Dutch-speaking country in South America as well as the only independent nation in the Americas where Dutch is spoken by a majority of the population, and one of the two non-Romance-speaking countries on the continent, the other being English-speaking Guyana.
Another explanation is that the Netherlands, at the time of its colonization of Suriname, used the left-hand side of the road for traffic, and yet another is that Suriname was first colonized by the English.
Average relative humidity is between 80% and 90%.
China's South-South cooperation with Suriname has included a number of large-scale infrastructure projects, including port rehabilitation and road construction.
Other popular decorative souvenirs are hand-carved purple-hardwood made into bowls, plates, canes, wooden boxes, and wall decors.
The beautiful architecture makes the temple a tourist attraction.
Other mountains include Tafelberg at , Mount Kasikasima at , Goliathberg at  and Voltzberg at .
The public discourse about Suriname's languages is a part of an ongoing debate about the country's national identity.
About a quarter of the people work in the agricultural sector.
The bridge was built during the tenure of President Jules Albert Wijdenbosch (1996–2000) and was completed in 2000.
On 25 November 1975, the country of Suriname left the Kingdom of the Netherlands to become an independent state, nonetheless maintaining close economic, diplomatic, and cultural ties to its former colonizer.
In the most recent elections, held on Tuesday, 25 May 2010, the "Megacombinatie" won 23 of the National Assembly seats followed by "Nationale Front" with 20 seats.
EU relations and cooperation with Suriname are carried out both on bilateral and regional basis, the latter within the framework of the ongoing EU-CELAC and EU-CARIFORUM dialogues.
Although the Netherlands converted to driving to the right at the end of the 18th century, Suriname did not.
Male life expectancy at birth was at 66.4 years, whereas female life expectancy at birth was at 73 years.
While the larger Arawak and Carib tribes lived off the coast and savanna, smaller groups of indigenous peoples lived in the inland rainforest, such as the Akurio, Trió, Warrau, and Wayana.
This is a legacy of centuries of Dutch rule, which entailed successive periods of forced, contracted, or voluntary migration by various nationalities and ethnic groups from around the world.
A vice president, normally elected at the same time as the president, needs a simple majority in the National Assembly or People's Assembly to be elected for a five-year term.
Hakka and Cantonese are spoken by the descendants of the Chinese contract workers.
Over 60% of the population speaks Dutch as a mother tongue, and most of the rest of the population speaks it as a second language.
The Maroons often raided the plantations to recruit new members from the slaves and capture women, as well as acquire weapons, food and supplies.
This will determine what their major subjects will be.
In 1999, Bouterse was convicted ''in absentia'' in the Netherlands on drug smuggling charges.
On 19 July 2010, the former dictator Dési Bouterse returned to power when he was elected as the new President of Suriname.
The Surinamese populace is characterized by its high level of diversity, wherein no particular demographic group constitutes a majority.
This plantation can be reached only by boat via Domburg, in the north central Wanica District of Suriname.
Kondreman is one of the popular cartoons in Suriname.
The earliest documented colony in Guiana was an English settlement named Marshall's Creek along the Suriname River.
Surinamese Maroons, whose ancestors are mostly runaway slaves that fled to the interior, comprise the next largest group at 21.7 percent; they are divided into five main groups: Ndyuka (Aucans), Kwinti, Matawai, Saramaccans and Paramaccans.
Other main export products include rice, bananas and shrimp.
When the territory was taken over by the Dutch, it became part of a group of colonies known as Dutch Guiana.
The economy of Suriname is dominated by the bauxite industry, which accounts for more than 15% of GDP and 70% of export earnings.
Iris Jharap, born in Paramaribo, played women's One Day International matches for the Dutch national side, the only Surinamer to do so.
The northern, lowland coastal area (roughly above the line Albina-Paranam-Wageningen) has been cultivated, and most of the population lives here.
Beneath the President and Minister of Defense is the Commander of the Armed Forces (''Bevelhebber van de Strijdkrachten'').
Infant mortality was at 30 per 1,000 live births.
There are several holidays which are unique to Suriname.
Suriname is the smallest independent country in South America.
The judiciary is headed by the Court of Justice (Supreme Court).
While Dutch is the official language of government, business, media, and education, Sranan, an English-based creole language, is a widely used ''lingua franca''.
From Leo spawned the Opa Leo Tjin-A-Djie Tennis tournament.
The official spelling of the country's English name was changed from "Surinam" to "Suriname" in January 1978, but "Surinam" can still be found in English.
The Central Suriname Nature Reserve became a World Heritage Site in 2000.
This court supervises the magistrate courts.
In 1954, the country became one of the constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
New Year's Eve in Suriname is called ''Oud jaar'', or "old year".
Originally inhabited by a number of indigenous tribes, Suriname was explored and contested by European powers before coming under Dutch rule in the late 17th century.
Other attractions include plantations such as Laarwijk, which is situated along the Suriname River.
After assuming power in the fall of 1996, the Wijdenbosch government ended the structural adjustment program of the previous government, claiming it was unfair to the poorer elements of society.
The people of Suriname are among the most diverse in the world, spanning a multitude of ethnic, religious, and linguistic groups.
The southern part consists of tropical rainforest and sparsely inhabited savanna along the border with Brazil, covering about 80% of Suriname's land surface.
The Armed Forces of Suriname have three branches: the Army, the Air Force, and the Navy.
There is no constitutional provision for removal or replacement of the president, except in the case of resignation.
The English got to keep New Amsterdam, the main city of the former colony of New Netherland.
Elections were held in 1987, and a new constitution was adopted that, among other things, allowed Bouterse to remain in charge of the army.
Indeed, Surinamese politics soon degenerated into ethnic polarisation and corruption, with the NPS using Dutch aid money for partisan purposes.
In 1667, during negotiations leading to the Treaty of Breda, the Dutch decided to keep the nascent plantation colony of Suriname they had conquered from the English.
Swimmer Anthony Nesty is the only Olympic medalist for Suriname.
Between 2&nbsp;am and 5&nbsp;am on 7 December 1982, the military, under the leadership of Dési Bouterse, rounded up 13 prominent citizens who had criticized the military dictatorship in Suriname and brought them to Fort Zeelandia.
With the help of the native South Americans living in the adjoining rain forests, these runaway slaves established a new and unique culture that was highly successful in its own right.
In the years leading up to independence, nearly one-third of the population of Suriname emigrated to the Netherlands, amidst concern that the new country would fare worse under independence than it had as a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Suriname is party to the Cotonou Agreement, the partnership agreement between the members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States and the European Union.
In Paramaribo, Dutch is the main home language in two-thirds of households.
Suriname is said to be the only region where one variety of snakewood (''Brosimum guianense''), a rare shrub-like tree, is found.
Suriname has twenty-four radio stations, two broadcast through the Internet (Apintie and Radio10).
More than 80% of Suriname's land-mass consists of unspoiled rain forest; with the establishment of the Central Suriname Nature Reserve in 1998, Suriname signalled its commitment to conservation of this precious resource.
Around 30% of the total land area of Suriname is protected by law as reserves.
Students from the elementary school wear a green shirt with jeans, while middle school students wear a blue shirt with jeans.
He was re-elected on 14 July 2015.
They live mainly in the districts of Paramaribo, Wanica, Marowijne and Sipaliwini.
In 2004 Suriname became an associate member of the Dutch Language Union.
He is also the main suspect in the court case concerning the 'December murders', the assassination of opponents of military rule in Fort Zeelandia, Paramaribo, in 1982.
As the final court of appeal, it was intended to replace the London-based Privy Council.
Virgil Soeroredjo also participated for Suriname at the 2012 London Summer Olympics, only the second badminton player, after Oscar Brandon, for Suriname to achieve this.
It is thought that it is because the first cars imported were from England, but this is yet undocumented.
Already a cultural and economic hub in those days, they renamed it after the Duke of York: New York.
* Agriculture: Products—rice, bananas, timber, palm kernels, coconuts, peanuts, citrus fruits, and forest products.
Students going from the second grade of middle school to the third grade have to choose between the business or science courses.
They celebrate the arrival of the first ships with their respective immigrants.
The Maroons gradually developed several independent tribes through a process of ethnogenesis, as they were made up of slaves from different African ethnicities.
Raleighvallen, or Raleigh Falls, is a  nature reserve on the Coppename River, rich in bird life.
When the night starts, the big street parties are already at full capacity.
If the student has fewer points, he/she will go into the business courses or fail the grade.
By the end of 1997, the allocation of new Dutch development funds was frozen as Surinamese Government relations with the Netherlands deteriorated.
The planters of the colony relied heavily on African slaves to cultivate the coffee, cocoa, sugar cane and cotton plantations along the rivers.
Brazil signed agreements to cooperate with Suriname in education, health, agriculture, and energy production.
The two buildings are located next to each other in the centre of Paramaribo and have been known to share a parking facility during their respective religious rites, should they happen to coincide with one another.
Although Suriname's population remains relatively small, because of this history it is one of the most ethnically and culturally diverse countries in the world.
The national capital, Paramaribo, is by far the dominant urban area, accounting for nearly half of Suriname's population and most of its urban residents; indeed, its population is greater than the next nine largest cities combined.
These two cases place a constraint on relations between the Netherlands and Suriname.
In addition, this view does not say anything about traffic before the automobile era.
Tax revenues fell as old taxes lapsed and the government failed to implement new tax alternatives.
The main university in the country is the Anton de Kom University of Suriname.
Education in Suriname is compulsory until the age of 12, and the nation had a net primary enrollment rate of 94% in 2004.
Multiple K-1 champion and legend, Ernesto Hoost, is from Surinamese descent.
The President of the Republic, Dési Bouterse, is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces (''Opperbevelhebber van de Strijdkrachten'').
Owing to the country's multicultural heritage, Suriname celebrates a variety of distinct ethnic and religious festivals.
In Guyana, this practice is inherited from United Kingdom colonial authorities.
Only in the interior of Suriname is Dutch seldom spoken.
In 1999, Humphrey Mijnals, who played for both Suriname and the Netherlands, was elected Surinamese footballer of the century.
Tonka Island in the reservoir is home to a rustic eco-tourism project run by the Saramaccaner Maroons.
There are also many waterfalls throughout the country.
The southern border is shared with Brazil and the northern border is the Atlantic coast.
It takes longer on average to register a new business in Suriname than virtually any other country in the world (694 days or about 99 weeks).
Originally from Trinidad and Tobago, he now lives in Gainesville, Florida, and is the coach of the University of Florida, mainly coaching distance swimmers.
Many Suriname-born players and Dutch-born players of Surinamese descent, like Gerald Vanenburg, Ruud Gullit, Frank Rijkaard, Edgar Davids, Clarence Seedorf, Andwélé Slory, Ryan Babel, Aron Winter, Patrick Kluivert, Romeo Castelen, and Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink turned out to play for ''Oranje''.
Major consumers: US 26.1%, Belgium 17.6%, UAE 12.1%, Canada 10.4%, Guyana 6.5%, France 5.6%, Barbados 4.7%.
Cricket is popular in Suriname to some extent, influenced by its popularity in the Netherlands and in neighbouring Guyana.
* Industry: Types—alumina, oil, gold, fish, shrimp, lumber.
Tafelberg Mountain in the centre of the country is surrounded by its own reserve – the Tafelberg Nature Reserve – around the source of the Saramacca River, as is the Voltzberg Nature Reserve further north on the Coppename River at Raleighvallen.
The Jules Wijdenbosch Bridge is a bridge over the river Suriname between Paramaribo and Meerzorg in the Commewijne district.
The most popular source for sports news in SMEsport.
The Military Branches and regional Military Commands report to the Commander.
Mandarin is spoken by some few recent Chinese immigrants.
The severance package was very substantial, and a large part of Suriname's economy for the first decade following independence was fueled by foreign aid provided by the Dutch government.
The elementary school has six grades, middle school four grades and high school three grades.
Other religious groups include Winti, an Afro-American religion practiced mostly by those of Maroon ancestry; Javanism, a syncretic faith found among some Javanese Surinamese; and various indigenous folk traditions that are often incorporated into one of the larger religions (usually Christianity).
Situated on the Guiana Shield, it lies mostly between latitudes 1° and 6°N, and longitudes 54° and 58°W.
In 1861-63 the Lincoln administration looked abroad for places to relocate freed slaves who wanted to leave the United States.
The largest tribes were the Arawaks, a nomadic coastal tribe that lived from hunting and fishing.
The largest ethnic group are the East Indians, who form 27 percent of the population.
