These terms may indicate personal attributes, location of origin, occupation, parentage, patronage, adoption, or clan affiliation.
In some countries, this form may be mainly social and not an official name change, i.e.
Thus, the term "maternal surname" means the ''patrilineal'' surname which one's mother inherited from either or both of her parents.
The first known instance in the United States of a woman insisting on the use of her birth name was that of Lucy Stone in 1855; and there has been a general increase in the rate of women using their birth name.
The sons would be known as Podwiński.
In Western Europe, where Germanic culture dominated the aristocracy, family names were almost non-existent.
* '''Habitation (place) names''' e.g., ''Burton'', ''Hamilton'', ''London'', ''Leighton'', ''Murray'', ''Sutton'', ''Flint'', ''Laughton''
(Kil may come from the Gaelic word 'Cill' which means Church.
To avoid such mistakes, Esteban Álvarez Cobos, would become Esteban Álvarez-Cobos, to clarify that both are last names.
She can be addressed as ''Sra.
Those who came from Europe usually have "Rosen"("rose"), "Spiel", "Gold", and other German words as their names' prefixes, and "man", "wyn"/"wein"("wine"), "berg"("mountain"), and other German words as their names' suffixes.
In the Roman Empire, the bestowal and use of clan and family names waxed and waned with changes in the various subcultures of the realm.
Arabic names sometimes contain surnames that denote the city of origin.
This can not be chosen by the person, as it is part of the surname, for example "Puente" and "Del Puente" are not the same surname.
there are thought to be over 90 Italian surnames based on the given name "Giovanni."
In most Spanish-speaking and Portuguese-speaking countries, two or more last names (or surnames) may be used.
* '''Personal characteristics''' e.g., ''Short'', ''Brown'', ''Black'', ''Whitehead'', ''Young'', ''Long'', ''White''
A child's first surname will usually be their father's first surname, while the child's second surname will usually be the mother's first surname.
In Ancient Greece, during some periods, formal identification commonly included place of origin.
Most Sephardic Jews adopted Arabic names, like "Azizi" ("you're someones love"), "Hassan" or added words to their original names, like "Kohenzadeh" ("she bore a Kohen").
The names Wang, Zhang and Li are the most frequent.
Others hold Arabic names as a result of the influence of Islam and Arab culture.
In later times, praenomen became less useful for distinguishing invidiuals as it was often passed down for boys along with the nomen (like an entire culture where "John Smith, Jr." was the norm), and girls, were often given no praenomen at all or functional names like Major and Minor ("Older" and "Younger") or Maxima, Maio, and Mino ("Biggest," "Middle," "Littlest") or ordinal numbers rather than what we might think of as names: Prima, Secunda, Tertia, Quarta, etc.
In recent years there has been a trend towards equality of treatment in relation to family names with women not being automatically required or expected, some places even forbidden, to take the husband's surname on marriage, and children not automatically being given the father's surname.
In this case, Paz y Miño is in fact the paternal surname, being a true compound surname.
Thus the Bourbeau family has split into Bourbeau dit Verville, Bourbeau dit Lacourse, and Bourbeau dit Beauchesne.
The latter is often called the Eastern order because Europeans are most familiar with the examples from the East Asian cultural sphere, specifically Japan, China and Taiwan, Korea and Vietnam.
Originally, Chinese surnames were derived matrilineally, although by the time of the Shang dynasty (1600 to 1046 BCE) they had become patrilineal.
''Molinero'' ("miller"), ''Zapatero'' ("Shoe-maker") and ''Guerrero'' ("warrior"); and geographic location or ethnicity, e.g.
(See Maiden and married names.)
Common surnames include: ''Aboona'', ''Abraham'', ''Abro'', ''Agajan'', ''Agassi'', ''Aghase'', ''Akkad'', ''Akbalit/Akbalut'',  ''Alamasha'', ''Alawerdy'', ''Aldawid'', ''Amo Baba'', ''Amu'', ''Antar'', ''Aprim'', ''Apshu'',  ''Afarcan'', ''Arad'', ''Ashai'', ''Ashouri'', ''Ashurian'', ''Ashur'', ''Awdishu'', ''Awikam'',  ''Awishalim'', ''Awitor'', ''Awia'', ''Awrohum'',  ''Aziz'', ''Azzo'', ''Baba'', ''Bacchus'', ''Badel'', ''Barkha/Barkho'', ''Brikha'',  ''Bronit'',  ''Balou'', ''Barkoo'', ''Benassi'', ''Benyamin'', ''Bidavid'', ''Bidawid'', ''Bishu'', ''Cabani'', ''Dadashu/Dadasho'',  ''Darmu'',  ''Dinkha'', ''Daoud'', ''Dayan/Daian'',  ''Disho'', ''Duman'', ''Elia'', ''Elias'', ''Enwia'', ''Eshai'', ''Farhad'', ''Gorges/Georgis'', ''Gewargis'', ''Hadad/Adad'', ''Hamsho'',  ''Hasso'', ''Harshu'', ''Hormis'', ''Hosanna'', ''Hurmis'', ''Ilshu'', ''Ilishu'', ''Ishmael'', ''Ishai'',  ''Isaac'', ''Ishaq'', ''Iskhaq'', ''Iwassi'', ''Jabri'', ''Jelu'', ''Jendo'', ''Juna'', ''Kambar'',  ''Karam'', ''Karoukian'', ''Kasri'',  ''Khamo'', ''Khanbaba'', ''Khanisho/Khnanisu'', ''Khnaninia'',  ''Khedroo'', ''Khoshanu'', ''Khoshaba'', ''Malech'', ''Malek'', ''Malka'', ''Malkai'', ''Malick'', ''Mamendo'', ''Matti'', ''Merza'', ''Mikhael/Mikhail'', ''Mnashi'', ''Nisan'', ''Nimrod'', ''Narsai'', ''Ninweh'', ''Nineveh'', ''Nessar'',  ''Odah'', ''Odisha'', ''Odisho'', ''Oraham'', ''Oshana'', ''Qateneh'', ''Raaba'',  ''Rabi'', ''Rafael'', ''Ramsin/Rumsin'', ''Rassam'', ''Rifkha'',  ''Ronay'', ''Samo'', ''Sargis'', ''Sargon'', ''Sarkis'', ''Sarmas'', ''Sayad'', ''Semma'', ''Shabad'', ''Shamash/Shamasha'', ''Shamshi'', ''Sinharib'', ''Sharrukin'', ''Shimun'', ''Shamoon'', ''Shimon'', ''Shimonaya'', ''Shinu'', ''Shinai'', ''Sleman'', ''Shulman'', ''Sliwoo/Sliwa'', ''Tematheus'', ''Thoma'', ''Thomaya'', ''Tamraz'', ''Tiras'', ''Tiyareh/Tyareh'', ''Urshan'', ''Warda'', ''Warad'', ''Yacoub'', ''Yawalaha'', ''Yalda'', ''Yatrin'', ''Yetron'',  ''Yelu'', ''Yoel'', ''Yohannan'', ''Yonan'', ''Yonadam'' ''Yoseph'', ''Yoshu'',  ''Youkhana'', ''Younan'', ''Yousif'', ''Yukhannan'', ''Zakharia'', ''Zilkha'',  ''Zimri''.
Location (toponymic, habitation) names derive from the inhabited location associated with the person given that name.
In south India, surname is placed before personal name and in most cases it is only shown as an initial (for example 'S.'
the Spanish northern maritime façade exposed to the Atlantic Ocean which runs along the coastal strip lying north of the Cantabrian and Basque mountains, along the Bay of Biscay.)
Surnames were uncommon prior to the 12th century, and still somewhat rare into the 13th; most European surnames were originally occupational or locational, and served to distinguish one person from another if they happened to live near one another (e.g., two different people named John could conceivably be identified as 'John Butcher' and 'John Chandler').
This is done because American born English-speakers are not aware of the Hispanic custom of using two last names and thus mistake the first last name of the individual for a middle name.
These descriptors often developed into fixed clan identifications that in turn became family names as we know them today.
For example, Abraham Mesfin's father's ''first'' name would have been Mesfin, while Abraham Mesfin's child might be called "Nestanet Abraham."
Surname laws vary around the world.
Surname origins have been the subject of much folk etymology.
In many countries, it is common for ordinary people to have only one name or mononym, with some cultures not using family names.
For example, a woman named ''Ana García Díaz'', upon marrying ''Juan Guerrero Macías'', could be called ''Ana García de Guerrero''.
When none (such as the mother's maiden name) is provided, the last name may simply be repeated.
For instance, the surname ''Vickers'' is thought to have arisen as an occupational name adopted by the servant of a vicar, while ''Roberts'' could have been adopted by either the son or the servant of a man named Robert.
This classification can be extended to surnames originating elsewhere.
"Former President Fernando Henrique", never Former President Cardoso, or even "Former President Lula" ("Lula" was actually his nickname).
Such locations can be any type of settlement, such as: homesteads, farms, enclosures, villages, hamlets, strongholds or cottages.
In Portugal, a person's full name has a minimum legal length of two names (one given name and one family name from either parent) and a maximum of six names (two first names and four surnames — he or she may have up to four surnames in any order desired picked up from the total of his/her parents and grandparents' surnames).
A subset of occupational names in English are names thought to be derived from the medieval mystery plays.
Kurds holding authentic Kurdish names are generally found in Diaspora or in Iraqi Kurdistan where Kurds are relatively free.
Based on an individual's occupation or area of residence, a byname would be used in situations where more than one person had the same name.
In general, the traditions followed in countries like Brazil, Portugal and Angola are somewhat different from the ones in Spain.
For instance, Indonesian business tycoon Liem Swie Liong (林绍良) "indonesianised" his name to Sudono Salim.
Baran of House of Alan
); in English (Johnson, son of John; Richardson, son of Richard), etc.
Circassian family names cannot be derived from women's names or from the name of female ancestors.
Some couples keep their own last names but give their children hyphenated or combined surnames.
For example, if ''Rosa María Pérez Martínez'' marries ''Juan Martín De la Cruz Gómez'', she will be called ''Rosa María Pérez Martínez de De la Cruz'', and if the husband dies, she will be called ''Rosa María Pérez Martínez Vda.
The United States followed the naming customs and practices of English common law and traditions until recent times.
Such confusion can be particularly troublesome in official matters.
This component of the name is called a ''nisbah''.
Around this time, the nomen became followed by one or more additional names called cognomen.
Some common Kurdish last names, which are also the names of their respective tribes, include Baradost, Barzani, Berwari, Berzinji, Chelki, Diri, Doski, Jaf, Mutki, Rami, Rekani, Rozaki, Sindi, and Tovi.
In Peru and the Dominican Republic, women normally conserve all family names after getting married.
paternal) surname, and Zapatero as his second (i.e.
Those changes accelerated a shift away from the interests of the parents to a focus on the best interests of the child.
Some of the early Norman nobility who arrived in England during the Norman conquest differentiated themselves by affixing 'de' (of) before the name of their village in France.
Also, in most Slavic countries and in Greece, for example, there are different family name forms for male and female members of the family.
Indian surnames may often denote caste, profession, and village and are invariably mentioned along with the personal names.
Usually the first surname comes from the father and the second from the mother, but it could be the other way round.
To avoid ambiguity, one might often informally see these true compound surnames hyphenated, for instance, as Paz-y-Miño.
In some cases, such as Chinese Indonesians and Chinese Thais, certain ethnic groups are subject to political pressure to change their surnames, in which case surnames can lose their family-name meaning.
Ornamental names used as surnames are more common in communities which adopted (or were forced to adopt) surnames in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Other name etymologists use a fuller classification, but these four types underlie them.
Many cultures have used and continue to use additional descriptive terms in identifying individuals.
In Poland, if the husband is named Podwiński, and his wife takes his surname, her last name, and those of their unmarried daughters, would be Podwińska.
"Paz" alone would not be passed on, nor would "Miño" alone.
They can be referred to either as their full birth names or as their husband's surname plus the word for wife.
Surnames have been imposed by the dominant authorities: evangelists, then administrations.
When those from Japan, Taiwan and Hong Kong write their personal name in the Latin alphabet, it is common to reverse the order of the given and family names for the convenience of Westerners, so that they know which name is the family name for official/formal purposes.
In England and cultures derived from there, there has long been a tradition for a woman to change her surname upon marriage from her birth name to her husband's family name.
A one-name study is a collection of vital and other biographical data about all persons worldwide sharing a particular surname.
But some early Norman nobles in England chose to drop the French derivations and call themselves instead after their new English holdings.
This is because "Paz" alone is not his surname (although other people use the "Paz" surname on its own).
Many Yemenite Jews' family names are consisting of the place in which their ancestors have come to Yemen (like Sana'a) and an "i" in the end (like the family name "San'ani"), indicating belonging to the place they have originated from.
These true compound surnames are passed on and inherited as compounds.
her name would still legally be her birth name.
A similar system is used in Greece.
In doing so they would, for example, mistakenly refer to Esteban Álvarez Cobos as Esteban A. Cobos.
According to some estimates, 85% of China's population shares just 100 surnames.
This is thought to be due to the tendency in Europe during the Middle Ages for migration to chiefly be from smaller communities to the cities and the need for new arrivals to choose a defining surname.
Other surnames which started off as compounds of two or more surnames, but which merged into one single word, also exist.
These type of customary compound surnames used to be found throughout Guipúzcoa, Navarra, Soria, Logroño, and most of Green Spain generally (i.e.
The Court found all these laws to be in violation of the Convention.
For example, in Greece, if a man called Papadopoulos has a daughter, she will likely be named Papadopoulou (if the couple have decided their offspring will take the father's surname), since that name has a female version.
In Medieval times, Portuguese nobility started to use one of their estates' names or the name of the town or village they ruled as their surname, just after their patronymic.
In some places, civil rights lawsuits or constitutional amendments changed the law so that men could also easily change their married names (e.g., in British Columbia and California).
Henry VIII (ruled 1509–1547) ordered that marital births be recorded under the surname of the father.
They may be a simple first name such as "Wilhelm," a patronymic such as "Andersen," a matronymic such as "Beaton," or a clan name such as "O'Brien."
Berfin of House of Evin
Location names, or habitation names, may be as generic as "Monte" (Portuguese for "mountain"), "Górski" (Polish for "hill") or "Pitt" (variant of "pit"), but may also refer to specific locations.
But in the past, women often had no official given name and were referred in official documents by their family name plus the character "Shi" and when married by their husband's surname, their birth surname, and the character "Shi."
Chinese women do not change their names upon marriage.
For example, in cases of Saddam Hussein al Tikriti, meaning Saddam Hussein originated from Tikrit, a city in Iraq.
from the Castilian language) or more unusually a Basque language patronymic, followed by the preposition "de", with the second part of the surname being a local toponymic surname from Álava.
Several cases concerning discrimination in family names have reached the courts.
Likewise, the Rivard family has split into the Rivard dit Lavigne, Rivard dit Loranger and Rivard dit Lanoie.
In English-speaking cultures, family names are often used by children when referring to adults, but it's also used to refer to someone in authority, the elderly, or in a formal setting, and are often used with a title or honorific such as Mr., Mrs., Ms., Miss, Dr, and so on.
However, the style of having both a family name (surname) and a given name (forename) is far from universal.
For instance, the name of the son of the couple in the example above could be either "Andrés Gómez Reyes" or "Andrés Reyes Gómez".
In England it was common for servants to take a modified version of their employer's occupation or first name as their last name, adding the letter ''s'' to the word, although this formation could also be a patronymic.
In Spain, a 1995 reform in the law allows the parents to choose whether the father's or the mother's surname goes first, although this order must be the same for all their children.
If a child's paternity was not known, or if the putative father denied paternity, the new-born child would have the surname of the mother.
It spread in the late 19th century in the upper classes, under French influence, and in the 20th century, particularly during the 1930s and 1940, it became socially almost obligatory.
In the Middle Ages, when a man from a lower-status family married an only daughter from a higher-status family, he would often adopt the wife's family name.
With the gradual influence of Greek/Christian culture throughout the Empire, Christian religious names were sometimes put in front of traditional cognomen, but eventually, people reverted to single names.
During the era of the Trans-Atlantic slave trade (of Africans) many Africans lost their native names and were forced to take the surnames of their slave masters and any given name the slave master desired.
Since family names are normally written last in European societies (except in Hungary), the term '''last name''' is commonly used for ''family name'', while in Japan (with vertical writing) the family name may be referred to as '''upper name''' ().
Each person usually has two family names: though the law specifies no order, the first one is usually the maternal family name, whereas the last one is commonly the paternal family name.
paternal) surname, and Estrella as his second (i.e.
In Ethiopia and Eritrea, a child adopts the given name of one of their parents, usually the father, as a pseudo-surname.
He would never be regarded as Luis Estrella, Telmo Estrella, or Luis Telmo Estrella, nor as Luis Paz, Telmo Paz, or Luis Telmo Paz.
This custom of adding the husband's surname is slowly fading.
ben adam () or Abraham ben Abraham.
In ancient times a patronymic was commonly used — surnames like ''Gonçalves'' ("son of ''Gonçalo''"), ''Fernandes'' ("son of ''Fernando''"), ''Nunes'' ("son of ''Nuno''"), ''Soares'' ("son of ''Soeiro''"), ''Sanches'' ("son of ''Sancho''"), ''Henriques'' ("son of ''Henrique''"), ''Rodrigues'' ("son of ''Rodrigo''") which along with many others are still in regular use as very prevalent family names.
In this article, ''family name'' and ''surname'' both mean the patrilineal (literally, father-line) surname, handed down from or inherited from the father's line or patriline, unless explicitly stated otherwise.
"Washington," for instance, is thought to mean "the homestead of the family of Wassa," while "Lucci" likely means "resident of Lucca."
So "Rodríguez Zapatero" is not considered one surname; it is two distinct surnames.
In later Europe, last names were developed to distinguish between individuals.
Sometimes, for single mothers or when the father would or could not recognize the child, the mother's surname has been used twice: for example, "Ana Reyes Reyes".
Beyond this seemingly "compound" surname system in the Hispanic world, there are also true compound surnames in the Spanish-speaking countries.
It should be noted that some Hispanic people, after leaving their country, drop their maternal surname, even if not formally, so as to better fit into the non-Hispanic society they live or work in.
Reversing the order of names for the same reason is also customary for the Baltic Fennic peoples and the Hungarians, but other Uralic peoples traditionally did not have surnames, perhaps because of the clan structure of their societies.
Sometimes a father transmits his combined family names, thus creating a new one e.g., the paternal surname of the son of ''Javier'' (given name) ''Reyes'' (paternal family name) ''de la Barrera'' (maternal surname) may become the new paternal surname ''Reyes de la Barrera''.
* '''Estate names''' For those descended from land-owners, the name of their holdings, castle, manor or estate, e.g.
For instance, painter Pablo Ruiz Picasso and Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero are known by their maternal surnames as "Picasso" and "Zapatero".
This practice also differs between cultures; see T–V distinction.
The father's paternal surname becomes the child's own paternal surname, while the mother's paternal surname becomes the child's second surname (as the child's own maternal surname).
The praenomen was literally the "forename" and was originally used like a first name today.
''Losonci Rose and Rose v. Switzerland'' challenged a prohibition on foreign men married to Swiss women keeping their surname if this option was provided in their national law, an option available to women.
In North Indian states the surname is placed after given names where it exists.
As of 2006, more than 80% of American women adopted the husband's family name after marriage.
Unlike other true compound surnames, which resulted from the merging of a previously paternal and maternal surname, the Álava compound surname is characterized for having the first portion of the surname as a patronymic, normally a Spanish patronymic (i.e.
The nomen, which was the gens name, was inherited much like last names are, but their purposes were quite different.
In Spain, a woman does not change her legal surnames when she marries.
Traditionally, Kurdish women did not inherit a man's last name.
In China, according to legend, family names started with Emperor Fu Xi in 2852 BC His administration standardised the naming system in order to facilitate census-taking, and the use of census information.
In most Spanish-speaking countries, the custom is for people to have two surnames.
This is what is known as a territorial surname, a consequence of feudal landownership.
Only a fraction of surnames in English-speaking countries around the world come from Britain.
Names like "Johnson" and "Peterson" may be used in Jewish tradition as they too used the father's name as identification.
de Gómez'' corresponding to "Mrs Gómez").
The majority of Kurds do not hold Kurdish names because the names have been banned in the countries they primarily live in (namely Iran, Turkey and Syria).
Many families later changed these names.
A woman may adopt her husband's surname(s), but nevertheless she usually keeps her birth names, or at least the last one.
In English and other languages like Spanish—although the usual order of names is "first middle last"—for the purpose of cataloging in libraries and in citing the names of authors in scholarly papers, the order is changed to "last, first middle," with the last and first names separated by a comma, and items are alphabetized by the last name.
A family name is typically a part of a person's personal name which, according to law or custom, is passed or given to children from one or both of their parents' family names.
In Brazil there is no limit of surnames used.
It became usual that one of these cognomen was inherited, but as the praenomen and nomen became ever more rigidly used and less useful for identifying individuals, additional personal cognomen were more often used, to the point that the first the praenomen and then the nomen fell out of use entirely.
Henceforth, they became mandatory, although the rules for their use were very liberal.
While this form of compound surname can be found in other regions of Spain, albeit scarcely, it is only in Álava that it has persisted.
In the 18th and 19th centuries in Britain, bequests were sometimes made contingent upon a man's changing (or hyphenating) his family name, so that the name of the testator continued.
In the Western Hemisphere, it is commonly synonymous with '''last name''' because it is usually placed at the end of a person's given name.
For example, ''Carlos da Silva Gonçalves'' and ''Ana Luísa de Albuquerque Pereira (Gonçalves)'' (in case she adopted her husband's name after marriage) would have a child named ''Lucas Pereira Gonçalves''.
There are also more complicated names based on occupational titles.
First-born males bore their father's surname, other children bore either both or only one of them at their will.
So "Johnson" in Hebrew is "Ben Yochanon", meaning "Yochanon (John)'s son".
Traditionally in most countries, and currently in some Spanish-speaking countries, women, upon marrying, keep their own family names.
Occupational names include such simple examples as ''Smith'' (for a smith), ''Miller'' (for a miller), ''Farmer'' (for farm tax collectors or sometimes farmers), ''Thatcher'' (for a thatcher), ''Shepherd'' (for a shepherd), ''Potter'' (for a potter), and so on, as well as non-English ones, such as the German ''Eisenhauer'' (iron hewer, later Anglicized in America as ''Eisenhower'') or ''Schneider'' (tailor) - or indeed, as in English, ''Schmidt'' (smith).
For instance, Spanish ex-premier José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero has José Luis as his given name, Rodríguez, as his first (i.e.
In medieval times in France, such a name indicated lordship, or ownership, of the village.
In Britain, hereditary surnames were adopted in the 13th and 14th centuries, initially by the aristocracy but eventually by everyone.
As an alternative, both spouses may adopt a double-barrelled name.
''Burghartz v. Switzerland'' challenged the lack of an option for husbands to add the wife's surname to his surname, which they had chosen as the family name, when this option was available for women.
The same is true for daughters which almost always inherit the father's surname with the feminine suffix.
Others denote a personal trait: Lacourse might have been a fast runner, Legrand was probably tall, etc.
A surname with the prefix "Fitz" can be spelled with the prefix as a separate word, as in "Fitz William", as well as "FitzWilliam" or "Fitzwilliam".
With a few exceptions, Europe's languages are cognate, so most European surnames have a common etymological origin.
They may change their name throughout life if advised by a Buddhist Lama, for example if a different name removes obstacles.
''Archer'', ''Bailey'', ''Baker'', ''Brewer'', ''Butcher'', ''Carter'', ''Chandler'', ''Clark'', ''Collier'', ''Cooper'', ''Cook'', ''Carpenter'', ''Dempster'', ''Dyer'', ''Farmer'', ''Faulkner'', ''Fisher'', ''Fletcher'', ''Fowler'', ''Fuller'', ''Gardener'', ''Glover'', ''Hayward'', ''Hawkins'', ''Head'', ''Hunt'' or ''Hunter'', ''Judge'', ''Knight'', ''Miller'', ''Mason'', ''Page'', ''Palmer'', ''Parker'', ''Porter'', ''Potter'', ''Sawyer'', ''Slater'', ''Smith'', ''Stringer'', ''Taylor'', ''Thatcher'', ''Turner'', ''Walker'', ''Weaver'', ''Woodman'' and ''Wright'' (or variations such as ''Cartwright'' and ''Wainwright'').
Soeiro Mendes da Maia bore a name "Soeiro", a patronymic "Mendes" ("son of Hermenegildo – shortened to Mendo") and the name of the town he ruled "Maia".
For instance, former Chairman of the Supreme Military Junta of Ecuador, General Luis Telmo Paz y Miño Estrella, has Luis as his first given name, Telmo as his middle name, the true compound surname Paz y Miño as his first (i.e.
Examples include "Morgenstern" ("morning star"), "Safire" ("sapphire"), and "Reis" ("branch").
By the time of the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century, family names were uncommon in the Eastern Roman Empire.
Basil Cottle classifies European surnames under just four broad categories, depending on their origin:  given name (patronymics), occupational name, local name (toponymics), and nickname.
When this happens, usually both spouses change their name after marriage.
In many cases, a surname is a family name and many dictionaries define "surname" as a synonym of "family name".
While this tradition is no longer in use, in many cases the nom-dit has come to replace the original family name.
Several American surnames are a result of corruptions or phonetic misappropriations of European surnames, perhaps as a result of the registration process at the immigration entry points.
However, hereditary last names are not universal.
if a Russian is called Ivan Andreyevich Sergeyev, that means that his father's name is Andrey and his family name is Sergeyev.
Evidence indicates that surnames were first adopted among the feudal nobility and gentry, and only slowly spread to other parts of society.
Names derived from this may include ''King'', ''Lord'', ''Virgin'', and ''Death''; the last is often wrongly thought to be an anglicization of the French name ''D'Ath''.
Ireland was the first country in Europe to use fixed surnames.
The original meaning of names based on medieval occupations may no longer be obvious in modern English (so the surnames ''Cooper'', ''Chandler'', and ''Cutler'' come from the occupations of making barrels, candles, and cutlery, respectively).
In the Spanish tradition, usually the father's surname comes first, followed by the mother's surname, whereas in Portuguese-speaking countries the father's name is the last, mother's coming first.
For instance, when John Smith and Mary Jones marry each other, they may become known as "John Smith-Jones" and "Mary Smith-Jones."
Although still not in practice by many Kurds, this can be more commonly found today.
From the 1960s onwards, this usage spread to the common people, again under French influence, this time, however, due to the forceful legal adoption of their husbands' surname which was imposed onto Portuguese immigrant women in France.
By 1400, most English and some Scottish people used surnames, but many Scottish and Welsh people did not adopt surnames until the 17th century, or even later.
