While this was initially a somewhat vague formulation, by the 1930s many Surrealists had strongly identified themselves with communism.
Freud initiated the psychoanalytic critique of Surrealism with his remark that what interested him most about the Surrealists was not their unconscious but their conscious.
:"We Surrealists pronounced ourselves in favour of changing the imperialist war, in its chronic and colonial form, into a civil war.
Shortly after the release of Breton's ''Surrealist Manifesto'', the Surrealists published the inaugural issue of ''La Révolution surréaliste''.
1931 was a year when several Surrealist painters produced works which marked turning points in their stylistic evolution: Magritte's ''Voice of Space (La Voix des airs)'' is an example of this process, where three large spheres representing bells hang above a landscape.
Breton's followers, along with the Communist Party, were working for the "liberation of man."
During the war, André Breton, who had trained in medicine and psychiatry, served in a neurological hospital where he used Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytic methods with soldiers suffering from shell-shock.
Many writers from and associated with the Beat Generation were influenced greatly by Surrealists.
Not only did they give emphasis to the poetic undercurrents, but also to the connotations and the overtones which "exist in ambiguous relationships to the visual images."
The Surrealists wanted to create an exhibition which in itself would be a creative act and called on Marcel Duchamp, Wolfgang Paalen, Man Ray and others to do so.
Between 1930 and 1933, the Surrealist Group in Paris issued the periodical ''Le Surréalisme au service de la révolution'' as the successor of ''La Révolution surréaliste''.
Theorising a new theatrical form that would be immediate and direct, that would link the unconscious minds of performers and spectators in a sort of ritual event, Artaud created the Theatre of Cruelty, in which emotions, feelings, and the metaphysical were expressed not through language but physically, creating a mythological, archetypal, allegorical vision, closely related to the world of dreams.
On the floor Wolfgang Paalen created a small lake with grasses and the aroma of roasting coffee filled the air.
In Europe and all over the world since the 1960s, artists have combined Surrealism with what is believed to be a classical 16th century technique called mischtechnik, a kind of mix of egg tempera and oil paint rediscovered by Ernst Fuchs, a contemporary of Dalí, and now practiced and taught by many followers, including Robert Venosa and Chris Mars.
Long after personal, political and professional tensions fragmented the Surrealist group, Magritte and Dalí continued to define a visual program in the arts.
There were a number of reconciliations after this period of disunion, such as between Breton and Bataille, while Aragon left the group after committing himself to the French Communist Party in 1932.
The first Surrealist work, according to leader Breton, was ''Les Champs Magnétiques'' (May–June 1919).
He provided the following definitions:
His images, including set designs for the Ballets Russes, would create a decorative form of Surrealism, and he would be an influence on the two artists who would be even more closely associated with Surrealism in the public mind: Dalí and Magritte.
Magritte continued to produce works which have entered artistic vocabulary, such as ''Castle in the Pyrenees (Le Château des Pyrénées)'', which refers back to ''Voix'' from 1931, in its suspension over a landscape.
Excluded members launched a counterattack, sharply criticizing Breton in the pamphlet ''Un Cadavre'', which featured a picture of Breton wearing a crown of thorns.
The original Paris Surrealist Group was disbanded by member Jean Schuster in 1969.
He included citations of the influences on Surrealism, examples of Surrealist works, and discussion of Surrealist automatism.
Other tempera artists, such as Robert Vickrey, regularly depict Surreal imagery.
Breton continued to write and espouse the importance of liberating of the human mind, as with the publication ''The Tower of Light'' in 1952.
Beside the use of dream analysis, they emphasized that "one could combine inside the same frame, elements not normally found together to produce illogical and startling effects."
World War I scattered the writers and artists who had been based in Paris, and in the interim many became involved with Dada, believing that excessive rational thought and bourgeois values had brought the conflict of the war upon the world.
Antonin Artaud, an early Surrealist, rejected the majority of Western theatre as a perversion of its original intent, which he felt should be a mystical, metaphysical experience.
In hindsight, the disunion of 1929-30 and the effects of ''Un Cadavre'' had very little negative impact upon Surrealism as Breton saw it, since core figures such as Aragon, Crevel, Dalí and Buñuel remained true the idea of group action, at least for the time being.
The journal ''Tropiques'', featuring the work of Césaire along with Suzanne Césaire, René Ménil, Lucie Thésée, Aristide Maugée and others, was first published in 1941.
The first is generally held to have a distance, and erotic subtext, whereas the second presents an erotic act openly and directly.
It stressed his connections to Surrealist methods, offered interpretations of his work by Breton, as well as Breton's view that Duchamp represented the bridge between early modern movements, such as Futurism and Cubism, to Surrealism.
Goll and Breton clashed openly, at one point literally fighting, at the Comédie des Champs-Élysées, over the rights to the term 'Surrealism'.
That same year the Bureau of Surrealist Research was established, and began publishing the journal ''La Révolution surréaliste''.
Paalen contributed Fumage and Onslow Ford Coulage as new pictorial automatic techniques.
During the 1940s Surrealism's influence was also felt in England and America.
He was also a writer whose novel ''Hebdomeros'' presents a series of dreamscapes with an unusual use of punctuation, syntax, and grammar designed to create an atmosphere and frame its images.
* 1959 - International Surrealist Exhibition - Paris
Up until the emergence of Pop Art, Surrealism can be seen to have been the single most important influence on the sudden growth in American arts, and even in Pop, some of the humor manifested in Surrealism can be found, often turned to a cultural criticism.
While the focus was on writing, the journal also included reproductions of art, among them works by Giorgio de Chirico, Ernst, Masson, and Man Ray.
Carlos Fuentes was inspired by the revolutionary voice in Surrealist poetry and points to inspiration Breton and Artaud found in Fuentes' homeland, Mexico.
The group aimed to revolutionize human experience, in its personal, cultural, social, and political aspects.
To the dismay of many, ''Documents'' fizzled out in 1931, just as Surrealism seemed to be gathering more steam.
In 1924 two Surrealist factions declared their philosophy in two separate Surrealist Manifestos.
By the Second World War, the taste of the American avant-garde in New York City swung decisively towards Abstract Expressionism with the support of key taste makers, including Peggy Guggenheim, Leo Steinberg and Clement Greenberg.
However it was Leonora Carrington, who called Paalen "the only feminist of the whole group".
Surrealist works feature the element of surprise, unexpected juxtapositions and non sequitur; however, many Surrealist artists and writers regard their work as an expression of the philosophical movement first and foremost, with the works being an artifact.
A Surrealist group developed in London and, according to Breton, their 1936 London International Surrealist Exhibition was a high-water mark of the period and became the model for international exhibitions.
Jazz and blues musicians have occasionally reciprocated this interest.
Germaine Tailleferre of the French group Les Six wrote several works which could be considered to be inspired by Surrealism, including the 1948 Ballet ''Paris-Magie'' (scenario by Lise Deharme), the Operas ''La Petite Sirène'' (book by Philippe Soupault) and ''Le Maître'' (book by Eugène Ionesco).
There have also been attempts to tie the obituary of the movement to the 1989 death of Salvador Dalí.
However, a striking example of the line used to divide Dada and Surrealism among art experts is the pairing of 1925's ''Little Machine Constructed by Minimax Dadamax in Person (Von minimax dadamax selbst konstruiertes maschinchen)'' with ''The Kiss (Le Baiser)'' from 1927 by Max Ernst.
The success (or at least the controversy) of Dalí and Buñuel's film L'Age d'Or in December 1930 had a regenerative effect, drawing a number of new recruits, and encouraging countless new artistic works the following year and throughout the 1930s.
Duchamp continued to produce sculpture in secret including an installation with the realistic depiction of a woman viewable only through a peephole.
Feminist critics believe that it adopts archaic attitudes toward women, such as worshiping them symbolically through stereotypes and sexist norms.
Surrealists revived interest in Isidore Ducasse, known by his pseudonym Comte de Lautréamont, and for the line "beautiful as the chance meeting on a dissecting table of a sewing machine and an umbrella", and Arthur Rimbaud, two late 19th-century writers believed to be the precursors of Surrealism.
They corresponded regularly with the Paris group, and in 1927 both Goemans and Magritte moved to Paris and frequented Breton's circle.
At the exhibition's entrance Salvador Dalí placed his Rainy Taxi (an old taxi rigged to produce a steady drizzle of water down the inside of the windows, and a shark-headed creature in the driver's seat and a blond mannequin crawling with live snails in the back) greeted the patrons who were in full evening dress.
The following year, on March 26, 1926 Galerie Surréaliste opened  with an exhibition by Man Ray.
* 1942 - ''First Papers of Surrealism'' - New York - The Surrealists again called on Duchamp to design an exhibition.
Ginsberg cites Artaud's "Van Gogh -- The Man Suicided by Society" as a direct influence on "Howl", along with Apollinaire's "Zone",  García Lorca's "Ode to Walt Whitman", and Schwitters' "Priimiititiii".
Back in Paris, Breton joined in Dada activities and started the literary journal ''Littérature'' along with Louis Aragon and Philippe Soupault.
Artaud in particular was very influential to many of the Beats, but especially Ginsberg and Carl Solomon.
Disgruntled surrealists moved to the periodical ''Documents'', edited by Georges Bataille, whose anti-idealist materialism formed a hybrid Surrealism intending to expose the base instincts of humans.
Liquid shapes became the trademark of Dalí, particularly in his ''The Persistence of Memory'', which features the image of watches that sag as if they were melting.
He thought that rational discourse comprised "falsehood and illusion."
There is no clear consensus about the end, or if there was an end, to the Surrealist movement.
Also in February, Breton asked Surrealists to assess their "degree of moral competence", and theoretical refinements included in the second ''manifeste du surréalisme'' excluded anyone reluctant to commit to collective action, a list which included Leiris, Georges Limbour, Max Morise, Baron, Queneau, Prévert, Desnos, Masson and Boiffard.
He sheltered Fontenis whilst he was in hiding.
The group grew to include Paul Éluard, Benjamin Péret, René Crevel, Robert Desnos, Jacques Baron, Max Morise, Pierre Naville, Roger Vitrac, Gala Éluard, Max Ernst, Salvador Dalí, Man Ray, Hans Arp, Georges Malkine, Michel Leiris, Georges Limbour, Antonin Artaud, Raymond Queneau, André Masson, Joan Miró, Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Prévert, and Yves Tanguy.
This program reached beyond painting, to encompass photography as well, as can be seen from a Man Ray self-portrait, whose use of assemblage influenced Robert Rauschenberg's collage boxes.
Breton included the idea of the startling juxtapositions in his 1924 manifesto, taking it in turn from a 1918 essay by poet Pierre Reverdy, which said: "a juxtaposition of two more or less distant realities.
For example, the 1976 World Surrealist Exhibition included performances by David Honeyboy Edwards.
From the 1920s onward, the movement spread around the globe, eventually affecting the visual arts, literature, film, and music of many countries and languages, as well as political thought and practice, philosophy, and social theory.
Women are often made to represent higher values and transformed into objects of desire and of mystery.
The Bureau of Surrealist Research (Centrale Surréaliste) was the center for Surrealist writers and artists to meet, hold discussions, and conduct interviews.
* 1938 - A new ''Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme'' was held at the Beaux-arts Gallery, Paris, with more than 60 artists from different countries, and showed around 300 paintings, objects, collages, photographs and installations.
Some art historians suggest that World War II effectively disbanded the movement.
Spike Jones, Jr., whose father's orchestral recordings had a deep and indelible effect on me as a child, said once in an interview, 'One of the things that people don't realize about Dad's kind of music is, when you replace a C-sharp with a gunshot, it has to be a C-sharp gunshot or it sounds awful.'"
Others fought for complete liberty from political ideologies, like Wolfgang Paalen, who, after Trotzky´s assassination in Mexico, prepared a schism between art and politics through his counter-surrealist art-magazine DYN and so prepared the ground for the abstract expressionists.
* 1936 - ''London International Surrealist Exhibition'' is organised in London by the art historian Herbert Read, with an introduction by André Breton.
Politically, Surrealism was Trotskyist, communist, or anarchist.
The early work of many Abstract Expressionists reveals a tight bond between the more superficial aspects of both movements, and the emergence (at a later date) of aspects of Dadaistic humor in such artists as Rauschenberg sheds an even starker light upon the connection.
His classic period did not represent so sharp a break with the past as some descriptions of his work might portray, and some, such as Thirion, argued that there were works of his after this period that continued to have some relevance for the movement.
In the ''Declaration of January 27, 1925'', for example, members of the Paris-based Bureau of Surrealist Research (including André Breton, Louis Aragon, and, Antonin Artaud, as well as some two dozen others) declared their affinity for revolutionary politics.
Gertrude Stein's opera ''Doctor Faustus Lights the Lights'' (1938) has also been described as "American Surrealism", though it is also related to a theatrical form of cubism.
The patrons were given flashlights with which to view the art.
''Littérature'' contained automatist works and accounts of dreams.
Continuing to write, they attracted more artists and writers; they came to believe that automatism was a better tactic for societal change than the Dada attack on prevailing values.
He admired the young writer's anti-social attitude and disdain for established artistic tradition.
Surrealism as a visual movement had found a method: to expose psychological truth; stripping ordinary objects of their normal significance, to create a compelling image that was beyond ordinary formal organization, in order to evoke empathy from the viewer.
He refused to take sides on the splits in the French anarchist movement and both he and Peret expressed solidarity as well with the new Fédération anarchiste set up by the synthesist anarchists and worked in the Antifascist Committees of the 60s alongside the FA."
Though the war proved disruptive for Surrealism, the works continued.
And—as in Magritte's case (where there is no obvious recourse to either automatic techniques or collage)—the very notion of convulsive joining became a tool for revelation in and of itself.
They began experimenting with automatic writing—spontaneously writing without censoring their thoughts—and published the writings, as well as accounts of dreams, in the magazine.
The Guggenheim Museum in New York City held an exhibit, ''Two Private Eyes'', in 1999, and in 2001 Tate Modern held an exhibition of Surrealist art that attracted over 170,000 visitors.
'''Surrealism''' is a cultural movement that began in the early 1920s, and is best known for its visual artworks and writings.
The structure of Breton's "Free Union" had a significant influence on Ginsberg's "Kaddish".
One might say that Surrealist strands may be found in movements such as Free Jazz (Don Cherry, Sun Ra, Cecil Taylor etc.)
Throughout the 1930s, Surrealism continued to become more visible to the public at large.
Dorothea Tanning and Louise Bourgeois continued to work, for example, with Tanning's ''Rainy Day Canape'' from 1970.
Surrealistic art also remains popular with museum patrons.
This caution was overcome by the discovery of such techniques as frottage and decalcomania.
The Orange Alternative was created in 1981 by Waldemar Fydrych (alias 'Major'), a graduate of history and art history at the University of Wrocław.
Monnerot perhaps makes it the original document of what is later called 'black Surrealism', although it is the contact between Aimé Césaire and Breton in the 1940s in Martinique that really lead to the communication of what is known as 'black Surrealism'.
Tailleferre also wrote popular songs to texts by Claude Marci, the wife of Henri Jeanson, whose portrait had been painted by Magritte in the 1930s.
Several of these artists, like Roberto Matta (by his own description) "remained close to Surrealism."
Samuel Beckett was also fond of Surrealists, even translating much of the poetry into English.
The show confirmed that Surrealism had a component in the visual arts (though it had been initially debated whether this was possible), and techniques from Dada, such as photomontage, were used.
He was one of the few intellectuals who continued to offer his support to the FCL during the Algerian war when the FCL suffered severe repression and was forced underground.
Breton and his comrades supported Leon Trotsky and his International Left Opposition for a while, though there was an openness to anarchism that manifested more fully after World War II.
Surrealism was meant to be always in flux—to be more modern than modern—and so it was natural there should be a rapid shuffling of the philosophy as new challenges arose.
Leading up to 1924, two rival surrealist groups had formed.
The foremost document of this tendency within Surrealism is the ''Manifesto for a Free Revolutionary Art'', published under the names of Breton and Diego Rivera, but actually co-authored by Breton and Leon Trotsky.
Other surrealist plays include Aragon's ''Backs to the Wall'' (1925) and Roger Vitrac's ''The Mysteries of Love'' (1927) and ''Victor, or The Children Take Over'' (1928).
Paalen and Duchamp designed the main hall to seem like subterranean cave with 1,200 coal bags suspended from the ceiling over a coal brazier with a single light bulb which provided the only lighting, as well as the floor covered with humid leaves and mud.
Jan Švankmajer of the Czech group continues to make films and experiment with objects.
The artists, with their roots in Dada and Cubism, the abstraction of Wassily Kandinsky, Expressionism, and Post-Impressionism, also reached to older "bloodlines" such as Hieronymus Bosch, and the so-called primitive and naive arts.
Art historian Whitney Chadwick has countered the critique of Surrealism: "Surrealism also battled the social institutions - church, state, and family - that regulate the place of women within patriarchy.
Though Breton admired Pablo Picasso and Marcel Duchamp and courted them to join the movement, they remained peripheral.
In 1924, Miró and Masson applied Surrealism to painting.
One group, led by Yvan Goll, consisted of Pierre Albert-Birot, Paul Dermée, Céline Arnauld, Francis Picabia, Tristan Tzara, Giuseppe Ungaretti, Pierre Reverdy, Marcel Arland, , Jean Painlevé and Robert Delaunay, among others.
In the end, Breton won the battle through tactical and numerical superiority.
Surrealists have often sought to link their efforts with political ideals and activities.
The preface to his first exhibition in the Furstenberg Gallery (1957) was written by Breton yet.
They used Surrealist symbolism and terminology in their large scale happenings organized in the major Polish cities during the Jaruzelski regime, and painted Surrealist graffiti on spots covering up anti-regime slogans.
While Surrealism is typically associated with the arts, it has been said to transcend them; Surrealism has had an impact in many other fields.
* 1947 - International Surrealist Exhibition - Galerie Maeght, Paris
However, in 1933 the Surrealists’ assertion that a 'proletarian literature' within a capitalist society was impossible led to their break with the Association des Ecrivains et Artistes Révolutionnaires, and the expulsion of Breton, Éluard and Crevel from the Communist Party.
Mark Rothko took an interest in biomorphic figures, and in England Henry Moore, Lucian Freud, Francis Bacon and Paul Nash used or experimented with Surrealist techniques.
Benjamin Péret, Mary Low and Juan Breá joined the POUM during the Spanish Civil War.
More members were ousted over the years for a variety of infractions, both political and personal, while others left of to pursue creativity of their own style.
Thus we placed our energies at the disposal of the revolution, of the proletariat and its struggles, and defined our attitude towards the colonial problem, and hence towards the colour question."
After a long trip through the forests of British-Columbia, he settled in Mexico and founded his influential art-magazine Dyn.
Later Breton wrote, "In literature, I was successively taken with Rimbaud, with Jarry, with Apollinaire, with Nouveau, with Lautréamont, but it is Jacques Vaché to whom I owe the most."
While Guy Debord was critical of and distanced himself from Surrealism, others, such as Asger Jorn, were explicitly using Surrealist techniques and methods.
It is interesting to note that when in 1938 André Breton traveled with his wife the painter Jacqueline Lamba to Mexico to meet Trotsky (staying as the guest of Diego Rivera's former wife Guadalupe Marin), he met Frida Kahlo and saw her paintings for the first time.
There were also groups who associated with both currents and were more attached to Surrealism, such as the Revolutionary Surrealist Group.
The other group, led by Breton, included Louis Aragon, Robert Desnos, Paul Éluard, Jacques Baron, Jacques-André Boiffard, Jean Carrive, René Crevel and Georges Malkine, among others.
Examples of Surrealist literature are Artaud's ''Le Pèse-Nerfs'' (1926), Aragon's ''Irene's Cunt'' (1927), Péret's ''Death to the Pigs'' (1929), Crevel's ''Mr.
Knife Miss Fork'' (1931), Sadegh Hedayat's ''the Blind Owl'' (1937), and Breton's ''Sur la route de San Romano'' (1948).
Breton initially doubted that visual arts could even be useful in the Surrealist movement since they appeared to be less malleable and open to chance and automatism.
Many new artists explicitly took up the Surrealist banner for themselves.
As the first directors, Naville and Péret modeled the format of the journal on the conservative scientific review ''La Nature.''
Even though Breton by 1946 responded rather negatively to the subject of music with his essay ''Silence is Golden'', later Surrealists, such as Paul Garon, have been interested in—and found parallels to—Surrealism in the improvisation of jazz and the blues.
Soon more visual artists became involved, including Giorgio de Chirico, Max Ernst, Joan Miró, Francis Picabia, Yves Tanguy, Salvador Dalí, Luis Buñuel, Alberto Giacometti, Valentine Hugo, Méret Oppenheim, Toyen, Kansuke Yamamoto and later after the second war: Enrico Donati.
Major himself was the author of a "Manifesto of Socialist Surrealism".
Feminists have in the past critiqued Surrealism, claiming that it is fundamentally a male movement and a male fellowship.
Surrealists believe that non-Western cultures also provide a continued source of inspiration for Surrealist activity because some may strike up a better balance between instrumental reason and imagination in flight than Western culture.
To this goal, at various times Surrealists aligned with communism and anarchism.
Each group claimed to be successors of a revolution launched by Guillaume Apollinaire.
Artists painted unnerving, illogical scenes with photographic precision, created strange creatures from everyday objects and developed painting techniques that allowed the unconscious to express itself.
They investigated speech under trance.
But—as in Breton's case—much of what is presented as purely automatic is actually edited and very "thought out".
This was especially visible in the New Left of the 1960s and 1970s and the French revolt of May 1968, whose slogan "All power to the imagination" rose directly from French Surrealist thought and practice.
Though not an organized movement, Esslin grouped these playwrights together based on some similarities of theme and technique; Esslin argues that these similarities may be traced to an influence from the Surrealists.
Magritte's work became more realistic in its depiction of actual objects, while maintaining the element of juxtaposition, such as in 1951's ''Personal Values (Les Valeurs Personnelles)'' and 1954's ''Empire of Light  (L’Empire des lumières)''.
His 1914 ''The Nostalgia of the Poet (La Nostalgie du poète)'' has the figure turned away from the viewer, and the juxtaposition of a bust with glasses and a fish as a relief defies conventional explanation.
Philip Lamantia and Ted Joans are often categorized as both Beat and Surrealist writers.
The anticolonial revolutionary and proletarian politics of "Murderous Humanitarianism" (1932) which was drafted mainly by René Crevel, signed by André Breton, Paul Éluard, Benjamin Péret, Yves Tanguy, and the Martiniquan Surrealists Pierre Yoyotte and J.M.
Meeting the young writer Jacques Vaché, Breton felt that Vaché was the spiritual son of writer and pataphysics founder Alfred Jarry.
In 1952 Breton wrote "It was in the black mirror of anarchism that surrealism first recognised itself."
In the 1960s, the artists and writers associated with the Situationist International were closely associated with Surrealism.
Thought of as the effort of humanity to liberate imagination as an act of insurrection against society, Surrealism finds precedents in the alchemists, possibly Dante, Hieronymus Bosch, Marquis de Sade, Charles Fourier, Comte de Lautreamont and Arthur Rimbaud.
Though the quarrel over the anteriority of 'Surrealism' concluded with the victory of Breton, the history of surrealism from that moment would remain marked by fractures, resignations, and resounding excommunications, with each surrealist having their own view of the issue and goals, and accepting more or less the definitions laid out by André Breton.
William S. Burroughs, a core member of the Beat Generation and a postmodern novelist, developed the cut-up technique with former surrealist Brion Gysin—in which chance is used to dictate the composition of a text from words cut out of other sources—referring to it as the "Surrealist Lark" and recognizing its debt to the techniques of Tristan Tzara.
The more the relationship between the two juxtaposed realities is distant and true, the stronger the image will be -- the greater its emotional power and poetic reality.
Other figures from the Surrealist movement were expelled.
Some Surrealists, such as Benjamin Péret, Mary Low, and Juan Breá, aligned with forms of left communism.
Breton and Soupault delved deeper into automatism and wrote ''The Magnetic Fields'' (1920).
and even in the daily lives of people in confrontation with limiting social conditions.
Wolfgang Paalen left the group in 1942 due to political/philosophical differences with Breton.
Salman Rushdie, when called a Magical Realist, said he saw his work instead "allied to surrealism".
The aim was to "resolve the previously contradictory conditions of dream and reality".
However, it was the American poet, Charles Henri Ford, and his magazine ''View'' which offered Breton a channel for promoting Surrealism in the United States.
During the 1980s, behind the Iron Curtain, Surrealism again entered into politics with an underground artistic opposition movement known as the Orange Alternative.
Because Surrealist writers seldom, if ever, appear to organize their thoughts and the images they present, some people find much of their work difficult to parse.
Publication continued into 1929.
Another example is Giacometti's 1925 ''Torso'', which marked his movement to simplified forms and inspiration from preclassical sculpture.
* 1936 - Museum of Modern Art in New York shows the exhibition ''Fantastic Art, Dada and Surrealism''.
Paul Auster, for example, has translated Surrealist poetry and said the Surrealists were "a real discovery" for him.
In 1929 the satellite group associated with the journal ''Le Grand Jeu'', including Roger Gilbert-Lecomte, Maurice Henry and the Czech painter Josef Sima, was ostracized.
Breton proclaimed that the true aim of Surrealism was "long live the social revolution, and it alone!"
This time he wove a 3-dimensional web of string throughout the rooms of the space, in some cases making it almost impossible to see the works.
The Second World War overshadowed, for a time, almost all intellectual and artistic production.
The first Surrealist exhibition, ''La Peinture Surrealiste'', was held at Galerie Pierre in Paris in 1925.
Breton declared Kahlo to be an "innate" Surrealist painter.
Between 1911 and 1917, he adopted an unornamented depictional style whose surface would be adopted by others later.
After the war, when they returned to Paris, the Dada activities continued.
The former curator of the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, Michael Bell, has called this style "veristic Surrealism", which depicts with meticulous clarity and great detail a world analogous to the dream world.
He made a secret arrangement with an associate's son to bring his friends to the opening of the show, so that when the finely dressed patrons arrived they found a dozen children in athletic clothes kicking and passing balls, and skipping rope.
Surrealist theatre and Artaud's "Theatre of Cruelty" were inspirational to many within the group of playwrights that the critic Martin Esslin called the "Theatre of the Absurd" (in his 1963 book of the same name).
''The Red Tower (La tour rouge)'' from 1913 shows the stark colour contrasts and illustrative style later adopted by Surrealist painters.
Breton published ''Surrealism and Painting'' in 1928 which summarized the movement to that point, though he continued to update the work until the 1960s.
They embraced idiosyncrasy, while rejecting the idea of an underlying madness.
In addition to Surrealist ideas that are grounded in the ideas of Hegel, Marx and Freud, Surrealism is seen by its advocates as being inherently dynamic and as dialectical in its thought.
In the second the influence of Miró and the drawing style of Picasso is visible with the use of fluid curving and intersecting lines and colour, whereas the first takes a directness that would later be influential in movements such as Pop art.
Magic realism, a popular technique among novelists of the latter half of the 20th century especially among Latin American writers, has some obvious similarities to Surrealism with its juxtaposition of the normal and the dream-like, as in the work of Gabriel García Márquez.
Much to the Surrealists' satisfaction the exhibition scandalized the viewers.
However, art historian Sarane Alexandrian (1970) states, "the death of André Breton in 1966 marked the end of Surrealism as an organized movement."
