Anthony supported citizenship for blacks but opposed any attempt to link it with a reduction in the status of women.
The Rochester Women's Rights Convention of 1848 was held at that church in 1848, inspired by the Seneca Falls Convention, the first women's rights convention, which was held two weeks earlier in a nearby town.
Despite such friction, their relationship continued to be close.
Two of them, Carrie Chapman Catt and Anna Howard Shaw, served as presidents of the NAWSA after Anthony retired from that position.
Soon she was wearing the controversial Bloomer dress, consisting of pantaloons worn under a knee-length dress.
Anthony resisted at first, feeling that she was needed more in the field of anti-slavery activities.
The rivalry between the two women's groups was so bitter, however, that a merger proved to be impossible for twenty years.
Anthony traveled extensively in support of women's suffrage, giving as many as 75 to 100 speeches per year and working on many state campaigns.
Anthony's commitment to the movement, her spartan lifestyle, and the fact that she did not seek personal financial gain, made her an effective fund-raiser and won her the admiration of many who did not agree with her goals.
Stanton was voted out as president, whereupon she and Anthony resigned from the organization.
When Anthony voted, however, the reaction was different, and her case became a national controversy.
In 1848, three years after the Anthony family moved to Rochester, a group of about 200 Quakers withdrew from the Hicksite organization in western New York, partly because they wanted to work in social reform movements without interference from that organization.
For the rest of her life, she lived almost entirely on fees she earned as a speaker.
President Cleveland and his wife sponsored a reception at the White House for delegates to the ICW's founding congress.
Originally envisioned as a modest publication that could be produced quickly, the history evolved into a six-volume work of more than 5700 pages written over a period of 41 years.
Anthony and Stanton soon became close friends and co-workers, forming a relationship that was pivotal for them and for the women's movement as a whole.
A Quaker, he had a difficult relationship with his traditionalist congregation, which rebuked him for marrying a non-Quaker and then disowned him for allowing a dance school to operate in his home.
One wing, whose leading figure was Lucy Stone, was willing for black men to achieve suffrage first and wanted to maintain close ties with the Republican Party and the abolitionist movement.
Over her career she estimated that she averaged 75 to 100 speeches per year.
Her seventieth birthday was celebrated at a national event in Washington with prominent members of the House and Senate in attendance.
Afterwards she invited everyone to a NWSA convention at the nearby Unitarian church where speakers like Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton awaited them.
The artwork ''The Dinner Party'', first exhibited in 1979, features a place setting for Anthony.
She sometimes had the use of the private railroad car of Jane Stanford, a sympathizer whose husband owned a major railroad.
Journalists repeatedly asked Anthony to explain why she never married.
Anthony expressed a vision of a racially integrated society that was radical for a time when abolitionists were debating the question of what was to become of the slaves after they were freed, and when people like Abraham Lincoln were calling for African Americans to be shipped to newly established colonies in Africa.
Anthony and Stanton initiated the project of writing a history of the women's suffrage movement in 1876.
In 1850, the first in a series of National Women's Rights Conventions was held in Worcester, Massachusetts.
Anthony reminded Garrison that he helped slaves escape to Canada in violation of the law and said, "Well, the law which gives the father ownership of the children is just as wicked and I'll break it just as quickly."
One of Stanton's biographers estimated that over her lifetime, Stanton spent more time with Anthony than with any other adult, including her own husband.
Its motto was "Men, their rights and nothing more: women, their rights and nothing less."
Just think, had I married at twenty, I would have been a drudge or a doll for fifty-nine years.
I love to make history but hate to write it."
In 1936, the U.S. Post Office issued its first postage stamp honoring Anthony.
In 1872, Anthony was arrested for voting in her hometown of Rochester, New York, and convicted in a widely publicized trial.
In 1898, she called a meeting of 73 local women's societies to form the Rochester Council of Women.
Her ally Stanton agreed, saying "if that word 'male' be inserted, it will take us a century at least to get it out."
The legislature rolled back much of this law in 1862, however, during a period when the women's movement was largely inactive because of the American Civil War.
Delegates from fifty-three women's organizations in nine countries met in Washington in 1888 to form the new association, which was called the International Council of Women (ICW).
Gordon said that Anthony "never voiced an opinion about the sanctity of fetal life&nbsp;... and she never voiced an opinion about using the power of the state to require that pregnancies be brought to term."
In 1893, she initiated the Rochester branch of the Women's Educational and Industrial Union.
The ICW's second congress was an integral part of the World's Columbian Exposition held in Chicago in 1893.
Anthony was listed as a member of First Unitarian in a church history written in 1881.
She took her lecture and petition campaign into almost every county in New York during the winter of 1855 despite the difficulty of traveling in snowy terrain in horse and buggy days.
At its fourth congress in Berlin in 1904, Augusta Victoria, the German Empress, received the ICW leaders at her palace.
In 1878, Anthony and Stanton arranged for Congress to be presented with an amendment giving women the right to vote.
After organizing a series of anti-slavery meetings in the winter of 1857, Anthony told a friend that, "the experience of the last winter is worth more to me than all my temperance and woman's rights work, though the latter were the school necessary to bring me into the antislavery work."
At the organization's convention the following year, however, conservative members attacked Stanton's advocacy of the right of a wife of an alcoholic to obtain a divorce.
In 1852, Anthony attended her first National Women's Rights Convention, which was held in Syracuse, New York, where she served as one of the convention's secretaries.
In 1852, she was elected as a delegate to the state temperance convention, but the chairman stopped her when she tried to speak, saying that women delegates were there only to listen and learn.
Anthony spoke in all 29 towns and villages of Monroe County, New York, where her trial was to be held, asking "Is it a Crime for a U.S. Citizen to Vote?"
Away from Quaker influences for the first time in her life, at the age of 26 she began to replace her plain clothing with more stylish dresses, and she quit using "thee" and other forms of speech traditionally used by Quakers.
I am all at sea..."
Some of them, including the Anthony family, began attending services at the First Unitarian Church of Rochester.
In a speech in 1889, Anthony noted that women had always been taught that their purpose was to serve men, but "Now, after 40 years of agitation, the idea is beginning to prevail that women were created for themselves, for their own happiness, and for the welfare of the world."
Anthony's death was widely mourned.
Undaunted, five women, headed by Anthony, walked onto the platform during the ceremony and handed their Declaration to the startled official in charge.
In 1863, they founded the Women's Loyal National League, which conducted the largest petition drive in the nation's history up to that time, collecting nearly 400,000 signatures in support of the abolition of slavery.
The newly designed $10 bill will include images which will pay homage to the women's suffrage movement and feature the images of Anthony, Sojourner Truth, Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Alice Paul.
On the third day of the trial, Hunt asked Anthony whether she had anything to say.
As early as 1875, Anthony began urging the NWSA to focus more exclusively on women's suffrage rather than a variety of women's issues.
After the formation of the NWSA, Anthony dedicated herself fully to the organization and to women's suffrage.
"Failure is impossible" quickly became a watchword for the women's movement.
Her brothers Daniel and Merritt moved to Kansas to support the anti-slavery movement there.
If women will not accept marriage ''with subjugation'', nor men proffer it ''without'', there is, there can be, ''no alternative''.
Anthony's work for the women's rights movement began at a time when that movement was already gathering momentum.
Anthony was sure that women's suffrage would be achieved, but she also feared that people would forget how difficult it was to achieve it, as they were already forgetting the ordeals of the recent past:
As her reputation grew, her working and travel conditions improved.
Train antagonized many activists by attacking the Republican Party and openly disparaging the integrity and intelligence of African Americans.
With the press treating her as a celebrity, she proved to be a major draw.
There had been earlier cases of women attempting to vote, and even some cases of success, but the reaction of the authorities had been muted.
Her first public speech, delivered at a temperance meeting as a young woman, contained frequent references to God.
In 1853, Anthony attended the World's Temperance Convention in New York City, which bogged down for three chaotic days in a dispute about whether women would be allowed to speak there.
She acted as her own publisher, which presented several problems, including finding space for the inventory.
There was no national office, the mailing address being simply that of one of the officers.
In 1867, the AERA campaigned in Kansas for referenda that would enfranchise both African Americans and women.
Anthony was arrested on November 18, 1872, by a U.S. Deputy Marshal and charged with illegally voting.
Its drive for universal suffrage, however, was resisted by some abolitionist leaders and their allies in the Republican Party, who wanted women to postpone their campaign for suffrage until after it had been achieved for male African Americans.
Her sister Mary Stafford Anthony, whose home had provided a resting place for Anthony during her years of frequent travel, had long played an active role in this church.
In a speech in 1861, Anthony said, "Let us open to the colored man all our schools ... Let us admit him into all our mechanic shops, stores, offices, and lucrative business avocations ... let him rent such pew in the church, and occupy such seat in the theatre ...
Their journeys during that decade covered a distance that was unmatched by any other reformer or politician.
She responded with "the most famous speech in the history of the agitation for woman suffrage", according to Ann D. Gordon, a historian of the women's movement.
Anthony and Stanton were seated as delegates to the NLU Congress in 1868, with Anthony representing the Working Women's Association (WWA), which had recently been formed in the offices of ''The Revolution''.
After it was over, one of the organizers of the Exposition's congress of women revealed that Anthony had played a pivotal but hidden role in that last-minute decision.
For nothing which they have attempted, not even to secure the suffrage, have they been so abused, condemned and antagonized."
Anthony managed the business aspects of the paper while Stanton was co-editor along with Parker Pillsbury, an abolitionist and a supporter of women's rights.
Using fees she earned by lecturing, she paid off the debts she had accumulated while supporting ''The Revolution''.
Anthony's parents and her sister Mary attended the Rochester convention and signed the Declaration of Sentiments that had been first adopted by the Seneca Falls Convention.
Wendell Phillips, an abolitionist leader who opposed mixing those two causes, blocked the funding that the AERA had expected for their campaign.
Her belief is not orthodox, but it is religious."
Anthony embarked on her career of social reform with energy and determination.
Anthony responded by speaking in every village in that county also before the trial began.
Anthony did not take part in either of these conventions because she had moved to Canajoharie in 1846 to be headmistress of the female department of the Canajoharie Academy.
Anthony, proud of her Quaker roots, continued to describe herself as a Quaker, however.
The ''New York Times'' caught the tone of the proceedings by reporting that, "It was conceded that the defendant was, on the 5th November, 1872, a woman."
The interests of Anthony and Stanton diverged somewhat in later years, but the two remained close friends.
Their lectures brought new recruits into the movement who strengthened suffrage organizations at the local, state and national levels.
While teaching in Canajoharie, Anthony joined the Daughters of Temperance and in 1849 gave her first public speech at one of its meetings.
In Syracuse, according to a local newspaper, "Rotten eggs were thrown, benches broken, and knives and pistols gleamed in every direction."
After Anthony reduced her arduous travel schedule and made her home in Rochester in 1891, she resumed regular attendance at First Unitarian and also worked with the Gannetts on local reform projects.
After it was ratified in 1920, the National American Woman Suffrage Association, whose character and policies were strongly influenced by Anthony, was transformed into the League of Women Voters, which is still an active force in U.S. politics.
In a letter to Lucy Stone, Anthony said, "The Men, even the ''best'' of them, seem to think the Women's Rights question should be waived for the present.
Few women at that time had an independent source of income, and even those with employment generally were required by law to turn over their pay to their husbands.
Anthony did not live to see the achievement of women's suffrage at the national level, but she was proud of the progress the women's movement had made.
The trial began on June 17, 1873, and was closely followed by the national press.
Her eightieth birthday was celebrated at the White House at the invitation of President William McKinley.
The city of Rochester put pictures of the message on Twitter and requested that residents go to Anthony's grave to sign it.
The work absorbed much of her time for several years although she continued to work on other women's suffrage activities.
Such moves irritated Stanton, who said, "I get more radical as I get older, while she seems to grow more conservative."
The AWSA supported the amendment, but Lucy Stone, who became its most prominent leader, also made it clear that she believed that suffrage for women would be more beneficial to the country than suffrage for black men.
She worked internationally for women's rights, playing a key role in creating the International Council of Women, which is still active.
She used as her model the Boston church of Theodore Parker, a Unitarian minister who helped to set the direction of his denomination by rejecting the authority of the Bible and the validity of miracles.
After Anthony retired as president of the National American Woman Suffrage Association, Carrie Chapman Catt, her chosen successor, began working toward an international women's suffrage association, one of Anthony's long-time goals.
Anthony's other suffrage work included organizing national conventions, lobbying Congress and state legislatures, and participating in a seemingly endless series of state suffrage campaigns.
In 1872, disgust with corruption in government led to a mass defection of abolitionists and other social reformers from the Republicans to the short-lived Liberal Republican Party.
As Anthony's fame grew, some politicians (certainly not all of them) were happy to be publicly associated with her.
The National Labor Union (NLU), which was formed in 1866, began reaching out to farmers, African Americans and women, with the intention of forming a broad-based political party.
Schooling herself in reform issues, she found herself drawn to the more radical ideas of people like William Lloyd Garrison, George Thompson and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
In November 1869, Lucy Stone, Julia Ward Howe and others formed the competing American Woman Suffrage Association (AWSA).
I can not imagine a God of the universe made happy by my getting down on my knees and calling him 'great.'"
As they left, they handed out copies of it to the crowd.
In 1870, debate about the Fifteenth Amendment was made irrelevant when that amendment was officially ratified.
Hunt had never served as a trial judge; originally a politician, he had begun his judicial career by being elected to the New York Court of Appeals.
Because Stanton was homebound with seven children while Anthony was unmarried and free to travel, Anthony assisted Stanton by supervising her children while Stanton wrote.
They arranged for the International Council of Women to make its upcoming meeting part of the Exposition by expanding its scope and calling itself the World's Congress of Representative Women.
The Anthony farmstead soon became the Sunday afternoon gathering place for local activists, including Frederick Douglass, a former slave and a prominent abolitionist who became Anthony's lifelong friend.
The History of Woman Suffrage preserves an enormous amount of material that might have been lost forever.
In 1853, Anthony worked with William Henry Channing, her activist Unitarian minister, to organize a convention in Rochester to launch a state campaign for improved property rights for married women, which Anthony would lead.
Both Anthony and Stanton joined the lecture circuit about 1870, usually traveling from mid-autumn to spring.
When the show opened, he rode his horse directly to her and greeted her with dramatic flair.
The two organizations had other differences as well.
Anthony had for years saved letters, newspapers clippings, and other materials of historical value to the women's movement.
The existing International Council of Women could not be expected to support a campaign for women's suffrage because it was a broad alliance whose more conservative members would object.
During a printers' strike in 1869, Anthony voiced approval of an employer-sponsored training program that would teach women skills that would enable them in effect to replace the strikers.
While lobbying and preparing for the annual suffrage conventions in Washington, she was provided with a free suite of rooms in the Riggs Hotel, whose owners supported her work.
A biography of Stanton says that during the early years of their relationship, "Stanton provided the ideas, rhetoric, and strategy; Anthony delivered the speeches, circulated petitions, and rented the halls.
In 1895 Stanton published ''The Woman's Bible'', which attacked the use of the ''Bible'' to relegate women to an inferior status.
The National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA) agreed to host its founding congress.
In 1890, the two organizations merged as the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), with Stanton as president but with Anthony as its effective leader.
If she married wealth she became a pet and a doll.
She developed a reputation for fearlessness in facing down attempts to disrupt her meetings, but opposition became overwhelming on the eve of the Civil War.
As several others in that group were already doing, the Anthony family began to attend services at the First Unitarian Church of Rochester, which was associated with social reform.
Following a rule of common law at that time which prevented criminal defendants in federal courts from testifying, Hunt refused to allow Anthony to speak until the verdict had been delivered.
Fearing that a public campaign would rouse opposition, Anthony had worked quietly to organize support for this project among women of the political elite.
In 1845, the family moved to a farm on the outskirts of Rochester, New York, purchased partly with the inheritance of Anthony's mother.
The house of her birth
Women won the right to vote in Wyoming in 1869 and in Utah in 1870.
Anthony fiercely opposed laws that gave husbands complete control over the marriage.
The other fourteen women were also arrested but released pending the outcome of Anthony's trial.
The two women had complementary skills.
Once she gave a speech from the top of a billiard table.
They never seem to think we have any feelings to be hurt when we have to sit under their reiteration of orthodox cant and dogma."
In 1999, Ken Burns and others produced the documentary ''Not for Ourselves Alone: The Story of Elizabeth Cady Stanton & Susan B. Anthony''.
Her family shared a passion for social reform.
Anthony and Stanton created a storm of controversy by accepting help during the last days of the campaign from George Francis Train, a wealthy businessman who supported women's rights.
This group soon ceased to operate as a religious body, however, and changed its name to the Friends of Human Progress, organizing annual meetings in support of social reform that welcomed everyone, including "Christians, Jews, Mahammedans, and Pagans".
William had been a national leader of the successful movement within the Unitarian denomination to end the practice of binding it by a formal creed, thereby opening its membership to non-Christians and even non-theists, a goal for the denomination that resembled Anthony's goal for her proposed Free church.
It also helped them promote their wing of the movement, which eventually became a separate organization.
If she obtained a divorce, which was difficult to do, he could easily end up with guardianship of the children.
Even so, Anthony refused to assist with the book's preparation, telling Stanton: "You say 'women must be emancipated from their superstitions before enfranchisement will have any benefit,' and I say just the reverse, that women must be enfranchised before they can be emancipated from their superstitions."
In Rochester, the police had to escort Anthony and other speakers from the building for their own safety.
As Anthony had no husband, she was a ''feme sole'' and could freely sign contracts for convention halls, printed materials, etc.
Because it was for years the main source of documentation about the suffrage movement, historians have had to uncover other sources to provide a more balanced view.
During a planning session for the 1858 women's rights convention, Stone, who had recently given birth, told Anthony that her new family responsibilities would prevent her from organizing conventions until her children were older.
Thank you for paving the way."
She was forced to limit the number of books she was storing in the attic of her sister's house because the weight was threatening to collapse the structure.
She also engaged in local projects.
She maintained her membership in the local Hicksite body but did not attend its meetings.
According to Ida Husted Harper, Anthony's authorized biographer, "Miss Anthony came away from the Syracuse convention thoroughly convinced that the right which woman needed above every other, the one indeed which would secure to her all others, was the right of suffrage."
Initial funding was provided by George Francis Train, the controversial businessman who supported women's rights but who alienated many activists with his political and racial views.
The attempted alliance did not last long.
I was very well as I was."
Anthony unsuccessfully attempted to start a "Free church in Rochester ... where no doctrines should be preached and all should be welcome."
Travel conditions in the earlier days were sometimes appalling.
This week-long congress seated delegates from 27 countries.
It took another 48 years for women to finally gain the right to vote.
The paper published its last issue less than two years later.
A major hindrance to the women's movement was a lack of money.
In 1866, they organized the Eleventh National Women's Rights Convention, the first since the Civil War began.
After an internal struggle, Kansas Republicans decided to support suffrage for black men only and formed an "Anti Female Suffrage Committee" to oppose the AERA's efforts.
Two of Anthony's closest associates were appointed to organize the women's congress.
Their father encouraged them all, girls as well as boys, to be self-supporting, teaching them business principles and giving them responsibilities at an early age.
Extend to him all the rights of Citizenship."
'Yes,' I answered, 'and every man as well.'
When Stanton retired from her post in 1892, Anthony became NAWSA's president.
Her speech was printed in its entirety in one of the Rochester daily newspapers, which further spread her message to potential jurors.
When Stanton, Anthony, and others supported a bill before the New York legislature that would permit divorce in cases of desertion or inhuman treatment, Horace Greeley, an abolitionist newspaper publisher, campaigned against it in the pages of his newspaper.
Fifteen of them convinced the election inspectors to allow them to cast ballots, but the others were turned back.
36,000 women were attending colleges and universities, up from zero a few decades earlier."
The relatively small women's rights movement of that time was closely associated with the abolitionist movement, especially the American Anti-Slavery Society led by William Lloyd Garrison.
The funding Train had arranged for the newspaper, however, was less than Anthony had expected.
Repeatedly ignoring the judge's order to stop talking and sit down, she protested what she called "this high-handed outrage upon my citizen's rights ... you have trampled under foot every vital principle of our government.
After the Stantons moved from Seneca Falls to New York City in 1861, a room was set aside for Anthony in every house they lived in.
To assist her family financially, Anthony left home to teach at a Quaker boarding school.
Anthony is commemorated along with Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott in a sculpture by Adelaide Johnson at the United States Capitol, unveiled in 1921.
To another she answered, "I never found the man who was necessary to my happiness.
They were forced to sell everything they had at an auction, but they were rescued by her maternal uncle, who bought most of their belongings and restored them to the family.
In 1896, she spent eight months on the California suffrage campaign, speaking as many as three times per day in more than 30 localities.
There they associated with a group of Quaker social reformers who had left their congregation because of the restrictions it placed on reform activities, and who in 1848 formed a new organization called the Congregational Friends.
In 1851, Anthony was introduced to Elizabeth Cady Stanton, who had been one of the organizers of the Seneca Falls Convention and had introduced the controversial resolution in support of women's suffrage.
Anthony and her co-workers collected 28,000 signatures on a petition for a law to prohibit the sale of alcohol in New York State.
