Like the rest of the country, the Church of England's split with Rome during the reign of Henry VIII was felt in Sussex.
After the union with Scotland two members represented the county in the House of Commons of Great Britain from 1707 to 1800 and of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom from 1801 to 1832.
In 1693 the county is stated to have contained 21,537 houses.
As the Sussex regiments served overseas, the defence of the county was undertaken by units of the Home Guard with help from the First Canadian Army.
Sussex has also been home to many composers of classical music including Thomas Weelkes, John Ireland, Edward Elgar, Frank Bridge, Sir Hubert Parry and Ralph Vaughan Williams, who played a major part in recording Sussex's traditional music.
'''Sussex''' (; abbreviated '''Sx'''), from the Old English ''Sūþsēaxe'' (South Saxons), is a historic county in South East England corresponding roughly in area to the ancient Kingdom of Sussex.
William Henry Hudson compared the singing of the Sussexians with that of the Basques and the Tehuelche people of Patagonia, both peoples with ancient cultures.
In the 660s-670s, King Aethelwealh of Sussex formed an alliance with the Mercian king Wulfhere and together they took the Isle of Wight from the West Saxons, probably at the battle of Biedanheafele.
In 2013, Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government Eric Pickles formally recognised and acknowledged the continued existence of England's 39 historic counties, including Sussex.
Major festivals include The Great Escape Festival and Glyndebourne Festival Opera.
The hospital also houses the Sussex Cancer Centre which serves most of Sussex.
During the lead up to the D-Day landings, the people of Sussex were witness to the buildup of military personnel and materials, including the assembly of landing crafts and construction of Mulberry harbours off the county's coast.
After the Reform Act 1832 some of the larger industrial towns of northern England were enfranchised for the first time and smaller English boroughs (known as Rotten Boroughs) were disenfranchised, including Bramber, East Grinstead, Seaford, Steyning and Winchelsea in Sussex.
The local prison in Sussex for men is Lewes Prison and there is also a Category D prison at Ford.
The county was of great importance to the Normans; Hastings and Pevensey being on the most direct route for Normandy.
There are working harbours at Rye, Hastings, Newhaven and Shoreham; whilst Pagham and Chichester harbours cater for leisure craft, as does Brighton Marina.
The longest river entirely in Sussex is the River Arun, which is  long.
The three eastern rapes of Sussex became east Sussex and the three western rapes became west Sussex.
Both collections form one of the most important bodies of Surrealist art in Europe.
Essex, Middlesex and Wessex).
Castles were built to defend the territories including at Arundel, Bramber, Lewes, Pevensey and Hastings.
It may also be a canting reference to the title of the historic leading Sussex family, the Earls of Arundel, seated at Arundel Castle in the county, as the French for swallow is ''hirondelle''.
Sussex continues to be recognised as a geographical territory and cultural region.
An act of Henry VII dating from 1504 directed that, for convenience, the two halves of the county should have separate administrations (Quarter Sessions).
Despite its being under Parliamentarian control, Charles II was able to journey through the county after the Battle of Worcester in 1651 to make his escape to France from the port of Shoreham.
In 1953 the bone fragments were exposed as a forgery, consisting of the lower jawbone of an orangutan deliberately combined with the skull of a fully developed modern human.
These seven things are Pulborough eel, Selsey cockle, Chichester lobster, Rye herring, Arundel mullet, Amberley trout and Bourne wheatear.
Sussex has three main geographic sub-regions, each oriented approximately east to west.
By the end of the 7th century, the region around Selsey and Chichester had become the political centre of the kingdom.
Martin Ryle shared the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1974 with Cornishman Antony Hewish, the first Nobel prize awarded in recognition of astronomical research.
It is bounded to the west by Hampshire, north by Surrey, north-east by Kent, south by the English Channel, and divided for local government into West Sussex and East Sussex and the city of Brighton and Hove.
Sussex cattle are the descendants of the draught oxen, which continued to be used in the Weald longer than in other parts of England.
Like other first-tier Crown Courts it has its own resident High Court Judge.
The UK headquarters of the Church of Scientology is situated at Saint Hill Manor, near East Grinstead.
Historically, the west of the county has had a tendency towards Catholicism while the east of the county has had a tendency towards non-conformism.
Wells was brought up at Uppark, South Harting, near Petersfield, where his mother was housekeeper.
Created in the fifth century, the kingdom of Sussex continued until its absorption into the kingdom of Wessex and later England in 825.
Lamb House was subsequently home to both E.F. Benson and Rumer Godden.
This situation was recognised by the County of Sussex Act 1865.
The large supply of wood in the county made it a favourable centre for the industry, all smelting being done with charcoal till the middle of the 18th century.
The Major Trauma Centre at the Royal Sussex County Hospital is the Major Trauma Centre for Sussex with the Sussex's other hospitals acting as trauma units.
While Glyndebourne is one of the world's best known opera houses, the county is home to professional orchestras the Brighton Philharmonic Orchestra and the Worthing Symphony Orchestra.
In the early 20th century  Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant, both members of the Bloomsbury Group, lived and worked at Charleston Farmhouse near Firle.
A provisional administration was set up, consisting of Montfort, the Bishop of Chichester and the Earl of Gloucester.
John 'Mad Jack' Fuller also commissioned Turner to make a series of paintings which resulted in thirteen finished watercolours of Fuller's house at Brightling and the area around it.
This includes William Blake and Alfred Tennyson.
Sussex also has some of the best-known independent schools in England including Brighton College, Lancing College and Roedean School.
In popular music, Sussex has produced artists including Leo Sayer, The Cure, The Levellers, Brett Anderson, Keane, The Kooks, The Feeling, Rizzle Kicks, Conor Maynard, Tom Odell and Royal Blood.
A large part of the county, centred on Gatwick Airport has been recognised as a key economic growth area for South East England whilst reasonable rail connections allow many people to work in London.
The county's existing sub-divisions, known as rapes, were made into castleries and each territory was given to one of William's most trusted barons.
Wilfrid, the exiled bishop of York, came to Sussex in 681 and with King Æthelwealh's approval set up a mission to convert the people of Sussex to Christianity.
Sussex was home to the magnificent Roman Palace at Fishbourne, by far the largest Roman residence known north of the Alps.
The round-headed rampion, also known as the 'Pride of Sussex', was adopted as Sussex's county flower in 2002.
Selsey is known as a tornado hotspot, with small tornadoes hitting the town in 1986, 1998 and 2000, with the 1998 tornado causing an estimated £10 million of damage to 1,000 buildings.
At the end of the 8th century, Ealdwulf was perhaps the last independent king of Sussex, after which Sussex and other southern kingdoms came increasingly under Mercian rule.
Boundaries were changed and a large part of the rape of Lewes was transferred from the eastern division into West Sussex, along with Gatwick Airport, which was historically part of the county of Surrey.
From 1967 to 1979, Sussex was home to the Isaac Newton Telescope at the Royal Greenwich Observatory in Herstmonceux Castle.
The decline of the Sussex ironworks probably accounts for the small increase of population during several centuries, although after the massacre of St Bartholomew upwards of 1,500 Huguenots landed at Rye, and in 1685, after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, many more refugees were added to the county.
The South Saxons were a Germanic tribe that settled in the region from the North German Plain during the 5th and 6th centuries.
Much of Sussex was a Roman canton of the Regnenses or Regni, with its capital at Noviomagus Reginorum, modern-day Chichester.
This was followed by an invasion by the Roman army under Julius Caesar that temporarily occupied the south-east in 55BC.
Another modernist Virginia Woolf (1882-1941) and her husband Leonard, had a country retreat at Monk's House in Rodmell near in Lewes from 1919.
The rape of Bramber was created later in the 11th century and the rape of Chichester was created in the 13th century.
With Sussex's cathedral located at Chichester in the far west of the county, 9 miles from the western boundary and 90 miles from the eastern boundary, it became practical to divide the county into two sections.
At the time of the Roman conquest in AD43, there was an ''oppidum'' in the southern part of their territory, probably in the Selsey region.
Sussex is also known for Ashdown Partridge Pudding, Chiddingly Hot pot, Sussex Bacon Pudding, Sussex Hogs' Pudding, Huffed Chicken, Sussex Churdles, Sussex Shepherds Pie, Sussex Pond Pudding, Sussex Blanket Pudding, Sussex Well Pudding, and Chichester Pudding.
The Normans also built Chichester Cathedral and moved the seat of Sussex's bishopric from Selsey to Chichester.
Administrative seat
The nationally important Patching hoard of Roman coins that was found in 1997 is the latest find of Roman coins found in Britain, probably deposited after 475 AD, well after the Roman departure from Britain around 410 AD.
During World War I, on the eve of the Battle of the Somme on 30 June 1916, the Royal Sussex Regiment took part in the Battle of the Boar's Head at Richebourg-l'Avoué.
Composed by William Ward-Higgs, ''Sussex by the Sea'' is the county's unofficial anthem.
The chalk downlands were traditionally grazed by large numbers of small Southdown sheep, suited to the low fertility of the pasture, until the coming of artificial fertiliser made cereal growing worthwhile.
Sussex was the venue for the momentous Battle of Hastings, the decisive victory in the Norman conquest of England.
Until then, Chichester was Sussex's only city.
Primary and secondary education in the state sector in Sussex is provided by its three local education authorities of East and West Sussex County Councils and Brighton and Hove City Council.
In addition there are writers, who while they were not born in Sussex had a strong connection.
The 1920s and 1930s saw the creation of some of the best-known works by Edward Burra who was known for his work of Sussex, Paris and Harlem and Eric Ravilious who is known for his paintings of the South Downs.
Also at this time, Amberley and Bodiam castles were built to defend the upper reaches of navigable rivers.
Conditions became so bad that it was even reported to the House of Lords in 1830 that four harvest labourers (seasonal workers) had been found dead of starvation.
The thriving population lived by hunting game such as horses, bison, mammoth and woolly rhinos.
The mission was jeopardised when King Æthelwealh was killed by Cædwalla, a prince of Wessex.
In 1264, the Sussex Downs were the location of the Battle of Lewes, in which Simon de Montfort and his fellow barons captured Prince Edward (later Edward I), the son and heir of Henry III.
At a site near Pulborough called The Beedings, tools have been found that date from around 35,000 years ago and that are thought to be from either the last Neanderthals in northern Europe or pioneer populations of modern humans.
A further 1,000 men were wounded or taken prisoner.
Passed on through oral tradition, many of Sussex's traditional songs may not have changed significantly for centuries, with their origins perhaps dating as far back as the time of the South Saxons.
In the 19th century landscape watercolourist Copley Fielding lived in Sussex and illustrator Aubrey Beardsley and painter and sculptor Eric Gill were born in Brighton.
The Society of Dependents (nicknamed the Cokelers) were a non-conformist sect formed in Loxwood.
It has had a single police force since 1968 and its name is in common use in the media.
In 1822 he was responsible for the discovery and eventual identification of the first fossil teeth, and later much of the skeleton of Iguanodon.
Around 6000BC the ice sheet over the North Sea melted, sea levels rose and the meltwaters burst south and westwards, creating the English Channel and cutting the people of Sussex off from their Mesolithic kinsmen to the south.
The flints were used to help fell trees for agriculture.
Sussex had an iron working industry since the Roman period.
The name derives from the Kingdom of Sussex, which was founded, according to legend, by Ælle of Sussex in AD 477.
Sussex has a centuries-long tradition of sport.
At  long, the River Medway is the longest river flowing through Sussex.
The local authority area of East Sussex has the lowest with a GVA per head of £13,521, 66 per cent of the UK average.
Sussex's bishop, Æthelric II, was deposed and imprisoned and replaced with and William the Conqueror's personal chaplain, Stigand.
Æthelwealh gave Wilfrid land on the Manhood peninsula, close to his own royal estate and Wilfrid founded Selsey Abbey.
Adopted by the Royal Sussex Regiment and popularised in World War I, it is sung at celebrations across the county, including those at Lewes Bonfire, and at sports matches, including those of Brighton and Hove Albion Football Club and Sussex County Cricket Club.
Gill went on to found an art colony in Ditchling known as The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic, which survived until 1989.
It was the home of some of Europe's earliest hominids, whose remains have been found at at Boxgrove, and was invaded by the Romans and is the site of the Battle of Hastings.
The All England Jumping Course show jumping facility at Hickstead is situated  north of Brighton and Hove.
Having fought on the banks of the Mearcredesburna, it seems Aelle secured the area between the Ouse and Cuckmere in a treaty.
The founding father of Keynesian economics, he is widely considered to be one of the founders of modern macroeconomics and the most influential economist of the 20th century.
In 2007, Sussex Day was created to celebrate the county's rich culture and history.
In 1897 Henry James (1843-1916) leased Lamb House in Rye, and purchasing it two years later, spent most of his last 18 years there, where he wrote several major works.
The county has vineyards and the 18th century beer brewers, Harveys of Lewes as well as many more recently established breweries.
Sussex is known for its strong tradition of bonfire celebrations and its proud musical heritage.
Pell is sometimes credited with inventing the division sign, which has also been attributed to Swiss mathematician Johann Heinrich Rahn, one of his students.
Adur, Arun, Chichester, Crawley, Horsham, Mid Sussex, Worthing
In these areas pastoral or mixed farming has always been the pattern, with field boundaries often little changed since the medieval period.
Although there was speculation that the dukedom would pass to Prince Andrew or Prince William the title is currently one of six inactive British royal titles.
The climate of the coastal districts is strongly influenced by the sea, which, because of its tendency to warm up slower than land, can result in cooler temperatures than inland in the summer.
Mercia's grip was shattered in 825 at the battle of Ellendun, after which Sussex and the other southern kingdoms came under the control of Wessex, which later grew into the kingdom of England.
At 280m, Blackdown is the highest point in Sussex, or county top.
Cricket is recognised as having been formed in the Weald and Sussex CCC is England's oldest county cricket club.
There are still fishing fleets, notably at Rye and Hastings, but the number of boats is much reduced.
Sussex has considerable variation in wealth and deprivation.
In the social sciences, Sussex was home to economist John Maynard Keynes from 1925 to 1946.
Aelle was recognised as the first 'Bretwalda' or overlord of southern Britain.
Sussex has had its own football association, since 1882 and its own football league, which has since expanded into Surrey, since 1920.
Several large companies are based in Sussex including American Express (Brighton), The Body Shop (Littlehampton), Bowers & Wilkins (Worthing), Hastings Insurance (Bexhill), Ricardo plc (Shoreham-by-Sea), Rolls-Royce Motor Cars (Goodwood), Thales UK (Crawley), Alfa Laval (Eastbourne) and Virgin Atlantic Airways (Crawley).
In winter, the east winds can be as cold as further inland.
During the Hundred Years War, Sussex found itself on the frontline, convenient both for intended invasions and retaliatory expeditions by licensed French pirates.
Chichester is home to the Chichester Festival Theatre and Pallant House Gallery.
In the 19th century, geologist and palaeontologist Gideon Mantell began the scientific study of dinosaurs.
Sussex has a centuries-old reputation for being separate and culturally distinct from the rest of England.
In 2011 the four Sussex NHS primary care trusts (PCTs) joined forces to become NHS Sussex.
Flint tools from Cissbury have been found as far away as the eastern Mediterranean.
A rape was a traditional sub-division of the county of Sussex.
There is also a third-tier Crown Court at Chichester.
In the 20th century, Frederick Soddy won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on radioactive substances, and his investigations into the origin and nature of isotopes.
The battle was fought between Duke William of Normandy and the English king, Harold Godwinson, who had strong connections with Sussex and whose chief seat was probably in Bosham.
Bone fragments said to have been collected in 1912 were presented as the fossilised remains of a previously unknown early human, referred to as Piltdown Man.
George Wyndham, 3rd Earl of Egremont of Petworth House was a patron of painters such as JMW Turner and John Constable.
The cricket ground at Arundel Castle traditionally plays host to a Duchess of Norfolk's XI which plays the national test sides touring England.
In recent decades Sussex wines have gained international acclaim winning awards including the 2006 Best Sparkling Wine in the World at the Decanter World Wine Awards.
The Prebendal School in Chichester is the oldest known school in Sussex and probably dates to when the Normans moved the Sussex bishopric from Selsey to Chichester Cathedral in the 11th century.
Sussex also played a major part in the folk music revival of the 1960s and 1970s with various singers including George 'Pop' Maynard, Scan Tester, Tony Wales and the sisters
Scottish writer Arthur Conan Doyle (1859-1930) spent the last thirty years of his life in Crowborough.
In 1538 there was a royal order for the demolition of the shrine of Saint Richard, in Chichester Cathedral, with Thomas Cromwell saying that there was "a certain kind of idolatry about the shrine".
A number of archaeologists now think there is a strong possibility that the Roman invasion of Britain in AD43 started around Fishbourne and Chichester Harbour rather than the traditional landing place of Richborough in Kent.
Dolly and Shirley Collins.
Sussex also became a major centre for surrealism in the early 20th century.
Sussex's first medical school, the Brighton and Sussex Medical School, was set up in 2002.
The alliance with Mercia was sealed with Æthelwealh taking the hand of Eabe, a Mercian princess in marriage.
The Mid Sussex area had a thriving clay industry in the first quarter of the 20th century.
Based on the traditional emblem of Sussex, a blue shield with six gold martlets, the flag of Sussex was recognised by the Flag Institute in 2011.
GVA per head in 2009 for Sussex was £17,590, higher than neighbouring Kent but around 86 per cent of the UK average of £20,341.
It has been divided into variants for the three western rapes of West Sussex, the two eastern rapes of Lewes and Pevensey and an area approximate to the easternmost rape of Hastings.
In horse racing, Sussex is home to Goodwood, Fontwell Park, Brighton and Plumpton.
The county is home to England's largest arts festival, the Brighton Festival.
After having marched his exhausted army all the way from Yorkshire, Harold fought the Normans at the Battle of Hastings, where England's army was defeated and Harold was killed.
In 1974, the Lord-Lieutenant of Sussex was replaced with one each for East and West Sussex, which became separate ceremonial counties.
Many vineyards make wines using traditional Champagne varieties and methods, and there are similarities between the topography and chalk and clay soils of Sussex downland and that of the Champagne region which lies on a latitude  to the south.
The earliest known usage of the term South Saxons (Latin: ''Australes Saxones'') is in a royal charter of 689 which names them and their king, Noðhelm, although the term may well have been in use for some time before that.
In 2011, two Local Enterprise Partnerships were formed to improve the economy in Sussex.
The glass making industry started on the Sussex/Surrey border in the early 13th century and flourished till the 17th century.
There is also serious deprivation in Sussex comparable to the most deprived UK inner city areas.
Administrative area
At West Dean, Edward James was patron to artists including  Salvador Dalí and René Magritte while at Farley Farm House near Chiddingly the home of Roland Penrose and Lee Miller was frequented by artists such as Pablo Picasso, Man Ray, Henry Moore, Eileen Agar, Jean Dubuffet, Dorothea Tanning and Max Ernst.
Hastings, Rye and Winchelsea were all burnt during this period and all three towns became part of the Cinque Ports, a loose federation for supplying ships for the country's security.
In Arlington, near Eastbourne, the local stadium is home to the Eastbourne Eagles speedway team, who race in the UK's top flight of speedway, the Elite League.
While working at the University of Sussex, Harold Kroto won the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Richard Smalley and Robert Curl from Rice University in the USA for the discovery of fullerenes.
Since he had no legitimate issue, the title became extinct on his death in 1843.
Cædwalla confirmed Æthelwealh's grant of land and Wilfrid built his Selsey Abbey.
Sussex's rich musical heritage encompasses folk, classical and popular genres amongst others.
The Reform Act of 1832 divided what had been a single county constituency into eastern and western divisions, with two representatives elected for each division.
According to this theory, the Romans were called to restore the refugee Verica, king of the Atrebates, who had been driven out by the Catuvellauni, a tribe based around modern Hertfordshire.
In the autumn months, the coast sometimes has higher temperatures.
Writers born in Sussex include the Renaissance poet Thomas May and playwights Thomas Otway, and John Fletcher.
Later in the Neolithic period, the area of the South Downs above Worthing was one of Britain's largest and most important flint-mining centres.
Brighton and Hove was created as a unitary authority in 1997, and granted City status in 2000.
Sussex is connected with several saints, including St Lewina; St Wilfrid, sometimes known as the 'Apostle of Sussex'; St Cuthman of Steyning; St Richard of Chichester, Sussex's patron saint; St Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel; and James Hannington.
Most of Sussex lies in Hardiness zone 8; the exception is the coastal plain west of Brighton, which lies in the milder zone 9.
Sussex's largest lakes are man-made reservoirs.
Christianity first came to Sussex at this time, but faded away when the Romans left in the 5th century.
These three were to elect a council of nine, to govern until a permanent settlement could be reached.
In September 1066, William of Normandy landed with his forces at Pevensey and erected a wooden castle at Hastings, from which they raided the surrounding area.
Their origin is unknown, but they appear to predate the Norman Conquest.
Brighton has been a League member since 1920, whereas Crawley was promoted to the League in 2011.
The UK's only Carthusian monastery is situated at St. Hugh's Charterhouse, Parkminster near Cowfold.
The University of Sussex and the University of Brighton provide employment for many more.
The Sussex dialect is also notable in having an unusually large number of words for mud, in a way similar to the popular belief which exists that the Inuit have an unusually large number of words for snow.
Stock Car racing is also held at the same venue.
They received there many important visitors connected to the Bloomsbury Group, including T. S. Eliot, E. M. Forster, Roger Fry and Lytton Strachey.
Towards the end of the Iron Age in 75BC people from the Atrebates, one of the tribes of the Belgae, a mix of Celtic and German stock, started invading and occupying southern Britain.
The county has been home to several pilgrimage sites, including the shrine (at Chichester Cathedral) to St Richard of Chichester which was destroyed during the Reformation, and the more recent Catholic shrine at West Grinstead.
In the late 18th century three men commissioned important works of the county which ensured that its landscapes and daily life were captured onto canvas.
Wulfhere gave the Isle of Wight and Meon Valley to Aethelwealh, with Wulfhere acting as overlord.
In 825, it was absorbed into the kingdom of Wessex and subsequently into the kingdom of England.
With the declaration of the World War II, Sussex found itself part of the country's frontline with its airfields playing a key role in the Battle of Britain and with its towns being some of the most frequently bombed.
The first-tier Crown Court for all of Sussex is Lewes Crown Court, which has courts in Lewes, Brighton and Hove.
William built Battle Abbey at the site of the battle, with the exact spot where Harold fell marked by the high altar.
He won the International Mathematical Union's Fields Medal in 1974 and in 2010 was awarded the United States National Medal of Science.
In the reign of Queen Mary, 41 people in Sussex were burnt at the stake for their Protestant beliefs.
Sussex experienced some of the greatest changes of any English county under the Normans, for it was the heartland of King Harold and was potentially vulnerable to further invasion.
The historic county is known for its "seven good things of Sussex".
Sussex escaped the worst ravages of the English Civil War, although in 1642 there were sieges at Arundel and Chichester, and a skirmish at Haywards Heath when Royalists marching towards Lewes were intercepted by local Parliamentarians.
Finds at Eartham Pit in Boxgrove show that the area has some of the earliest hominid remains in Europe, dating back some 500,000 years and known as Boxgrove Man or Homo heidelbergensis.
