The treaty grants permission for any nation to conduct research on Svalbard, resulting in the Polish Polar Station and the Chinese Arctic Yellow River Station, plus Russian facilities in Barentsburg.
Tourism is focused on the environment and is centered on Longyearbyen.
Russia retains a consulate in Barentsburg.
Svalbard is a breeding ground for many seabirds, and also features polar bears, reindeer, the Arctic fox, and certain marine mammals.
No person is required visa or residence permit for Svalbard.
At 74° north, the midnight sun lasts 99 days and polar night 84 days, while the respective figures at 81° are 141 and 128 days.
Discussions to establish the sovereignty of the archipelago commenced in the 1910s, but were interrupted by World War I.
Scandinavian Airlines has daily scheduled services to Tromsø and Oslo.
On the south of Spitsbergen, the temperature is slightly higher than further north and west.
Svalbard Airport, Longyear, located  from Longyearbyen, is the only airport offering air transport off the archipelago.
After the war, the Soviet Union proposed common Norwegian and Soviet administration and military defence of Svalbard.
The institution is subordinate to the Ministry of Justice and the Police, but reports to other ministries in matters within their portfolio.
Sveagruva is a dormitory town, with workers commuting from Longyearbyen weekly.
Russians have traditionally called the archipelago Grumant ().
The Svalbard reindeer (''R.
The largest non-Norwegian groups in Longyearbyen in 2005 were from Thailand, Sweden, Denmark, Russia, Iran and Germany.
While protected, anyone outside of settlements is recommended to carry a firearm to kill polar bears in self-defence, as a last resort, should they attack, and is required to have appropriate means of frightening and chasing off polar bears; a British schoolboy was killed by a polar bear in 2011.
In 1993 it was sold to the national government and the University Centre was established.
Svalbard has permafrost and tundra, with both low, middle and high Arctic vegetation.
Pyramiden was closed in 1998.
It is a company town: all facilities are owned by Arktikugol, which operates a coal mine.
Situated north of mainland Europe, it is about midway between continental Norway and the North Pole.
Other settlements include the Russian mining community of Barentsburg, the research station of Ny-Ålesund, and the mining outpost of Sveagruva.
Coal exports from Barentsburg ceased in 2006 because of a fire, but resumed in 2010.
About thirty species of bird are found on Svalbard, most of which are migratory.
Since 2007, there has not been any significant mining by the Russian state-owned Arktikugol in Barentsburg.
Activities include hiking, kayaking, walks through glacier caves and snowmobile and dog-sled safari.
Svalbard has historically been a base for both whaling and fishing.
At first the outposts were merely summer camps, but from the early 1630s, a few individuals started to overwinter.
There are fifteen to twenty types of marine mammals, including whales, dolphins, seals, walruses, and polar bears.
The Dutchman Willem Barentsz made the first indisputable discovery of the archipelago in 1596, when he sighted its coast while searching for the Northern Sea Route.
Winter temperatures in Svalbard are up to  higher than similar latitudes in Russia and Canada.
There is a separate budget for Svalbard to ensure compliance.
On 4 September 1945, the soldiers were picked up by a Norwegian seal hunting vessel and surrendered to its captain.
Most of the nature reserves and three of the national parks were protected in 1973, with nearly all the remaining protected occurring in the 2000s.
The Arctic tern has the furthest migration, all the way to Antarctica.
The West Spitsbergen Current, the northernmost branch of the North Atlantic Current system, moderates Svalbard's temperatures, particularly during winter.
Within Longyearbyen, Barentsburg, and Ny-Ålesund, there are road systems, but they do not connect with each other.
After British raids into the Barents Sea in 1809, Russian activity on Svalbard diminished, and ceased by the 1820s.
In summer, particularly away from land, fog is common, with visibility under  registered 20% of the time in July and 1% of the time in January, at Hopen and Bjørnøya.
The archipelago features an Arctic climate, although with significantly higher temperatures than other areas at the same latitude.
In 1941, Operation Gauntlet, all Norwegian and Soviet settlements on Svalbard were evacuated, and a German presence was established with a meteorological outpost, although a small Norwegian garrison was kept on Spitsbergen.
Remains of Predator X from the Jurassic period have been found; it is the largest dinosaur-era marine reptile ever found—a pliosaur estimated to have been almost  long.
There are seven national parks in Svalbard: Forlandet, Indre Wijdefjorden, Nordenskiöld Land, Nordre Isfjorden Land, Nordvest-Spitsbergen, Sassen-Bünsow Land and Sør-Spitsbergen.
Norway retains a restrictive fisheries policy in the zone, and the claims are disputed by Russia.
The treaty took effect on 14 August 1925, at the same time as the Svalbard Act regulated the archipelago and the first governor, Johannes Gerckens Bassøe, took office.
Although Norway is part of the European Economic Area (EEA) and the Schengen Agreement, Svalbard is not part of the Schengen Area or the EEA.
Pyramiden features similar facilities; both are built in typical post-World War II Soviet architectural and planning style and contain the world's two most northerly Lenin statues and other socialist realism artwork.
Duties include environmental policy, family law, law enforcement, search and rescue, tourism management, information services, contact with foreign settlements, and judge in some areas of maritime inquiries and judicial examinations—albeit never in the same cases as acting as police.
Norway claimed a  exclusive economic zone (EEZ) around Svalbard in 1977, with  of internal waters and  of EEZ.
This was rejected in 1947 by Norway, which two years later joined NATO.
The archipelago has traditionally been known as Spitsbergen, and the main island as West Spitsbergen.
Only a small fraction of the mining activity remains at Longyearbyen; instead, workers commute to Sveagruva (or Svea) where Store Norske operates a mine.
Many scientists and tourists attended.
In the novel it is used as a prison for important and powerful people.
One source of income for the area is visiting cruise ships.
All human traces dating from before 1946 are automatically protected.
While there is little precipitation, giving the archipelago a steppe climate, plants still have good access to water because the cold climate reduces evaporation.
Svalbard Treaty grants treaty nationals equal right of abode as Norwegian nationals.
The warm Atlantic water keeps the surrounding waters open and navigable most of the year.
The fictional town of Fortitude, as portrayed in the 2015 TV series ''Fortitude'' (from UK's Sky Atlantic), is situated in Svalbard.
The first known landing on the island dates to 1604, when an English ship landed at Bjørnøya and started hunting walrus; annual expeditions soon followed, and  Spitsbergen became a base for hunting the bowhead whale from 1611.
Grumant was closed after it was depleted in 1962.
Longyearbyen is the largest settlement on the archipelago, the seat of the governor and the only town to be incorporated.
The same year, the mining gave a revenue of NOK&nbsp;2.008 billion (227,791,078 USD), tourism NOK&nbsp;317 million (35,967,202 USD) and research NOK&nbsp;142 million (16,098,404 USD) In 2006, the average income for economically active people was NOK&nbsp;494,700—23% higher than on the mainland.
The town features a hospital, primary and secondary school, university, sports center with a swimming pool, library, culture center, cinema, bus transport, hotels, a bank, and several museums.
With the increasing size of the larger ships, up to 2000 people can potentially appear in a community that normally numbers less than 40.
Cruise ships generate a significant portion of the traffic, including both stops by offshore vessels and expeditionary cruises starting and ending in Svalbard.
The Norwegian Store Norske and the Russian Arktikugol remain the only mining companies in place.
The treaty came into effect in 1925, following the Svalbard Act.
The islands of the group range from 74° to 81° north latitude, and from 10° to 35° east longitude.
Lufttransport provides regular corporate charter services from Longyearbyen to Ny-Ålesund Airport and Svea Airport for Kings Bay and Store Norske; these flights are in general not available to the public.
It lost radio contact in May 1945, and the soldiers were capable of asking for support only in August 1945.
After the war, Norway re-established operations at Longyearbyen and Ny-Ålesund, while the Soviet Union established mining in Barentsburg, Pyramiden and Grumant.
In September 2010 a treaty was made between Russia and Norway fixing the boundary between the Svalbard archipelago and the Novaya Zemlya archipelago.
Svalbard makes a prominent appearance in ''Northern Lights'' by Philip Pullman and the corresponding movie.
Since 2002, Svalbard's main settlement, Longyearbyen, has had an elected local government, somewhat similar to mainland municipalities.
During winter, the temperature difference between south and north is typically , and about  in summer.
The growing season is very short, and may last only a few weeks.
Attempts to introduce the Arctic hare and the muskox have both failed.
The Norwegian Meteorological Institute has outposts at Bjørnøya and Hopen, with respectively ten and four people stationed.
The German Operation Zitronella took this garrison by force in 1943, and at the same time destroying the settlements at Longyearbyen and Barentsburg.
They also established Svalbard as a free economic zone and a demilitarized zone.
Svalbard and Franz Joseph Land share a common population of 3,000 polar bears, with Kong Karls Land being the most important breeding ground.
In addition to humans, three primarily terrestrial mammalian species inhabit the archipelago: the Arctic fox, the Svalbard reindeer, and accidentally introduced southern voles, which are found only in Grumant.
"Regulations concerning rejection and expulsion from Svalbard" in force.
tarandus platyrhynchus'') is a distinct sub-species; although it was previously almost extinct, it can be legally hunted (as can Arctic fox).
The archipelago has fifteen bird sanctuaries, one geotopic protected area and six nature reserves—with Nordaust-Svalbard and Søraust-Svalbard both being larger than any of the national parks.
Svalbard is on Norway's tentative list for nomination as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
So far, non-treaty nationals were admitted visa-free as well.
165 species of plants have been found on the archipelago.
No roads connect the settlements; instead snowmobiles, aircraft and boats serve inter-community transport.
Rock ptarmigan is the only bird to overwinter.
The Soviet Union retained the name Spitsbergen () to support undocumented claims that Russians were the first to discover the island.
Vegetation is most abundant in Nordenskiöld Land, around Isfjorden and where affected by guano.
During summer, it is possible to ski from Sørkapp in the south to the north of Spitsbergen, with only a short distance not being covered by snow or glacier.
From the 1920s, Norway renamed the archipelago Svalbard, and the main island became Spitsbergen.
Both areas are administered by Norway, though they are separated by a distance of over 500 nautical miles (approximately 600 miles or 950 kilometres) and have very different administrative structures.
The most common are little auk, northern fulmar, thick-billed murre and black-legged kittiwake.
Svalbard is where cold polar air from the north and mild, wet sea air from the south meet, creating low pressure, changeable weather and strong winds, particularly in winter; in January, a strong breeze is registered 17% of the time at Isfjord Radio, but only 1% of the time in July.
Petroleum test drilling was started in 1963 and continued until 1984, but no commercially viable fields were found.
Only those areas which defrost in the summer have vegetations, which accounts for about 10% of the archipelago.
'''Svalbard''' (; formerly known by its Dutch name '''Spitsbergen''') is a Norwegian archipelago in the Arctic Ocean.
The protected areas make up 65% of the archipelago.
Through the 1990s, tourism increased and the town developed an economy independent of Store Norske and the mining.
The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 recognizes Norwegian sovereignty, and the 1925 Svalbard Act made Svalbard a full part of the Kingdom of Norway.
Catholics on the archipelago are pastorally served by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Oslo.
Since 2015, Kjerstin Askholt has been governor; she is assisted by a staff of 26 professionals.
Non-EU and non-Nordic Svalbard residents do not need Schengen visas, but are prohibited from reaching Svalbard from mainland Norway without such.
On 9 February 1920, following the Paris Peace Conference, the Svalbard Treaty was signed, granting full sovereignty to Norway.
Research and tourism have become important supplementary industries, with the University Centre in Svalbard (UNIS) and the Svalbard Global Seed Vault playing critical roles.
By the 1890s, Svalbard had become a destination for Arctic tourism, coal deposits had been found and the islands were being used as a base for Arctic exploration.
Only two songbirds migrate to Svalbard to breed: the snow bunting and the wheatear.
The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 defines Svalbard as all islands, islets and skerries from 74° to 81° north latitude, and from 10° to 35° east longitude.
All forty signatory countries of the treaty have the right to conduct commercial activities on the archipelago without discrimination, although all activity is subject to Norwegian legislation.
Off-road motorized transport is prohibited on bare ground, but snowmobiles are used extensively during winter—both for commercial and recreational activities.
In 2015, YouTuber Tom Scott visited the island as part of his Amazing Places video series, producing videos on subjects such as the island's gun regulations, the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, and the Longyearbyen Sundial.
One of the primary characters, Lord Asriel, was imprisoned and manages to flee from Svalbard during the novel.
The longest fjord is Wijdefjorden (), followed by Isfjorden (), Van Mijenfjorden (), Woodfjorden () and Wahlenbergfjorden ().
Svalbard is the northernmost settlement in the world with a permanent civilian population.
The subsequent rescue attempts were covered extensively in the press and Svalbard received short-lived fame as a result.
The agreement takes into account the relative positions of the archipelagos, rather than being based simply on northward extension of the continental border of Norway and Russia.
Svalbard is part of the High Arctic Large Igneous Province, and experienced Norway's strongest earthquake on 6 March 2009, which hit 6.5 on the Richter scale.
Poland operates the Polish Polar Station at Hornsund, with ten permanent residents.
More rain falls on the uninhabited east side, where there can be more than .
While there is some tourism there, Norwegian authorities limit access to the outpost to minimize impact on the scientific work.
Norwegian whaling was abandoned about the same time as the Russians left, but whaling continued around Spitsbergen until the 1830s, and around Bjørnøya until the 1860s.
Because of this, it is nearly impossible to live on Svalbard without working for an established institution.
The treaty limits Norway's right to collect taxes to that of financing services on Svalbard.
Ny-Ålesund is a permanent settlement based entirely around research.
There are heliports in Barentsburg and Pyramiden, and helicopters are frequently used by the governor and to a lesser extent the mining company Arktikugol.
Everybody can live and work in Svalbard indefinitely regardless of citizenship.
The Norwegian authorities do not allow offshore petroleum activities for environmental reasons, and the land formerly test-drilled on has been protected as natural reserves or national parks.
The interior fjord areas and valleys, sheltered by the mountains, have larger temperature differences than the coast, giving about  warmer summer temperatures and  colder winter temperatures.
Filmed in 2015-2016, it focused on the lives of eleven Longyearbyen residents through the passing seasons.
The land area is , and dominated by the island of Spitsbergen, which constitutes more than half the archipelago, followed by Nordaustlandet and Edgeøya.
Both outposts can also house temporary research staff.
There are traditional Norse accounts of a land known as Svalbarð&mdash;literally "cold shores"&mdash;although this might have referred to Jan Mayen, or a part of eastern Greenland.
, a handful of workers are stationed in the largely abandoned Pyramiden to maintain the infrastructure and run the hotel, which has been re-opened for tourists.
Seven national parks and twenty-three nature reserves cover two-thirds of the archipelago, protecting the largely untouched, yet fragile, natural environment.
The archipelago might in that period have been used for fishing and hunting.
All settlements have ports and Longyearbyen has a bus system.
The newspaper ''Svalbardposten'' is published weekly.
In 2016, a ten-part reality series was broadcast on BBC Earth (called Ice Town: Life on the Edge) and BBC Nordic (called Svalbard: Life on the Edge).
Norwegian residents retain pension and medical rights through their mainland municipalities.
The tallest peak is Newtontoppen (), followed by Perriertoppen (), Ceresfjellet (), Chadwickryggen () and Galileotoppen ().
Other settlements are farther north, but are populated only by rotating groups of researchers.
Kvitøya, Kong Karls Land, Hopen and Bjørnøya were not regarded as part of the Spitsbergen archipelago.
Glacial ice covers  or 60% of Svalbard; 30% is barren rock while 10% is vegetated.
Operation Haudegen (i.e., swashbuckler) was the name of a German operation during the Second World War to establish meteorological stations on Svalbard.
The Barents Sea is among the areas in the world with most seabirds, with about 20 million individuals during late summer.
The station was active from 9 September 1944 to 4 September 1945.
The Norwegian state took possession of all unclaimed land, or 95.2% of the archipelago, at the time the Svalbard Treaty entered into force; Store Norske owns 4%, Arktikugol owns 0.4%, while other private owners hold 0.4%.
During the Cold War, the Soviet Union retained about two-thirds of the population on the islands (with a third being Norwegians) with the archipelago's population slightly under 4,000.
Ny-Ålesund has a winter population of 35 and a summer population of 180.
People without a source of income can be rejected by the governor.
Traffic is strongly concentrated between March and August; overnights have quintupled from 1991 to 2008, when there were 93,000 guest-nights.
Smaller bases were also built by the English, Danish and French.
It was then thought both Svalbard and Greenland were connected to Continental Europe.
Since the resettlement of Svalbard in the early 20th century, coal mining has been the dominant commercial activity.
In 2012, Svalbard had an estimated population of 2,642, of whom 439 were Russians and Ukrainian, 10 were Polish and 322 were other non-Norwegians living in Norwegian settlements.
Sixteen species are on the IUCN Red List.
Kvitøya is 99.3% covered by glacier.
Bear Island has average temperatures even higher than the rest of the archipelago.
In 1928, Italian explorer Umberto Nobile and the crew of the airship ''Italia'' crashed on the icepack off the coast of Foyn Island.
Polar bears are the iconic symbol of Svalbard, and one of the main tourist attractions.
The largest glacier is Austfonna () on Nordaustlandet, followed by Olav V Land and Vestfonna.
The Norwegian government has become concerned in recent years about large numbers of cruise ship passengers suddenly landing at small settlements such as Ny-Ålesund, which is conveniently close to the barren-yet-picturesque Magdalena Fjord.
Smeerenburg was one of the first settlements, established by the Dutch in 1619.
There are limited numbers of domesticated animals in the Russian settlements.
The first mining was along Isfjorden by Norwegians in 1899; by 1904, British interests had established themselves in Adventfjorden and started the first all-year operations.
The Svalbard Undersea Cable System is a  fibre optic line from Svalbard to Harstad, needed for communicating with polar orbiting satellites through Svalbard Satellite Station and installations in Ny-Ålesund.
The Russian community has also experienced two air accidents, Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801, which killed 141 people, and the Heerodden helicopter accident.
Particularly Bjørnøya, Storfjorden, Nordvest-Spitsbergen and Hopen are important breeding ground for seabirds.
Longyearbyen was incorporated on 1 January 2002, receiving a community council.
Store Norske Spitsbergen Kulkompani, a subsidiary of the Norwegian Ministry of Trade and Industry, operates Svea Nord in Sveagruva and Mine 7 in Longyearbyen.
Norwegian military activity is limited to fishery surveillance by the Norwegian Coast Guard as the treaty requires Norway to protect the natural environment.
Finnair announced commencement of service from Helsinki, operating three times a week starting June 1, 2016 and lasting until August 27, 2016, but Norwegian authorities did not allow this route as it was not in bilateral agreement on air traffic between Finland and Norway.
A cooperation between the government of Norway and the Global Crop Diversity Trust, the vault is cut into rock near Longyearbyen, keeping it at a natural  and refrigerating the seeds to .
Ny-Ålesund and Barentsburg remain company towns with all infrastructure owned by Kings Bay and Arktikugol, respectively.
The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 established full Norwegian sovereignty over the archipelago.
In theory it would be possible to do a visa-free airport transit at Oslo Airport, but this is not allowed by Norway.
The landforms of Svalbard were created through repeated ice ages, when glaciers cut the former plateau into fjords, valleys and mountains.
Since 2002, Longyearbyen Community Council has had many of the same responsibilities of a municipality, including utilities, education, cultural facilities, fire department, roads and ports.
The Soviet Union retained high civilian activity on Svalbard, in part to ensure that the archipelago was not used by NATO.
The first Norwegian citizens to reach Spitsbergen proper were a number of Coast Sámi people from the Hammerfest region, who were hired as part of a Russian crew for an expedition in 1795.
Because of the lawless nature of the area, English, Danish, Dutch, and French companies and authorities tried to use force to keep out other countries' fleets.
Precipitation is frequent, but falls in small quantities, typically less than  per year in western Spitsbergen.
Svalbard is subordinate to Nord-Troms District Court and Hålogaland Court of Appeal, both located in Tromsø.
The former produced 3.4 million tonnes in 2008, while the latter uses 35% of its output to Longyearbyen Power Station.
However, all signatory countries were granted non-discriminatory rights to fishing, hunting and mineral resources.
Barentsz did not recognize that he had discovered an archipelago, and consequently the name ''Spitsbergen'' long remained in use both for the main island and for the archipelago as a whole.
The Svalbard Act established the institution of the Governor of Svalbard (), who holds the responsibility as both county governor and chief of police, as well as holding other authority granted from the executive branch.
The University Centre in Svalbard in Longyearbyen offers undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate courses to 350 students in various arctic sciences, particularly biology, geology and geophysics.
In addition to the mining facilities, Arktikugol has opened a hotel and souvenir shop, catering for tourists taking day trips or hikes from Longyearbyen.
The government has recently passed legislation, effective from January 2014, severely restricting the size of cruise ships that may visit.
Most of the population is affiliated with the Church of Norway.
Norwegian hunting—mostly for walrus—started in the 1790s.
Barentsburg is the only permanently inhabited Russian settlement after Pyramiden was abandoned in 1998.
The islands were first taken into use as a whaling base in the 17th and 18th centuries, after which they were abandoned.
