It was under construction adjacent Swansea Marina until 2010.
The source of this nickname is not clear.
Swansea has three association football clubs that play in the Welsh Football League: Garden Village, South Gower and West End.
And many other departments such as History, Computer Science and German were awarded an "Excellent" in the last inspection.
The two largest rivers in the region are the Tawe which passes the city centre and the Loughor which flows on the northern border with Carmarthenshire.
Swansea City A.F.C.
Other Green Coast Awards went to Pwll Du, Rhossili Bay and Tor Bay.
To the west is the Gower Peninsula with its rural landscape dotted with small villages.
*Ysgol Gynradd Gymraeg Tirdeinaw
Not surprisingly, ''The Guardian'' named it one of Britain's blue-riband top 10 category beaches (2007).
In the local authority area, the geology is complex, providing diverse scenery.
The five-mile promenade from the Marina to Mumbles offers views across Swansea Bay.
Swansea is also served by National Express Coaches operating eastbound to Heathrow Airport, Gatwick Airport, London, Birmingham, Cardiff and Bristol, and westbound to Llanelli, Carmarthen and Haverfordwest.
The region has featured regularly in the Wales in Bloom awards.
45% of the rural council ward Mawr are able to speak Welsh, as can 38% of the ward of Pontarddulais.
Swansea's most famous daughter is Hollywood actress Catherine Zeta-Jones who still owns a home in Mumbles.
The A483 dual carriageway links the city centre with the motorway at Junction 42 to the east and Junction 47 to the north west.
The patients and staff at Singleton Hospital can listen to the hospital radio station, Radio City 1386AM and Swansea University also runs its own radio station, Xtreme Radio, on 1431 AM.
As well as Kilvey Hill the city is in the catchment areas of the Wenvoe transmitter (in the Vale of Glamorgan) and the Carmel transmitter in Carmarthenshire.
At the sea front, The Tower, Meridian Quay is now Wales's tallest building at a height of  with a restaurant on the top (29th) floor.
This arrangement was a subject of considerable controversy in the period leading up to Bryn Tawe's inauguration.
It later moved from horse power to steam locomotion, and finally converting to electric trams, before closing in January 1960, in favour of motor buses.
Swansea, like Wales in general, has seen many Non-conformist religious revivals.
Other theatres include the Dylan Thomas Theatre (formerly the Little Theatre) near the marina, and one in Penyrheol Leisure Centre near Gorseinon.
However, the wider urban area including most of Swansea Bay has a total population of 300,352 (making it the 24th largest urban area in England and Wales).
The "City and County of Swansea" local authority area is bordered by unitary authorities of Carmarthenshire to the north, and Neath Port Talbot to the east.
Much of Swansea's growth was due to migration from within and beyond Wales—in 1881, more than a third of the borough's population had been born outside Swansea and Glamorgan, and just under a quarter outside Wales.
The Wales National Pool is in Swansea.
In 2002, the BBC described Swansea as a "black spot for car crime".
* Danygraig Primary School
Swansea RFC remained at St Helen's in semi-professional form, but the Ospreys moved into the Liberty Stadium in Landore for the start of the 2005–2006 season.
*Adjacent to the Fabian Way: Forming part of National Cycle Network, Route 4 and extending as the Celtic Trail to Chepstow and (eventually) London.
Swansea Leisure Centre opened in 1977; it has undergone extensive refurbishment which retained elements of the original structure and re-opened in March 2008.
The Gower landmark topped the BBC Holiday Hit Squad nationwide competition (2006) and was voted Britain's best camping beach by ''The Independent'' thanks to its superb setting and quiet location (2007).
Playing out of St Helens Rugby and Cricket Ground the club not only produced several of the greatest Welsh rugby superstars, including Billy Bancroft and Billy Trew, they also hosted national touring sides from Australia, South Africa and New Zealand.
In 2009 Swansea Council launched Wales's only week long St David's Week festival in venues throughout the city.
Some primary schools in Swansea are:
After combining with other councils, it now includes Tenby and other parts of West Wales, its population including these areas an estimated 685,051.
Independent schools in Swansea include Ffynone House School and Oakleigh House School.
Virgin Atlantic also maintains its largest worldwide contact centre in Swansea; including reservations, sales, baggage claims, and customer relations.
Following this, more coal mines (everywhere from north-east Gower to Clyne and Llangyfelach) were opened and smelters (mostly along the Tawe valley) were opened and flourished.
During busy periods of the year, additional Park and Ride services are operated from the Brynmill recreation ground.
The Guildhall is one of the main office buildings in the centre of the city and was designed by Percy Thomas and opened in 1934.
A large area of the city is earmarked for redevelopment.
There are also suburban stations in Gowerton, Llansamlet and in Pontarddulais which are served by Arriva Trains Wales.
Swansea Synagogue and Jehovah's Witness Kingdom Hall are both located in the Uplands area.
The 1930s and 1940s was a period of slight decline.
This is because Matt Ryan, the voice actor of Edward, is from Swansea.
Abertawe, its Welsh name, meaning ''Mouth of the Tawe'', first appears as Aper Tyui c. 1150 see Place-Names in Glamorgan, Gwynedd O.
To the north are the Lliw uplands which are mainly open moorland, reaching the foothills of the Black Mountain.
The annual programme ranges from pantomime and drama to opera and ballet.
The Welsh-medium school is named  Bryn Tawe, and is located in the buildings of the former Penlan boys' school, which itself was merged with the girls' school at Mynyddbach on that site to become Daniel James Community School.
The Welsh medium schools are Ysgol Gyfun Gymraeg Gŵyr and Ysgol Gyfun Gymraeg Bryn Tawe.
Swansea's rugby league side plays  from Swansea in the small town of Ystalyfera.
The church has an organ by Harrison & Harrison.
Situated on the sandy South West Wales coast, the county area includes the Gower Peninsula and the Lliw uplands.
Bus routes within Swansea are operated predominantly by First Cymru, while smaller bus and coach operators such as NAT Group, South Wales Transport, Lewis Coaches, First Call Travel and DANSA also operate some routes in the city, most of which serving Swansea bus station.
New green spaces will be provided in conjunction with the proposed Quadrant Square and Grand Theatre Square.
Three Cliffs Bay also made the final of the ITV series Britain's Favourite View – the only nomination in Wales and backed by singer Katherine Jenkins.
The highest point is located at Penlle'r Castell at  on the northern border with Carmarthenshire.
In the 1950s and 1960s the population grew and then fell in the 1970s.
In 2011, the Gorseinon built-up area had a population of 20,581 and the Pontarddulais built-up area had a population of 9,073.
Megabus also operate services in the city, running eastbound to London via Cardiff and Newport, and westbound to Pembroke Dock.
However, by the end of the Second World War these heavy industries were in decline, and over the post-war decades Swansea shared in the general trend towards a post-industrial, service sector economy.
About three quarters of Swansea is bordered by the sea—the Loughor Estuary, Swansea Bay and the Bristol Channel.
In 2005, GVA per head in Swansea was £14,302 – nearly 4% above the Welsh average but 20% below the UK average.
Swansea is also the home to Swansea Rugby Football Club (Swansea RFC), a founder member of the Welsh Rugby Union and one of the most important teams in the early history of Welsh rugby union.
The football violence that Swansea experienced during the 1970s–1990s has considerably reduced, the only major clashes occurring between Swansea City supporters and Cardiff City supporters.
St Helens Rugby and Cricket Ground is the home of Swansea RFC and Glamorgan County Cricket Club have previously played matches there.
The Taliesin building on the university campus has a theatre, opened in 1984.
Limeslade was awarded the Rural Seaside Award and the Green Coast Award.
In 1935 Swansea became the first club side to beat the All Blacks.
There are four dedicated cycle routes in the local authority's area:
The earliest known form of the modern name is ''Sweynesse'', which was used in the first charter granted sometime between 1158 and 1184 by William de Newburgh, 3rd Earl of Warwick.
The traditional agricultural landscape consists in a patchwork of fields characterised by walls, stone-faced banks and hedgerows.
The Department of Physics is renowned for its research achievements at the frontiers of Theoretical Physics, particularly in the areas of Elementary Particle Physics and String Theory.
The Swansea Docks complex is owned and operated by Associated British Ports and is used to handle a range of cargo ranging from agribulks and coal to timber and steel.
In midsummer, Swansea's temperatures can reach into the high twenties Celsius.
Within a few months about 100,000 people were converted.
Clyne Gardens is home to a collection of plants set in parkland and host to 'Clyne in Bloom' in May.
Typical of the west of Britain, Swansea has a temperate oceanic climate.
Swansea is also home to the Palace Theatre.
Prior to closure in 2003, Swansea Leisure Centre was one of the top ten visitor attractions in the UK; it has been redeveloped as an indoor waterpark, rebranded the 'LC', and was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 7 March 2008.
The film is of a rather graphic nature and features heroin users as well as community members affected by the narcotic while trying to provide some explanation for the increase in use.
The university was awarded ''The Times'' Higher Education Supplement Award for the UK's "best student experience" in 2005.
In this charter, the name appears as ''Sweyneshe''.
It is also served by two regional radio stations Heart Wales and Nation Radio.
Car crime is a central theme in the film ''Twin Town'', which was set in and around Swansea and Port Talbot.
A new city-centre retail precinct is planned involving demolition of the dilapidated St. David's Shopping Centre  which has three or four traders, about 13% of the retail space in the centre and the Quadrant Shopping Centre.
Every autumn, Swansea hosts a Festival of Music and the Arts, when international orchestras and soloists visit the Brangwyn Hall.
This explanation supports the tradition that the city was founded by the Danish king Sweyn Forkbeard.
The geology of the Gower Peninsula ranges from Carboniferous Limestone cliffs along its southern edge from Mumbles to Worm's Head and the salt-marshes and dune systems of the Loughor estuary to the north.
From the late 17th century to 1801, Swansea's population grew by 500%—the first official census (in 1841) indicated that, with 6,099 inhabitants, Swansea had become significantly larger than Glamorgan's county town, Cardiff, and was the second most populous town in Wales behind Merthyr Tydfil (which had a population of 7,705).
Pembrey Airport,  to the west offers charter flights to a few European destinations.
The Norwegian Church is a Grade II listed building in the docklands area of the city.
Within the city centre are the ruins of the castle, the Marina, the Glynn Vivian Art Gallery, Swansea Museum, the Dylan Thomas Centre, the Environment Centre, and the Market, which is the largest covered market in Wales.
Clydach, Kingsbridge and Upper Loughor all have levels of more than 20%.
The last official census stated that the city, metropolitan and urban areas combined concluded to be a total of 462,000 in 2011, making it the second most populous local authority area in Wales after Cardiff.
In 1889, Swansea attained county borough status, and it was granted city status in 1969, which was inherited by the Swansea district when it was formed by the merger of the borough and Gower Rural District in 1974.
The team presently play in the Premier League, after being promoted during the 2010/11 season.
The port of Swansea initially traded in wine, hides, wool, cloth and later in coal.
Swansea was designated chief town of the lordship and received a borough charter some time between 1158 and 1184 (and a more elaborate one in 1304).
In the Second World War, its industrial importance made Swansea the target of German bombing, and much of the town centre was destroyed during the Swansea Blitz on the 19, 20 and 21 February 1941 (the 'Three Nights Blitz').
Median full-time earnings in Swansea were £21,577 in 2007, almost identical to the Welsh average.
Services calling at Swansea operate to Llanelli, Carmarthen, Milford Haven and Haverfordwest to the west, Shrewsbury to the north, and Cardiff Central (for connections to England and beyond), Newport and London Paddington to the east.
It was opened by the celebrated opera singer Adelina Patti and was refurbished from 1983 to 1987.
The new authority received the name 'City and County of Swansea' ().
From 1804 until the 1920s, Swansea experienced continuous population growth.
The Gower Peninsula was the first area in the United Kingdom to be designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB).
The Dylan Thomas Centre is the focal point for the annual Dylan Thomas Festival (27 October – 9 November).
Swansea is thought to have developed as a Viking trading post.
It boasts over three miles (5&nbsp;km) of soft, golden sands, making it the ideal family getaway.
There are also suburban stations in Gowerton, Llansamlet and in Pontarddulais which are served by Arriva Trains Wales.
This same location, though, leaves Swansea exposed to rain-bearing winds from the Atlantic: figures from the Met Office make Swansea the wettest city in Britain.
It is faced in white Portland stone and includes a tall clock-tower which makes it a landmark.
R. J. Willoughby came to the church.
There are also a few Roman Catholic primary schools, one of them being St. Joseph's Primary School.
The city is home to 10 per cent of the total Welsh Muslim population; Swansea's Muslim community is raising money to open a new central mosque and community centre in the former St. Andrew's United Reformed Church.
First operates the Swansea Metro, a road-based FTR bus rapid transit route, introduced between Morriston Hospital and Singleton Hospital in 2009, and a shuttle bus (Service X10) to Cardiff Central bus station calling at Bridgend Designer Outlet.
Areas of high land up to  range across the central section and form the hills of Kilvey, Townhill and Llwynmawr, separating the centre of Swansea from its northern suburbs.
(founded 1912) is the city's main football association team.
Through the 20th century, heavy industries in the town declined, leaving the Lower Swansea Valley filled with derelict works and mounds of waste products from them.
This had a great bearing on the development of the city of Swansea and other nearby towns such as Morriston.
Originally playing at the Vetch Field, they moved to the Liberty Stadium at the start of the 2005–2006 season, winning promotion to League One in their final year at their old stadium.
The seaside village of Mumbles has a Victorian pier, small, independent shops and boutiques, restaurants and cafes.
Swansea can be roughly divided into four physical areas.
The Royal Institution of South Wales was founded in 1835 as the Swansea Literary and Philosophical Society.
During its lifetime, the building has been used as a bingo hall as well as a nightclub.
Swansea is part of the Anglican Diocese of Swansea and Brecon and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Menevia.
Over 218,000 individuals are white; 1,106 are of mixed race; 2,215 are Asian – mainly Bangladeshi (1,015); 300 are black; and 1,195 belong to other ethnic groups.
At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, the combination of port, local coal, and trading links with the West Country, Cornwall and Devon, meant that Swansea was the logical place to site copper smelting works.
In 1969, Swansea was granted city status, to mark Prince Charles's investiture as the Prince of Wales.
Valleys cut through the peninsula and contain rich deciduous woodland.
Swansea is bounded by Swansea Bay and the Bristol Channel to the south.
Excluding the urbanised area in the south-eastern corner, the whole of the Gower Peninsula is part of an AONB.
Henry Vivian became the first Lord Swansea in 1893.
* Sketty Primary School
It is also the home of the tallest floodlight stand in Europe.
Other notable local roads include the A484, which provides a link from Fforestfach west to Llanelli, and the A4118, the main route westwards from the city centre across Gower to Port Eynon.
The eastern, southern and western coasts of the peninsula are lined with numerous sandy beaches both wide and small, separated by steep cliffs.
In November 2007 a new bridge was completed over the Fabian Way which provides a one way park and ride bus lane and a shared-use pedestrian and NCN route 4 cycle way.
The final ball landed on the ground past the Cricketers' pub just outside the ground.
Gower also claims Britain's Best Beach, Three Cliffs Bay.
Swansea is also the home town of 2013 ITU Triathlon World Champion Non Stanford.
The 2006 event occupied the site of the former Felindre tinplate works to the north of the city and featured a strikingly pink main tent.
Many matches between these sides have ended in violence in both Swansea and Cardiff.
The oldest school in Swansea is Bishop Gore School.
The city also has a community radio station, Radio Tircoed.
The South Wales Coalfield reaches the coast in the Swansea area.
Swansea City Centre is undergoing a £1 billion transformation scheme.
It was originally built as a place of worship for Norwegian sailors when they visited the UK.
The Local Gas Distribution company is Wales and West Utilities.
Fastnet Line operated a Swansea Cork Ferry roll-on/roll-off service until November 2011, when the service was ended.
Its engineering department is recognised as a centre of excellence with pioneering work on computational techniques for solving engineering design problems.
As part of a coastal region, it experiences a milder climate than the mountains and valleys inland.
A unique feature is the use of semi-circular arches.
''The Independent'' newspaper hailed Rhossili Bay as "the British supermodel of beaches" (2006) and the best beach in Britain for breathtaking cliffs (2007), whilst ''The Sunday Times'' listed it as one of the 25 best beaches in the world (2006).
Swansea is covered by the Swansea and Gower Methodist Circuit.
They are known as the Swansea Valley Miners but were formed as the Swansea Bulls in 2002.
The building has been described as the "Nonconformist Cathedral of Wales" and has been listed as Grade I on the basis that it is "the most ambitious grand chapel in Wales, its interior and fittings remain virtually unaltered".
According to its local council, the City and County of Swansea had a population of 241,300 in 2014.
Currently it has facilities to broadcast live radio and television and is listed as a BBC regional studio.
The city centre is also being brightened up with street art and new walkways, along with the first phase of the David Evans – Castle Street development.
In addition, there are six special schools.
The city expanded rapidly in the 18th and 19th centuries, and was termed "Copperopolis".
Further leisure boating berths are being constructed at the Prince of Wales Dock in the Swansea Docks complex.
Swansea Metropolitan University is particularly well known for its Architectural Glass department, as well as its Teaching and Transport & Logistics degrees.
Swansea Airport is a minor aerodrome situated in the Gower providing recreational flights only.
There are 77 primary schools, nine of which are Welsh-Medium, and six of which are voluntary aided.
Swansea hosted the National Eisteddfod in 1863, 1891, 1907, 1926, 1964, 1982 and 2006.
The Tabernacle Chapel at Morriston was built in 1872 by John Humphreys of Swansea.
*Swansea Bay: The Maritime Quarter to the Knab Rock near the Mumbles Pier.
In addition to these there are a number of Grade II* listed buildings; Ebenezer Baptist Chapel and its Hall in Ebenezer Street; the Glynn Vivian Art Gallery; the Midland Bank building; the Mount Pleasant Baptist Church in Kingsway, along with its Hall and School blocks; the Offices of Associated British Ports in Pier Street; the Royal Institution of South Wales building, now Swansea Museum in Victoria Road; and the Old Guildhall in Somerset Place.
Throughout the 19th century, the Vivian family did much to develop Swansea into a city.
Oxwich Bay on the Gower Peninsula was named the most beautiful beach in Britain by travel writers who visited more than 1,000 around the world in search of the perfect sands (2007).
There are many Welsh language chapels and churches in the area.
A folk festival is held on Gower.
The largest comprehensive school in Swansea is Olchfa School.
People from Swansea are known locally as Swansea Jacks, or just Jacks.
It was relocated to Swansea in 1910 at a site directly opposite the Sainsbury's supermarket on the River Tawe.
The population of the Swansea built-up area within the unitary authority boundaries in 2011 was about 179,485, and the council population was 238,700.
Swansea Castle was once an impressive building occupying a strategic position above the River Tawe but it is now hemmed in by other buildings.
The charter gave Swansea the status of a borough, granting the townsmen, called burgesses certain rights to develop the area.
Standing near Victoria Park on the coast road is the Patti Pavilion; this was the Winter Garden from Adelina Patti's Craig-y-Nos estate in the upper Swansea valley, which she donated to the town in 1918.
The chief urbanised area radiates from the city centre towards the north, south and west; along the coast of Swansea Bay to Mumbles; up the Swansea Valley past Landore and Morriston to Clydach; over Townhill to Cwmbwrla, Penlan, Treboeth and Fforestfach; through Uplands, Sketty, Killay to Dunvant; and east of the river from St. Thomas to Bonymaen, Llansamlet and Birchgrove.
On the Waterfront, Swansea Bay has a five-mile (8&nbsp;km) sweep of coastline which features a beach, promenade, children's lido, leisure pool, marina and maritime quarter featuring the museums the National Waterfront Museum and Swansea Museum, the oldest museum in Wales.
Other notable modern buildings are the BT Tower (formerly the GPO tower) built around 1970, Alexandra House opened in 1976, County Hall opened in July 1982.
Swansea is served by three local radio stations - the CHR-formatted 96.4 The Wave on FM and DAB, its sister station Swansea Sound on 1170MW and DAB and lastly, the Adult Contemporary-orientated Swansea Bay Radio on 102.1FM and DAB.
The building comprises the City Hall, the Brangwyn Hall concert venue and the County Law Courts.
'''Swansea''' ( ;  ), officially known as the '''City and County of Swansea''' (''''), is a coastal city and county in Wales.
In the 2000s, so far, Swansea is experiencing a small amount of population growth; the local authority area had an estimated population of 228,100 in 2007.
Other schools in Swansea include Birchgrove Comprehensive School, Cefn Hengoed Community School, Dylan Thomas School, Pentrehafod Comprehensive School, Morriston Comprehensive School and Gowerton School.
There was a high rate of car crime during the 1990s.
In late 2015 the fleet of Wright StreetCar articulated buses that served the Swansea Metro route were removed from service and replaced with standard non-articulated Wright StreetLite vehicles.
The Grand Theatre in the centre of the city is a Victorian theatre which celebrated its centenary in 1997 and which has a capacity of a little over a thousand people.
Some venues feature live music.
Reservoirs which supply Swansea include the Cray reservoir and the Lliw Reservoirs, which are operated by Welsh Water.
The church building was originally located at Newport Docks.
By contrast, the urban St. Thomas has one of the lowest figures in Wales, at 6.4%, a figure only barely lower than Penderry and Townhill wards.
This would replace the existing central Mosque on St Helens Road and be in addition to the other three existing mosques (Swansea University Mosque, Hafod Mosque, Imam Khoei Mosque).
