He suggests that this notion was transmitted to the west and flourished in Roman mithraism in which this symbol appears in Mithraic iconography and astrological representations.
In 2007, Spanish fashion chain Zara withdrew a handbag from its stores after a customer in Britain complained swastikas were embroidered on it.
The stole worn by a priest in the 1445 painting of the Seven Sacraments by Rogier van der Weyden presents the swastika form simply as one way of depicting the cross.
This carries most significance in establishing the creation of the Universe and the arms as 'kal' or time, a calendar that is seen to be more advanced than the lunar calendar  where the seasons drift from calendar year to calendar year.
In Armenia the  swastika is called the  "arevakhach" and "kerkhach" () and is the ancient symbol of eternity and eternal light (i.e.
The bronze frontispiece of a ritual pre-Christian (c. 350-50 BC) shield found in the River Thames near Battersea Bridge (hence "Battersea Shield") is embossed with 27 swastikas in bronze and red enamel.
It was adopted as the sole national flag on September 15, 1935.
* a 45° black swastika on a white lozenge (Hitler Youth);
In early 2007, while Germany held the European Union presidency, Berlin proposed that the European Union should follow German Criminal Law and criminalize the denial of the Holocaust and the display of Nazi symbols including the swastika, which is based on the Ban on the Symbols of Unconstitutional Organizations Act.
One hypothesis is that the cross symbols and the swastika share a common origin in simply symbolizing the sun.
President Emomali Rahmonov declared the swastika an Aryan symbol and 2006 to be "the year of Aryan culture," which would be a time to "study and popularize Aryan contributions to the history of the world civilization, raise a new generation (of Tajiks) with the spirit of national self-determination, and develop deeper ties with other ethnicities and cultures."
Swastikas also appear in art and architecture during the Renaissance and Baroque era.
Swastika can be found on Ashanti gold weights and among adinkra symbols in West Africa.
Also it was present on icons, vestments and clerical clothing but in World War II it was removed, becoming by association, a symbol of the German occupation.
To the Hopi it represents the wandering Hopi clan; to the Navajo it is one symbol for the whirling log (''tsil no'oli''), a sacred image representing a legend that is used in healing rituals.
The concept of racial hygiene was an ideology central to Nazism, though it is scientific racism.
A ceiling painted in 1910 in the church of St Laurent in Grenoble has many swastikas.
Earlier versions pointed counter-clockwise, while later versions pointed clock-wise and eliminated the white background.
Some have said the four arms of cross are four seasons, where the division for 90-degree sections correspond to the solstices and equinoxes.
A controversy was stirred by the decision of several police departments to begin inquiries against anti-fascists.
The swastika was adopted by several organizations in pre-World War I-Europe and later, and most notably, by the Nazi Party and Nazi Germany prior to World War II.
Since its adoption by the Nazi Party of Adolf Hitler, the swastika has been associated with Nazism, fascism, racism in its (white supremacy) form, the Axis powers in World War II, and the Holocaust in much of the West.
In December 2007, a silver replica of the World War II period Finnish air defence's relief ring decorated with a swastika became available as a part of a charity campaign.
The swastika was adopted as a standard character in Sanskrit. ""
(Red, white, and black were the colors of the flag of the old German Empire.)
In Asia, the swastika symbol first appears in the archaeological record around 3000 BCE in the Indus Valley Civilization.
When Hitler created a flag for the Nazi Party, he sought to incorporate both the swastika and "those revered colors expressive of our homage to the glorious past and which once brought so much honor to the German nation."
The current seal also includes the text "There is no religion higher than truth."
The Lambach swastika is probably of Medieval origin.
Also a design by Gallen-Kallela from 1918, the Cross of Liberty has a swastika pattern in its arms.
It also appears in the Bronze and Iron Age cultures around the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea.
The eagle remains, but appears to be holding a solid black circle between its talons.
Bengali Swastika.jpg|thumb|left|Image of a swastika (স্বস্তিক) from a Bengali wedding invitation printed in 2006
Swastika2.JPG|Svastika on a Roman mosaic in Veli Brijun, Croatia
The town of  Swastika, Ontario, Canada is named after the symbol.
A border of linked swastikas was a common Roman architectural motif, and can be seen in more recent buildings as a neoclassical element.
"spinning wheel"), but there are no ethnographic sources, confirming this.
Swastika Mukherjee.
Related symbols in classical Western architecture include the cross, the three-legged triskele or triskelion and the rounded lauburu.
A proposed direct link between it and a swastika floor mosaic in the Cathedral of Our Lady of Amiens, which was built on top of a pagan site at Amiens, France in the 13th century, is considered unlikely.
The first time the swastika was used with an Aryan meaning was on December 25, 1907, when the self-named Order of the New Templars, a secret society founded by Adolf Joseph Jörg Lanz von Liebenfels, hoisted at Werfenstein Castle (Austria) a yellow flag with a swastika and four fleurs-de-lys.
The symbol was also introduced to Balinese Hinduism by Hindu kings.
In East Asian countries, the left-facing character is often used as symbol for Buddhism and marks the site of a Buddhist temple on maps.
Beyond its certain presence in the "proto-writing" symbol systems, such as the Vinca script, which  appeared during the Neolithic, nothing certain is known about the symbol's origin.
Ulric of England sic says
By the early 20th century, it was used worldwide and was regarded as a symbol of good luck and success.
The cross itself was maroon on a white background, mirroring the colors of the Latvian flag.
In Indian Subcontinent, the swastika is omnipresent as a symbol of wealth and good fortune.
According to chronicles, the Rus' prince Oleg, who in the 9th century attacked Constantinople, nailed his shield (which had a large red swastika painted on it) to the city's gates.
The compact swastika can be seen as a chiral irregular icosagon (20-sided polygon) with fourfold (90°) rotational symmetry.
The swastika symbol is also known in these contexts by a number of names, especially ''gammadion'', or rather the tetra-gammadion.
During WWII it was common to use small swastikas to mark air-to-air victories on the sides of Allied aircraft, and at least one British fighter pilot inscribed a swastika in his logbook for each German plane he shot down in World War II.
The swastika has been replaced by a stylized Greek Cross.
It is known most widely as an important symbol, long used in Indian religions, denoting "auspiciousness."
* an upright black swastika outlined by thin white and black lines on a white disc ( Personal standard of Adolf Hitler in which a gold wreath encircles the swastika; the ''Schutzstaffel''; and the ''Reichsdienstflagge'', in which a black circle encircles the swastika);
There are also gold plate fibulae from the 8th century BC decorated with an engraved swastika.
The Cross of Liberty is depicted in the upper left corner of the standard of the President of Finland.
In Chinese unicode it is U+534D 卍 (left-facing) and U+5350 卐 (right-facing); the latter has a mapping in the original Big5 character set, but the former does not (although it is in Big5+).
The swastika is also seen in Egypt during the Coptic period.
In Greco-Roman art and architecture, and in Romanesque and Gothic art in the West, isolated swastikas are relatively rare, and the swastika is more commonly found as a repeated element in a border or tessellation.
Davidson cites "many examples" of the swastika symbol from Anglo-Saxon graves of the pagan period, with particular prominence on cremation urns from the cemeteries of East Anglia.
Mirror-image swastikas (clockwise and anti-clockwise) have been found on ceramic pottery in the Devetashka cave, Bulgaria, dated 6,000 B.C.
It is also censored from the reprints of 1930s railway timetables published by the Reichsbahn.
The original design of the collar, decorated with 9 swastikas, dates from 1918, and was designed by the artist Akseli Gallen-Kallela.
Several variants are found:
The Grand Cross with the swastika collar has been awarded 41 times to foreign heads of state.
In Russia before the World War I the swastika was a favorite sign of the last Russian Empress Alexandra Feodorovna.
The bags were made by a supplier in India and inspired by commonly used Hindu symbols, which include the swastika.
Ancient Greek architectural designs are replete with the interlinking symbol.
To avoid misunderstandings, the swastika decorations were replaced by fir crosses at the decision of president Urho Kekkonen in 1963 after it became known that the President of France Charles De Gaulle was uncomfortable with the swastika collar.
The swastika rose in importance around the 3rd century BC (during the Mauryan Empire).
There have also been swastikas found on the floors of Pompeii.
The swastika motif is found in some traditional Native American art and iconography.
The family reached its greatness in the 14th and 15th centuries and its crest can be seen in many heraldry books produced at that time.
The bird was found with a number of phallic objects which is consistent with the idea that the swastika pattern was used as a fertility symbol.
A brightly colored First Nations saddle featuring swastika designs is on display at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum in Canada.
as well as an article concerning carpet decoration in ''Good Housekeeping''.
His work was published in 1923, by a publishing house that was then based in the Dębniki district of Kraków.
In 2006 the Stade police department started an inquiry against anti-fascist youths using a placard depicting a person dumping a swastika into a trashcan.
It can be visited today because the church became the archaeological museum of the city.
"Sawaddi" derives from the Sanskrit word "swasti" and its meaning is a combination of the words: prosperity, luck, security, glory, and good.
Ancient Greek architectural, clothing and coin designs are replete with single or interlinking swastika motifs.
The village of Tursa uses the tursaansydän as a kind of a certificate of authenticity on products made there.
Nintendo of America announced that the cards would be discontinued, explaining that what was acceptable in one culture was not necessarily so in another; their action was welcomed by the Anti-Defamation League who recognised that there was no intention to be offensive but said that international commerce meant that "isolating the Swastika in Asia would just create more problems."
Several noble houses, e.g.
Latvia adopted the swastika, called the Ugunskrusts ("fire cross"), for its air force in 1918/1919 and continued its use until 1940.
The German and Austrian postwar criminal code makes the public showing of the ''Hakenkreuz'' (the swastika), the sigrune, the Celtic cross (specifically the variations used by the White-Power-Activists), the wolfsangel, the odal rune and the SS skull illegal, except for scholarly reasons (and - in the case of the odal rune - as the insignia of the rank of sergeant major, ''Hauptfeldwebel'', in the modern German Bundeswehr).
The Sun cult was the main Illyrian cult, and the Sun was represented by a swastika in clockwise motion, and it stood for the movement of the Sun.
The swastika continues to be prominently used in Hindu religious ceremonies and temples, and is recognised as a Hindu religious symbol, sometimes used to evoke the Shakti in tantric rituals.
In the fifties Heinrich Böll came across a van belonging to the company while he was staying in Ireland, leading to some awkward moments before he realized the company was older than Nazism and totally unrelated to it.
It is also said to represent God (the Brahman) in his universal manifestation, and energy (''Shakti'').
The swastika is included in the Unicode character sets of two languages.
It continues to be commonly used as a religious symbol in Indian religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism.
Swastikas are prominently displayed in a mosaic in the St. Sophia church of Kiev, Ukraine dating from the 12th century.
Traditional textiles are still being made with swastikas as parts of traditional ornaments.
Because of the stigma attached to the symbol, many buildings that have used the symbol as decoration have had the symbol removed.
The swastika marks the beginning of many Buddhist scriptures.
The genesis of the swastika symbol is often treated in conjunction with cross symbols in general, such as the sun cross of pagan Bronze Age religion.
It is commonly referred as the ''manji'' (lit.
This piece was found at Qau-el-Kebir, near Asyut, and is dated between AD300-600.
It is painted on many, if not most, three-wheel auto-rikshas and trucks.
The same symbol can be found on Armenian carpets, cross-stones (khachkar) and in medieval manuscripts, as well as on modern monuments as a symbol of eternity.
Hirosaki City in Aomori Prefecture designates this symbol as its official flag, which stemmed from its use in the emblem of Tsugaru clan, the lord of Hirosaki Domain in Edo era.
Other Iron Age attestations of the swastika can be associated with Indo-European cultures such as the Indo-Iranians, Celts, Greeks, Germanic peoples and Slavs.
In ''Life's Other Secret'' (1999), Ian Stewart suggests the ubiquitous swastika pattern arises when parallel waves of neural activity sweep across the visual cortex during states of altered consciousness, producing a swirling swastika-like image, due to the way quadrants in the field of vision are mapped to opposite areas in the brain.
Sagan suggests that in antiquity a comet could have approached so close to Earth that the jets of gas streaming from it, bent by the comet's rotation, became visible, leading to the adoption of the swastika as a symbol across the world.
Geometric kantharos Staatliche Antikensammlungen 8501.jpg|Two sauwastikas (opposite-facing swastikas) on an ancient Greek Kantharos, Attica, ca.
During the Chinese Tang Dynasty, Empress Wu Zetian (684-704) decreed that the swastika would also be used as an alternative symbol of the Sun.
A swastika shape is a symbol in the culture of the Kuna people of Kuna Yala, Panama.
On Japanese maps, a swastika (left-facing and horizontal) is used to mark the location of a Buddhist temple.
A criminal investigation found the paper included an array of racial epithets .
Or "geeses", "ognevtsi" (dialect.
The Hindus represent it as the Universe in our own spiral galaxy in the fore finger of Lord Vishnu.
It was printed on some banknotes of the Russian Provisional Government (1917) and some sovznaks (1918-1922).
She placed it where she could for happiness, including drawing it in pencil on the walls and windows in the Ipatiev House, - place of execution of the royal family, and, without dating, on the wallpaper above the bed, where obviously slept the heir.
Musaeus College in Colombo, Sri Lanka  which is a popular Buddhist girls' school in the country has a left facing swastika in their school logo alongside the Sanskrit motto පදීපං ගවේසථ" ''(pronounced: "padeepang gavae saTha")'' which means "Follow the Light".
The Swastika Laundry was a laundry founded in 1912, located on Shelbourne Road, Ballsbridge, a district of Dublin, Ireland.
Groups in higher latitudes experience the seasons more strongly, offering more advantage to the calendar represented by the swastika/cross.
In red, we see the social idea of the movement; in white, the nationalistic idea; in the swastika, the mission of the struggle for the victory of the Aryan man, and, by the same token, the victory of the idea of creative work."
In Japanese the symbol is called  or .
Even wider diffusion of this "Asiatic" theme has been proposed, to the Pacific and even North America (especially Moundville).
The swastika carved on elephants at the entrance gates of the company's headquarters in Copenhagen in 1901 can still be seen today.
* a swastika with curved outer arms forming a broken circle, as worn by the Waffen SS ''Wiking'' and ''Nordland'' Divisions.
Historically, the design has been found in excavations of Mississippian-era sites in the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys, and on objects associated with the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex (S.E.C.C.).
A meander of connected swastikas makes up the large band that surrounds the Augustan Ara Pacis.
The Kolovrat has since been used by the Rusich Battalion, a Russian militant group known for its operation during the War in Donbass.
Western literature's older term for the symbol, ''gammadion cross'', derives mainly from its appearance, which is identical to four Greek gamma letters affixed to each other.
According to painter Stanisław Jakubowski the "little sun" is an Early Slavic pagan symbol of the sun.
The swastikas on Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain temples are exempt, as religious symbols cannot be banned in Germany.
In the Polish First Republic the symbol of the swastika was also popular with the nobility.
The work of Schliemann soon became intertwined with the ''völkisch'' movements, for which the swastika was a symbol of the "Aryan race", a concept that came to be equated by theorists such as Alfred Rosenberg with a Nordic master race originating in northern Europe.
In modern Russia some neo-Nazis and neopagan followers of pseudohistory argue that the Russian name of the swastika is "Kolovrat" (Russian: Коловрат, lit.
The use of the swastika was incorporated by Nazi theorists with their conjecture of Aryan cultural descent of the German people.
The placard was displayed in opposition to the campaign of right-wing nationalist parties for local elections.
Among various tribes, the swastika carries different meanings.
They pointed out that the swastika has been around for 5,000 years as a symbol of peace.
The use of the swastika by the Bön faith of Tibet, as well as Chinese Taoism, can also be traced to Buddhist influence.
It also represents the Purushartha: Dharma (natural order), Artha (wealth), Kama (desire), and Moksha (liberation).
The right-facing swastika is often referred to as the  or , and can also be called .
The swastika often represented perpetual motion, reflecting the design of a rotating windmill or watermill.
However, Liebenfels was drawing on an already established use of the symbol.
The Star of David is thought to originate as a symbol of that calendar system, where the two overlapping triangles are seen to form a partition of 12 sections around the perimeter with a 13th section in the middle, representing the 12 and sometimes 13 months to a year.
The paired swastika symbols are included, at least since the Liao Dynasty (AD 907–1125), as part of the Chinese writing system (卍 and 卐) and are variant characters for 萬 or 万 (''wàn'' in Mandarin, ''man'' in Korean, Cantonese, and Japanese, ''vạn'' in Vietnamese) meaning "all" or "eternity" (lit.
In the traditional vernacular the swastika was called differently; for example, "breeze" - as in Christianity, the swastika represents a spiritual movement, descent of the Holy Spirit, and therefore the "wind" and "spirit" - a word with one meaning.
The use of the swastika as a symbol of the Aryan race dates back to writings of Emile Burnouf.
Carl Sagan in his book ''Comet'' (1985) reproduces Han period Chinese manuscript (the ''Book of Silk'', 2nd century BC) that shows comet tail varieties: most are variations on simple comet tails, but the last shows the comet nucleus with four bent arms extending from it, recalling a swastika.
Before the Nazis, the swastika was already in use as a symbol of German ''völkisch'' nationalist movements (''Völkische Bewegung'').
'the myriad things' in the Dao De Jing.
) is an ancient religious symbol that generally takes the form of an equilateral cross, with its four legs bent at 90 degrees.
The manufacturer, based in China, said the symbol was presented in a traditional sense and not as a reference to the Nazis, and apologized to the customers for the cross-cultural mixup.
In response, Esprit Holdings destroyed two hundred thousand catalogues.
The symbol was first seen in a collection of Early Slavic symbols and architectural features drawn and compiled by Polish painter Stanisław Jakubowski, which he named ''Prasłowiańskie motywy architektoniczne'' ().
* small gold, silver, black, or white 45° swastikas, often lying on or being held by an eagle, on many badges and flags.
Swastikas are fairly ubiquitous in Indian and Nepalese cities, located on buses, buildings, auto-rickshaws, and clothing.
When a ten-year-old boy in Lynbrook, New York, bought a set of Pokémon cards imported from Japan in 1999, two of the cards contained the left-facing Buddhist swastika.
The Book of Kells (ca.
Swastika was widespread among the Illyrians, symbolizing the Sun.
Swastikas have also been found on pottery in archaeological digs in Africa, in the area of Kush and on pottery at the Jebel Barkal temples, in Iron Age designs of the northern Caucasus (Koban culture), and in Neolithic China in the Majiabang,Majiayao, Dawenkou and Xiaoheyan cultures.
The swastika was also understood as "the symbol of the creating, effecting life" (''das Symbol des schaffenden, wirkenden Lebens'') and as "race emblem of Germanism" (''Rasseabzeichen des Germanentums'').
For Alfred Rosenberg, the Aryans of India were both a model to be imitated and a warning of the dangers of the spiritual and racial "confusion" that, he believed, arose from the proximity of races.
When the Chinese writing system was introduced to Japan in the 8th century, the swastika was adopted into the Japanese language and culture.
This led to an opposition campaign by Hindu groups across Europe against a ban on the swastika.
Swastikas in Armenia were founded on petroglyphs.
The swastika remains a core symbol of Neo-Nazi groups, and is used regularly by activist groups.
Some of the earliest archaeological evidences of Swastika in the Indian subcontinent can be dated to 3,000 BCE.
The swastika is an important Hindu symbol.
() and as such entered various other East Asian languages, including Chinese script.
Textile number T.231-1923 held at the V&A Museum in London includes small swastikas in its design.
The name of the Sami thunder god was Horagalles, thought to be derived from "Old Man Thor" (''Þórr karl'').
Buddhism originated in the 5th century BC and spread throughout the Indian subcontinent.
In all these uses it is a lucky charm protecting from evil and attracting good.
The name gammadion comes from the fact that it can be seen as being made up of four Greek gamma (Γ) letters.
In 2010, Microsoft officially spoke out against the use of the swastika in the first-person shooter ''Call of Duty: Black Ops''.
He connected it with similar shapes found on ancient pots in Germany, and theorized that the swastika was a "significant religious symbol of our remote ancestors", linking Germanic, Greek and Indo-Iranian cultures.
The neo-Nazi Russian National Unity group's branch in Estonia is officially registered under the name "Kolovrat" and published an extremist newspaper in 2001 under the same name.
According to the protocol, the president shall wear the Grand Cross of the White Rose with collar on formal occasions.
Swastikas can also be seen on early Medieval churches and fortresses, including the principal tower in Armenia's historical capital city of Ani.
The Benedictine choir school at Lambach Abbey, Upper Austria, which Hitler attended for several months as a boy, had a swastika chiseled into the monastery portal and also the wall above the spring grotto in the courtyard by 1868.
In late 2005 police raided the offices of the punk rock label and mail order store "Nix Gut Records" and confiscated merchandise depicting crossed-out swastikas and fists smashing swastikas.
A design of interlocking swastikas is one of several tessellations on the floor of the cathedral of Amiens, France.
Boreyko, Borzym, and Radziechowski from Ruthenia, also had Swastikas as their coat of arms.
The symbol can also be found on embroidery and pottery in most Slavic countries.
Sometimes on the drums, a male figure with a hammer-like object in either hand is shown, and sometimes it is more like a cross with crooked ends, or a swastika.
In many Western countries, the swastika has been highly stigmatized because of its use in and association with Nazism.
It is traced with the finger with sindoor on the head or body during Hindu religious rites, and on doors on festival days - notably on diwali, or deepavalli.
The chimney of the boiler-house of the laundry still stands, but the laundry has been redeveloped.
Hewitt's observation on page 145 of ''Primitive Traditional History: vol.
In fact, the famous fresco ''The School of Athens'' shows an ornament made out of swastikas, and the symbol can also be found on the facade of the ''Santa Maria della Salute'', a Roman Catholic church and minor basilica located at Punta della Dogana in the Dorsoduro sestiere of the city of Venice.
They also appear as a repeating ornamental motif on a tomb in the Basilica of St. Ambrose in Milan.
In India, Swastik and Swastika, with their spelling variants, are common first names for males and females respectively, e.g.
In Thailand, the word "Sawaddi" is normally used as a greeting which simply means "hello"; Sawaddi-ka (feminine) and Sawaddi-krup (masculine).
It appears on a late paleolithic figurine of a bird, carved from mammoth ivory, which was found in Mezine, Ukraine.
The tursaansydän is used by scouts in some instances and a student organization.
In Chinese and Japanese art, the swastika is often found as part of a repeating pattern.
Bob Kobres in his 1992 paper ''Comets and the Bronze Age Collapse'' contends that the swastika like comet on the Han Dynasty silk comet atlas was labeled a "long tailed pheasant star" (Di-Xing) because of its resemblance to a bird's foot or footprint, the latter comparison also being drawn by J.F.K.
An Ogham stone found in Anglish, Co Kerry, Ireland (CIIC 141) was modified into an early Christian gravestone, and was decorated with a cross pattée and two swastikas.
In the Indiana Jones Stunt Spectacular in Disney Hollywood Studios in Orlando, Florida, the swastikas on German trucks, aircraft and actor uniforms in the reenactment of a scene from ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' were removed in 2004.
In Christianity, the swastika is used as a hooked version of the Christian Cross, the symbol of Christ's victory over death.
The traditional symbols of the Podhale Rifles include the edelweiss flower and the Mountain Cross, a swastika symbol popular in folk culture of the Polish mountainous regions.
In February 1925 the Kuna revolted vigorously against Panamanian suppression of their culture, and in 1930 they assumed autonomy.
