The Supreme Court, which replaced the previous Court of Appeal, consists of the Chief Justice and at least four other Supreme Court judges.
Swaziland's currency is pegged to the South African Rand, subsuming Swaziland's monetary policy to South Africa.
The regions are managed by a regional administrator, who is aided by elected members in each inkhundla.
Elections are held every five years to determine the House of Assembly majority.
Prior to that they were settled in the area of the Tembe River near present-day Maputo.
Winter is the dry season.
Swaziland does not have an expansive mental health infrastructure.
At no more than  north to south and  east to west, Swaziland is one of the smallest countries in Africa.
Special interests could be people of gender, race, disability, the business community, civic society, scholars, chiefs and so on.
The population of Swaziland is fairly young with a median age of 20.5 years and people aged 14 years or younger constituting 37.4% of the country's total population.
The country was under the chastity rite of "umchwasho" until 19 August 2005.
There are three structures for sleeping, cooking, and storage (brewing beer).
It is high treason for any other person to hold an Incwala.
As a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), its main local trading partner is South Africa.
* 2015– Bheki Maphalala
From another perspective, the last available World Health Organization data in 2002 shows that 64% of all deaths in the country were caused by HIV/AIDS.
The King is the Commander-in-Chief of the Defense Force and the substantive Minister of the Ministry of Defence.
Christianity in Swaziland is sometimes mixed with traditional beliefs and practices.
One of the King's daughters will be her counterpart.
The Swazi economy is very closely linked to the economy of South Africa, from which it receives over 90% of its imports and to which it sends about 70% of its exports.
The secondary and high school education system in Swaziland is a five-year programme divided into three years junior secondary and two years senior secondary.
The Reed Dance today is not an ancient ceremony but a development of the old "umchwasho" custom.
The formalised handcraft businesses of Swaziland employ over 2,500 people, many of whom are women (per TechnoServe Swaziland Handcrafts Impact Study," February 2011).
The mountains are broken by the canyons of three rivers, the Ngwavuma, the Usutu and the Mbuluzi River.
Customs duties from the Southern African Customs Union, which may equal as much as 70% of government revenue this year, and worker remittances from South Africa substantially supplement domestically earned income.
A campus of Limkokwing University of Creative Technology can be found at Sidvwashini, a suburb of the capital Mbabane.
The current constitution does not clearly deal with the status of political parties.
By tradition, the king reigns along with his mother or a ritual substitute, the ''Ndlovukati'' (lit.
It is neighboured by  Mozambique to its east and by South Africa to its north, west and south.
In the eight-day ceremony, girls cut reeds and present them to the queen mother and then dance.
Many patients have a multi-drug resistant strain, and 83% are co-infected with HIV.
Thus, progress toward constitutional reforms began, culminating with the introduction of the current Swaziland constitution in 2005.
The new parliament, the second since promulgation of the constitution, was elected on 20 September 2013.
There are approximately 3,000 personnel in the defence force, with the army being the largest component.
A 15-member team was announced in December 2001 to draft a new constitution; several members of this team were reported to be close to the royal family.
If he or she accepts it, he or she must be supported by at least ten members of that chiefdom.
The biggest number of schools is in the Hhohho region.
Swaziland is a developing country with a small economy.
The Military of Swaziland (Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force) is used primarily during domestic protests, with some border and customs duties.
Other vocational institutions include Nhlangano Agricultural Skills Training Center and Siteki Industrial Training Centre.
In fact, most healthcare is centralized in cities where approximately 20% of the population lives.There is one psychiatrist available for a population of roughly one million.
According to the constitution of Swaziland, the King and Ingwenyama is a symbol of unity and the eternity of the Swazi nation.
Despite such opposition, elections took place and the first Legislative Council of Swaziland was constituted on 9 September 1964.
The Swazi bicameral Parliament or Libandla consists of the Senate (30 seats; 10 members appointed by the House of Assembly and 20 appointed by the monarch; to serve five-year terms) and the House of Assembly (65 seats; 10 members appointed by the monarch and 55 elected by popular vote; to serve five-year terms).
Swaziland is well known for its culture.
The local government is divided into differently structured rural and urban councils depending on the level of development in the area.
As a result of the effects of excess mortality due to AIDS, residents of Swaziland have nearly the lowest documented life expectancy in the world at 50.54 years, higher than only four other countries.
Economic growth in Swaziland has lagged behind that of its neighbours.
Development of the region was inhibited, in early days, by the scourge of malaria.
Under Sobhuza I, the Ngwane people eventually established their capital at Zombodze in the heartland of present-day Swaziland.
The minimum number of nominees is four and the maximum is ten.
Incwala is best translated as 'Kingship Ceremony' : when there is no king, there is no Incwala.
Facing the cattle byre is the great hut which is occupied by the mother of the headman.
Life expectancy had fallen from 61 years in 2000 to 32 years in 2009.
The western border of Swaziland, with an average altitude of 1200 metres, lies on the edge of an escarpment.
The diviner is consulted for various reasons, such the cause of sickness or even death.
Adult and non-formal education centres are Sebenta National Institute for adult basic literacy and Emlalatini Development Centre which provides alternative educational opportunities for school children and young adults who have not been able to complete their schooling.
Annual rainfall is highest on the Highveld in the West, between  depending on the year.
Swaziland has four separate geographical regions.
These were strongly criticized by civil society organisations in Swaziland and human rights organisations elsewhere.
In each of the four regions, there are several ''tinkhundla'' (singular ''inkhundla'').
Swaziland has a wide variety of landscapes, from the mountains along the Mozambican border to savannas in the east and rain forest in the northwest.
Mbabane, the capital, is located on the Highveld.
According to the 2011 UNAIDS Report, Swaziland is close to achieving universal access to HIV/AIDS treatment, defined as 80% coverage or greater.
Low agricultural productivity in the SNLs, repeated droughts, the devastating effect of HIV/AIDS and an overly large and inefficient government sector are likely contributing factors.
Swaziland's other key trading partners are the United States and the EU, from whom the country has received trade preferences for apparel exports (under the African Growth and Opportunity Act&nbsp;– AGOA&nbsp;– to the US) and for sugar (to the EU).
From the early seventies, there was active resistance to the royal hegemony.
These special interests are citizens who might have been left out by the electorate during the course of elections or did not enter as candidates.
Primary elections also take place at the chiefdom level.
Tuberculosis is also a significant problem, with an 18% mortality rate.
These run from North to South and are determined by altitude.
Between the mountains rivers rush through deep gorges.
There are three tiers of government in the urban areas and these are city councils, town councils and town boards.
Sobhuza's official coronation was in December 1921 after the regency of Labotsibeni after which he led an unsuccessful deputation to the Privy council in London in 1922 regarding the issue of the land.
If any girl became pregnant outside of marriage, her family paid a fine of one cow to the local chief.
In 1963 Waterford school, later named Waterford Kamhlaba United World College of Southern Africa, was founded as southern Africa's first multiracial school.
Mswati II was the greatest of the fighting kings of Swaziland, and he greatly extended the area of the country to twice its current size.
The major towns and regional capitals are also shown.
Swaziland will thus have to face the challenge of remaining competitive in a changing global environment.
The Swazi population faces major health issues: HIV/AIDS and, to a lesser extent, tuberculosis are serious challenges.
A combination of declining revenues and increased spending led to significant budget deficits.
The nominees with majority votes become the winners and they become members of parliament or constituency headman.
Primary Education is from grade 1 to grade 7.
In the country 21.6% of preschool age children have access to early childhood education.
(There is no formal competition.)
This happened despite objections by political activists.
All election procedures are overseen by the elections and boundaries commission.
Swaziland is divided into four regions: Hhohho, Lubombo, Manzini and Shiselweni.
The training of the Sangoma is called "kwetfwasa".
Swaziland also received Portuguese settlers and African refugees from Mozambique.
The House of Assembly has 65 seats, 55 of which are occupied by elected representatives from the 55 constituencies around the country, 10 appointed by the king on recommendation of the advisory council and the attorney general ex-officio.
Manzini, the principal commercial and industrial city, is situated in the Middleveld.
His diagnosis is based on "kubhula", a process of communication, through trance, with the natural superpowers.
The king is allowed by the constitution to appoint some members to parliament for special interests.
Mswati III, the son of Ntfombi, was crowned king on 25 April 1986 as King and ''Ingwenyama'' of Swaziland.
Mental illness is also a significant public health problem in Swaziland.
Elections are held every five years.
It is located in Mbabane.
The present population growth rate is 1.195%.
In the period between 1923 and 1963, Sobhuza established the Swazi Commercial Amadoda which was to grant licences to small businesses on the Swazi reserves and also established the Swazi National School to counter the dominance of the missions in education.
The former was viewed as the administrative head of state and the latter as a spiritual and national head of state, with real power counterbalancing that of the king, but, during the long reign of Sobhuza II, the role of the ''Ndlovukati'' became more symbolic.
There is a small air wing, which is mainly used for transporting the King as well as cargo, and personnel, surveying land with search and rescue functions, and mobilising in case of a national emergency.
These MPs served five-year terms which ended in 2013.
The majority of Swaziland's population is ethnically Swazi, mixed with a small number of Zulu and White Africans, mostly people of British and Afrikaner descent.
The Examination Council of Swaziland (ECOS) administers this examination.
At the end of the training, a graduation ceremony takes place where all the local sangoma come together for feasting and dancing.
The country is an absolute monarchy, currently ruled by ''Ngwenyama'' ("King") Mswati III.
Textile exports grew by over 200% between 2000 and 2005 and sugar exports increasing by more than 50% over the same period.
September – October
Many traditionalists believe that most Swazi ascribe a special spiritual role to the monarch.
Swaziland is divided into four climatic regions, the Highveld, Middleveld, Lowveld and Lubombo plateau.
It is an official language of Swaziland (along with English) and one of the official languages of South Africa.
He is head of state and appoints the country's prime ministers and a number of representatives of both chambers (Senate and House of Assembly) in the country's parliament.
Many patients have a multi-drug resistant strain and 83 percent are co-infected with HIV.
In 1881 the British government signed a convention recognizing Swazi independence despite the Scramble for Africa that was taking place at the time.
Aspiring members of parliament and the constituency Headman are also elected from each chiefdom.
Submissions were made by citizens around the country to commissions, including the constitutional draft committee, indicating that they would prefer to maintain the current situation.
The Highveld temperature is temperate and, seldom, uncomfortably hot while the Lowveld may record temperatures around  in summer.
The majority of the country's employment is provided by its agricultural and manufacturing sectors.
There is an external public examination (Junior Certificate) at the end of the junior secondary that learners have to pass to progress to the senior secondary level.
The government is trying to improve the atmosphere for foreign direct investment.
It is held on the fourth day after the full moon nearest the longest day, 21 December.
The clans who accompanied the Dlamini kings were known as the ''Bemdzabuko'' or ''true Swazi''.
Swaziland is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the African Union, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the Southern African Development Community.
Drafts were released for comment in May 1999 and November 2000.
The University of Swaziland, Southern African Nazarene University and Swaziland Christian University are the institutions that offer university education in the country.
The recent rapid growth in SACU revenues has, however, reversed the fiscal situation, and a sizeable surplus was recorded since 2006.
SIMPA is a government owned management and development institute and IDM is a regional organisation in Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland that provides training, consultancy, and research in management.
She will be an expert dancer and knowledgeable on royal protocol.
In larger homesteads there are also structures used as bachelors' quarters and guest accommodation.
The royal family appoints a commoner maiden to be "induna" (captain) of the girls and she announces over the radio the dates of the ceremony.
Swaziland's major overseas trading partners are the United States and the European Union.
The considerable spending did not lead to more growth and did not benefit the poor.
This independence was also recognized in the convention of 1884.
The Inyanga (a medical and pharmaceutical specialist in western terms) possesses the bone throwing skill ("kushaya ematsambo") used to determine the cause of the sickness.
Members of parliament were elected from 55 constituencies (also known as tinkhundla ).
Estimates of treatment coverage range from 70% to 80% of those infected.
Swaziland is home to a United World College.
Other technical and vocational institutions are the Gwamile Vocational and Commercial Training Institute located in Matsapha and the Manzini Industrial and Training Centre (MITC) in Manzini.
The headman is central to all homestead affairs and he is often polygamous.
These later arrivals became known to the Swazis as ''Emafikamuva''.
Much of the increased spending has gone to current expenditures related to wages, transfers, and subsidies.
The products are unique and reflect the culture of Swaziland, ranging from housewares, to artistic decorations, to complex glass, stone, or wood artwork.
Because of controversial land/mineral rights and other concessions, Swaziland had a triumviral administration in 1890 following the death of King Mbandzeni in 1889.
The 1990s saw a rise in student and labour protests pressuring the king to introduce reforms.
Generally speaking, rain falls mostly during the summer months, often in the form of thunderstorms.
Given Swaziland's situation, many health-related non-governmental organizations, university programs, and other organizations work in the country on research and service projects related to health.
In contrast with the commercial farms, Swazi Nation Land suffers from low productivity and investment.
Decisions are made by full council based on recommendations made by the various sub-committees.
Swaziland is not poor enough to merit an IMF program; however, the country is struggling to reduce the size of the civil service and control costs at public enterprises.
The main centre for technical training in Swaziland is the Swaziland College of Technology which is slated to become a full university.
Because of this, individuals with mental illness are also susceptible to stigma.
'''Swaziland''', officially the '''Kingdom of Swaziland''' ( or ; Swazi: ''Umbuso weSwatini''&#8201;; sometimes called '''kaNgwane''' or '''Eswatini'''), is a sovereign state in Southern Africa.
The earliest known inhabitants of the region were Khoisan hunter-gatherers.
During this period, there was increased pressure on the Swaziland government to carry out more reforms.
The Sangoma is a traditional diviner chosen by the ancestors of that particular family.
His successor Sobhuza was four months old.
Swaziland is also known for a strong presence in the handcrafts industry.
After the Anglo-Boer War, Swaziland was a British protectorate from 1903 until 1967.
His stature grew with time and the Swazi royal leadership was successful in resisting the weakening power of the British administration and the incorporation of Swaziland into the Union of South Africa.
The elections are held every five years after dissolution of parliament by the king.
The High Court consists of the Chief Justice and at least four High Court judges.
In addition traditional courts (Swazi Courts or National Courts) deal with minor offenses and violations of traditional Swazi law and custom.
The current constitution was adopted in 2005.
A few schools offer the Advanced Studies (AS) programme in their curriculum.
Judges are appointed by the King and are usually expatriates from South Africa.
On 18 July 2012, Ellinah Wamukoya, was elected Anglican Bishop of Swaziland, becoming the first woman to be a bishop in Africa.
The town clerk is the chief advisor in each local council council or town board.
Swaziland is located at approximately 26°30'S, 31°30'E.
There are 830 public schools in Swaziland including primary, secondary and high schools.
The country and its people take their names from Mswati II, the 19th-century king under whose rule Swazi territory was expanded and unified.
The ''Emakhandzambili'' clans were initially incorporated into the kingdom with wide autonomy, often including grants of special ritual and political status.
The aims of the ceremony are to preserve girls' chastity, provide tribute labour for the Queen mother, and to encourage solidarity by working together.
In Swaziland early childhood care and education (ECCE) centres are in the form of preschools or neighbourhood care points (NCPs).
The psychiatrist works at the National Psychiatric Referral Hospital located in Manzini and sees all of the psychiatric patients in the country, including patients housed at the hospital, but also prisoners, children, and people who commute from rural villages.
In 2004, the Swaziland government acknowledged for the first time that it suffered an AIDS crisis, with 38.8% of tested pregnant women infected with HIV (see AIDS in Africa).
Each inkhundla has a development committee ('''bucopho''') elected from the various constituency chiefdoms in its area for a five-year term.
The extent of their autonomy however was drastically curtailed by Mswati, who attacked and subdued some of them in the 1850s.
The 2006 constitution established a court system based on the western model consisting of four regional Magistrates Courts, a High Court and a Court of Appeal (the Supreme Court), which are independent of crown control.
In a polygamous homestead, each wife has her own hut and yard surrounded by reed fences.
Nominations take place at the chiefdoms.
It is located in Manzini next to the Raleigh Fitkin Memorial Hospital.
In 1894 a convention placed Swaziland under the South African Republic as a protectorate.
In 1903, after British victory in the Anglo-Boer war, Swaziland became a British protectorate.
The cattle byre has ritual as well as practical significance as a store of wealth and symbol of prestige.
The nominations are for the position of Member of Parliament, Constituency Headman (Indvuna) and the Constituency Executive Committee (Bucopho).
The Swaziland Christian University, focusing on medical education and established in 2012, is Swaziland's newest university.
About 76,000&nbsp;people in the country speak Zulu.
The Swazi settlers, then known as ''the Ngwane'' (or ''bakaNgwane''), before entering Swaziland had been settled on the banks of the Pongola River.
On the positive side, the external debt burden has declined markedly over the last 20 years, and domestic debt is almost negligible; external debt as a percent of GDP was less than 20% in 2006.
This variation considers the size of the town or city.
A crucial factor in addressing this challenge is the investment climate.
There are twelve municipalities and 55 tinkhundla.
Public protests by civic organisations and trade unions became more common.
Tuberculosis is a significant problem, with an 18 percent mortality rate.
This saw the reappointment of Sibusiso Dlamini, by the king, as prime minister for the third time.
Swaziland's most well-known cultural event is the annual Umhlanga Reed Dance.
In this process, they conquered and incorporated the long established clans of the country known to the Swazi as ''Emakhandzambili''.
The further East, the less rain, with the Lowveld recording  per annum.
The king appoints the prime minister from the legislature and also appoints a minority of legislators to both chambers of the Libandla (parliament) with help from an advisory council.
