Most of the State administrative authorities () report to the Government, including (but not limited to) the Armed Forces, the Enforcement Authority, the National Library, the Swedish police and the Tax Agency.
Sweden is first described in a written source in ''Germania'' by Tacitus in 98 AD.
The National Task Force is a national SWAT unit within the Police Service.
Gotland and Öland are Sweden's largest islands; Vänern and Vättern are its largest lakes.
In terms of structure, the Swedish economy is characterised by a large, knowledge-intensive and export-oriented manufacturing sector; an increasing, but comparatively small, business service sector; and by international standards, a large public service sector.
With the conversion of the land to Christianity around 1100 AD, Sweden entered the Middle Ages, during which monastic writers preferred to use Latin.
In addition, a national VAT of 25% is added to many things bought by private citizens, with the exception of food (12% VAT), transportation, and books (6% VAT).
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), deregulation, globalisation, and technology sector growth have been key productivity drivers.
The need to recruit only the soldiers later prepared to volunteer for international service will be emphasised.
Sweden and Gothia were two separate nations long before that into antiquity.
More recently Håkan Lans invented the Automatic Identification System, a worldwide standard for shipping and civil aviation navigation.
However, Sweden's wealth Gini coefficient at 0.853 was the second highest in developed countries, and above European and North American averages, suggesting high wealth inequality.
Notwithstanding their self-rule, local authorities are nevertheless in practice interdependent upon the State, as the parameters of their responsibilities and the extent of their jurisdiction is specified in the Local Government Act () passed by the Riksdag.
Jonas Wenström was an early pioneer in alternating current and is along with Serbian inventor Nikola Tesla credited as one of the inventors of the three-phase electrical system.
Trelleborg is the busiest ferry port in Sweden in terms of weight transported by lorry.
Municipal and county council government in Sweden is similar to city commission and cabinet-style council government.
After completing the 9th grade, about 90% of the students continue with a three-year upper secondary school (''gymnasium''), which can lead to both a job qualification or entrance eligibility to university.
Because the Swedish peasantry had never been enserfed as elsewhere in Europe, the Swedish farming culture began to take on a critical role in Swedish politics, which has continued through modern times with modern Agrarian party (now called the Centre Party).
After World War II a succession of governments expanded the welfare state by raising the taxes.
North of Halland Denmark had a direct border to Norway and its province Bohuslän.
The Supreme Court consists of 16 Justices (), appointed by the Government, but the court as an institution is independent of the Riksdag, and the Government is not able to interfere with the decisions of the court.
Today, Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state.
It is not known when and how the kingdom of Sweden was born, but the list of Swedish monarchs is drawn from the first kings known to have ruled both Svealand (Sweden) and Götaland (Gothia) as one province, beginning with Eric the Victorious.
After the Battle of Nördlingen, Sweden's only significant military defeat of the war, pro-Swedish sentiment among the German states faded.
The traditional flat and dry crisp bread has developed into several contemporary variants.
Between 1870 and 1914, Sweden began developing the industrialised economy that exists today.
The population density is 20.6 people per km² (53.3 per square mile) and it is substantially higher in the south than in the north.
The counties have financing, ticket and marketing responsibility for local trains.
Since 1996, only children that are christened become members.
The highest population density is in the Öresund Region in southern Sweden, along the western coast up to central Bohuslän, and in the valley of lake Mälaren and Stockholm.
The right to stand outside any religious denomination was formally established in the Law on Freedom of religion in 1951.
It also ranks high in life expectancy and in safe drinking water.
Sweden, like countries around the globe, entered a period of economic decline and upheaval following the oil embargoes of 1973–74 and 1978–79.
'''Sweden''' ( ;   ), officially the '''Kingdom of Sweden''' (Swedish: ), is a Scandinavian country in Northern Europe.
It was not until elections in 2010 that an eighth party, the Sweden Democrats, gained Riksdag seats.
The total population of Sweden was estimated to be 9,845,155 on 30 November 2015.
The only exception is Gotland Municipality which also has the responsibilities of a county council.
However, until 1860 it remained illegal for Lutherans to convert to another religion.
Between 1970 and 1990 the overall tax burden rose by over 10%, and the growth was low compared to other countries in Western Europe.
*'''16%''' believed in ghosts
Since 1995 Sweden has been a member of the European Union, and as a consequence of a new world security situation the country's foreign policy doctrine has been partly modified, with Sweden playing a more active role in European security co-operation.
Other research has shown that religion in Sweden continues to play a role in cultural identity.
Still, Sweden remained a poor and economically backward country in which barter was the means of exchange.
In recent decades Sweden has become a more culturally diverse nation due to significant immigration; in 2013 it was estimated that 15 per cent of the population was foreign-born, and an additional 5 per cent of the population were born to two immigrant parents.
Sweden was the second Nordic country to disestablish its state church (after Finland did so in the Church Act of 1869).
The most used airport for a large part of Southern Sweden is Kastrup or Copenhagen Airport which is located only 12 minutes by train from the closest Swedish railway station, Hyllie.
Licence funded radio broadcasts started in 1925.
Financial deregulation in the 1980s impacted adversely on the property market, leading to a bubble and eventually a crash in the early 1990s.
The fundamental laws can be altered by the Riksdag alone; only an absolute majority with two separate votes, separated by a general election in between, is required.
In and around Stockholm and Scania, two of the more densely populated regions of Sweden, the income Gini coefficient is between 0.35 and 0.55.
With these concessions, Lübeck merchants flocked to Stockholm, where they soon came to dominate the city's economic life and made the port city of Stockholm into the leading commercial and industrial city of Sweden.
The main responsibility of the County Administrative Board is to co-ordinate the development of the county in line with goals set by the Riksdag and Government.
It has maritime borders with Denmark, Germany, Poland, Russia, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, and it is also linked to Denmark (south-west) by the Öresund Bridge.
Sweden has also become known for a large number of heavy metal bands, including Bathory, Opeth, Amon Amarth and Ghost.
Shortly afterwards he rejected Catholicism and led Sweden into the Protestant Reformation.
Sweden has  of paved road and  of expressways.
Operators include SJ, Veolia Transport, DSB, Green Cargo, Tågkompaniet and Inlandsbanan.
The licence-funded television service was officially launched in 1956.
Large organisations, both in manufacturing and services, dominate the Swedish economy.
The team has won the World Championships nine times, placing them third in the all-time medal count.
The sparsely populated Norrland encompasses almost 60% of the country.
The privileges obtained by the Hansa included assurances that only Hansa citizens would be allowed to trade from the ports where they were located.
In 1971 the parliament became unicameral.
The lines leave from Visby harbour on the island, and the ferries sail to either Oskarshamn or Nynäshamn.
The title ''Sveriges och Götes Konung'' was last used for Gustaf I of Sweden, after which the title became "King of Sweden, of the Goths and of the Wends" (''Sveriges, Götes och Vendes Konung'') in official documentation.
The two largest evening tabloids are ''Aftonbladet'' (social democratic) and ''Expressen'' (liberal).
Sweden Finns are Sweden's largest linguistic minority, comprising about 5% of Sweden's population, and Finnish is recognised as a minority language.
There was also considerable participation in expeditions westwards, which are commemorated on stones such as the England runestones.
It borders Norway to the west and Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a bridge-tunnel across the Öresund.
The Centre for Swedish Folk Music and Jazz Research has published an overview of jazz in Sweden by Lars Westin.
The internal workings of the Riksdag is, in addition to the Instrument of Government, regulated by the Riksdag Act ().
With a large influx of native speakers of Arabic in latter years, the prevalence of native Arab speakers is likely more widespread than actual usage of Finnish.
Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, with increasing forest coverage northward.
Voters rejected right-hand traffic in 1955, but after the Riksdag passed legislation in 1963 changeover took place in 1967, known in Swedish as Dagen H.
Sweden was the first country in the world to outlaw corporal punishment of children by their parents (parents' right to spank their own children was first removed in 1966, and it was explicitly prohibited by law from July 1979).
With religious liberalisations in the late 18th century believers of other faiths, including Judaism and Roman Catholicism, were allowed to live and work freely in the country.
Sweden is the fourth-most competitive economy in the world, according to the World Economic Forum in its ''Global Competitiveness Report 2012–2013''.
The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905, leading to Sweden's current borders.
Sweden joined the European Union on 1 January 1995.
The ferry ports of Karlskrona and Karlshamn in southeastern Sweden serve Gdynia, Poland, and Klaipeda, Lithuania.
For several decades the Swedish government has prioritised scientific and R&D activities.
"''Götaland''" in this sense mainly includes the provinces of Östergötland (East Gothia) and Västergötland (West Gothia).
In the mid-2000s, Martin came back with a more rock-tinged sound and produced major hits with artists such as Kelly Clarkson, Pink and Katy Perry.
The actual age of the kingdom of Sweden is unknown.
More recently, the films of Lukas Moodysson and Lasse Hallström have received international recognition.
As so happens, many of them were built in Scania and are in effect Danish churches.
English became a compulsory subject for secondary school students studying natural sciences as early as 1849, and has been a compulsory subject for all Swedish students since the late 1940s.
Ystad and Trelleborg near the southern tip of Sweden have ferry links with the Danish island of Bornholm and the German ports of Sassnitz, Rostock and Travemünde, respectively, and ferries run to Świnoujście, Poland, from both of them.
As a reaction to the failed Great Northern War, a parliamentary system was introduced in 1719, followed by three different flavours of constitutional monarchy in 1772, 1789 and 1809, the latter granting several civil liberties.
In the elections to the European Parliament, parties who have failed to pass the Riksdag threshold have managed to gain representation at that venue: the June List (2004–2009), the Pirate Party (2009–2014), and Feminist Initiative (2014-present).
In a 2005 survey by Eurobarometer, 89% of Swedes reported the ability to speak English.
At the end of 2014, 64.6% of Swedes belonged to the Church of Sweden; this number has been decreasing by about one percentage point a year for the last two decades.
Second to football, horse sports have the highest number of practitioners who are mostly women.
To the west is the Scandinavian mountain chain (Skanderna), a range that separates Sweden from Norway.
However, Sweden also indirectly contributed to the defence of Finland in the Winter War, and permitted the training of Norwegian and Danish troops in Sweden after 1943.
The official language of Sweden is Swedish, a North Germanic language, related and very similar to Danish and Norwegian, but differing in pronunciation and orthography.
In exchange, they offered a certain amount of protection.
Partly as a result of these privatisations and widening economic disparity, the Swedes in the 2014 elections put the Social Democrats back in power.
During the 17th century Sweden emerged as a European great power.
Martin of Tours Eve is celebrated in Scania in November with ''Mårten Gås'' parties, where roast goose and ''svartsoppa'' ('black soup', made of goose stock, fruit, spices, spirits and goose blood) are served.
In 2014 Stefan Löfven won the General Election and became the new Swedish Prime Minister.
Except for the provinces of Scania, Blekinge and Halland, in the south-west of the Scandinavian peninsula which were parts of the Kingdom of Denmark during this time, feudalism never developed in Sweden as it did in the rest of Europe.
Starting in the 1990s, Denniz Pop's Cheiron Studios became an international hit factory, with his disciple Max Martin responsible for Britney Spears' breakthrough songs and for shaping the whole boy-band boom at the turn of the millennium with global hits for groups like the Backstreet Boys and 'N Sync.
Around 26.5% of the Swedish population is, at least partly, of foreign descent.
During the early Cold War era, Sweden combined its policy of non-alignment and a low profile in international affairs with a security policy based on strong national defence.
Timber, hydropower and iron ore constitute the resource base of an economy with a heavy emphasis on foreign trade.
Sweden is the ninth-largest arms exporter in the world.
Public sector spending amounts to 53% of the GDP.
Establishing the age depends mostly on whether Sweden should be considered a nation when the ''Svear'' (Sweonas) ruled Svealand or if the emergence of the nation started with the ''Svear'' and the ''Götar'' (Geats) of Götaland being united under one ruler.
Later he mentions other Scandinavian tribes for being of the same height.
Between the ages of 6 and 16, children attend compulsory comprehensive school.
The positive trend continued during the first half of 2008, but the rate of increase slackened.
A second channel, TV2, was launched in 1969.
His legacy to his son, the coming ruler of Sweden, Charles XII, was one of the finest arsenals in the world, a large standing army and a great fleet.
These events are often described as the consolidation of Sweden, although substantial areas were conquered and incorporated later.
Danderyd, outside Stockholm, has Sweden's highest Gini coefficient of income inequality, at 0.55, while Hofors near Gävle has the lowest at 0.25.
Since the 1930s, the agricultural sector had been subject to price controls.
He launched a military campaign against Norway on 27 July 1814, ending in the Convention of Moss, which forced Norway into a personal union with Sweden under the Swedish crown, which lasted until 1905.
This has largely been attributed to the reduction in state benefits and a shift toward the privatisation of public services.
However, the Swedes began to resent the monopoly trading position of the Hansa (mostly German citizens), and to resent the income they felt they lost to the Hansa.
Prisons were closed in the towns of Åby, Håja, Båtshagen, and Kristianstad.
A unique feature of Swedish State administration is that individual cabinet ministers ''do not bear any'' individual ministerial responsibility for the performance of the agencies within their portfolio; as the director-generals and other heads of government agencies reports directly to the Government as a whole; and individual ministers are prohibited to interfere; thus the origin of the pejorative in Swedish political parlance term ''ministerstyre'' (English: "ministerial rule") in matters that are to be handled by the individual agencies, unless otherwise specifically provided for in law.
In 2008, the second best-selling fiction author in the world was Stieg Larsson, whose ''Millennium'' series of crime novels is being published posthumously to critical acclaim.
Despite the opening of the fixed link to Denmark, the Øresund Bridge, the busiest ferry route remains the short link across the narrowest section of the Øresund between Helsingborg and the Danish port of Helsingør, known as the HH Ferry route.
Among others, Swedish companies export weapons that were used by the American military in Iraq.
The ''Global Gender Gap Report 2006'' ranked Sweden as the number one country in terms of gender equality.
Even on a disposable income basis, the geographical distribution of Gini coefficient of income inequality varies within different regions and municipalities of Sweden.
Immigrants in Sweden are mostly concentrated in the urban areas of Svealand and Götaland.
Some Danish and Norwegian is at times also taught as part of Swedish courses for native speakers.
The Swedish national men's ice hockey team, affectionately known as ''Tre Kronor'' (English: Three Crowns; the national symbol of Sweden), is regarded as one of the best in the world.
The foundation of Sweden's success during this period is credited to Gustav I's major changes to the Swedish economy in the 16th century, and his introduction of Protestantism.
Sweden remains non-aligned militarily, although it participates in some joint military exercises with NATO and some other countries, in addition to extensive co-operation with other European countries in the area of defence technology and defence industry.
The issue of whether Swedish should be declared the official language has been raised in the past, and the Riksdag voted on the matter in 2005, but the proposal narrowly failed.
The Swedish colonisation of the coastal areas of Finland started at the same time in 12th and 13th century.
Between 1750 and 1850, the population in Sweden doubled.
There are several connections from the Stockholm area across the Sea of Åland to Mariehamn in the Åland Islands as well as Turku and Helsinki on the Finnish mainland and beyond to Estonia and St Petersburg in Russia.
Up to 1974 the King was ''pro forma'' Commander-in-Chief, but in reality it was clearly understood all through the 20th century that the Monarch would have no ''active'' role as a military leader.
Remains of what is believed to have been a large market dating from 600–700 AD have been found in Ystad.
The largest trade flows are with Germany, the United States, Norway, the United Kingdom, Denmark and Finland.
They sought agreement to be free of all customs and taxes.
The non-aligned Sweden Democrats more than doubled their support and won the remaining 49 seats.
Sweden has one of the most highly developed welfare states in the world.
At the same time, the country maintained relatively close informal connections with the Western bloc, especially in the realm of intelligence exchange.
The second- and third-largest cities are Gothenburg and Malmö.
According to some scholars, mass emigration to America became the only way to prevent famine and rebellion; over 1% of the population emigrated annually during the 1880s.
The Stockholm metro is the only subway system in Sweden and serves the city of Stockholm via 100 stations.
As a nation, only ten other countries hold more patents than Sweden.
Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into history as the Geats/Götar and Swedes/Svear and constituting the sea peoples known as the Norsemen.
There is also Sami music, called the ''joik'', which is actually a type of chant which is part of the traditional Saami animistic spirituality but has gained recognition in the international world of folk music.
Sweden lies between latitudes 55° and 70° N, and mostly between longitudes 11° and 25° E (part of Stora Drammen island is just west of 11°).
In the middle of the 17th century Sweden was the third-largest country in Europe by land area, only surpassed by Russia and Spain.
Swedes are among the greatest consumers of newspapers in the world, and nearly every town is served by a local paper.
Municipalities are also divided into a total of 2,512 parishes (''församlingar'').
Among older structures are also some significant fortresses and other historical buildings such as at Borgholm Castle, Halltorps Manor and Eketorp fortress on the island Öland, the Nyköping fortress and the Visby city wall.
From the mid-1990s until today Sweden's economic growth has once again accelerated and has been higher than in most other industrialised countries (including the US) during the last 15 years.
The renowned neo-classical power metal guitarist Yngwie Malmsteen is also from Sweden.
There are also a number of special courts, which will hear a narrower set of cases, as set down by legislation.
Household debt-to-income rose above 170% as the IMF was calling on legislators to consider zoning reform and other means of generating a greater supply of housing as demand was outstripping what was available, pushing prices higher.
Copenhagen Airport also is the largest ''international'' airport in Scandinavia and Finland.
Sweden was heavily affected by the 2015 European migrant crisis, forcing the government to tighten regulations of entry to the country, as Sweden received thousands of asylum seekers per week during the autumn, overwhelming existing structures.
The Swedish government is seeking to reduce its costs through decreased sick leave hours and increased efficiency.
Other big sports events include the UEFA Euro 1992, 1995 FIFA Women's World Cup, 1995 World Championships in Athletics, UEFA Women's Euro 2013, and several championships of ice hockey, curling, athletics, skiing, bandy, figure skating and swimming.
The Sami, one of Sweden's indigenous minorities, have their holiday on 6 February and Scania celebrate their Scanian Flag day on the third Sunday in July.
Swedish traditional dishes, some of which are many hundreds of years old, others perhaps a century or less, are still a very important part of Swedish everyday meals, in spite of the fact that modern-day Swedish cuisine adopts many international dishes.
During the early stages of the Scandinavian Viking Age, Ystad in Danish province Scania and Paviken on Gotland, were flourishing centres of trade, but they were not parts of the early Swedish Kingdom.
Then Jordanes names the ''Suetidi'', which is considered to be the Latin form of ''Svíþjóð'', the Old Norse name for the Swedes.
Greater Gothenburg counts close to a million inhabitants and the same goes for the Western part of Scania, around the Øresund.
GDP per-hour-worked is growing 2.5% per year for the economy as a whole and the trade-terms-balanced productivity growth is 2%.
In addition, the plague raging in East Central Europe devastated the Swedish dominions and reached Central Sweden in 1710.
TV4, which had previously been broadcasting via satellite, was granted a permit and began its terrestrial broadcasts in 1992, becoming the first private channel to broadcast television content from within the country.
Småland was at that time of little interest to anyone due to the deep pine forests, and only the city of Kalmar with its castle was of importance.
Sweden was in 2014 a net exporter of electricity by a margin of 16 TWh, the production from windpower mills had increased to 11.5 TWh.
Later investigations revealed that the plane was actually gathering information for NATO.
According to Eurostat, in 2010, there were 1.33 million foreign-born residents in Sweden, corresponding to 14.3% of the total population.
The total forces gathered would consist of about 60,000 men.
Sweden is ranked fourth in the IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2013.
During World War II Sweden joined neither the allied nor axis powers.
The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due to significant maritime influence, that in spite of this still retains warm continental summers.
Thereafter, golf, track and field, and the team sports of handball, floorball, basketball and bandy are the most popular.
By 2014, legislators, economists and the IMF were again warning of a bubble with residential property prices soaring and the level of personal mortgage debt expanding.
The monarchy became hereditary in 1544.
The list of previous officeholders for the counties stretches back, in most cases, to 1634 when the counties were created by Lord High Chancellor Count Axel Oxenstierna.
* '''18%''' of Swedish citizens responded that "they believe there is a god"
The school system is largely financed by taxes.
The Swedish name ''Sverige'' (a compound of the words ''Svea'' and ''Rike'', with lenition of the consonant k, first recorded in the cognate ''Swēorice'' in Beowulf) literally means "Realm of the Swedes", excluding the Geats in Götaland.
These innovations included government-sponsored programmes of enclosure, aggressive exploitation of agricultural lands, and the introduction of new crops such as the potato.
However, only about 110,000 are members of a congregation and of these approximately 25,000 actively practise Islam in the sense that they pray five times a day and attend Friday prayer.
Sweden has low levels of burglary, car theft and drug problems.
The traditional engineering industry is still a major source of Swedish inventions, but pharmaceuticals, electronics and other high-tech industries are gaining ground.
Following the war, Sweden took advantage of an intact industrial base, social stability and its natural resources to expand its industry to supply the rebuilding of Europe.
In 1975 the total number of conscripts was 45,000.
High and medium-high technology manufacturing accounts for 9.9% of GDP.
In the 2010 general election the Alliance contended against a unified left block consisting of the Social Democrats, the Greens and the Left Party.
The two main spectator sports are football and ice hockey.
By 2003 it was down to 15,000.
It is believed that Swedish Vikings and Gutar mainly travelled east and south, going to Finland, the Baltic countries, Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, the Black Sea and even as far as Baghdad.
The main exports from Sweden were iron and copper.
In varying degrees, depending largely on frequency of interaction with English, a majority of Swedes, especially those born after World War II, understand and speak English owing to trade links, the popularity of overseas travel, a strong Anglo-American influence and the tradition of subtitling rather than dubbing foreign television shows and films, and the relative similarity of the two languages which makes learning English easier.
With improved education and the freedom brought by secularisation, the 17th century saw several notable authors develop the Swedish language further.
Biomass is mainly used to produce heat for district heating and central heating and industry processes.
