Most pools in the world are measured in metres, but in the United States pools are often measured in feet and yards.
A '''swimming pool''', '''swimming bath''', '''wading pool''', or '''paddling pool''' is a container filled with water to enable swimming or other leisure activities.
Most swimming pool heat loss is through evaporation.
These reels can be run from either an external motor requiring a pit to be dug beside the pool or using an internal motor that spins the reel.
Due to their family-oriented nature, home spas are normally operated from .
The last swimmers managed to overturn the raft, to the amusement of 150 spectators.
Levels of bacteria and viruses in swimming pool water must be kept low to prevent the spread of diseases and pathogens.
An Olympic-size swimming pool (first used at the 1924 Olympics) is a pool that meets FINA's additional standards for the Olympic Games and for world championship events.
In France and some other European countries, board shorts are usually not allowed for hygienic reasons.
The building may sometimes also have facilities for related activities, such as a diving tank.
The custom safety cover was invented in 1957 by Fred Meyer Jr. of Meyco Pool Covers when he found a dead animal in his pool.
The reel, usually on wheels, can be rolled in or out of place.
They cover most of the surface of the pool and offer evaporation reduction similar to continuous covers.
The modern Olympic Games started in 1896 and included swimming races, after which the popularity of swimming pools began to spread.
Commercial spas are generally made of concrete, with a mosaic tiled interior.
When diving from a high board, swim suits are sometimes worn doubled up (one brief inside another) in case the outer suit tears on impact with the water.
Thermal bubble covers are lightweight UV-stabilized floating covers designed to minimize heat loss on heated swimming pools.
Air bubbles may be introduced into the nozzles via an air-bleed venturi pump that combines cooler air with the incoming heated water to cool the pool if the temperature rises uncomfortably high.
If it is a public pool designed for diving, it may slope from  in the deep end.
A pool of this type was the training ground for Australian Olympian Dawn Fraser.
One part algaecide for every 50,000 parts of pool water should be added, and topped up each month.
Gaius Maecenas was a rich Roman lord and considered one of the first patrons of arts.
There are also many pools 33⅓&nbsp;m long, so that 3 lengths = 100&nbsp;m. This pool dimension is commonly used to accommodate water polo.
They were decorated with flights of steps, punkalas or pots of abundance, and scroll design.
They have also been used for specialist tasks such as teaching water-ditching survival techniques for aircraft and submarine crews and astronaut training.
In many jurisdictions, it is a requirement to show the water depth with clearly marked depths affixed to the pool walls.
Home spas are a worldwide retail item in western countries since the 1980s, and are sold in dedicated spa stores, pool shops, department stores, the Internet, and catalog sales books.
Natural pools, by requiring a water garden to be a part of the system, offer different aesthetic options and can support amphibious wildlife such as snails, frogs, and salamanders, and even small fish if desired.
For example, red eyes, dried-out skin and hair, and bleached bathing suits associated with overly chlorinated water are naturally absent in natural pools.
Despite the development of chlorinated and heated pools, ocean baths remain a popular form of recreation in New South Wales.
Inexpensive temporary polyvinyl chloride pools can be bought in supermarkets and taken down after summer.
The Maidstone Swimming Club in Maidstone, Kent is believed to be the oldest surviving swimming club in Britain.
They are used mostly outdoors in yards, are typically shallow, and often their sides are inflated with air to stay rigid.
Toys are available for children and other people to play with in pool water.
A variation was the later development of sea- or harbour-side pools that circulated sea water using pumps.
Most pools are permanent fixtures, while others are temporary, collapsible structures.
An above-ground pool should also be closed, so that ice does not drag down the pool wall, collapsing its structure.
Many products exist, such as removable baby fences, floating alarms and window/door alarms to reduce the risk of drowning for infants.
Swimming with regular clothes on is not only unhygienic, but can potentially weigh a swimmer down should he or she need to be rescued.
This resort is located at 4200 m AMSL and has two indoor swimming pools and one outdoor swimming pool, all filled with water from hot springs.
Winter sunlight can create an algae mess when a cover that has been left on all winter is removed.
Bubble covers are typically applied and removed by being rolled up on a device fitted to one side of the pool (see illustration).
One of the largest swimming pools ever built was reputedly created in Moscow after the Palace of Soviets remained uncompleted.
Home pools can be permanently built-in, or be assembled above ground and disassembled after summer.
Drain plugs on the pool filter are removed after the filter has been cleaned.
By taking steps to properly secure the pool, it lessens the likelihood that the superstructure will be damaged or compromised by freezing water.
The illusion is most effective whenever there is a significant change in elevation, though having a natural body of water on the horizon is not a limiting factor.
Special swimming pools are also used for diving and other water sports, as well as for the training of lifeguards and astronauts.
The water must be kept at  and the lighting level at greater than 1500 lux.
Covers fall apart after four or five years due to sun exposure, overheating in the sun while off the pool, and chlorine attacking the plastic.
As early as 1837, six indoor pools with diving boards existed in London, England.
Some small nations enjoy a thriving swimming pool industry (e.g., New Zealand pop.
The lockers can require a coin to be inserted in a slot, either as deposit or payment.
They use electrical power to roll and unroll the cover, but usually require someone to pull on the cover when unrolling, or guide the cover onto the reel when rolling up the cover.
There are also elaborate pools with artificial waterfalls, fountains, splash pads, wave machines, varying depths of water, bridges, and island bars.
Educational facilities such as schools and universities occasionally have pools for physical education classes, recreational activities, leisure or competitive athletics such as swimming teams.
Bathing in these pools provided security against both rough surf and sea life.
In-ground pools are most commonly constructed from materials such as concrete, natural stone, metal, plastic or fiberglass, and can be of a custom size and shape or built to a standardised size, the largest of which is the Olympic-size swimming pool.
A pool may be referred to as fast or slow, depending on its physical layout.
The pool should be filtered for one to two hours daily to keep the automated chlorination system active.
Standards improved and training became essential.
However, commercial installations in many countries must comply with various safety standards which reduce this risk considerably.
Many countries require a similar level of protection for the children residing in or visiting the house, although many pool owners prefer the visual aspect of the pool in close proximity to their living areas, and will not provide this level of protection.
Hot tubs are typically made somewhat like a wine barrel with straight sides, from wood such as Californian redwood held in place by metal hoops.
They are the most expensive option, but are also the most convenient.
Upmarket spas include various jet nozzles (massage, pulsating, etc.
As there are no stairs or ladders to navigate, this type of entry assists older people, young children and people with accessibility problems where gradual entry is useful.
They are regarded in the swimming pool industry as "splasher" pools intended for cooling off and amusing toddlers and children, not for swimming, hence the alternate name of "kiddie" pools.
The cover is attached to the pool typically using a stretch cord, similar to a bungee cord and hooks fitted into the pool surround.
Whirlpool tubs first became popular in America during the 1960s and 1970s.
Especially the selection of unsuitable stainless steels can cause problems with stress corrosion cracking.
Semi-automatic covers can be built into the pool deck surrounding the pool, or can use reels on carts.
There may also be a sauna and one or more hot tubs or spa pools ("jacuzzis").
This is more common as a temperature control device where the heated water comes from a natural (uncontrolled heat) geothermal source, rather than artificially heated.
required by the pool.
This is an effort to conserve water, as much water evaporates and transpires.
Construction methods for private pools vary greatly.
In essence, natural pools seek to recreate swimming holes and swimmable lakes, the environment where people feel safe swimming in a non-polluted, healthy, and ecologically balanced body of water.
Public pools are often part of a larger leisure centre or recreational complex.
Interest in competitive swimming grew following World War I.
Various types are available, for example opaque (for UV resistance and possible reduced algal growth), transparent (for esthetics), heavy and solid (for wind resistance), light and inflatable (for ease of handling).
In the last two decades, a new style of pool has gained popularity.
Natural pools were developed in central and western Europe in the early and mid-1980s by designers and landscape architects with environmental concerns.
Bubble covers should be removed during super chlorination.
Some pools are equipped with computer-aided drowning prevention or other forms of electronic safety and security systems.
For men, wearing ordinary shorts and a tee shirt to go in the water at a beach may be considered acceptable, but pools usually require real swim suits or other dedicated water wear.
The selection of materials under tension should be done with care.
More recently with the innovation of the pre-form composite method where mosaic tiles are bonded to the shell this enables commercial spas to be completely factory manufactured to specification and delivered in one piece.
Water in natural pools has many desirable characteristics.
Use of a pool cover also can help reduce the amount of chemicals (chlorine, etc.)
Some spas have a constant stream of bubbles fed via the seating area of the pool, or a footwell area.
US high schools and the NCAA conduct short course (25 yards) competition.
Ozone is an effective bactericide and is commonly included in the circulation system with cartridge filtration, but not with sand media filtration due to clogging problems with turbid body fats.
In 2014, the Y-40 swimming pool at the Hotel Terme Millepini in Padua, Italy became the deepest indoor pool, certified by the Guinness Book of World Records The recreational diving center Nemo 33 near Brussels, Belgium previously held the record until the Y-40 was completed.
It was formed in 1844, in response to concerns over drownings in the River Medway, especially since would-be rescuers would often drown because they themselves could not swim to safety.
Pools claimed to be "Olympic pools" do not always meet these regulations, as FINA cannot police use of the term.
There are usually showers - sometimes mandatory - before and/or after swimming.
It was closed in 1971 due to low patronage.
Low power electric immersion heaters are common with home spas.
Some design considerations allow the reduction of swimming resistance making the pool faster: namely, proper pool depth, elimination of currents, increased lane width, energy absorbing racing lane lines and gutters, and the use of other innovative hydraulic, acoustic and illumination designs.
Private pools are usually smaller than public pools, on average  to  whereas public pools usually start at .
The oldest known public swimming pool in America, Underwood Pool, is located in Belmont, Massachusetts.
The club used to swim in the River Medway, and would hold races, diving competitions and water polo matches.
In the US, the Racquet Club of Philadelphia clubhouse (1907) boasts one of the world's first modern above-ground swimming pools.
The South East Gazette July 1844 reported an aquatic breakfast party: coffee and biscuits were served on a floating raft in the river.
These centres often have more than one pool, such as an indoor heated pool, an outdoor (chlorinated, saltwater or ozonated) pool which may be heated or unheated, a shallower children's pool, and a paddling pool for toddlers and infants.
The plumbing is sealed with air, typically with rubber plugs, to prevent cracking from freezing water.
The Fleishhacker Pool in San Francisco was the largest heated outdoor swimming pool in the United States.
Touchpads are mounted on both walls for long course meets and each end for short course.
If a pool is in a separate building, the building may be called a natatorium.
Concrete wading pools come in many shapes, traditionally rectangle, square or circle.
A semi-natural ocean pool exists on the central coast of New South Wales; it is called The Bogey Hole.
A ''zero-entry swimming pool'', also called a ''beach entry swimming pool'', is a swimming pool having an edge or entry that gradually slopes from the deck into the water, becoming deeper with each step, in the manner of a natural beach.
If not properly maintained, chemical sanitation can produce high levels of disinfection byproducts.
Many pools are incorporated in a redwood or simulated wood surround, and are termed "portable" as they may be placed on a patio rather than sunken into a permanent location.
The first heated swimming pool was built by Gaius Maecenas of Rome in the 1st century BC.
Opened on 23 April 1925, it measured  and was so large that the lifeguards required kayaks for patrol.
In the US, pools tend to either be 25 yards ('''SCY'''-short course yards), 25 metres ('''SCM'''-short course metres) or 50 metres (long course).
It was completed in December 2006.
Hot tubs and spas are pools filled with hot water, used for relaxation or hydrotherapy, and are common in homes, hotels, clubs and massage parlors.
In the early 20th century, especially in Australia, ocean pools were built, typically on headlands by enclosing part of the rock shelf, with water circulated through the pools by flooding from tidal tanks or by regular flooding over the side of the pools at high tide.
A vinyl cover absorbs more sunlight directly, allowing temperature to rise faster, but ultimately prevents the pool from reaching as high a temperature as a clear cover.
For example, in London many larger homes are now refurbished with indoor pools, usually in the basement or in a conservatory.
Swimming pool heating costs can be significantly reduced by using a pool cover.
In Japan, men's clubs with many spas of different size and temperature are common.
The pool is typically covered to prevent leaves and other debris from falling in.
The innovation of a composite construction of fibreglass, with an epoxy coating and porcelain ceramic tiles has led to the Pre-form, Composite-type with significant advantages over older methods; however, it also has increased sensitivity to metal staining.
Staff chlorinate the water to ensure health and safety standards.
It must be  in length by  wide, divided into eight lanes of  each plus two areas of  at each side of the pool.
The depth of a swimming pool depends on the purpose of the pool, and whether it is open to the public or strictly for private use.
Swimming pools became popular in Britain in the mid-19th century.
The largest indoor wave pool in North America is at the West Edmonton Mall and the largest indoor pool is at the Neutral Buoyancy Lab in the Sonny Carter Training Facility at NASA JSC in Houston.
Most European pools are between 10 m and 50 m wide.
Some swimming facilities have lockers for clothing and other belongings.
Many public swimming pools are rectangles 25&nbsp;m or 50&nbsp;m long, but they can be any size and shape.
Hot tubs and spa pools are common heated pools used for relaxation and sometimes for therapy.
Safety covers may be required by inspectors for public pools.
It is  long and has an area of 8 ha (20 acres).
In areas which reach freezing temperature, it is important to close a pool properly.
They are custom designed to stop leaf debris from entering the pool but more importantly they also provide safety for animals and small children when designed and installed properly.
The first swimming pool to go to sea on an ocean liner was installed on the White Star Line's ''Adriatic'' in 1907.
USA Swimming (USA-S) swims in both metric and non-metric pools.
Bacteria, algae and insect larvae can enter the pool if water is not properly sanitized.
Vinyl covers consist of a heavier material and have a longer life expectancy than bubble covers.
Some are filled and drained daily due to lack of a filter system.
Private pools are increasingly a feature of homes in greater latitudes.
Pools also present a significant risk of infant and toddler death due to drowning.
The Amateur Swimming Association was founded in 1869 in England, and the Oxford Swimming Club in 1909 with its home at Temple Cowley Pool.
According to the Guinness World Records, the largest swimming pool in the world is San Alfonso del Mar Seawater pool in Algarrobo, Chile.
The pool pump motor is taken under cover.
These covers are mandatory to be fitted to all pools in areas of Australia that have experienced drought since 2006.
Many towns and cities provide public pools.
Ancient Sinhalese built pairs of pools called "Kuttam Pokuna" in the kingdom of Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka in the 4th century BC.
The highest swimming pool is believed to be in Yangbajain (Tibet, China).
The main types of in-ground pools are gunite shotcrete, concrete, vinyl-lined, and one-piece fiberglass shells.
Though a cover decreases the total amount of solar heat absorbed by the pool, the cover eliminates heat loss due to evaporation and reduces heat loss at night through its insulating properties.
Many hotels have pools available for their guests to use at their leisure.
In 1839, Oxford created its first major public indoor pool at Temple Cowley, and swimming began to increase in popularity.
They are often blown up with air so they are soft but still reasonably rugged, and can float in water.
For example, in countries where women can be topless on the beach, this is often not allowed in a swimming pool, and a swimsuit must be worn.
Semi-automatic covers use a motor-driven reel system.
The coffee was kept hot over a fire; club members had to tread water and drink coffee at the same time.
Pools can be sunk into the ground or built above ground (as a freestanding construction or as part of a building or other larger structure), and are also a standard feature aboard oceanliners and cruise ships.
Insulated vinyl covers are also available with a thin layer of flexible insulation sandwiched between two layers of vinyl.
In regions where residential pools are common, drowning is a major cause of childhood fatalities.
There is no consensus between states or countries on the requirements to fence private swimming pools, and in many places they are not required at all, particularly in rural settings.
In Europe, the largest swimming pool opened in 1934 in Elbląg (Poland), providing a water area of .
Typically, the thermal cover is removed and stored.
In preparation for freezing temperatures, an in-ground swimming pool's pipes must be emptied.
Some portable spas are shallow and narrow enough to fit sideways through a standard door and be used inside a room.
They raise temperature of a pool by around 20 °Fahrenheit, or 11 °Celsius, after being on the pool for a week.
Today covers are made to meet ASTM safety barrier standards and have kept animals, people and even large vehicles out of the pool.
In Nordic countries and in particular Iceland, rules about clothing and hygiene are especially strict.
Water temperature is usually very warm to hot — , so bathers usually stay in for only 20 to 30 minutes.
An infinity edge pool (also named ''negative edge'' or ''vanishing edge pool'') is a swimming pool which produces a visual effect of water extending to the horizon, vanishing, or extending to "infinity".
A pool cover can be either manually, semi-automatically, or automatically operated.
Automatic covers have permanently mounted reels that automatically cover and uncover the pool at the push of a button.
In climates where there is no risk of freezing, closing down the pool for winter is not so important.
The heating effectiveness of a cover depends on type.
Larger pools sometimes have a diving board affixed at one edge above the water.
This continued a pre-European tradition of bathing in rockpools with many of the current sites being expanded from sites used by Aboriginal Australians or early European settlers.
), a drinks tray, lights, LCD flat-screen TV sets and other features that make the pool a recreation center.
Round-cornered, irregular swimming pools, such as the Nude Bowl, were drained of water and used for vertical skateboarding.
If it is a private casual, relaxing pool, it may go from  deep.
Most public pools have differing depths to accommodate different swimmer requirements.
These were the forerunners of modern "Olympic" pools.
Manual covers can be folded and stored in an off site location.
Pool cover reels can also be used to help manually roll up the pool cover.
They even support the weight of several people.
There are often also lifeguards to ensure the safety of users.
They can be of any size and shape, and inground or above ground.
An alternative to a continuous sheet of pool covering is multiple floating disks which are deployed and removed disk by disk.
Suspended ceilings in indoor swimming pools are safety-relevant components.
The pool is correctly pH-balanced and super-chlorinated.
Pools can be either indoors or outdoors.
Spa clubs may have very large pools, some segmented into increasing temperatures.
In general, the shorter the pool, the faster the time for the same distance, since the swimmer gains speed from pushing off the wall after each turn at the end of the pool.
Many health clubs, fitness centers and private clubs, such as the YMCA, have pools used mostly for exercise or recreation.
However, after the fall of communism, Christ the Saviour Cathedral was re-built  on the site between 1995 and 2000; the cathedral had originally been located there.
Privately owned outdoor pools in backyards or gardens started to proliferate in the 1950s in regions with warm summer climates, particularly in the United States with desegregation.
