The Italian Ministry of Interior has warned that switchblade knives will be considered offensive weapons in their own right.
The Act also prohibits the manufacture, sale, or possession of switchblade knives on any Federal lands, Indian reservations, military bases, and Federal maritime or territorial jurisdictions including the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and other territories.
As with the medieval stiletto, the stiletto switchblade was designed primarily as an offensive weapon, optimized for thrusting rather than cutting (many imported stiletto switchblades had no sharpened cutting edge at all).
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: Offenses Against Public Health and Safety - 76-10-504''
On 12 May 1959, Parliament passed the ''Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959''.
'''Limited''' - Legal to carry concealed '''unless''' switchblade meets the definition of deadly weapon (any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried, or used as a weapon) -  ''State Code § 2923.11'' ''State Code: § 2923.12  ''State Code: § 2923.20''
Multi-tools featuring one-hand opening blades are also illegal to own or possess.
Beginning with the Austrian Arms Act of 1996 switchblades, like all other knives, are generally legal to buy, import, possess or carry, regardless of blade length or opening or locking mechanism.
In 1903, Schrade sold his interest in the New York Press Button Knife Co. to the Walden Knife Co., and moved to Walden, New York, where he opened a new factory.
(2) by operation of inertia, gravity, or both, are nonmailable and shall not be deposited in or carried by the mails or delivered by any officer or employee of the Postal Service.
As the blade catch mechanism required a good deal of space within the handle, the knife's blade length was short relative to its handle length.
Some states which have specific legislation against switchblades allow individuals to apply for an exemption from this legislation if they have a legitimate reason.
In the USA, switchblades remain illegal to import from abroad or to purchase through interstate commerce since 1958 under the Switchblade Knife Act (15 U.S.C.
'''Illegal'''-''State Code: Pa. C.S.A.
Even when such a knife is legally owned, carrying it in public without good reason or lawful authority is also illegal under current UK laws.
'''Illegal''' - Illegal if for sale, and simple possession is considered prima facie evidence of intent to sell  ''State Code: 18.2-311''
Schrade's new ''Safety Pushbutton Knives'' incorporated several design improvements over his earlier work, and featured a handle-mounted operating button with a sliding safety switch.
Schrade Knife Co.'' to produce a small single-edge switchblade for U.S. airborne troops, to be used similarly to the ''Fallschirmjäger-Messer''.
In ''The Toy That Kills'', Pollack wrote that the switchblade was "Designed for violence, deadly as a revolver - that’s the switchblade, the 'toy' youngsters all over the country are taking up as a fad.
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: 22-14-19''
While still not a hugely strong design, because it is more firmly attached a good quality single action out the front blade displays less wobble and play than its comparable quality double action counterpart.
At a state and local level, most jurisdictions declare flick knives to be prohibited weapons in their respective acts, codes and regulations.
A switchblade opens its blade from the handle automatically with the press of a button, lever, or switch that is remotely mounted in the knife handle or bolster.
In the UK, knives with an automated opening system are nearly impossible to acquire or carry legally; although they can legally be owned, it is illegal to manufacture, sell, hire, give, lend, or import such knives.
The law came in response to their perceived use by juvenile delinquents and gangs and associated media coverage, as well as by the 1958 passage of the ''Switchblade Knife Act'' in the United States.
18-12-102''; See  ''C.R.S.
'''Legal''' -  Code: 18-3302''
This is easily remedied by either pulling the blade out so that it locks or pushing it in till it locks and then redeploying.
'''Limited'''- Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping permit required to purchase and possess.
This loophole was eventually closed by new federal regulations.
The article sparked a storm of controversy and a nationwide campaign that would eventually result in state and federal laws criminalizing the importation, sale, and possession of automatic-opening knives.
Concealed carry of a blade greater than 5 inches (130&nbsp;mm) requires a "Weapons Carry License"  § 16-11-126''
After the American Civil War (1865), knife production became industrialized.
The oldest American made production automatic knife is the ''Korn Patent Knife'', which used a rocking bolster release.
In recent years, several states such as Alaska, Arkansas, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, Tennessee, and Texas have repealed older laws against possession or purchase of switchblade or automatic knives.
This coverage included not only magazine articles but also highly popular films of the late 1950s including ''Rebel Without a Cause'' (1955), ''Crime in the Streets'' (1956), ''12 Angry Men'' (1957), ''The Delinquents'' (1957), ''High School Confidential'' (1958), and the 1957 Broadway musical ''West Side Story''.
Section 9 of the Firearms and Offensive Weapons Act 1990 makes it an offence to carry a "flick knife" in any public space without lawful authority or reasonable excuse.
The largest model was ''KA-BAR Grizzly'', a folding hunter pattern with a broad bowie-type clip point blade.
The knife was not intended primarily as a fighting knife, but rather as a utility tool, to enable a paratrooper to rapidly cut himself out of his lines and harness in the event he could not escape them after landing.
'''Legal''' except "on campus or other educational property," as defined in  ''NC General Statutes Chap.
Butterfly knives, throwing knives and daggers with a symmetrical blade are banned likewise.
In rural areas of America, these campaigns were partially successful, particularly with younger buyers, who aspired to own the most modern tools at a time when new labor-saving inventions were constantly appearing on the market.
In Sweden, the possession of any knife in a public place, at school, or public roads is prohibited.
Most of Schrade's switchblade patterns were automatic versions of utilitarian jackknives and pocket knives, as well as smaller penknife models designed to appeal to women buyers.
The ''Switchblade Knife Act'', (, , enacted on August 12, 1958, and codified in ), prohibits the manufacture, importation, distribution, transportation, and sale of switchblade knives in commercial transactions substantially affecting interstate commerce between any state, territory, possession of the United States, or the District of Columbia, and any place outside that state, territory, U.S. possession, or the District of Columbia.
Any type of automatic-opening knife or bladed tool that can be opened using just one hand (this includes any one-handed knife that has been deactivated by removing its opening mechanism) is illegal to own or possess.
18-12-102''; See  ''C.R.S.
Since no law prohibited importation of switchblade parts or unassembled kits, all risk of prosecution was assumed by the assembling purchaser, not the importer.
In Japan any switchblade over  in blade length requires permission from the prefectural public safety commission in order to possess.
Persons residing in states that do not have specific weapons legislation covering switchblades (such as Tasmania) are still covered by Federal Customs legislation, but in conditions where the state has no legislation against such items, an exemption may be applied for and received if approved by the chief supervisory officer of the police service in that state.
While operationally identical (in terms of one-handed opening), the spring-assisted knife has slight but important differences.
Sale of a switchblade is authorised only to the persons and organizations above.
The ''Flying Jack'' had a sliding operating latch and could be produced with one or more automatically opening blades.
The blade is locked in position when the rear notch of the blade allows the button to return to its rest position.
'''Limited''' - Possession is only allowed if possessor has a "lawful purpose"  ''State Code: Code of Criminal Justice - 2C:39-3''
'''Limited''' - Illegal unless allowed under exceptions made for collectors and/or possession as curios or antiques -
'''Limited''' - concealed carry, even on one's own property, allowed only with "concealed deadly weapons permit" -  ''State Code: 527.020''
Pollack, a former aide to Democratic Senator Harley M. Kilgore and a ghostwriter for then-Senator Harry S Truman, had authored a series of melodramatic magazine articles calling for new laws to address a variety of social ills.
In contrast, a spring-assist design uses manual pressure on a lever or switch mounted on the blade or connected via a direct mechanical linkage to open the blade initially, at which point an internal torsion spring propels the blade into an open, locked position.
For example, in the state of Victoria, a member of a ''bona fide'' knife-collectors' association, who is not a prohibited person (per the Firearms Act 1996), and meets other guidelines and conditions may apply to the Chief Commissioner of Police for a Prohibited Weapons Exemption to possess, carry, or otherwise own such a knife.
Switchblade knives date from the mid-18th century.
Co." (''Jewelry Cutlery Novelty Company'' of North Attleboro, Massachusetts) Always looking for a new way to appeal to customers, Schrade continued to experiment with new forms of switchblade designs up to the time of his death in 1940.
The Criminal Code definition of "prohibited weapons" includes switchblades:
::(b) any knife which has a blade which is released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force and which, when released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever, or other device, sometimes known as a "gravity knife",
A multi-blade operating button allowed the knife to operate with up to four automatic blades.
Curiously, the sale and possession of stilettos and other 'offensive' knives with fixed or lockback blades were not prohibited.
The cocking arm is pulled backwards which itself pulls the blade backward.
This was a curious device consisting of a folding spring-loaded knife blade attached to a handle which fastened to the back of the hand and was secured by a leather strap, leaving the palm and fingers free for grasping other objects.
The ''Pull-Ball'' opened by pulling a ball located on the butt end of the handle.
In the 1980s, automatic knife imports to the U.S. resumed with the concept of kit knives, allowing the user to assemble a working switchblade from a parts kit with the addition of a mainspring or other key part (often sold separately).
The company's submission was approved by the U.S. Army Materiel Command in December 1940 as the ''Knife, Pocket, M2''.
'''Illegal'''  - ''State Code: Chapter 11 Section 1446''
'''Illegal''' -  ''State Code: 750.226a.''
The act provides for a fine and/or imprisonment of not more than one year.
In 1954, the state of New York passed the first law banning the sale or distribution of switchblade knives in hopes of reducing gang violence.
:(2) The importation of any such knife as is described in the foregoing subsection is hereby prohibited.
'''Legal''' - ''Senate Bill 489 (2012), signed by Governor on 10 July 2012 with emergency clause.
Some in the industry even supported the legislation, hoping to gain market share at the expense of Colonial and Schrade.
1108 Changes to Arizona Code: 13-3102, 13-3105, and 13-3112''
Most of these knives were novelty items, assembled at the lowest possible cost.
18-12-101''; Accord, see generally  ''C.R.S.
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: California Penal Code 653k''
The two spring carriers (green) fit into the spaces on the slide (blue) and this assembly rests to the side of the blade.
Most American-made switchblades made after 1900 were patterned after standard utilitarian pocketknives, though a few larger ''Bowie'' or ''Folding Hunter'' patterns were produced with blade shapes and lengths that could be considered useful as fighting knives.
'''Limited''' - Illegal if carried concealed -  ''State Code: Crimes and Punishments.
Schrade would go on to manufacture thousands of contract switchblade knives under several trademarks and brands, including ''E.
Prior to World War II, hand crafted automatic knives marked ''Campobasso'' or ''Frosolone'' were often called ''Flat Guards'' because of the two-piece top bolster design.
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code:§ 4-105''
A number of states prohibit or severely restrict ownership or possession of automatic knives or switchblades as deadly or prohibited weapons, occasionally inserting exceptions to enforcement for short-bladed knives, while others such as New Hampshire and Arizona have no restrictions on sale, ownership, possession, or carry (in most circumstances).
That same year, Democratic Rep. James J. Delaney of New York authored the first bill submitted to the U.S. Congress banning the manufacture and sale of switchblades.
'''Illegal''' -  ''State Code: §134-51''
A few manufacturers introduced the double switchblade, featuring two blades that could be automatically opened and locked with the push of a button.
It may not be also listed or sold in auctions in Singapore.
'''Legal''' -  Mass.
1243 United States Code''
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: NRS 202.355''
Switchblades that have the appearance of a dagger or stiletto are prohibited from carry in a public place as dangerous weapons.
The classic Italian style stiletto switchblade continues to be produced in Italy, Taiwan, and China.
'''Limited''' - Illegal if carried concealed  ''State Code: 166.240''
The line included the ''KA-BAR Grizzly'', ''KA-BAR Baby Grizzly'', and ''KA-BAR Model 6110 Lever Release'' knives.
A Challenge Cutlery advertisement of the day depicted a female hand operating a fly-lock automatic pen knife, accompanied by a caption urging women to buy one for their sewing kit so as not to break a nail while attempting to open a normal pen knife.
'''Limited''' - Illegal to carry on one's person or in a vehicle when purpose is to use switchblade against another.
All large side-opening switchblade knives (blade longer than 8.5&nbsp;cm), OTF switchblades, balisongs or butterfly knives (blade longer than 4&nbsp;cm), and gravity knives are illegal to own, import or export under German law.
The law requires that switchblades be cased and secured while being transported.
of the Hungarian government ''a közbiztonságra különösen veszélyes eszközökről'' (about the instruments particularly hazardous to public safety), it is prohibited to possess a switchblade in public places or private places open to the public – that includes the inside of vehicles present there – and on public transport vehicles, except for filmmaking and theatrical performances.
Schrade's company operated out of a small workshop in New York City and employed about a dozen workmen.
When the pin evacuates the notch the blade and right spring carrier are free to move.
Schrade manufactured many pull-ball knives for sale under other brands, including Remington, Case, and the "J.C.N.
In 1892, George Schrade, a toolmaker and machinist from New York developed and patented the first of several practical automatic knife designs.
The Customs Import Prohibition Order 2008 prohibits the importation of "any knife having a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in or attached to the handle of the knife (sometimes known as a 'flick-knife' or 'flick gun')".
In addition, French law provides that authorities may classify any knife as a prohibited item depending upon circumstances and the discretion of the police or judicial authorities.
'''Legal''' - Effective 9/1/13 -  HB 1862
In Europe as well as the United States, automatic knife sales were never more than a fraction of sales generated by conventional folding knives, yet the type enjoyed consistent if modest sales from year to year.
Even if the button is pressed spring tension holds the knife open.
'''Illegal''' -  ''State Code: 750.226a.''
1108 Changes to Arizona Code: 13-3102, 13-3105, and 13-3112''
'''Legal''' -  ''S.B.
'''Illegal''' -  ''Title 15, Ch.
A summary conviction is punishable with either a €1000 fine, up to 12 months imprisonment or both but if indictable the penalty can be up to five years in prison.
Upon returning to the United States, Schrade made a final improvement to his ''Presto'' series of switchblades, filing his patent application on June 6, 1916.
Switchblades are illegal to buy, sell and carry in Turkey per the corresponding law 6136 (4) which includes an incarceration sentence of up to 1 year.
When issued to paratroopers, the M2 was normally carried in the dual-zippered knife pocket on the upper chest of the M42 jump uniform jacket.
Indeed, much of the language in the ''Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959'' appears to be taken directly from the American law.
(1) by hand pressure applied to a button or other device in the handle of the knife, or
If carried in a vehicle, such knives must be placed in a secure, locked compartment not accessible to the vehicle occupants.
Though undeniably limited in practical usefulness, the new stiletto switchblades were a revelation to buyers accustomed to the utilitarian nature of most U.S.-made automatic knives such as the Schrade ''Presto'' pocketknife.
'''Legal''' - became legal on 9-16-13 -
Other companies such as Imperial Knife and Remington Arms paid royalties to Schrade in order to produce automatic "contract knives" for rebranding and sale by large mail-order catalog retailers such as Sears, Roebuck & Co.
The advertising campaigns of the day by Schrade and other automatic knife manufacturers focused on marketing to farmers, ranchers, hunters, or outdoors men who needed a compact pocket knife that could be quickly brought into action when needed.
The Act also prohibits possession of such knives on federal or Indian lands or on lands subject to federal jurisdiction.
'''Illegal''' -  ''State Code: Section 609.66 Subdivision 1''
'''Limited''' - Possession in vehicle prohibited; Illegal '''unless''' carried by person with a valid hunting, fishing, or trapping license while actively hunting, fishing or trapping; when moving one's possessions; when being transported for repair; when being used in an authorized historic reenactment; or if the blade of the switchblade is under 1.5&nbsp;inches -  ''Knives Defined As Dangerous Weapons''
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: 790.001''
'''Limited''' - Allowed only if blade is under 2&nbsp;inches -  ''State Code: California Penal Code 12020''
'''Illegal''' -  ''State Code: §134-51''
'''Legal''' - '' Session of 2013 amending K.S.A.
The main spring (red) is under tension but the blade cannot eject because the spring mounted button (light grey, its spring not shown) is resting in a notch in the blade.
Part III of the Criminal Code defines such knives as prohibited weapons (''armes défendues'').
Consumer demand for more of these knives resulted in the importation of large numbers of side-opening and telescoping blade switchblades, primarily from Italy.
While Kefauver's bill failed, a new U.S. Senate bill prohibiting the importation or possession of switchblade knives in interstate commerce was introduced the following year by Democratic Senator Peter F. Mack, Jr. of Illinois in an attempt to reduce gang violence in Chicago and other urban centers in the state.
-  ''State Code: 941.24''
In 1904, in combination with his brothers Louis and William, George Schrade formed the Schrade Cutlery Co. in Walden, and began developing a new series of switchblades, which he patented in 1906–07.
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: Statutes 6-8-104''
In Canada, in 1959 Parliament amended the Criminal Code to include the new-production automatic knives as prohibited weapons banned from importation, sale or possession within that country.
In South Africa, little to no laws exist on the possession, sale, manufacture, and carrying of weapons, other than firearms.
The ''Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959'', which took effect 13 June 1959, specifies that anyone who "manufactures, sells or hires or offers for sale or hire, or exposes or has in his possession for the purpose of sale or hire or lends or gives to any other person" an automatic-opening knife (flick knife) or gravity knife in England, Wales and Scotland is guilty of an offence.
According to decree 175/2003.
When the blade is fully retracted the spring mounted button rests in the forward notch and again pops up and locks the blade in the cocked position.
In Russia, switchblades (rus.
Some U.S. congressmen saw the switchblade controversy as a political opportunity to capitalize on constant negative accounts of the switchblade knife and its connection to violence and youth gangs.
In Belgium, the police and local jurisdictions are also allowed to prohibit the carrying or possession of a wide variety of knives, which are not explicitly banned by law, if the owner cannot establish a legitimate reason (''motif légitime'') for having that knife, particularly in urban areas or at public events.
With the ''Presto'' line, Schrade would largely dominate the automatic knife market in the United States for the next forty years.
In 1957, Senator Estes Kefauver (D) of Tennessee attempted unsuccessfully to pass a law restricting the importation and possession of switchblade knives.
'''Limited''' - Illegal if carried concealed or when intoxicated -  ''State Code: Crimes Section § 97-37-1''
In consequence, knife manufacturers began marketing new and much more affordable automatic knives to the general public.
'''Illegal''' -  ''C.R.S.
Most had flat or sabre-ground clip or spear-point blade profiles and single-sharpened edges.
(1) to civilian or Armed Forces supply or procurement officers and employees of the Federal Government ordering, procuring, or purchasing such knives in connection with the activities of the Federal Government;
85 Weapons - T.13-4003''
The purported offensive nature of the stiletto switchblade combined with reports of knife fights, robberies, and stabbings by youth gangs and other criminal elements in urban areas of the United States generated continuing demands from newspaper editorial rooms and the public for new laws restricting the lawful possession and/or use of switchblade knives.
'''Limited''' - Allowed if the switchblade is a part of a school function.
1243 United States Code''
In Britain, the folding type of switchblade is commonly referred to as a flick knife.
The Act, which classifies a flick knife as an offensive weapon, also prohibits the manufacture, importation, sale, hire or loan of these knives.
The Summary Offences Act 1981 and the Crimes Act 1961 section 202A(4)(a) make it an offence to possess any weapon in a public place without reasonable excuse.
Knives, including switchblades, although regarded as dangerous tools, are not considered weapons under Polish law, except for blades hidden in umbrellas, canes, etc.
'''Legal''' -  HB 1665-FN (2010)''
This exemption may then, in turn, be used to apply to the Australian Customs Service for an import permit.
Some famous present-day automatic knife manufacturers include ''Colonial Knife Co.'', ''Microtech Knives'', ''Benchmade'', ''Severtech'', ''Gerber Legendary Blades'', ''Mikov'', ''Pro-Tech Knives'', ''Dalton'', ''Böker'', ''Spyderco'', ''Kershaw Knives'', and ''Piranha''.
'''Legal''' -  HB 1665-FN (2010)''
Australian customs refer to the automatic knife or switchblade as a flick knife.
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: Crimes and Punishments.
'''Legal''' - Allowed if possessor has a "lawful purpose" -''State Code: Pa. C.S.A.
At the low end of the market, ''Shapleigh Hardware Company'' of St. Louis, Missouri contracted thousands of switchblades under the trademark ''Diamond Edge'' for distribution to dealers across the United States and Canada.
'''Limited''' - Concealed carry allowed if not otherwise prohibited by local ordinance, but prohibited if possessor is intoxicated, exhibits an 'intent to assault another', or exhibits any deadly or dangerous weapon in a rude, angry or threatening manner -  ''State Code: 18-3302''
(ii)'' -- definition ''§ 4-101 (c).
The ability to purchase or carry switchblades or automatic knives continues to be heavily restricted or prohibited throughout much of Europe, with some notable exceptions.
When the blade is fully extended flanges on the blade engage pins on the cocking arm retarding the blade's motion.
'''Legal''' –  Code: IC 35-47-5-2 Sec.2.
Manufacture, importation, trade, use and possession of switchblade knives are prohibited in Spain
With regard to carrying switchblades on the person, some states allow concealed carry of some or all types of switchblade knives, while others may either authorize only open carry.
Schrade pursued his knifemaking interests at both Challenge and at Schrade, where his brother George now managed one of the company's factories.
'''Legal''' -  ''S.B.
In Spain, Admiral D'Estaing is attributed with a type of folding naval dirk that doubled as an eating utensil.
In South Korea, any knife that automatically opens wider than 45 degrees with the push of a button and has a blade that is longer than 5.5 centimeters is subject to registration.
Switchblade knives continued to be sold and collected in those states in which possession remained legal.
'''Legal''' -  ''State Code: 16-23-460''
Because the main spring is constantly acting on the blade and is extended by a far greater amount and is cocked by the whole hand and arm rather than by thumb the force it can exert on the blade is greater than with a double action knife.
Hughes went on to patent his automatic trench knife in 1919, though Hughes appears to have been unsuccessful in persuading a knife manufacturing company to produce his design.
As an anti-violence measure, legislation against switchblade sales or use clearly failed in the United States, as youth street gangs increasingly turned from bats and knives to handguns, MAC-10s, and AK-47s to settle their disputes over territory as well as income from prostitution, extortion, and illicit drug sales.
'''Legal''' No restrictions
'''Legal''' –  ''State Code: IC 35-47-5-2 Sec.2.
In order to register the knife and legally possess it, one must be older than 20, have no previous criminal offences and be healthy both physically and psychologically.
'''Legal''' - as long as possession is not against federal law -  ''Senate Bill 489 (2012), signed by Governor on 10 July 2012 with emergency clause.
One spring post (green, left) is rigidly fixed to the handle (orange), the other spring post (green, right) is fastened to the base of the blade.
:shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction in the case of a first offence to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or to both such imprisonment and fine, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale or to both such imprisonment and fine.
The act was amended in 1986 to also prohibit the importation, sale, manufacture, or possession of ballistic knives in interstate commerce.
An automatic knife or switchblade may be legal or illegal in a given state depending upon the particular blade style, i.e.
"A knife that has a blade that opens automatically by gravity or centrifugal force or by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in or attached to the handle of the knife."
1716 prohibits the mailing or transport of switchblades or automatic knives through the U.S. mails (U.S.
