Since 2000 the armed force department has also maintained the Onyx intelligence gathering system to monitor satellite communications.
In 2009, Switzerland hosted the IIHF World Championship for the 10th time.
The instruments of this system at the federal level, known as popular rights (, , ), include the right to submit a ''federal initiative'' and a ''referendum'', both of which may overturn parliamentary decisions.
Among the high valleys of the Swiss Alps many glaciers are found, totalling an area of .
Furthermore, many sport federations and organisations are located throughout the country, such as the International Basketball Federation in Geneva, the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) in Nyon, the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) and the International Ice Hockey Federation both in Zürich, the International Cycling Union in Aigle, and the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne.
The largest Swiss companies by revenue are Glencore, Gunvor, Nestlé, Novartis, Hoffmann-La Roche, ABB, Mercuria Energy Group and Adecco.
The Swiss refused to fight alongside the French in the name of the Helvetic Republic.
The unemployment rate is 3.2% in 2014.
On 9 February 2014, Swiss voters narrowly approved by 50.3% a ballot initiative launched by the national conservative Swiss People's Party (SVP/UDC) to restrict immigration, and thus reintroducing a quota system on the influx of foreigners.
Vineyards have been cultivated in Switzerland since the Roman era, even though certain traces can be found of a more ancient origin.
It was defeated with about two thirds of the voters against the proposal.
The most popular alcoholic drink in Switzerland is wine.
The latter town hosted the second Winter Olympic Games in 1928 and the fifth edition in 1948.
Her creator, Johanna Spyri (1827–1901), wrote a number of other books on similar themes.
Switzerland, together with Liechtenstein, has been completely surrounded by the EU since Austria's entry in 1995.
It became known internationally as the ''Protestant Rome'', being base for such reformers as Theodore Beza or William Farel.
The land border checkpoints will remain in place only for goods movements, but should not run controls on people, though people entering the country had their passports checked until 29 March 2009 if they originated from a Schengen nation.
The English name ''Switzerland'' is a compound containing ''Switzer'', an obsolete term for the Swiss, which was in use during the 16th to 19th centuries.
The wettest conditions persist in the high Alps and in the Ticino canton which has much sun yet heavy bursts of rain from time to time.
Switzerland was able to remain independent through a combination of military deterrence, concessions to Germany, and good fortune as larger events during the war delayed an invasion.
One of the most important tribal groups in the Swiss region was the Helvetii.
The country was historically about evenly balanced between Catholic and Protestant, with a complex patchwork of majorities over most of the country.
In 2006, Switzerland approved 1 billion francs of supportive investment in the poorer Southern and Central European countries in support of cooperation and positive ties to the EU as a whole.
There are 12 universities in Switzerland, ten of which are maintained at cantonal level and usually offer a range of non-technical subjects.
The climatic, geological and topographical conditions of the alpine region make for a very fragile ecosystem that is particularly sensitive to climate change.
The other international airports are Geneva Airport (13.9 million passengers in 2012), EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg which is located in France, Bern Airport, Lugano Airport, St. Gallen-Altenrhein Airport and Sion Airport.
However, the country does participate in the Schengen Area and the EU's single market through a number of bilateral treaties.
In business and management studies, the University of St. Gallen, (HSG) is ranked 329th in the world according to QS World University Rankings  and the International Institute for Management Development (IMD), was ranked first in open programmes worldwide by the ''Financial Times.''
Population growth from net immigration is quite high, at 0.52% of population in 2004.
Concessions reached a peak after a crucial rail link through Vichy France was severed in 1942, leaving Switzerland completely surrounded by the Axis.
In total, 113 Nobel Prize winners in all fields stand in relation to Switzerland and the Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded nine times to organisations residing in Switzerland.
The fourth official language, Romansh (0.5%), is a Romance language spoken locally in the southeastern trilingual canton of Graubünden, and is designated by Article 4 of the Federal Constitution as a national language along with German, French, and Italian, and in Article 70 as an official language if the authorities communicate with persons who speak Romansh.
The first and second century AD were an age of prosperity for the population living on the Swiss plateau.
Parliament will discuss the plan in June 2011, and there could be a referendum as well.
While the sectors social welfare and finance & tax have been growing from 35% in 1990 to 48.2% in 2010, a significant reduction of expenditures has been occurring in the sectors of agriculture and national defence; from 26.5% in to 12.4% (estimation for the year 2015).
An important clause of the constitution was that it could be re-written completely if this was deemed necessary, thus enabling it to evolve as a whole rather than being modified one amendment at a time.
It introduced the facultative referendum for laws at the federal level.
The Alemanni settled the Swiss plateau in the 5th century and the valleys of the Alps in the 8th century, forming Alemannia.
On 5 June 2005, Swiss voters agreed by a 55% majority to join the Schengen treaty, a result that was regarded by EU commentators as a sign of support by Switzerland, a country that is traditionally perceived as independent and reluctant to enter supranational bodies.
During World War I, Switzerland was home to Vladimir Illych Ulyanov (Vladimir Lenin) and he remained there until 1917.
The area occupied by the Helvetii—the namesakes of the later ''Confoederatio Helvetica''—first became part of Rome's Gallia Belgica province and then of its Germania Superior province, while the eastern portion of modern Switzerland was integrated into the Roman province of Raetia.
Annually, approximately 20,000 persons are trained in recruit centres for a duration from 18 to 21 weeks.
The second was in response to the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914.
During the war, the Swiss Air Force engaged aircraft of both sides, shooting down 11 intruding Luftwaffe planes in May and June 1940, then forcing down other intruders after a change of policy following threats from Germany.
Swiss citizens are subject to three legal jurisdictions: the municipality, canton and federal levels.
Zürich became another stronghold around the same time, with Huldrych Zwingli and Heinrich Bullinger taking the lead there.
Swiss motorcycle racer Thomas Lüthi won the 2005 MotoGP World Championship in the 125cc category.
Economic cooperation and extension of credit to the Third Reich varied according to the perceived likelihood of invasion and the availability of other trading partners.
However, spending on health is particularly high at 11.4% of GDP (2010), on par with Germany and France (11.6%) and other European countries, and notably less than spending in the USA (17.6%).
Apart from the United Nations headquarters, the Swiss Confederation is host to many UN agencies, like the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and about 200 other international organisations, including the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization.
: 1 seat for the Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP/PDC),
There are both public and private schools, including many private international schools.
It also became World Vice-Champion in 2013.
Steadily harassed by the Germanic tribes, in 58 BC the Helvetii decided to abandon the Swiss plateau and migrate to western Gallia, but Julius Caesar's armies pursued and defeated them at the Battle of Bibracte, in today's eastern France, forcing the tribe to move back to its original homeland.
However, from the beginning of the 21st century, the population growth in urban areas is higher than in the countryside.
Within Switzerland there are two enclaves: Büsingen belongs to Germany, Campione d'Italia belongs to Italy.
In June 2007 the Swiss National Council, one house of the Federal Assembly of Switzerland, voted to overturn the ban, however the other house, the Swiss Council of States rejected the change and the ban remains in place.
Rubbish (except dangerous items, batteries etc.)
The most influential newspapers are the German-language Tages-Anzeiger and Neue Zürcher Zeitung NZZ, and the French-language Le Temps, but almost every city has at least one local newspaper.
The two institutes sponsored by the federal government are the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETHZ) in Zürich, founded 1855 and the EPFL in Lausanne, founded 1969 as such, which was formerly an institute associated with the University of Lausanne.
The earliest known cultural tribes of the area were members of the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures, named after the archaeological site of La Tène on the north side of Lake Neuchâtel.
: 2 seats for the Swiss People's Party (SVP/UDC).
In the largest Canton of Graubünden, lying entirely in the Alps, population density falls to 27 /km² (70 /sq mi).
Under General Henri Guisan central command, a general mobilisation of the armed forces was ordered.
The restoration of power to the patriciate was only temporary.
Tennis has become an increasingly popular sport, and Swiss players such as Martina Hingis, Roger Federer, and most recently, Stanislas Wawrinka have won multiple Grand Slams.
It also established federal responsibility for defence, trade, and legal matters.
More recent authors include Charles Ferdinand Ramuz (1878–1947), whose novels describe the lives of peasants and mountain dwellers, set in a harsh environment and Blaise Cendrars (born Frédéric Sauser, 1887–1961).
Nevertheless, domestic purchasing power is one of the best in the world.
Illegal disposal of garbage is not tolerated but usually the enforcement of such laws is limited to violations that involve the unlawful disposal of larger volumes at traffic intersections and public areas.
Traditional sports include Swiss wrestling or "Schwingen".
The freedom of the press and the right to free expression is guaranteed in the federal constitution of Switzerland.
In 1798, the revolutionary French government conquered Switzerland and imposed a new unified constitution.
The mountainous regions themselves are also vulnerable, with a rich range of plants not found at other altitudes, and experience some pressure from visitors and grazing.
In 2012, Switzerland's population slightly exceeded eight million.
Spanning the intersection of Germanic and Romance Europe, Switzerland comprises four main linguistic and cultural regions: German, French, Italian and Romansh.
After obtaining suffrage at the federal level, women quickly rose in political significance, with the first woman on the seven member Federal Council executive being Elisabeth Kopp, who served from 1984–1989, and the first female president being Ruth Dreifuss in 1999.
In many places in Switzerland, household rubbish disposal is charged for.
''Helvetica'' is derived from the ''Helvetii'', a Gaulish tribe living on the Swiss plateau before the Roman era.
Because of its neutrality policy, the Swiss army does not currently take part in armed conflicts in other countries, but is part of some peacekeeping missions around the world.
In 1920, Switzerland joined the League of Nations, which was based in Geneva, on condition that it was exempt from any military requirements.
Swiss independence from the Holy Roman Empire was formally recognized in the Peace of Westphalia in 1648.
Switzerland has more than 1500 lakes, and contains 6% of Europe's stock of fresh water.
The largest, Lake Geneva, is the home of the sailing team Alinghi which was the first European team to win the America's Cup in 2003 and which successfully defended the title in 2007.
The 1848/1999 federal constitution defines a system of direct democracy (sometimes called ''half-direct'' or ''representative direct democracy'' because it is aided by the more commonplace institutions of a representative democracy).
The numerous lakes make Switzerland an attractive place for sailing.
Italians were the largest single group of foreigners, with 15.6% of total foreign population, followed closely by Germans (15.2%), immigrants from Portugal (12.7%), France (5.6%), Serbia (5.3%), Turkey (3.8%), Spain (3.7%), and Austria (2%).
The fastest learners are taught advanced classes to be prepared for further studies and the matura, while students who assimilate a little more slowly receive an education more adapted to their needs.
It has the world's nineteenth largest economy by nominal GDP and the thirty-sixth largest by purchasing power parity.
In the private sector, several companies are implicated in the space industry such as Oerlikon Space or Maxon Motors who provide spacecraft structures.
It had been imposed by a foreign invading army and destroyed centuries of tradition, making Switzerland nothing more than a French satellite state.
The Cantons comprise a total of 2,485 municipalities.
Geneva and the nearby French department of Ain co-host the world's largest laboratory, CERN, dedicated to particle physics research.
The most widespread varieties are the Chasselas (called Fendant in Valais) and Pinot noir.
The Latin name ''Confoederatio Helvetica'' was neologized and introduced gradually after the formation of the federal state in 1848, harking back to the Napoleonic Helvetic Republic, appearing on coins from 1879, inscribed on the Federal Palace in 1902 and after 1948 used in the official seal.
The Confederacy facilitated management of common interests and ensured peace on the important mountain trade routes.
In Switzerland it is mostly expressed in music, dance, poetry, wood carving and embroidery.
However, federal laws and other official acts do not need to be decreed in Romansh.
Some regions (Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden, later known as ''Waldstätten'') were accorded the Imperial immediacy to grant the empire direct control over the mountain passes.
However, the president is a ''primus inter pares'' with no additional powers, and remains the head of a department within the administration.
Conversely, in the French-speaking regions the local dialects have almost disappeared (only 6.3% of the population of Valais, 3.9% of Fribourg, and 3.1% of Jura still spoke dialects at the end of the 20th century), while in the Italian-speaking regions dialects are mostly limited to family settings and casual conversation.
Switzerland has gone from a largely rural country to an urban one in just 70 years.
If adjusted for purchasing power parity, Switzerland ranks 8th in the world in terms of GDP per capita, according to the World Bank and IMF (ranked 15th according to the CIA Worldfactbook).
The classic distribution of 2 CVP/PDC, 2 SPS/PSS, 2 FDP/PRD and 1 SVP/UDC as it stood from 1959 to 2003 was known as the "magic formula".
Growth has since stabilised, and like most of Europe, Switzerland faces an ageing population, albeit with consistent annual growth projected into 2035, due mostly to immigration and a fertility rate close to replacement level.
: 2 seats for the Social Democratic Party (SPS/PSS),
A notable referendum on the subject, launched by an anti-militarist group, was held on 26 November 1989.
In 1803 Napoleon organised a meeting of the leading Swiss politicians from both sides in Paris.
Also, notable are UBS AG, Zurich Financial Services, Credit Suisse, Barry Callebaut, Swiss Re, Tetra Pak, The Swatch Group and Swiss International Air Lines.
Geneva is the birthplace of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and the Geneva Conventions and, since 2006, hosts the United Nations Human Rights Council.
Also a breakthrough was the invention of solid milk chocolate in 1875 by Daniel Peter.
The Empire built another line of defence at the north border (the so-called Donau-Iller-Rhine-Limes), but at the end of the fourth century the increased Germanic pressure forced the Romans to abandon the linear defence concept, and the Swiss plateau was finally open to the settlement of Germanic tribes.
Switzerland is a member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
Similarly, the federal ''constitutional initiative'' allows citizens to put a constitutional amendment to a national vote, if 100,000 voters sign the proposed amendment within 18 months.
Switzerland voted against membership in the European Economic Area in a referendum in December 1992 and has since maintained and developed its relationships with the European Union (EU) and European countries through bilateral agreements.
In about 260 AD, the fall of the Agri Decumates territory north of the Rhine transformed today's Switzerland into a frontier land of the Empire.
The SNA supplies almost all Swiss media and a couple dozen foreign media services with its news.
The structure of the Swiss militia system stipulates that the soldiers keep their Army issued equipment, including all personal weapons, at home.
Some news commentators claim that this proposal ''de facto'' contradicts the bilateral agreements on the free movement of persons from these respective countries.
An extensive cable network also allows most Swiss to access the programmes from neighbouring countries.
Following the end of the Cold War there have been a number of attempts to curb military activity or even abolish the armed forces altogether.
Zürich and Geneva have each been ranked among the top cities in the world in terms of quality of life, with the former ranked second globally, according to Mercer.
Some traditionally Protestant cantons and cities nowadays have a slight Catholic majority, not because they were growing in members, quite the contrary, but only because since about 1970 a steadily growing minority became not affiliated with any church or other religious body (21.4% in Switzerland, 2012) especially in traditionally Protestant regions, such as Basel-City (42%), canton of Neuchâtel (38%), canton of Geneva (35%), canton of Vaud (26%), or Zürich city (city: >25%; canton: 23%).
An application for membership in the European Union was sent in May 1992, but not advanced since the EEA was rejected in December 1992 when Switzerland was the only country to launch a referendum on the EEA.
Swiss professional wrestler Claudio Castagnoli is currently signed with WWE, and is a former United States champion.
: 2 seats for the Free Democratic Party (FDP/PRD),
The war lasted for less than a month, causing fewer than 100 casualties, most of which were through friendly fire.
In 2012, life expectancy at birth was 80.4 years for men and 84.7 years for women — the highest in the world.
The government has established an Integration Office under the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Economic Affairs.
Constitutional amendments, whether introduced by initiative or in parliament, must be accepted by a double majority of the national popular vote and the cantonal popular votes.
Product market liberalisation is lagging behind many EU countries according to the OECD.
Switzerland is home to several large multinational corporations.
The fierce French suppression of the Nidwalden Revolt in September 1798 was an example of the oppressive presence of the French Army and the local population's resistance to the occupation.
The largest exported goods are chemicals (34% of exported goods), machines/electronics (20.9%), and precision instruments/watches (16.9%).
The first one was held on the occasion of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71.
The main sources of income for the federal government are the value-added tax (33%) and the direct federal tax (29%) and the main expenditure is located in the areas of social welfare and finance & tax.
For example, the International Olympic Committee (IOC), IOC's Olympic Museum and the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) are located in Lausanne.
The expenditures of the Swiss Confederation have been growing from 7% of GDP in 1960 to 9.7% in 1990 and to 10.7% in 2010.
Due to its linguistic diversity, Switzerland is known by a variety of native names: ''Schweiz''  (German); ''Suisse''  (French); ''Svizzera''  (Italian); and ''Svizra''  or  (Romansh).
Switzerland is one of the most developed countries in the world, with the highest nominal wealth per adult and the eighth-highest per capita gross domestic product according to the IMF.
A 1980 initiative calling for the complete separation of church and state was rejected by 78.9% of the voters.
The name originates as an exonym, applied ''pars pro toto'' to the troops of the Confederacy.
With an ageing population and new healthcare technologies, health spending will likely continue to rise.
The Alps are a high mountain range running across the central-south of the country, comprising about 60% of the country's total area.
Extending across the north and south side of the Alps in west-central Europe, Switzerland encompasses a great diversity of landscapes and climates on a limited area of .
Also Italian and Romansh-speaking authors contributed but in more modest way given their small number.
Giving credit to those who favoured the power of the cantons (the Sonderbund Kantone), the national assembly was divided between an upper house (the Council of States, two representatives per canton) and a lower house (the National Council, with representatives elected from across the country).
About two thirds of the young Swiss are found suited for service; for those found unsuited, various forms of alternative service exist.
This need soon proved itself when the rise in population and the Industrial Revolution that followed led to calls to modify the constitution accordingly.
It is among the oldest constitutions in the world.
In addition to being the birthplace of the Red Cross, Switzerland is home to numerous international organisations, including the second largest UN office.
Four fifths of persons with an immigration background were themselves immigrants (first generation foreigners and native-born and naturalised Swiss citizens), whereas one fifth were born in Switzerland (second generation foreigners and native-born and naturalised Swiss citizens).
The foreign citizen population was 21.8% in 2004, about the same as in Australia.
Switzerland is a landlocked country geographically divided between the Alps, the Swiss Plateau and the Jura, spanning an area of .
Notable inventions include lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), the scanning tunnelling microscope (Nobel prize) and Velcro.
Swiss people from all strata of society, whether Catholic or Protestant, from the liberal or conservative current, realised that the cantons would profit more if their economic and religious interests were merged.
This urban sprawl does not only affect the plateau but also the Jura and the Alpine foothills and there are growing concerns about land use.
GDP per hour worked is the world's 16th highest, at 49.46 international dollars in 2012.
The Federal Constitution adopted in 1848 is the legal foundation of the modern federal state.
Publicly organised collection by volunteers and economical railway transport logistics started as early as 1865 under the leadership of the notable industrialist Hans Caspar Escher (Escher Wyss AG) when the first modern Swiss paper manufacturing plant was built in Biberist.
La Tène culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age from around 450 BC, possibly under some influence from the Greek and Etruscan civilisations.
The service sector – especially banking and insurance, tourism, and international organisations – is another important industry for Switzerland.
The country is situated in Western-Central Europe, and is bordered by Italy to the south, France to the west, Germany to the north, and Austria and Liechtenstein to the east.
A system of single weights and measures was introduced and in 1850 the Swiss franc became the Swiss single currency.
These include terms from Switzerland's surrounding language cultures (German ''Billette'' from French), from similar term in another language (Italian ''azione'' used not only as ''act'' but also as ''discount'' from German ''Aktion'').
Learning one of the other national languages at school is compulsory for all Swiss pupils, so many Swiss are supposed to be at least bilingual, especially those belonging to linguistic minority groups.
In the 2000s, domestic and international institutions expressed concern about what was perceived as an increase in xenophobia, particularly in some political campaigns.
From 1990, a steady increase can be observed, reflecting the high costs of the services provided.
Most of these (64%) were from European Union or EFTA countries.
The result was the Act of Mediation which largely restored Swiss autonomy and introduced a Confederation of 19 cantons.
The more mountainous southern half of the country is far more sparsely populated than the northern half.
In 1815 the Congress of Vienna fully re-established Swiss independence and the European powers agreed to permanently recognise Swiss neutrality.
Some organisations and political parties find this practice controversial but mainstream Swiss opinion is in favour of the system.
A similar referendum, called for before, but held shortly after the 11 September attacks in the US, was defeated by over 78% of voters.
Folk art is kept alive in organisations all over the country.
Nevertheless, it pursues an active foreign policy and is frequently involved in peace-building processes around the world.
Switzerland also has one of the world's largest account balances as a percentage of GDP.
To minimise the negative consequences of Switzerland's isolation from the rest of Europe, Bern and Brussels signed seven bilateral agreements to further liberalise trade ties.
The Merlot is the main variety produced in Ticino.
The Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) is the office responsible for all questions relating to energy supply and energy use within the Federal Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications (DETEC).
The Swiss Constitution of 1848, under the recent impression of the clashes of Catholic vs. Protestant cantons that culminated in the Sonderbundskrieg, consciously defines a consociational state, allowing the peaceful co-existence of Catholics and Protestants.
The majority of the Swiss population live in the Swiss Plateau.
Chocolate has been made in Switzerland since the 18th century but it gained its reputation at the end of the 19th century with the invention of modern techniques such as conching and tempering which enabled its production on a high quality level.
Central Switzerland, the Valais, the Ticino, Appenzell Innerrhodes, the Jura, and Fribourg are traditionally Catholic.
diglossic usage of a language).
The precursors of Switzerland established a protective alliance at the end of the 13th century (1291), forming a loose confederation of states which persisted for centuries.
While the Rhône flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the French Camargue region and the Rhine flows into the North Sea at Rotterdam in the Netherlands, about 1000&nbsp;km apart, both springs are only about 22&nbsp;km apart from each other in the Swiss Alps.
During the Early Modern period of Swiss history, the growing authoritarianism of the patriciate families combined with a financial crisis in the wake of the Thirty Years' War led to the Swiss peasant war of 1653.
Between two thirds and three quarters of the population live in urban areas.
The headquarters of the international football's and ice hockey's governing bodies, the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) and International Ice Hockey Federation(IIHF), are located in Zürich.
Traditionally, the first foreign language in school was always one of the other national languages, although recently (2000) English was introduced first in a few cantons.
The Swiss victory in the Swabian War against the Swabian League of Emperor Maximilian I in 1499 amounted to ''de facto'' independence within the Holy Roman Empire.
For much of the 20th century, Switzerland was the wealthiest country in Europe by a considerable margin (by GDP – per capita).
At , Monte Rosa is the highest, although the Matterhorn () is often regarded as the most famous.
The linguistically isolated Romansh culture in Graubünden in eastern Switzerland constitutes an exception, it survives only in the upper valleys of the Rhine and the Inn and strives to maintain its rare linguistic tradition.
More than two-fifths (42.6%) of the permanent resident population indicated speaking more than one language regularly.
With the extinction of its male line in 1263 the Kyburg dynasty fell in AD 1264; then the Habsburgs under King Rudolph I (Holy Roman Emperor in 1273) laid claim to the Kyburg lands and annexed them extending their territory to the eastern Swiss plateau.
In reply to one critical report, the Federal Council noted that "racism unfortunately is present in Switzerland", but stated that the high proportion of foreign citizens in the country, as well as the generally unproblematic integration of foreigners", underlined Switzerland's openness.
While the Alps occupy the greater part of the territory, the Swiss population of approximately eight million people is concentrated mostly on the plateau, where the largest cities are to be found: among them are the two global and economic centres Zürich and Geneva.
Large alpine areas such as Graubünden remain drier than pre-alpine areas and as in the main valley of the Valais wine grapes are grown there.
