This building was completed in 1816 and first served as a hospital.
Cycling trips have increased by 113% across Sydney's inner-city since March 2010, with about 2,000 bikes passing through top peak-hour intersections on an average weekday.
7.8% of Sydney residents are attending primary school and 6.4% are enrolled in secondary school.
The percentage of trips taken by car has increased from 13% in 1947 to 50% in 1960 and to 70% in 1971.
Strategies have been implemented to reduce private vehicle pollution by encouraging mass and public transit, initiating the development of high density housing and introducing a fleet of 10 new Nissan LEAF electric cars, the largest order of the pollution-free vehicle in Australia.
11.8% of mortgagees in 2011 had monthly loan repayments of less than $1,000 and 82.9% had monthly repayments of $1,000 or more.
Sydney's gross regional product was $337.45 billion in 2013 with the City of Sydney responsible for $95.18 billion of this total.
Taronga Zoo is situated in Mosman.
The earliest Europeans to visit the area noted that the indigenous people were conducting activities such as camping and fishing, using trees for bark and food, collecting shells, and cooking fish.
Structured finance was pioneered in Sydney and the city is a leading hub for asset management firms.
Its steel arch was designed by John Jacob Crew Bradfield and completed in 1932.
John Verge's Elizabeth Bay House and St Philip's Church of 1856 were built in Gothic Revival style along with Edward Blore's Government House of 1845.
The Star is the city's only casino and is situated around Darling Harbour.
Coogee and Bondi, both known for tourism and recreation, are also found in the Eastern Suburbs.
Maps from this time show no prison buildings; the punishment for convicts was transportation rather than incarceration, but serious offences were penalised by flogging and hanging.
The Global Economic Power Index ranks Sydney number eleven in the world.
Sydney experiences an urban heat island effect.
The outer suburbs include Centennial Park and Moore Park in the east, Sydney Park and Royal National Park in the south, Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park in the north, and the Western Sydney Parklands in the west.
Most of Sydney's water storages can be found on tributaries of the Nepean River.
On average, the tourism industry contributes $36 million to the city's economy per day.
Sydney has an advanced market economy with strengths in finance, manufacturing and tourism.
The One Central Park development, completed in 2013, is an example of this implementation and design.
Sydney has also become a leader in the development of green office buildings and enforcing the requirement of all building proposals to be energy-efficient.
Captain Arthur Phillip was charged with establishing the new colony.
70 beaches can be found along its coastline with Bondi Beach being one of the most famous.
Foreign countries of birth with the greatest representation are England, China, India, New Zealand, and Vietnam.
Sydney's earliest migrants brought with them a passion for sport but were restricted by the lack of facilities and equipment.
Gold was discovered in the colony in 1851 and with it came thousands of people seeking to make money.
Regulations limit new buildings to a height of  due to the proximity of Sydney Airport.
The sand that was to become this sandstone was washed from Broken Hill and laid down about 200 million years ago.
2UE was founded in 1925 and under the ownership of Fairfax Media is the oldest station still broadcasting.
However, numerous Aboriginal stone tools found in Western Sydney's gravel sediments were dated from 45,000 to 50,000 years BP, which would indicate that there was human settlement in Sydney earlier than thought.
It transports water  from the Nepean, Cataract, and Cordeaux rivers and continues to service about 15% of Sydney's total water needs.
Sydney is also a gateway to Australia for many international visitors.
Despite this increase, the Australian Bureau of Statistics predicts that Melbourne will replace Sydney as Australia's most populous city by 2053.
Deep river valleys known as rias were carved during the Triassic period in the Hawkesbury sandstone of the coastal region where Sydney now lies.
To compensate, workers receive the seventh highest wage levels of any city in the world.
The El Niño–Southern Oscillation plays an important role in determining Sydney's weather patterns: drought and bushfire on the one hand, and storms and flooding on the other, associated with the opposite phases of the oscillation.
Transport developments in the north-west and east of the city have been designed to encourage the use of Sydney's expanding public transportation system.
The Government has announced plans to sell nearly 300 historic public housing properties in the harbourside neighbourhoods of Millers Point, Gloucester Street, and The Rocks.
Established in 1842, the City of Sydney is one such local government area and includes the central business district and some adjoining inner suburbs.
More than 50,000 international students study at the city's universities and a further 50,000 study at its vocational and English language schools.
Macquarie did make the most of less than ideal circumstances.
28.3% identify themselves as Catholic, whilst 17.6% practice no religion, 16.1% are Anglican, 4.7% are Muslim, 4.2% are Eastern Orthodox, 4.1% are Buddhist, 2.6% are Hindu, and 0.9% are Jewish.
There were 480,000 visitors and 27,500 people staying overnight each day in 2012.
Under the reign of Queen Victoria federation of the six colonies occurred on 1 January 1901.
North Sydney is dominated by advertising, marketing businesses and associated trades, with many large corporations holding office in the region.
There are 15 contiguous regions around Sydney: the CBD, Canterbury-Bankstown, the Eastern Suburbs, the Forest District, Greater Western Sydney, the Hills District, the Inner West, Macarthur, the Northern Beaches, the Northern Suburbs, the North Shore, Southern Sydney, St George, Sutherland Shire, and Western Sydney.
The city has been ranked eleventh in the world for economic opportunity.
Sydney once had one of the largest tram networks in the world.
Its competitor is the News Corporation tabloid ''The Daily Telegraph'' which has been in print since 1879.
The area now known as The Domain was set aside by Governor Arthur Phillip in 1788 as his private reserve.
Chinatown, Darling Harbour, and Kings Cross are important locations for culture, tourism, and recreation.
Government House was completed in 1845 and has served as the home of 25 Governors and 5 Governors-General.
From the 1960s onwards Parramatta gained recognition as the city's second central business district and finance and tourism became major industries and sources of employment.
Since 1995, there have been significant developments in the analysis of air pollution in the Sydney metropolitan region.
Sydney is divided into local government areas (also known as councils or shires) which are comparable in nature to London's boroughs.
Yachting has been popular amongst wealthier residents since the 1840s and the Royal Sydney Yacht Squadron was founded in 1862.
It has been announced that a new facility named Western Sydney Airport will be constructed at Badgerys Creek from 2016 at a cost of $2.5 billion.
A strong rivalry between Sydney and Melbourne that began in the 1850s still exists to this day.
The first organised sports were boxing, wrestling, and horse racing from 1810 in Hyde Park.
The colonial settlements elsewhere on the continent eventually seceded from New South Wales and formed their own governments.
Vivid Sydney is an annual outdoor exhibition of art installations, light projections, and music.
The municipal council of Sydney was incorporated in 1842 and became Australia's first city.
It has been forecasted that the population will grow to between 8 and 8.5 million by 2061.
Since its inception in 1945 it has been recognised as one of the most difficult yacht races in the world.
With the lifting of height restrictions in the 1960s there came a surge of high-rise construction.
With a rate of 26.3%, Sydney has the highest utilisation of public transport for travel to work of any Australian capital city.
Successful films shot in Sydney since then include ''The Matrix'', ''Mission: Impossible II'', ''Moulin Rouge!
The City of Sydney is led by an elected Council and Lord Mayor who has in the past been treated as a representative of the entire city.
Sydney FC and the Western Sydney Wanderers compete in the A-League soccer tournament and Sydney frequently hosts matches for the Australian national team, the Socceroos.
Officers and convicts alike faced starvation as supplies ran low and little could be cultivated from the land.
''The Sydney Morning Herald'' is Australia's oldest newspaper still in print.
There continues to be examples of rock art and engravings located in the protected Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park.
It is responsible for fostering development in the local area, providing local services (waste collection and recycling, libraries, parks, sporting facilities), representing and promoting the interests of residents, supporting organisations that target the local community, and attracting and providing infrastructure for commerce, tourism, and industry.
The University of Sydney was established in 1850 and remains the oldest university in Australia while the other city's universities were all founded after World War II.
The Society exists "for the encouragement of studies and investigations in science, art, literature, and philosophy".
It also includes the high capacity Stadium Australia used for rugby, soccer, and Australian rules football.
The 2000 Summer Olympics were held in Sydney and became known as the "best Olympic Games ever" by the President of the International Olympic Committee.
The Gardens are not just a place for exploration and relaxation, but also for scientific research with herbarium collections, a library, and laboratories.
The countries of origin in descending order were China, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United States, South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Germany, Hong Kong, and India.
Protectionist policies after federation allowed for the creation of a manufacturing industry which became the city's largest employer by the 1920s.
A total of 39,000 tonnes of structural steel span the  between Milsons Point and Dawes Point.
It occasionally features Australian theatre icons such as David Williamson, Hugo Weaving, and Geoffrey Rush.
Construction of the Sydney Harbour Bridge served to alleviate some of the effects of the economic downturn by employing 1,400 men between 1924 and 1932.
Tasmania separated in 1825, Victoria did so in 1850, and Queensland followed in 1859.
Royal Randwick Racecourse opened in 1833 and holds several major cups throughout the year.
The Upper North Shore usually refers to the suburbs between Chatswood and .
Its literal meaning is "from this place".
In 2009, dry conditions brought a severe dust storm towards eastern Australia.
Most foreign companies in Sydney maintain significant sales and service functions but comparably less production, research, and development capabilities.
Sydney's first tower was Culwulla Chambers on the corner of King Street and Castlereagh Street which topped out at .
The City of Sydney is responsible for 33 of these suburbs, all of which are located close to the central business district.
The Sydney Observatory building was constructed in 1859 and used for astronomy and meteorology research until 1982 before being converted into a museum.
Sydney Theatre Company maintains a roster of local, classical, and international plays.
The highest minimum temperature recorded at Observatory Hill is , in February 2011 while the lowest maximum temperature is , recorded in July 1868.
He spent a short time collecting food and conducting scientific observations before continuing further north along the east coast of Australia and claiming the new land he had discovered for Britain.
Having arrived on the Royal Yacht Britannia through Sydney Heads, Her Majesty came ashore at Farm Cove.
The first British settlers arrived in 1788 to found Sydney as a penal colony, the first European settlement in Australia.
Governor Lachlan Macquarie made an effort to found a culture of formal religion throughout the early settlement and ordered the construction of churches such as St Matthew's, St Luke's, St James's, and St Andrew's.
The suburb of Cronulla in southern Sydney is close to Royal National Park, Australia's oldest national park.
Nine's offices are based in Willoughby, Ten and Seven are based in Pyrmont, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation is located in Ultimo, and the Special Broadcasting Service is based in Artarmon.
Westmead Hospital in 1978 was the last major facility to open.
Prior to the arrival of the British there were 4,000 to 8,000 native people in Sydney from as many as 29 different clans.
The Parramatta River is mostly industrial and drains a large area of Sydney's western suburbs into Port Jackson.
A catchment called the Tank Stream sourced water from what is now the central business district but was little more than an open sewer by the end of the 1700s.
The Constitution Act of 1855 gave New South Wales a bicameral government.
Since its completion in 1973 the city's Opera House has become a World Heritage Site and one of the world's most renowned pieces of Modern design.
The wider part of the project, which involves a second underground harbour crossing, will be commercially known as the Sydney Metro.
New private banks opened throughout the 1800s but the financial system was unstable.
New structures became more restrained with far less ornamentation than was common before the 1930s.
Located on Australia's east coast, the metropolis surrounds the world's largest natural harbour, and sprawls towards the Blue Mountains to the west.
Horse racing remains popular to this day and events such as the Golden Slipper Stakes attract widespread attention.
The North Shore includes the commercial centres of North Sydney and Chatswood.
Central and Circular Quay are transport hubs with ferry, rail, and bus interchanges.
Romanesque designs gained favour amongst Sydney's architects from the early 1890s.
The city now has a world heritage listed building, several national heritage listed buildings, and dozens of Commonwealth heritage listed buildings as evidence of the survival of Macquarie's ideals.
The North Shore has one of the highest property prices in Sydney with the recent property price inflation sending the average property prices in suburbs such as Roseville, Lindfield, Killara and Gordon over 2 million dollars.
The motor vehicle, more than any other factor, has determined the pattern of Sydney's urban development since World War II.
The Universities of New South Wales and Sydney are similarly ranked in the top 50 in the world, the University of Technology Sydney is ranked 193, while Macquarie University ranks 237, and the Western Sydney University below 500.
The population of Sydney at the time of the  was 4.39 million, 1.5 million of which were born overseas, representing many different nationalities and making Sydney one of the most multicultural cities in the world.
At the 2011 census, 2.4% of Sydney residents are enrolled in a TAFE course.
There are 935 public preschool, primary, and secondary schools in Sydney that are administered by the New South Wales Department of Education.
The mass migration following World War II has seen further ethnic groups establish.
Six sailors died and 71 vessels of the fleet of 115 failed to finish in the 1998 edition.
The largest industries by employment across Sydney are Health Care and Social Assistance with 10.9%, Retail with 9.8%, Professional Services with 9.6%, Manufacturing with 8.5%, Education and Training with 7.6%, Construction with 7.1%, and Financial and Insurance Services with 6.6%.
Green Square is a former industrial area of Waterloo which is undergoing urban renewal worth $8 billion.
Sydney Olympic Park accommodates athletics, aquatics, tennis, hockey, archery, baseball, cycling, equestrian, and rowing facilities.
Following the end of the war the city continued to expand.
Popular nightspots are found at Kings Cross, Oxford Street, Circular Quay, and The Rocks.
Between 1970 and 1985 there was a loss of 180,000 manufacturing jobs.
From 1828 all of the common laws in force in England were to be applied in New South Wales wherever it was appropriate.
This makes certain parts of the city more vulnerable to extreme heat.
St Vincent's Hospital was founded in 1857, followed by Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children in 1880, the Prince Henry Hospital in 1881, the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in 1882, the Royal North Shore Hospital in 1885, the St George Hospital in 1894, and the Nepean Hospital in 1895.
Macquarie undertook an extensive building programme of some 265 separate works.
Kingsford-Smith Airport is one of the world's oldest continually operating airports.
Between 1788 and 1792 about 4,300 convicts were landed at Sydney.
The Great Depression of the 1930s had a severe effect on Sydney's economy, as it did with most cities throughout the industrial world.
It is estimated that half of the native people in Sydney died during the smallpox epidemic of 1789.
In total, nearly 225 million boardings were recorded across the bus network  NightRide is a nightly bus service that operate between midnight and 5am, also replacing trains for most of this period.
Vaucluse in the Eastern Suburbs is amongst Australia's most affluent addresses.
The suburb of Paddington is a well known suburb for its streets of restored terrace houses, Victoria Barracks, and shopping including the weekly Oxford Street markets.
Most of these suburbs measure less than  in area.
Mortimer Lewis designed the Australian Museum in 1857.
Far from mass unemployment, there were now labour shortages and women becoming active in male roles.
Patronage declined from 37 million passengers in 1945 to 11 million in 1963 but has recovered somewhat in recent years.
For much of the 1930s up to one in three breadwinners was unemployed.
84.9% of Sydney households own a motor vehicle and 46.5% own two or more.
One-tenth of the colony attended a New South Wales versus New Zealand rugby match in 1907.
Further to the south west is the region of Macarthur and the city of Campbelltown, a significant population centre until the 1990s considered a region separate to Sydney proper.
Erosion by coastal streams has created a landscape of deep gorges and remnant plateaus.
Widespread criticism over Sydney's reliance on sprawling road networks, as well as the motor vehicle, have stemmed largely from proponents of mass public transport and high density housing.
Public housing in Sydney is managed by the Government of New South Wales.
The Nepean River wraps around the western edge of the city and becomes the Hawkesbury River before reaching Broken Bay.
The 28 local government areas making up Sydney according to the New South Wales Division of Local Government are:
The southern parts of the city are drained by the Georges River and the Cooks River into Botany Bay.
It is the oldest public parkland in Australia and measures  in area.
There was a 30% increase in the number of apartments in Sydney between 1996 and 2006.
The Sydney Desalination Plant came into operation in 2010.
Sydney's first radio stations commenced broadcasting in the 1920s.
The Australian Securities Exchange began operating in 1987 and with a market capitalisation of $1.6 trillion is now one of the ten largest exchanges in the world.
Parts of the facility have been repurposed for use as Parliament House but the hospital itself still operates to this day.
The live medium lost much of its popularity to cinema during the Great Depression before experiencing a revival after World War II.
Barnet also oversaw the 1883 reconstruction of Greenway's Macquarie Lighthouse.
Prior to 1906, Central Railway was located further west of the current Central Railway Station in the vicinity of Redfern.
Captain Arthur Phillip, in one of his first reports back to Britain, described Sydney Cove as being "without exception the finest harbour in the world".
Observers have noted Sydney's focus on the domestic market and high-tech manufacturing as reasons for its resilience against the high Australian dollar of the early 2010s.
Haberfield is known as "The Federation Suburb" due to the extensive number of Federation homes.
It established three new courts, including the Supreme Court, and dictated that English law was to be followed.
There can be up to 350,000 cars using Sydney's roads simultaneously during peak hour, leading to significant traffic congestion.
These and other religious institutions have contributed to the education and health of Sydney's residents over time.
Macquarie gave a charter in 1817 to form the first bank in Australia, the Bank of New South Wales.
The Sydney Opera House is the home of Opera Australia and Sydney Symphony.
The growth of low density housing in the city's outer suburbs has made car ownership necessary for hundreds of thousands of households.
The city is still the largest manufacturing centre in Australia.
The City of Sydney became the first council in Australia to achieve formal certification as carbon-neutral in 2008.
Sydney has public, denominational, and independent schools.
Sydney is home to nine of the sixteen teams in the National Rugby League competition: Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs, Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks, Manly Sea Eagles, Penrith Panthers, Parramatta Eels, South Sydney Rabbitohs, St George Illawarra Dragons, Sydney Roosters, and Wests Tigers.
His first task was to restore order after the Rum Rebellion of 1808 against the previous Governor.
The median weekly income for the same period was $619 for individuals, $2,302 for families without children, and $2,537 for families with children.
* Canterbury-Bankstown
Sydney's largest ancestry groups are English, Australian, Irish, Chinese, and Scottish.
The storm produced massive hailstones of at least  in diameter.
With the proclamation of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901 the status of local governments across Sydney was formalised and they became separate institutions from the state of New South Wales.
Prominent theatres in the city today include State Theatre, Theatre Royal, Sydney Theatre, The Wharf Theatre, and Capitol Theatre.
The population of Sydney is now highly educated.
The Northern Beaches area includes Manly one of Sydney's most popular holiday destinations for much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
It was  the second largest in the British Empire, after London, with routes covering .
The median age of Sydney residents is 36 and 12.9% of people are 65 or older.
Cruise ship terminals are located at Sydney Cove and White Bay.
The terrace style housing has largely been retained and Darlinghurst has undergone significant gentrification since the 1980s.
The first hospital in the new colony was a collection of tents at The Rocks.
The city is rarely affected by cyclones, although remnants of ex-cyclones do affect the city.
Upon his appointment, Governor Lachlan Macquarie set ambitious targets for the architectural design of new construction projects.
The flat areas of the south were the first to be developed as the city grew.
From the late 1850s there was a shift towards Classical architecture.
The Sydney Kings compete in the National Basketball League.
Sydney's iconic Opera House was opened in 1973 by Her Majesty.
The Professional Services and Financial and Insurance Services industries account for 26.9% of employment within the City of Sydney.
Port Botany has surpassed Port Jackson as the city's major shipping port.
