Plath's poem "The jailor" was included in the 1970 anthology ''Sisterhood is Powerful: An Anthology of Writings From The Women's Liberation Movement.''
Otto Plath died on November 5, 1940, a week and a half after Plath's eighth birthday, of complications following the amputation of a foot due to untreated diabetes.
Born in Boston, she studied at Smith College and Newnham College at the University of Cambridge before receiving acclaim as a poet and writer.
Plath was born on October 27, 1932, in Boston's Jamaica Plain neighborhood.
She was furious at not being at a meeting the editor had arranged with Welsh poet Dylan Thomas—a writer whom she loved, said one of her boyfriends, "more than life itself."
Their daughter Frieda was born on April 1, 1960 and in October, Plath published her first collection of poetry, ''The Colossus''.
In addition to writing, she showed early promise as an artist, winning an award for her paintings from The Scholastic Art & Writing Awards in 1947.
In July 1962, Plath discovered Hughes had been having an affair with Assia Wevill and in September the couple separated.
Such is Plath's control that the book possesses a singularity and certainty which should make it as celebrated as ''The Colossus'' or ''Ariel''.
Sylvia Plath's early poems exhibit what became her typical imagery, using personal and nature-based depictions featuring, for example, the moon, blood, hospitals, fetuses, and skulls.
Kukil finished her editing in December 1999, and in 2000 Anchor Books published ''The Unabridged Journals of Sylvia Plath''.
What is more, 'Daddy' was merely the first jet of flame from a literary dragon who in the last months of her life breathed a burning river of bile across the literary landscape.
She hung around the White Horse Tavern and the Chelsea Hotel for two days, hoping to meet Thomas, but he was already on his way home.
Ferretter also claims that the rare books department at Smith College in Massachusetts has a secret copy of the work under seal.
That morning, she asked her downstairs neighbor, a Mr.&nbsp;Thomas, what time he would be leaving.
After each defacement, Hughes had the damaged stone removed, sometimes leaving the site unmarked during repair.
Their daughter Frieda spoke for the first time about her mother and father.
''Time'' and ''Life'' both reviewed the slim volume of ''Ariel'' in the wake of her death.
In ''The Guardian'' on April 20, 1989, Hughes wrote the article "The Place Where Sylvia Plath Should Rest in Peace": "In the years soon after Plath's death, when scholars approached me, I tried to take their apparently serious concern for the truth about Sylvia Plath seriously.
At age 11, Plath began keeping a journal.
Just after graduating from high school, she had her first national publication in the ''Christian Science Monitor.''
On April 27, 1935, Plath's brother Warren was born, and in 1936 the family moved from 24 Prince Street in Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, to 92 Johnson Avenue, Winthrop, Massachusetts.
That manuscript disappeared somewhere around 1970."
We talked death with burned-up intensity, both of us drawn to it like moths to an electric lightbulb, sucking on it.
Robert Lowell's poetry may have played a part in this shift as she cited Lowell's 1959 book ''Life Studies'' as a significant influence, in an interview just before her death.
Plath's semi-autobiographical novel, which her mother wished to block, was published in 1963 and in the US in 1971.
Before her death, Plath tried several times to take her own life.
She described the current depressive episode she was experiencing; it had been taking place for six or seven months.
Following electroconvulsive therapy for depression, Plath made her first medically documented suicide attempt in late August 1953 by crawling under her house and taking her mother's sleeping pills.
Knowing she was at risk alone with two young children, he says he visited her daily and made strenuous efforts to have her admitted to a hospital; when that failed, he arranged for a live-in nurse.
He presumes in his book that the draft may lie unfound in a university archive.
Plath was pleased by this fact and considered it a good omen.
All the poems in ''The Colossus'' had already been printed in major US and British journals and she had a contract with ''The New Yorker''.
'Daddy' was its title; its subject was her morbid love-hatred of her father; its style was as brutal as a truncheon.
Biographers variously attribute the source of the quote to the 16th-century Buddhist novel ''Journey to the West'' written by Wu Cheng'en or to the Hindu text, the Bhagavad Gita.
''The Colossus'' received largely positive UK reviews, highlighting Plath's voice as new and strong, individual and American in tone.
While for most of the time she had been able to continue working, her depression had worsened and become severe, "marked by constant agitation, suicidal thoughts and inability to cope with daily life."
As soon as it was published critics began to see the collection as the charting of Plath's increasing desperation or death wish.
Wevill's death led to claims that Hughes had been abusive to both Plath and Wevill.
She was 30&nbsp;years old.
In June 1962, Plath drove her car off the side of the road, into a river.
She obtained a Fulbright scholarship to study at Newnham College, one of the three women-only colleges of Cambridge University in England, where she continued actively writing poetry and publishing her work in the student newspaper ''Varsity''.
She openly discussed her depression with Lowell and her suicide attempts with Sexton, who led her to write from a more female perspective.
Theories about what happened to the unfinished manuscript are repeatedly brought up in the novel ''Sylvia Plath's Fiction: A Critical Study'' by Luke Ferretter.
William Butler Yeats once lived in the house, which bears an English Heritage blue plaque for the Irish poet.
In February 1961, Plath's second pregnancy ended in miscarriage; several of her poems, including "Parliament Hill Fields", address this event.
Plath wrote poetry from the age of eight, her first poem appearing in the ''Boston Traveller''.
Still the subject of speculation and opprobrium, Hughes published ''Birthday Letters'' in 1998, his own collection of 88 poems about his relationship with Plath.
In the foreword of the 1982 version, he writes, "I destroyed the last of her journals because I did not want her children to have to read it (in those days I regarded forgetfulness as an essential part of survival)."
While visiting Norton, Plath broke her leg skiing, an incident that was fictionalized in the novel.
Her dramatic death became her most famous aspect, and remains so.
In 1982, she won a posthumous Pulitzer Prize for ''The Collected Poems''.
In 1963, after Plath's ''The Bell Jar'' was published, she began working on another literary work titled ''Double Exposure.''
Horder prescribed her an antidepressant, a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, a few days before her suicide.
He lost another journal and an unfinished novel and instructed that a collection of Plath's papers and journals should not be released until 2013.
She found it difficult to both teach and have enough time and energy to write and in the middle of 1958, the couple moved to Boston.
They were mostly imitation exercises of poets she admired such as Dylan Thomas, W. B. Yeats and Marianne Moore.
Hughes was devastated; they had been separated six months.
The Fantasia about Sylvia Plath is more needed than the facts.
In his 1971 book on suicide, friend and critic Al Alvarez claimed that Plath's suicide was an unanswered cry for help.
Her father was buried in Winthrop Cemetery, Massachusetts.
In January 1963, Plath spoke with Dr. John Horder, her GP and a close friend who lived near her.
Her depression returned but she completed the rest of her poetry collection which would be published after her death (1965 in the UK, 1966 in the US).
Bernard Bergonzi at the ''Manchester Guardian'' said the book was an "outstanding technical accomplishment" with a "virtuoso quality".
He had become ill shortly after a close friend died of lung cancer.
According to Hughes, Plath left behind "some one hundred thirty typed pages of another novel, provisionally titled ''Double Exposure.''
Both Lowell and Sexton encouraged Plath to write from her experience and she did so.
In early 1957, Plath and Hughes moved to the United States and from September 1957 Plath taught at Smith College, her alma mater.
In August she finished her semi-autobiographical novel ''The Bell Jar'' and immediately after this, the family moved to Court Green in the small market town of North Tawton in Devon.
"''Crossing the Water'' is full of perfectly realised works.
The collection, ''Letters Home: Correspondence 1950–1963'', came out partly in response to the strong public reaction to the publication of ''The Bell Jar'' in America.
Plath was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for poetry, posthumously.
Moore says: "When Sylvia Plath’s ''Ariel'' was published in the United States in 1966, American women noticed.
She was married to fellow poet Ted Hughes from 1956 until they separated in September 1962.
A casual visitor or unexpected telephone call, a cut, a bruise, a kitchen bowl, a candlestick—everything became usable, charged with meaning, transformed.
Ferretter believes that the draft of ''Double Exposure'' may have been destroyed, stolen, or even lost.
In a letter to an old friend of Plath's from Smith College, he wrote, "That's the end of my life.
Here was a woman, superbly trained in her craft, whose final poems uncompromisingly charted female rage, ambivalence, and grief, in a voice with which many women identified."
Outraged mourners accused Hughes in the media of dishonoring her name by removing the stone.
Late in 1959, when she and Hughes were at the Yaddo writers' colony in New York State, she wrote the seven-part "Poem for a Birthday", echoing Theodore Roethke's ''Lost Son'' sequence, though its theme is her own traumatic breakdown and suicide attempt at 20.
Hughes faced criticism for his role in handling the journals: he claims to have destroyed Plath's last journal, which contained entries from the winter of 1962 up to her death.
Plath resumed psychoanalytic treatment in December, working with Ruth Beuscher.
The rest is posthumous."
Posthumously published in 1966, the impact of ''Ariel'' was dramatic, with its dark and potentially autobiographical descriptions of mental illness in poems such as '"Tulips", "Daddy" and "Lady Lazarus".
Frieda Hughes, now a poet and painter, who was two years old when her mother died, was angered by the making of entertainment featuring her parents' lives.
I went to this little celebration and that's actually where we met... Then we saw a great deal of each other.
She dated a Yale senior named Dick Norton during her junior year.
She accused the "peanut crunching" public of wanting to be titillated by the family's tragedies.
During the last years of his life, Hughes began working on a fuller publication of Plath's journals.
Her only novel, ''The Bell Jar,'' was released in January 1963, published under the pen name Victoria Lucas, and was met with critical indifference.
Upon arrival, she could not get into the flat, but eventually gained access with the help of a workman, Charles Langridge.
However, she continued to take care of her physical appearance and did not outwardly speak of feeling guilty or unworthy.
During this time she was refused admission to the Harvard writing seminar.
It was never published and disappeared around 1970.
Her September 1961 poem "Wuthering Heights" takes its title from the Emily Brontë novel, but its content and style is Plath's own particular vision of the Pennine landscape.
Plath's poem ''Morning Song'' from Ariel is regarded as one of the best poems in the world on ''freedom of expression'' of an artist.
Peter Dickinson at ''Punch'' called the collection "a real find" and "exhilarating to read", full of "clean, easy verse".
Plath was clinically depressed for most of her adult life.
In 1989, with Hughes under public attack, a battle raged in the letters pages of ''The Guardian'' and ''The Independent''.
'''Sylvia Plath''' (; October 27, 1932&nbsp;– February 11, 1963) was one of the most renowned and influential poets, novelists, and short story writers of the 20th century.
Plath's fellow confessional poet and friend Anne Sexton commented: "Sylvia and I would talk at length about our first suicide, in detail and in depth—between the free potato chips.
In 1961, the couple rented their flat at Chalcot Square to Assia and David Wevill.
Plath returned to Newnham in October to begin her second year.
Ted came back to Cambridge and suddenly we found ourselves getting married a few months later... We kept writing poems to each other.
I happened to be at Cambridge.
Therefore, it is argued Plath turned on the gas at a time when Mr.&nbsp;Thomas would have been able to see the note.
Writing in ''New Statesman,'' fellow poet Peter Porter wrote:
After 1960 her work moved into a more surreal landscape darkened by a sense of imprisonment and looming death, overshadowed by her father.
When Hughes' partner Assia Wevill killed herself and their four-year-old daughter Shura in 1969, this practice intensified.
He stated that "No one who saw the care with which the kitchen was prepared could have interpreted her action as anything but an irrational compulsion."
In 1998, shortly before his death, he unsealed the two journals, and passed the project onto his children by Plath, Frieda and Nicholas, who passed it on to Karen V. Kukil.
She committed suicide in 1963.
Plath's close friend Al Alvarez, who has written about her extensively, said of her later work: "Plath's case is complicated by the fact that, in her mature work, she deliberately used the details of her everyday life as raw material for her art.
On August 24, 1953, Plath overdosed on pills in the cellar of her mother's home.
Commentators have argued that because antidepressants may take up to three weeks to take effect, her prescription from Horder would not have taken full effect.
After Hughes left, Plath produced, in less than two months, the forty poems of rage, despair, love, and vengeance on which her reputation mostly rests.
Some have suggested that Plath had not intended to kill herself.
The couple married on June 16, 1956, at St George the Martyr, Holborn (now in the London Borough of Camden) with Plath's mother in attendance, and spent their honeymoon in Benidorm, Spain.
Additionally, she won a summer guest editor position at the college magazine ''Mademoiselle,'' and, on her graduation in 1955, she won the Glascock Prize for ''Two Lovers and a Beachcomber by the Real Sea''.
Plath's letters were published in 1975, edited and selected by her mother Aurelia Plath.
But I learned my lesson early.
She also left a note reading "Call Dr.&nbsp;Horder," including the doctor's phone number.
In 1982, when Smith College acquired Plath's remaining journals, Hughes sealed two of them until February 11, 2013, the 50th anniversary of Plath's death.
Hughes was immediately struck with the beautiful Assia, as she was with him.
A few weeks later, she slashed her legs to see if she had enough courage to commit suicide.
Her adult diaries, starting from her first year at Smith College in 1950, were first published in 1982 as ''The Journals of Sylvia Plath,'' edited by Frances McCullough, with Ted Hughes as consulting editor.
Revisionist critics such as Tracy Brain have, however, argued against a tightly autobiographical interpretation of Plath's material.
Plath's father was an entomologist and a professor of biology at Boston University who authored a book about bumblebees.
Plath took a job as a receptionist in the psychiatric unit of Massachusetts General Hospital and in the evening sat in on creative writing seminars given by poet Robert Lowell (also attended by the writers Anne Sexton and George Starbuck).
I was sent there by the US government on a government grant.
The book went on to win the Forward Poetry Prize, the T. S. Eliot Prize for Poetry, and the Whitbread Poetry Prize.
She also wrote ''The Bell Jar'', a semi-autobiographical novel published shortly before her death.
Plath attended Bradford Senior High School (now Wellesley High School) in Wellesley, graduating in 1950.
A visit to her father's grave later prompted Plath to write the poem ''Electra on Azalea Path''.
Suicide is, after all, the opposite of the poem.
Comparing the similarities between his friend's symptoms and his own, Otto became convinced that he, too, had lung cancer and did not seek treatment until his diabetes had progressed too far.
She edited ''The Smith Review'' and during the summer after her third year of college was awarded a coveted position as guest editor at ''Mademoiselle'' magazine, during which she spent a month in New York City.
The poem, composed during Plath's early years at Smith College, is published in ''Blackbird'', the online journal.
Plath says that it was here that she learned "to be true to my own weirdnesses", but she remained anxious about writing confessionally, from deeply personal and private material.
The book went on to be published in America in 1962 to less glowing reviews.
The ''Collected Poems'', published in 1981, edited and introduced by Ted Hughes, contained poetry written from 1956 until her death.
Plath's mother, Aurelia, had grown up in Winthrop, and her maternal grandparents, the Schobers, had lived in a section of the town called Point Shirley, a location mentioned in Plath's poetry.
Plath is credited with advancing the genre of confessional poetry and is best known for her two published collections, ''The Colossus and Other Poems'', and ''Ariel''.
By the time Heinemann published her first collection, ''The Colossus and other poems'' in the UK in late 1960, Plath had been short-listed several times in the Yale Younger Poets book competition and had had work printed in ''Harper's'', ''The Spectator'' and the ''Times Literary Supplement''.
Plath's work is often held within the genre of confessional poetry and the style of her work compared to other contemporaries, such as Robert Lowell and W.D.
's Novels'', and in June graduated from Smith with highest honors.
In 2006 Anna Journey, then a graduate student at Virginia Commonwealth University, discovered a previously unpublished sonnet written by Plath titled ''Ennui''.
Then it just grew out of that, I guess, a feeling that we both were writing so much and having such a fine time doing it, we decided that this should keep on.
More than half of the new volume contained newly released material; The American author Joyce Carol Oates hailed the publication as a "genuine literary event".
As Hughes and Plath were legally married at the time of her death, Hughes inherited the Plath estate, including all her written work.
Nicholas was born in January 1962.
Hughes has been condemned repeatedly for burning Plath's last journal, saying he "did not want her children to have to read it."
The critic at ''Time'' said: "Within a week of her death, intellectual London was hunched over copies of a strange and terrible poem she had written during her last sick slide toward suicide.
They are poems, as Robert Lowell says in his preface to ''Ariel'', that 'play Russian roulette with six cartridges in the cylinder.'"
Plath and Hughes traveled across Canada and the United States, staying at the Yaddo artist colony in Saratoga Springs, New York State in late 1959.
She told the story of her first suicide in sweet and loving detail, and her description in ''The Bell Jar'' is just that same story."
Writer Honor Moore describes ''Ariel'' as marking the beginning of a movement, Plath suddenly visible as "a woman on paper", certain and audacious.
Her mother, Aurelia Schober Plath (1906–1994), was a second-generation American of Austrian descent, and her father, Otto Plath (1885–1940), was from Grabow, Germany.
It was, however, her 1965 collection ''Ariel'', published posthumously, on which Plath's reputation essentially rests.
Later at Cambridge, she wrote for the University publication, ''Varsity''.
During this time, they both became deeply interested in astrology and the supernatural, using Ouija boards.
Dr.&nbsp;Horder also believed her intention was clear.
In June 1962, Plath had had a car accident which she described as one of many suicide attempts.
Describing the compilation of the book to her mother, she wrote, "What I've done is to throw together events from my own life, fictionalising to add colour&nbsp;– it's a pot boiler really, but I think it will show how isolated a person feels when he is suffering a breakdown....
Plath's voice is heard in the BBC documentary about her life.
At Newnham, she studied with Dorothea Krook, whom she held in high regard.
Plath began to conceive of herself as a more serious, focused poet and short-story writer.
Plath struggled with insomnia, taking medication at night to induce sleep, and frequently woke up early.
The nurse was due to arrive at 9:00 the morning of February&nbsp;11, 1963 to help Plath with the care of her children.
In December 1962, she returned alone to London with their children, and rented, on a five-year lease, a flat at 23 Fitzroy Road—only a few streets from the Chalcot Square flat.
Whilst her craft was generally praised, her writing was viewed as more derivative of other poets.
Raised as a Unitarian Christian, Plath experienced a loss of faith after her father's death and remained ambivalent about religion throughout her life.
While living in Winthrop, eight-year-old Plath published her first poem in the ''Boston Herald'''s children's section.
They found Plath dead of carbon&nbsp;monoxide poisoning with her head in the oven, having sealed the rooms between her and her sleeping children with wet towels and cloths.
Many of the events that took place during that summer were later used as inspiration for her novel ''The Bell Jar.''
Hughes had published very little about his experience of the marriage and Plath's subsequent suicide, and the book caused a sensation, being taken as his first explicit disclosure, and it topped best seller charts.
In her most ferocious poems, 'Daddy' and 'Lady Lazarus,' fear, hate, love, death and the poet's own identity become fused at black heat with the figure of her father, and through him, with the guilt of the German exterminators and the suffering of their Jewish victims.
However, in her biography ''Giving Up: The Last Days of Sylvia&nbsp;Plath,'' Plath's best friend, Jillian Becker wrote, "According to Mr.&nbsp;Goodchild, a police officer attached to the coroner's office ... Plath had thrust her head far into the gas oven... and had really meant to die."
She lost 20 pounds.
Plath began keeping a diary from the age of 11 and continued doing so until her suicide.
In 1950, Plath attended Smith College and excelled academically.
On March 16, 2009, Nicholas Hughes, the son of Plath and Hughes,  hanged himself at his home in Alaska, following a history of depression.
Sylvia and I often talked opposites.
The poems, written after Plath's death, in some cases long after, try to find a reason why Plath took her own life.
If I tried too hard to tell them exactly how something happened, in the hope of correcting some fantasy, I was quite likely to be accused of trying to suppress Free Speech.
Her poems are full of references and images that seem impenetrable at this distance, but which could mostly be explained in footnotes by a scholar with full access to the details of her life."
It was Sylvia's publication of ''Ariel'' in 1965 that precipitated Plath's rise to fame.
In one of her last prose pieces, Plath commented that her first nine years "sealed themselves off like a ship in a bottle—beautiful inaccessible, obsolete, a fine, white flying myth".
She spent her first year winter and spring holidays traveling around Europe.
In mid-1962, Hughes began to keep bees, which would be the subject of many Plath poems.
Gwyneth Paltrow portrayed Plath in the biopic ''Sylvia'' (2003).
Plath's gravestone, in Heptonstall's parish churchyard of St Thomas the Apostle, bears the inscription that Hughes chose for her: "Even amidst fierce flames the golden lotus can be planted."
Beginning in October 1962, Plath experienced a great burst of creativity and wrote most of the poems on which her reputation now rests, writing at least 26 of the poems of her posthumous collection ''Ariel'' during the final months of her life.
In 1970, radical feminist poet Robin Morgan published the poem "Arraignment", in which she openly accused Hughes of the battery and murder of Plath; other radical feminists threatened to kill him in Plath's name.
In October 2015 the BBC Two documentary ''Ted Hughes: Stronger Than Death'' examined Hughes' life and work and included audio recordings of Plath reciting her own poetry.
In general, my refusal to have anything to do with the Plath Fantasia has been regarded as an attempt to suppress Free Speech ...
The poems in ''Ariel'' mark a departure from her earlier work into a more personal arena of poetry.
At Smith she majored in English and won all the major prizes in writing and scholarship.
At this time Plath and Hughes first met the poet W. S. Merwin, who admired their work and was to remain a lifelong friend.
Plath described Hughes as "a singer, story-teller, lion and world-wanderer" with "a voice like the thunder of God".
