* '''Voltage-controlled amplifier (VCA)''' – After the signal generated by one (or a mix of more) VCOs has been modified by filters and LFOs, and its waveform has been shaped (contoured) by an ADSR envelope generator, it then passes on to one or more voltage-controlled amplifiers (VCAs).
Gray also built a simple loudspeaker device into later models, consisting of a vibrating diaphragm in a magnetic field, to make the oscillator audible.
The vocoder, linear predictive coding, and some forms of speech synthesis are based on analysis/resynthesis.
Envelope following systems, the most sophisticated being the vocoder, are controlled by the power or amplitude of input audio signal.
Most samplers designate a part of the sample for each component of the Attack Decay Sustain Release (ADSR) envelope, repeating that section while changing the volume according to the envelope.
ADSR control is provided by ''envelope generators''.
In contrast with MIDI, OSC allows thousands of synthesizers or computers to share music performance data over the Internet in realtime.
'''Subtractive synthesis''' is based on filtering harmonically rich waveforms.
During the attack phase, the modulated sound parameter fades from the maximum amplitude to zero then, during the decay phase, rises to the value specified by the sustain parameter.
Generally, a sound that does not change over time includes a fundamental partial or harmonic, and any number of partials.
In 1949, Japanese composer Minao Shibata discussed the concept of "a musical instrument with very high performance" that can "synthesize any kind of sound waves" and is "...operated very easily," predicting that with such an instrument, "...the music scene will be changed drastically."
Planet of the Vampires, 1965), and a
While these new instruments were expensive, these characteristics meant musicians were quick to adopt them, especially in the United Kingdom and the United States.
'''Additive synthesis''' builds sounds by adding together waveforms (which are usually harmonically related).
The General MIDI (GM) software standard was devised in 1991 to serve as a consistent way of describing a set of over 200 sounds (including percussion) available to a PC for playback of musical scores.
In 1977 Parliament's funk single "Flash Light" used the bass synthesizer.
Some harmonics may have higher amplitudes than others.
Typically, high-frequency harmonics die out more quickly than the lower harmonics.
Modern synthesizers like the Dave Smith Instruments Prophet '08 have DADSR (delay, attack, decay, sustain, release) envelopes.
The Moog Taurus was used in live performances by a range of pop, rock, and blues-rock bands.
A ribbon controller is similar to a touchpad, but a ribbon controller only registers linear motion.
Various models can also be combined, e.g.
Saxophone-style controllers have included the Lyricon, and products by Yamaha, Akai, and Casio.
Bass synth patches incorporate a range of sounds and tones, including wavetable-style, analog, and FM-style bass sounds, delay effects, distortion effects, envelope filters.
Gary Numan's 1979 hits "Are 'Friends' Electric?"
Lou Reed, widely considered a pioneer of electric guitar textures, played bass synthesizer on the song "Families", from his 1979 album ''The Bells''.
The gain of the VCA is affected by a ''control voltage'' (CV), coming from an envelope generator, an LFO, the keyboard or some other source.
Although it may be used to operate any parameter that is affected by control voltages, a ribbon controller is most commonly associated with pitch bending.
Due to its simplicity, it is the basis of early synthesizers such as the Moog synthesizer.
In mid–late 1970s, patch memory (allowing storage and loading of 'patches' or 'programs') began to appear in synths like the Oberheim Four-voice (1975/1976)  and Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 (1977/1978).
This instrument was featured on various 1960s popular recordings, including Del Shannon's "Runaway" (1961), and The Beatles' "Baby, You're a Rich Man" (1967).
The resulting complex waveform may have many component frequencies, and there is no requirement that they all bear a harmonic relationship.
In the 2010s, synthesizers are used in many genres of pop, rock and dance music.
Fingerboard-controlled instruments include the Trautonium (1929), Hellertion (1929) and Heliophon (1936), Electro-Theremin (Tannerin, late 1950s), Persephone (2004), and the Swarmatron (2004).
In the case of SMF playback using integrated synthesizers (as in computers and cell phones), the hardware component of the MIDI interface design is often unneeded.
In the 1970s miniaturized solid-state components allowed self-contained, portable instruments such as the Moog Taurus, a 13-note pedal keyboard played by the feet.
Synthesizers were first used in pop music in the 1960s.
* Univox (1951) by  Jennings Musical Instruments (JMI).
An "envelope modulation" ("env mod") parameter on many synthesizers with filter envelopes determines how much the envelope affects the filter.
Electronic music albums by Beaver and Krause, Tonto's Expanding Head Band, The United States of America, and White Noise reached a sizable cult audience and progressive rock musicians such as Richard Wright of Pink Floyd and Rick Wakeman of Yes were soon using the new portable synthesizers extensively.
RAI-TV mini-series, "Jeckyll".
After World War II, electronic music including electroacoustic music and musique concrète was created by contemporary composers, and numerous ''electronic music studios'' were established around the world, especially in Bonn, Cologne, Paris and Milan.
These studios were typically filled with electronic equipment including oscillators, filters, tape recorders, audio consoles etc., and the whole studio functioned as a "sound synthesizer".
'''Subtractive''' synthesis depends upon filtering a harmonically rich oscillator waveform.
* Fingerboards (ribbon controllers) and touchpads
To implement real-time additive synthesis, wavetable synthesis is useful for reducing required hardware/processing power, and is commonly used in low-end MIDI instruments (such as educational keyboards) and low-end sound cards.
In 1987, Roland's D50 synthesizer was released, which combined the already existing sample-based synthesis and the onboard digital effects, while  Korg's even more popular M1 (1988) now also heralded the era of the workstation synthesizer, based on ROM sample sounds for composing and sequencing whole songs, rather than solely traditional sound synthesis.
* '''Other''' sound processing effects such as ring modulators may be encountered.
A low-frequency oscillator (LFO) generates an electronic signal, usually below 20&nbsp;Hz.
This instrument was a remote electromechanical musical instrument that used telegraphy and electric buzzers that generated fixed timbre sound.
A synthesized sound requires accurate reproduction of the original sound in both the frequency domain and the time domain.
FM synthesis is especially valuable for metallic or clangorous noises such as bells, cymbals, or other percussion.
Modular synthesizers used cables ("patch cords") to connect the different sound modules together.
'''Sample-based''' and '''granular''' synthesis use one or more digitally recorded sounds in place of an oscillator.
The synthesizer had a considerable effect on 20th-century music.
This data includes note events, commands for the selection of instrument presets (i.e.
MIDI is an opto-isolated serial interface and communication protocol.
LFOs are used in most forms of synthesis.
'''Sample-based synthesis''' involves recording a real instrument as a digitized waveform, and then playing back its recordings at different speeds (pitches) to produce different tones.
The Akai bass synth pedal contains a four-oscillator synthesizer with user selectable parameters (attack, decay, envelope depth, dynamics, cutoff, resonance).
* '''Low frequency oscillator''' (LFO) – an oscillator of adjustable frequency that can be used to modulate the sound rhythmically, for example to create tremolo or vibrato or to control a filter's operating frequency.
This involves modelling components of musical objects and creating systems that define action, filters, envelopes and other parameters over time.
Accordion controllers use pressure transducers on bellows for articulation.
When a synthesizer patch is uploaded to a personal computer that has patch editing software installed, the user can alter the parameters of the patch and download it back to the synthesizer.
Among the most popular waveform synthesis techniques are subtractive synthesis, additive synthesis, wavetable synthesis, frequency modulation synthesis, phase distortion synthesis, physical modeling synthesis and sample-based synthesis.
For the first time, a given MIDI preset consistently produced a specific instrumental sound on any GM-compatible device.
Synthesizers use various methods to generate electronic signals (sounds).
A working group at Roman Electronic Music Center, composer Gino Marinuzzi, Jr., designer Giuliano Strini, MSEE, and sound engineer and technician Paolo Ketoff in Italy; their vacuum-tube modular "FonoSynth" slightly predated (1957–58) Moog and Buchla's work.
Over time, this helped influence the emergence of synthpop, a subgenre of new wave, in the late 1970s and early 80s.
Other early users included Emerson, Lake & Palmer's Keith Emerson, Todd Rundgren, Pete Townshend, and The Crazy World of Arthur Brown's Vincent Crane.
* ''Theremin'' &nbsp; by Léon Theremin in 1920
The specific set of harmonic-vs-amplitude pairs is known as a sound's harmonic content.
In 1959–1960, Harald Bode developed a modular synthesizer and sound processor, and in 1961, he wrote a paper exploring the concept of self-contained portable modular synthesizer using newly emerging transistor technology.
Arpeggiators seem to have grown from the accompaniment system of electronic organs in mid-1960s – mid-1970s, and possibly hardware sequencers of the mid-1960s, such as the 8/16 step analog sequencer on modular synthesizers (Buchla Series 100 (1964/1966)).
In the late 1980s, keyboards in the synth lab at Berklee College of Music were equipped with membrane thin ribbon style controllers that output MIDI.
* ''Trautonium'' &nbsp; by Friedrich Trautwein in 1929
A ribbon controller is used as an additional controller in the Yamaha CS-80 and CS-60, the Korg Prophecy and Korg Trinity series, the Kurzweil synthesizers, Moog synthesizers, and others.
In most conventional synthesizers, for purposes of re-synthesis, recordings of real instruments are composed of several components representing the acoustic responses of different parts of the instrument, the sounds produced by the instrument during different parts of a performance, or the behavior of the instrument under different playing conditions (pitch, intensity of playing, fingering, etc.)
This, along with the development of Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI), made it easier to integrate and synchronize synthesizers and other electronic instruments for use in musical composition.
''Phase distortion synthesis'' is a method implemented on Casio CZ synthesizers.
MIDI interfaces are now almost ubiquitous on music equipment and are commonly available on personal computers (PCs).
sounds, or programs or patches, previously stored in the instrument's memory), the control of performance-related parameters such as volume, effects levels and the like, as well as synchronization, transport control and other types of data.
* Ondioline (1941) designed by Georges Jenny in France.
''FM synthesis'' (frequency modulation synthesis) is a process that usually involves the use of at least two signal generators (sine-wave oscillators, commonly referred to as "operators" in FM-only synthesizers) to create and modify a voice.
The notes can often be transmitted to a MIDI sequencer for recording and further editing.
In 1938, USSR engineer Yevgeny Murzin designed a compositional tool called ANS, one of the earliest real-time additive synthesizers using optoelectronics.
Stevie Wonder and Herbie Hancock  also contributed strongly to the popularisation of synthesizers in Black American music.
Giorgio Moroder, Howard Jones, Kitaro, Stevie Wonder, Peter Gabriel, Thomas Dolby, Kate Bush, Dónal Lunny, Deadmau5, Frank Zappa and Todd Rundgren, and Owl City all made use of synthesizers.
Typically, a synth pad is performed using whole notes, which are often tied over bar lines.
It can be categorized as both modulation synthesis (along with FM synthesis), and distortion synthesis along with waveshaping synthesis.
This instrument was featured on The Tornados' "Telstar" (1962).
Both devices remained prototypes (except a model made for John Eaton who wrote a "Concert Piece for Synket and Orchestra"), owned and used only by Marinuzzi, notably in the original soundtrack of Mario Bava's sci-fi film "Terrore nello spazio" (a.k.a.
A '''synthesizer''' (usually abbreviated as "'''synth'''", also spelled "'''synthesiser'''") is an electronic musical instrument that generates electric signals that are converted to sound through instrument amplifiers and loudspeakers or headphones.
Harmonic '''additive''' synthesis models sounds directly from pure sine waves, somewhat in the manner of an organ, while '''frequency modulation''' and '''phase distortion ''' synthesis use one oscillator to modulate another.
* '''Sustain level''' is the level during the main sequence of the sound's duration, until the key is released.
He invented the first amplifying vacuum tube, called the ''Audion tube''.
The "attack" and "decay" of a sound have a great effect on the instrument's sonic character.
A '''synth pad''' is a sustained chord or tone generated by a synthesizer, often employed for background harmony and atmosphere in much the same fashion that a string section is often used in orchestral music and film scores.
the model of a violin with characteristics of a pedal steel guitar and the action of piano hammer.
Some allow a pattern sustained after releasing keys: in this way, sequence of arpeggio patterns may be built up over time by pressing several keys one after the other.
In the late 1960s to 1970s, the development of miniaturized solid-state components allowed synthesizers to become self-contained, portable instruments, as proposed by Harald Bode in 1961.
A '''ribbon controller''' or other violin-like user interface may be used to control synthesizer parameters.
This technique is referred to a "sampling".
The mouthpieces range from alto clarinet to alto saxophone sizes.
Certain synthesizers also allow for a ''delay'' parameter before the ''attack''.
Contemporary classical music composers from the 20th and 21st century write compositions for synthesizer.
Compared with analog synthesizer sounds, the digital sounds produced by these new instruments tended to have a number of different characteristics: clear attack and sound outlines, carrying sounds, rich overtones with inharmonic contents, and complex motion of sound textures, amongst others.
'''Essynth''' is a mathematical model for interactive sound synthesis based on evolutionary computation and uses genetic operators and fitness functions to create sound.
This method gained wide popularity after Phuture used it for the single "Acid Tracks" in 1987.
By the early 1980s, companies were selling compact, modestly priced synthesizers to the public.
It is quite similar to FM synthesis but avoids infringing on the Chowning FM patent.
The combination of simple modulation routings (such as pulse width modulation and oscillator sync), along with the physically unrealistic lowpass filters, is responsible for the "classic synthesizer" sound commonly associated with "analog synthesis"—a term often mistakenly used when referring to software synthesizers using subtractive synthesis.
Other less common synthesis types (''see #Types of synthesis'') include subharmonic synthesis, a form of additive synthesis via subharmonics (used by mixture trautonium), and granular synthesis, sample-based synthesis based on grains of sound, generally resulting in soundscapes or clouds.
Although his idea of reconstructing a sound from its visible image was apparently simple, the instrument was not realized until 20 years later, in 1958, as Murzin was "''an engineer who worked in areas unrelated to music''" .
Trumpet-style controllers have included products by Steiner/Crumar/Akai, Yamaha, and Morrison.
1980s pop and dance music often made heavy use of synthesizers.
Many post-1980s pop music songs use a synth lead to provide a musical hook to sustain the listener's interest throughout a song.
'''''' is a form of synthesis that uses a series of bandpass filters or Fourier transforms to analyze the harmonic content of a sound.
These new technologies also influenced the music industry, and resulted in various early electronic musical instruments that used vacuum tubes, including:
The BOSS SYB-3 was one of the early bass synthesizer pedals.
Wind controllers (and wind synthesizers) are convenient for woodwind and brass players, being designed to imitate those instruments.
This ''musical telegraph'' used steel reeds with oscillations created by electromagnets transmitted over a telegraph line.
An early implementation of ADSR can be found on the Hammond Novachord in 1938 (which predates the first Moog synthesizer by over 25 years).
in Italy at about the same time: among them, Moog is known as the first synthesizer designer to popularize the ''voltage control'' technique in analog electronic musical instruments.
Bass synth patches may incorporate a range of sounds and tones, including wavetable-style, analog, and FM-style bass sounds, delay effects, distortion effects, envelope filters.
In 1983, however, Yamaha's revolutionary  DX7  digital synthesizer swept through  popular music, leading to the adoption and development of digital synthesizers in many varying forms during the 1980s, and the rapid decline of analog synthesizer technology.
The results are then used to ''resynthesize'' the sound using a band of oscillators.
A synth pad sometimes holds the same note while a lead voice sings or plays an entire musical phrase or section.
The contour of an ADSR envelope is specified using four parameters:
In the 1980s, the invention of the relatively inexpensive, mass market Yamaha DX7 synth made synthesizers widely available.
In the 1990s, synthesizer emulations began to appear in computer software, known as software synthesizers.
Though it lacked an arbitrary sound-synthesis function, some have erroneously called it ''the first synthesizer''.
* Guitar-style interfaces
A VCA is a preamp that boosts (amplifies) the electronic signal before passing it on to an external or built-in power amplifier, as well as a means to control its amplitude (volume) using an attenuator.
* '''Decay time''' is the time taken for the subsequent run down from the attack level to the designated sustain level.
The General Instruments AY-3-8912 sound chip included a hold time parameter only—the sustain level was not programmable.
Older fingerboards used a long wire pressed to a resistive plate.
Synthesis may attempt to mimic the amplitude and pitch of the partials in an acoustic sound source.
Open Sound Control (OSC) is another music data specification designed for online networking.
Because there is no standard patch language, it is rare that a patch generated on one synthesizer can be used on a different model.
In 2016, Korg announced the release of the Korg Minilogue, the first polyphonic analogue synth to be mass-produced in decades.
They are often played with a musical keyboard, but they can be controlled via a variety of other input devices, including music sequencers, instrument controllers, fingerboards, guitar synthesizers, wind controllers, and electronic drums.
* Various auxiliary input device including: wheels for pitch bend and modulation, footpedals for expression and sustain, breath controllers, beam controllers, etc.
These are used in most forms of synthesis.
Early synthesizers were analog hardware based but many modern synthesizers use a combination of DSP software and hardware or else are purely software-based (see softsynth).
Stevie Wonder introduced synth bass to a pop audience in the early 1970s, notably on "Superstition" (1972) and "Boogie On Reggae Woman" (1974).
Most of these early instruments used "''heterodyne circuits''" to produce audio frequencies, and were limited in their synthesis capabilities.
A musician uses the Talk box to manipulated sound using the vocal tract, though it is rarely categorized as a synthesizer.
Most often this is an (ADSR) envelope, which may be applied to overall amplitude control, filter frequency, etc.
An arpeggiator may have controls for speed, range, and order in which the notes play; upwards, downwards, or in a random order.
Bass synthesizers often provide samples from vintage 1970s and 1980s bass synths.
Relatively successful instruments, with each selling more than several hundred units per series, included the NED Synclavier (1977), Fairlight CMI (1979), E-mu Emulator (1981), and PPG Wave (1981).
Such ribbon controllers can serve as a main MIDI controller instead of a keyboard, as with the Continuum instrument.
More advanced arpeggiators allow the user to step through a pre-programmed complex sequence of notes, or play several arpeggios at once.
An early use of bass synthesizer was in 1972, on a solo album by John Entwistle (the bassist for The Who), entitled ''Whistle Rymes''.
A common variation of the ADSR on some synthesizers, such as the Korg MS-20, was ADSHR (attack, decay, sustain, hold, release).
In certain genres of electronic music, the LFO signal can control the cutoff frequency of a VCF to make a rhythmic wah-wah sound, or the signature dubstep wobble bass.
A few months later, both the Rolling Stones' "2000 Light Years from Home" and the title track of the Doors' 1967 album ''Strange Days'' featured a Moog, played by Brian Jones and Paul Beaver, respectively.
An '''arpeggiator''' ('''arp''') is a feature available on several synthesizers that automatically steps through a sequence of notes based on an input chord, thus creating an arpeggio.
* '''Attack time''' is the time taken for initial run-up of level from nil to peak, beginning when the key is first pressed.
Also they were commonly fitted to keyboard instruments through the late 1970s and early 1980s.
* ''Audion piano'' &nbsp; by Lee De Forest in 1915
The envelope may be a discrete circuit or module, or implemented in software.
These are essential to '''subtractive''' synthesis.
Ever since, an overall sound setting for any type of synthesizer has been referred to as a patch.
Micky Dolenz of The Monkees bought one of the first Moog synthesizers.
The main feature of a synth pad is very long attack and decay time with extended sustains.
* '''Electronic oscillators''' – create raw sounds with a timbre that depends upon the waveform generated.
A modern digital synthesizer uses a frequency synthesizer microprocessor component to generate signals of different frequencies.
Synthesizers may either imitate instruments like piano, Hammond organ, flute, vocals; natural sounds like ocean waves, etc.
The SYB-3 reproduces sounds of analog synthesizers with Digital Signal Processing saw, square, and pulse synth waves and user-adjustable filter cutoff.
The sound of the Moog  reached the mass market with Simon and Garfunkel's ''Bookends'' in 1968 and The Beatles' ''Abbey Road'' the following year; hundreds of other popular recordings subsequently used synthesizers, most famously the portable Minimoog.
The work of German electronic bands such as Kraftwerk and Tangerine Dream, British acts Gary Numan and David Bowie and the Japanese Yellow Magic Orchestra were also influential in the development of the genre.
* ''Ondes Martenot''  &nbsp; by Maurice Martenot in 1928
Some bass synths are built into an organ style pedalboard or button board.
This encouraged a trend towards producing music using digital sounds, and laid the foundations for the development of the inexpensive digital instruments popular in the next decade (see below).
One of many well-known songs from the era to incorporate a synth pad is "West End Girls" by the Pet Shop Boys, who were noted users of the technique.
The '''bass synthesizer''' (or "bass synth") is used to create sounds in the bass range, from simulations of the electric bass or double bass to distorted, buzz-saw-like artificial bass sounds, by generating and combining signals of different frequencies.
However, sometimes manufacturers design a family of synthesizers to be compatible.
In some instances pulse-width modulation (PWM) using a square wave oscillator can be added to create a "vibrating" sound.
Often, the sounds used for synth pads have a vaguely organ, string, or vocal timbre.
Robert Moog built his first prototype between 1963 and 1964, and was then commissioned by the Alwin Nikolais Dance Theater of NY;Moog synthesizer,  Stearns 2035 is known as 1st commercial Moog synthesizer commissioned by the Alwin Nikolais Dance Theater of New York in October 1964.
Voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs) and digital oscillators may be used.
; or generate new electronic timbres.
Rock musician Keith Emerson used it with the Moog modular synthesizer from 1970 onward.
When turned up the envelope becomes more noticeable, expanding the minimum and maximum range of the filter.
Synthesizers became easier to integrate and synchronize with other electronic instruments and controllers with the introduction of Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) in 1983.
Some software synthesizers, such as Image-Line's 3xOSC (included with their DAW FL Studio) have DAHDSR (delay, attack, hold, decay, sustain, release) envelopes.
The delay setting determines the length of silence between hitting a note and the attack.
the Crumar Steiner Masters Touch, Yamaha Breath Controller and compatible products.
Nick Rhodes, keyboardist of Duran Duran, used various synthesizers including the Roland Jupiter-4 and Jupiter-8.
In the 1970s, synths were used in disco, especially in the late 1970s.
Most of these (except for Clavivox) were designed for conventional ensembles, rather than as experimental instruments for electronic music studios—but they contributed to the evolution of modern synthesizers.
Now it resides as part of the Stearns Collection at the University of Michigan
Released in late 1981, it featured a built-in sequencer and later became strongly associated with acid house music.
A seven-position rotary knob set preset ADS parameter for all 72 notes; a pedal controlled release time.
In the 1970s, Jean Michel Jarre, Larry Fast, and Vangelis released successful synthesizer-led instrumental albums.
Arpeggiators are also commonly found in software sequencers.
* '''Voltage-controlled filter''' (VCF) – "shape" the sound generated by the oscillators in the frequency domain, often under the control of an envelope or LFO.
The Standard MIDI File (SMF) format (extension .mid) combined MIDI events with delta times – a form of time-stamping – and became a popular standard for exchanging music scores between computers.
