As a result of the ongoing civil war, various alternative governments were formed, including the Syrian Interim Government, the Democratic Union Party and localised regions governed by sharia law.
Za'atar, minced beef, and cheese manakish are popular hors d'œuvres.
The vast majority of this population was from Iraq (1,300,000), but sizeable populations from  Palestine (543,400) and Somalia (5,200) also lived in the country.
The most important oil fields are those of Suwaydiyah, Qaratshui, Rumayian, and Tayyem, near Dayr az–Zawr.
Syria has a population of approximately  (2014 est.)
The indigenous Christian Western Aramaic-speakers and Assyrians are numbered around 400,000 people, with the Western Aramaic-speakers living all over the country, particularly in major urban centers, while the Assyrians mainly reside in the north and northeast (Homs, Aleppo, Qamishli, Hasakah).
The Telecommunications in Syria are overseen by the Ministry of Communications and Technology.
Arabic is the official language.
Damascus was made the major entrepot for Mecca, and as such it acquired a holy character to Muslims, because of the beneficial results of the countless pilgrims who passed through on the hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca.
However, by this time, power was increasingly concentrated in the military and security establishment.
Syrian food mostly consists of Southern Mediterranean, Greek, and Southwest Asian dishes.
From these coastal regions they eventually spread their influence throughout the Mediterranean, including building colonies in Malta, Sicily, the Iberian peninsula (modern Spain and Portugal), the coasts of North Africa, and most significantly, founding the major city state of Carthage (in modern Tunisia) in the 9th century BC which was much later to become the center of a major empire, rivaling the Roman Empire.
The post-independence period was tumultuous, and a large number of military coups and coup attempts shook the country in the period 1949–71.
Historically, the country produced heavy-grade oil from fields located in the northeast since the late 1960s.
Due to a combination of persecution in Syria and opportunities elsewhere, the Jews began to emigrate in the second half of the 19th century to Great Britain, the United States, and Israel.
The Northeast of the country "al-Jazira" and the South "Hawran" are important agricultural areas.
In 887, the Egypt-based Tulunids annexed Syria from the Abbasids, and were later replaced by once the Egypt-based Ikhshidids and still later by the Hamdanids originating in Aleppo founded by Sayf al-Dawla.
, the Syrian economy relies upon inherently unreliable revenue sources such as dwindling customs and income taxes which are heavily bolstered by lines of credit from Iran.
The authorities operate several intelligence agencies, among them Shu'bat al-Mukhabarat al-'Askariyya, employing a large number of operatives.
In 1920, a short-lived independent Kingdom of Syria was established under Faisal I of the Hashemite family.
On 1 February 1958, Syrian President Shukri al-Quwatli and Egypt's Nasser announced the merging of Egypt and Syria, creating the United Arab Republic, and all Syrian political parties, as well as the communists therein, ceased overt activities.
During this period, Syria became a battle ground between Babylonia and another former Assyrian colony, that of Egypt.
William Montgomery Watt claims that this was the most significant expedition Muhammad ordered at the time, even though it received little notice in the primary sources.
The literacy rate of Syrians aged 15 and older is 90.7% for males and 82.2% for females.
The Syrian music scene, in particular that of Damascus, has long been among the Arab world's most important, especially in the field of classical Arab music.
The fields are a natural extension of the Iraqi fields of Mosul and Kirkuk.
Nearly all of Syria's media outlets are state-owned, and the Ba'ath Party controls nearly all newspapers.
Some Syrian dishes also evolved from Turkish and French cooking: dishes like shish kebab, stuffed zucchini/courgette, yabra' (stuffed grape leaves, the word yapra' derıves from the Turkish word 'yaprak' meaning leaf).
The legislature, the Peoples Council, is the body responsible for passing laws, approving government appropriations and debating policy.
Syria has three levels of courts: courts of first instance, courts of appeals, and the constitutional court, the highest tribunal.
People opposing President Assad's rule claim that more than 200, mostly civilians, were massacred and about 300 injured in Hama in shelling by the Government forces on 12 July 2012.
In 1516, the Ottoman Empire invaded the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt, conquering Syria, and incorporating it into its empire.
The President of Syria is commander in chief of the Syrian armed forces, comprising some 400,000 troops upon mobilization.
Syria received significant financial aid from Arab states of the Persian Gulf as a result of its participation in the Persian Gulf War, with a sizable portion of these funds earmarked for military spending.
The Personal Status Law 59 of 1953 (amended by Law 34 of 1975) is essentially a codified sharia.
Syrian writers, many of whom migrated to Egypt, played a crucial role in the nahda or Arab literary and cultural revival of the 19th century.
Syria was once home to a substantial population of Jews, with large communities in Damascus, Aleppo, and Qamishii.
The largest water consuming sector in Syria is agriculture.
Originally an Indo-European corruption of "Assyria" in northern Mesopotamia, the Greeks used this term to describe not only Assyria itself but also the lands to the west which had for centuries been under Assyrian dominion.
Eventually parts of southern Seleucid Syria were taken by Judean Hasmoneans upon the slow disintegration of the Hellenistic Empire.
The Ottoman system was not burdensome to Syrians because the Turks respected Arabic as the language of the Quran, and accepted the mantle of defenders of the faith.
The 1970 retreat of Syrian forces sent to aid the PLO during the "Black September" hostilities with Jordan reflected this disagreement.
The constitution adopted in 2012 effectively transformed Syria into a semi-presidential republic due to the constitutional right for the election of individuals who do not form part of the National Progressive Front.
Education is free and compulsory from ages 6 to 12.
In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.4% of the country's GDP.
Syria lies between latitudes 32° and 38° N, and longitudes 35° and 43° E. It consists mostly of arid plateau, although the northwest part of the country bordering the Mediterranean is fairly green.
Many popular football teams are based in Damascus, Aleppo, Homs, Latakia, etc.
The Egyptians fought the Hittites for control over western Syria; the fighting reached its zenith in 1274 BC with the Battle of Kadesh.
In English, the name "Syria" was formerly synonymous with the Levant (known in Arabic as ''al-Sham''), while the modern state encompasses the sites of several ancient kingdoms and empires, including the Eblan civilization of the 3rd millennium BC.
The Emergency Law, effectively suspending most constitutional protections, was in effect from 1963 until 21 April 2011.
A Canaanite group known as the Phoenicians came to dominate the coasts of Syria, (and also Lebanon and northern Palestine) from the 13th century BC, founding city states such as Amrit, Simyra, Arwad, Paltos, Ramitha and Shuksi.
Syria is a traditional society with a long cultural history.
Only heated debates in the United Nations lessened the threat of war.
Sunni Arabs make up the largest population group in Syria.
Pompey the Great of the Roman Empire, who captured Antioch in 64 BC, turning Syria into a Roman province.
The opposition is dominated by Sunni Muslims, whereas the leading government figures are Alawites.
In May 1948, Syrian forces invaded Palestine, together with other Arab states, and immediately attacked Jewish settlements.
However, his rule over Syria ended after only a few months, following the Battle of Maysalun.
Minority Alawites and Christians are being increasingly targeted by Islamists and other groups fighting in the Syrian civil war.
Syria holds the 7th largest Armenian population in the world.
Iran is believed to spend between $6 billion and $20 billion USD a year on Syria during the Syrian Civil War.
The government began to institute economic reforms aimed at liberalizing most markets, but those reforms were slow and ad hoc, and have been completely reversed since the outbreak of conflict in 2011.
In August 2013 the government was suspected of using chemical weapons against its civilians.
Linked to the regions of Syria where a specific dish has originated, Syrian cuisine is rich and varied in its ingredients.
Syria's judicial branches include the Supreme Constitutional Court, the High Judicial Council, the Court of Cassation, and the State Security Courts.
During World War I, the Ottoman Empire entered the conflict on the side of Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Sections of Syria were held by French, English, Italian and German overlords between 1098 and 1189 AD during the Crusades and were known collectively as the Crusader states among which the primary one in Syria was the Principality of Antioch.
In addition, Syrian Telecom plays an integral role in the distribution of government internet access.
The Assyrians named their colonies of Syria and Lebanon Eber-Nari.
Ebla appears to have been founded around 3500 BC, and gradually built its fortune through trade with the Mesopotamian states of Sumer, Assyria and Akkad, as well as with the Hurrian and Hattian peoples to the northwest, in Asia Minor.
The following month, ISIS blew up a gas pipeline to Damascus that was used to generate heating and electricity in Damascus and Homs; "the name of its game for now is denial of key resources to the regime" an analyst stated.
In May 2015, ISIS captured Syria's phosphate mines, one of the Assad regime's last chief sources of income.
Syrians' taste for the traditional arts is expressed in dances such as the al-Samah, the Dabkeh in all their variations, and the sword dance.
During the conflict, genocide against indigenous Christian peoples was carried out by the Ottomans and their allies in the form of the Armenian Genocide and Assyrian Genocide, of which Deir ez-Zor, in Ottoman Syria, was the final destination of these death marches.
Syria's large and prosperous population made Syria one of the most important of the Roman and Byzantine provinces, particularly during the 2nd and 3rd centuries (AD).
English and French are widely spoken as a second language, but English is more often used.
The climate in Syria is dry and hot, and winters are mild.
In 2008, there were 14.9 physicians and 18.5 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants.
Because of internet censorship laws, 13,000 internet activists have been arrested between March 2011 and August 2012.
Syria is formally a unitary republic.
Under the previous constitution, Syria did not hold multi-party elections for the legislature, with two-thirds of the seats automatically allocated to the ruling coalition.
Schooling consists of 6 years of primary education followed by a 3-year general or vocational training period and a 3-year academic or vocational program.
Mainstream modern academic opinion strongly favours the argument that the Greek word is related to the cognate , '''', ultimately derived from the Akkadian ''''.
Meanwhile, a group of Syrian Ba'athist officers, alarmed by the party's poor position and the increasing fragility of the union, decided to form a secret Military Committee; its initial members were Lieutenant-Colonel Muhammad Umran, Major Salah Jadid and Captain Hafez al-Assad.
The city's inhabitants were massacred, except for the artisans, who were deported to Samarkand.
Syrians are an overall indigenous Levantine people, closely related to their immediate neighbours, like Lebanese people, Palestinians, Iraqis, Maltese and Jordanians.
His son, Bashar al-Assad, was elected President in an election in which he ran unopposed.
With the fall of France in 1940 during World War II, Syria came under the control of Vichy France until the British and Free French occupied the country in the Syria-Lebanon campaign in July 1941.
The weakness of Parliamentary institutions and the mismanagement of the economy led to unrest and the influence of Nasserism and other ideologies.
Syriac Christianity had taken hold as the major religion, although others still followed Judaism, Mithraism, Manicheanism, Greco-Roman Religion, Canaanite Religion and Mesopotamian Religion.
Syrian folk narrative, as a subgenre of historical fiction, is imbued with magical realism, and is also used as a means of veiled criticism of the present.
Many Christian Syrians belong to a high socio-economic class.
There are also many higher institutes in Syria, like the Higher Institute of Business Administration, which offer undergraduate and graduate programs in business.
Most people live in the Euphrates River valley and along the coastal plain, a fertile strip between the coastal mountains and the desert.
His cousin Elagabalus, who was emperor from 218 to 222, was also from Syria and his family held hereditary rights to the high priesthood of the Aramean sun god El-Gabal at Emesa (modern Homs) in Syria.
Syria and the entire Near East and beyond then fell to the vast Neo Assyrian Empire (911 BC – 605 BC).
In the mid-7th century, the Umayyad dynasty, then rulers of the empire, placed the capital of the empire in Damascus.
Continuing pressure from Syrian nationalists and the British forced the French to evacuate their troops in April 1946, leaving the country in the hands of a republican government that had been formed during the mandate.
Oil and gas revenues constituted around 20% of total GDP and 25% of total government revenue.
They too were subjugated by Assyria and the Hittites for centuries.
The Mongols of the Ilkhanate took the city, but Qalawun persuaded Al-Ashqar to join him, and they fought against the Mongols on 29 October 1281, in the Second Battle of Homs, which was won by the Mamluks.
The military is a conscripted force; males serve in the military upon reaching the age of 18.
Al-Ashqar, who had married a Mongol woman, appealed for help from the Mongols.
Since approximately 10,000 BC, Syria was one of centers of Neolithic culture (known as Pre-Pottery Neolithic A) where agriculture and cattle breeding appeared for the first time in the world.
It broadcast in black and white until 1976.
Long-run economic constraints include foreign trade barriers, declining oil production, high unemployment, rising budget deficits, and increasing pressure on water supplies caused by heavy use in agriculture, rapid population growth, industrial expansion, and water pollution.
Yamhad was described in the tablets of Mari as the mightiest state in the near east and as having more vassals than Hammurabi of Babylon.
Syria briefly came under Armenian control from 83 BC, with the conquests of Tigranes the Great, who was welcomed as a savior from the Seleucids and Romans by its people.
Syria's share in global exports has eroded gradually since 2001.
The Arab Republic of Syria came into being in late 1961 after December 1 constitutional referendum, and was increasingly unstable until the Ba'athist coup d'état, since which the Ba'ath Party has maintained its power.
Syria's legislative branch is the unicameral People's Council.
The army of Yamhad campaigned as far away as Dēr on the border of Elam (modern Iran).
In 2006 the population of Syria was 19.4 million with a growth rate of 2.7%.
Since March 2011, Syria has been embroiled in an uprising against Assad and the Ba'athist government as part of the Arab Spring, a crackdown that contributed to the Syrian Civil War and to Syria's becoming one of the most violent countries in the world.
Syria's GDP declined by over 3% in 2011, and is expected to further decline by 20% in 2012.
In order to facilitate this, a faulty election was done in which ethnic Turks who were originally from the Sanjak but lived in Adana and other areas near the border in Turkey came to vote in the elections, shifting the election in favor of secession.
In the early 1980s, light-grade, low-sulphur oil was discovered near Deir ez-Zor in eastern Syria.
Brazil is the first country in the Americas to offer humanitarian visas to Syrian refugees.
At the outset of the ongoing Syrian Civil War, Syria was classified by the World Bank as a "lower middle income country."
Because of the country's elevation, snowfall does occasionally occur during winter.
Instead, reforms have been limited to some market reforms.
After Israel launched a preemptive strike on Egypt to begin the Six-Day War, Syria joined the war and attacked against Israel as well.
Syria then remained in Lebanon until 2005.
Syria enjoyed an improvement in relations with several of the states in its region in the 21st century, prior to the Arab Spring and the Syrian Civil War.
With the destruction of the Hittites and the decline of Assyria in the late 11th century BC, the Aramean tribes gained control of much of the interior, founding states such as Bit Bahiani, Aram-Damascus, Hamath, Aram-Rehob, Aram-Naharaim, and Luhuti.
France sent thousands of troops from Morocco and Senegal, leading the French to regain many cities, although resistance lasted until the spring of 1927.
In what the UN has described as "the biggest humanitarian emergency of our era", about 9.5 million Syrians, half the population, have been displaced since the outbreak of the Syrian Civil War in March 2011; 4 million are outside the country as refugees.
However, representatives of the Russian Federation have voiced their support of this election's results.
Palmyra, a rich and sometimes powerful native Aramaic-speaking kingdom arose in northern Syria in the 2nd century; the Palmyrene established a trade network that made the city one of the richest in the Roman empire.
Outside of the coalition are 14 illegal Kurdish political parties.
Poverty rates have increased from 11% in 2004 to 12.3% in 2007.
The country also has 900&nbsp;km of navigable but not economically significant waterways.
Overall population density in Syria is about 99 per square kilometre (258 per square mile).
An estimated 450,000 Syrian Christians have fled their homes.
It is usually served for guests or after food.
Total enrollment at post-secondary schools is over 150,000.
In the past, others believed that it was derived from ''Siryon'', the name that the Sidonians gave to Mount Hermon.
Islamists attacked civilians and off-duty military personnel, leading security forces to also kill civilians in retaliatory strikes.
As of 9 November 2011 during the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad, the United Nations reported that of the over 3500 total deaths, over 250 deaths were children as young as 2 years old, and that boys as young as 11 years old have been gang raped by security services officers.
The agriculture sector contributes to about 20% of GDP and 20% of employment.
The ongoing Syrian Civil War was inspired by the Arab Spring revolutions.
Syrian Arabs, together with some 600,000 Palestinian Arabs, make up roughly 74% of the population (if Syriac Christians are excluded).
General Gouraud had according to his secretary de Caix two options: "Either build a Syrian nation that does not exist... by smoothing the rifts which still divide it" or "cultivate and maintain all the phenomena, which require our abitration that these divisions give".
The Aramaic language has been found as far afield as Hadrians Wall in Ancient Britain, with inscriptions written by Assyrian and Aramean soldiers of the Roman Empire.
Baklava is made of filo pastry filled with chopped nuts and soaked in honey.
The earliest recorded indigenous civilisation in the region was the Kingdom of Ebla near present-day Idlib, northern Syria.
Ottoman administration followed a system that led to peaceful coexistence.
On 5 October 2003, Israel bombed a site near Damascus, claiming it was a terrorist training facility for members of Islamic Jihad.
William Muir also believes that the expedition was important as Muhammad followed by 1000 men reached the confines of Syria, where distant tribes had now learnt his name, while the political horizon of Muhammad was extended.
The power struggle culminated in the November 1970 Syrian Corrective Revolution, a bloodless military overthrow that installed Hafez al-Assad as the strongman of the government.
There are 6 state universities in Syria and 15 private universities.
They are mainly gathered in Aleppo, Qamishli, Damascus and Kesab.
Ugarit also arose during this time, circa 1800 BC, close to modern Latakia.
Ugaritic was a Semitic language loosely related to the Canaanite languages, and developed the Ugaritic alphabet.
The northern Mesopotamian Assyrian kingdom of Adiabene controlled areas of north east Syria between 10 AD and 117 AD, before it was conquered by Rome.
Syria's rate of oil production has decreased dramatically from a peak close to  (bpd) in 1995 down to less than  in 2012.
By Pliny's time, however, this larger Syria had been divided into a number of provinces under the Roman Empire (but politically independent from each other): Judaea, later renamed Palaestina in AD 135 (the region corresponding to modern-day Israel, the Palestinian Territories, and Jordan) in the extreme southwest; Phoenice (established in 194 AD) corresponding to modern Lebanon, Damascus and Homs regions; Coele-Syria (or "Hollow Syria") south of the Eleutheris river, and Iraq.
The last stand of the Assyrian army was at Carchemish in northern Syria in 605 BC.
The constitution gives the president the right to appoint ministers, to declare war and state of emergency, to issue laws (which, except in the case of emergency, require ratification by the People's Council), to declare amnesty, to amend the constitution, and to appoint civil servants and military personnel.
Since the civil war began, the economy shrank by 35%, and the Syrian pound has fallen to one-sixth of its prewar value.
Finds of obsidian tools from Anatolia are evidences of early trade relations.
The team was ranked 101st in the world by FIFA as of June 2016.
Gifts from Pharaohs, found during excavations, confirm Ebla's contact with Egypt.
In 2007, Syria's main exports include crude oil, refined products, raw cotton, clothing, fruits, and grains.
From this point, the region became known as Aramea or Aram.
The literature of Syria has contributed to Arabic literature and has a proud tradition of oral and written poetry.
In 1925, Sultan al-Atrash led a revolt that broke out in the Druze Mountain and spread to engulf the whole of Syria and parts of Lebanon.
The Abbasiyyin Stadium in Damascus is home to the Syrian national football team.
Most remarkably, Western Neo-Aramaic is still spoken in the village of Ma'loula as well as two neighboring villages,  northeast of Damascus.
On 6 October 1973, Syria and Egypt initiated the Yom Kippur War against Israel.
The Arabic flatbread khubz is always eaten together with meze.
In early 1976, Syria entered Lebanon, beginning the thirty-year Syrian military occupation.
The Babylonians, like their Assyrian relations, were victorious over Egypt.
In the late 1970s, an Islamist uprising by the Muslim Brotherhood was aimed against the government.
Prior to the ''Arab Islamic Conquest'' in the 7th century AD, the bulk of the population were Arameans, but Syria was also home to Greek and Roman ruling classes, Assyrians still dwelt in the north east, Phoenicians along the coasts, and Jewish and Armenian communities was also extant in major cities, with Nabateans and ''pre-Islamic'' Arabs such as the Lakhmids and Ghassanids dwelling in the deserts of southern Syria.
the Ugarites kingdom survived until its destruction at the hands of the marauding Indo-European Sea Peoples in the 12th century BC.
Thus in the Greco-Roman world both the Arameans of Syria and the Assyrians of Mesopotamia to the east were referred to as "Syrians" or "Syriacs", despite these being distinct peoples in their own right, a confusion which would continue into the modern world.
In the early 1990s, Scud-C missiles with a 500-kilometer range were procured from North Korea, and Scud-D, with a range of up to 700 kilometers, is allegedly being developed by Syria with the help of North Korea and Iran, according to Zisser.
The Umayyad dynasty was then overthrown in 750 by the Abbasid dynasty, which moved the capital of empire to Baghdad.
Syria's violence against civilians has also seen it suspended from the Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation in 2012.
Upheaval dominated Syrian politics from independence through the late 1960s.
Their president Shukri al-Quwwatli instructed his troops in the front, “to destroy the Zionists".
Shishakli eventually abolished multipartyism altogether, but was himself overthrown in a 1954 coup and the parliamentary system was restored.
Disagreement developed between Jadid, who controlled the party apparatus, and Assad, who controlled the military.
On 23 February 1966, the Military Committee carried out an intra-party overthrow, imprisoned President Amin Hafiz and designated a regionalist, civilian Ba'ath government on 1 March.
Oil reserves are expected to decrease in the coming years and Syria has already become a net oil importer.
During the fall of Assyria, the Scythians ravaged and plundered much of Syria.
The Syrian Electronic Army serves as a pro-government military faction in cyberspace and has been long considered an enemy of the hacktivist group Anonymous.
This is what Gouraud did.
When he died, power was taken by Qalawun.
The coastal mountainous region was also occupied in part by the Nizari Ismailis, the so-called Assassins, who had intermittent confrontations and truces with the Crusader States.
Armenian and Turkish (South Azeri dialect) are spoken among the Armenian and Turkmen minorities.
The main dishes that form Syrian cuisine are kibbeh, hummus, tabbouleh, fattoush, labneh, shawarma, mujaddara, shanklish, pastırma, sujuk and baklava.
The country's power declined during later Umayyad rule; this was mainly due to totalitarianism, corruption and the resulting revolutions.
It ultimately suffered defeat and loss of control of the entire Near East to the British Empire and French Empire.
US Secretary of State John Kerry said it was "undeniable" that chemical weapons had been used in the country and that President Bashar al-Assad's forces had committed a "moral obscenity" against his own people.
Today only a few Jews remain in Syria.
The Code of Personal Status is applied to Muslims by sharia courts.
Damascus was home to the fifth and seventh Pan Arab Games.
Syria is a semiarid country with scarce water resources.
