Lawrence carefully avoided informing his British superiors about the details of the planned inland attack, due to concern that it would be blocked as contrary to French interests.
They were funded by the Palestine Exploration Fund to search for an area referred to in the Bible as the ''Wilderness of Zin''.
During this time, Thomas and his cameraman Harry Chase shot a great deal of film and many photographs, which Thomas used in a highly lucrative film that toured the world after the war.
In the summer of 1896, the Lawrences moved to Oxford, where Lawrence attended high school, then in 1907-1910 studied History at Jesus College.
Lawrence attended the City of Oxford High School for Boys from 1896 until 1907, where one of the four houses was later named "Lawrence" in his honour; the school closed in 1966.
He had been a frequent visitor to their home, Okers Wood House, and had for years corresponded with Louisa Frampton.
Woolley and Lawrence subsequently published a report of the expedition's archaeological findings, but a more important result was updated mapping of the area, with special attention to features of military relevance such as water sources.
He left, but he returned some time later with an RAF Messenger carrying a written order for Johns to accept Lawrence.
Lawrence claimed that he ran away from home circa 1905 and served for a few weeks as a boy soldier with the Royal Garrison Artillery at St Mawes Castle in Cornwall, from which he was bought out.
Lawrence lived in a period of strong official opposition to homosexuality, but his writing on the subject was tolerant.
In his description of the Dera'a beating, Lawrence wrote "a delicious warmth, probably sexual, was swelling through me," and also included a detailed description of the guards' whip in a style typical of masochists' writing.
Working closely with Emir Faisal, a leader of the revolt, he participated in and sometimes led military activities against the Ottoman armed forces, culminating in the capture of Damascus in October 1918.
Guy, but his biographers and contemporaries have found them unconvincing.
His coffin was transported on the Frampton estate's bier.
He then went to work on the excavations at Carchemish, near Jerablus in northern Syria, where he worked under Hogarth, R. Campbell Thompson of the British Museum, and  Leonard Woolley, until 1914.
In addition to being a memoir of his experiences during the war, certain parts also serve as essays on military strategy, Arabian culture and geography, and other topics.
In December 1910, he sailed for Beirut and on his arrival went to Jbail (Byblos), where he studied Arabic.
Lawrence was afraid that the public would think that he would make a substantial income from the book, and he stated that it was written as a result of his war service.
He met Arab nationalists, counselling them to avoid revolt until the arrival of Faisal's forces, and attacked a bridge to create the impression of guerrilla activity.
In exchange, he wanted a British guarantee of an independent Arab state including the Hejaz, Syria, and Mesopotamia.
In the spring of 1916, Lawrence was dispatched to Mesopotamia to assist in relieving the Siege of Kut by some combination of starting an Arab uprising and bribing Ottoman officials.
He continued serving in the RAF based at Bridlington, East Riding of Yorkshire, specialising in high-speed boats and professing happiness, and it was with considerable regret that he left the service at the end of his enlistment in March 1935.
No evidence of this appears in army records.
* 16 September 1918: Destruction of railway bridge between Amman and Deraa.
One officer wrote in his notes: "Though a price of £15,000 has been put on his head by the Turks, no Arab has, as yet, attempted to betray him.
Meanwhile, unbeknown to the British officials in Cairo, the Sykes–Picot Agreement was being negotiated in London, which awarded a large proportion of Syria to France.
In later life, Lawrence arranged to pay a military colleague to administer beatings to him, and to be subjected to severe formal tests of fitness and stamina.
However, he allowed both American editions and translations, which resulted in a substantial flow of income.
In the summer of 1909, he set out alone on a three-month walking tour of crusader castles in Ottoman Syria, during which he travelled  on foot.
However, there was resistance from French diplomats, who insisted that Syria's future was as a French colony not an independent Arab state.
In 1914, Sir Thomas inherited the Chapman baronetcy based at Killua Castle, the ancestral family home in County Westmeath, Ireland; but he and Sarah continued to live in England.
Lawrence's major work is ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom'', an account of his war experiences.
At the Arab Bureau, Lawrence supervised the preparation of maps, produced a daily bulletin for the British generals operating in the theatre, and interviewed prisoners.
Lawrence was born out of wedlock in Tremadog, Wales in August 1888 to Thomas Chapman (who became, in 1914, Sir Thomas Chapman, 7th Baronet), an Anglo-Irish nobleman from County Westmeath, and Sarah Junner, a Scottish governess who was herself illegitimate.
* 19 April 1918: Attack using British armoured cars on Tell Shahm.
The hut was removed in 1930 when the Chingford Urban District Council acquired the land and passed it to the City of London Corporation, which re-erected the hut in the grounds of The Warren, Loughton, where it remains (neglected) today.
Again he vowed not to take any fees from the publication, partly to appease the subscribers to ''Seven Pillars'' who had paid dearly for their editions.
John E. Mack sees a possible connection between T. E.'s masochism and the childhood beatings that he had received from his mother for routine misbehaviours.
There is no reliable evidence for consensual sexual intimacy between Lawrence and any person.
At the age of 46, two months after leaving military service, Lawrence was fatally injured in an accident on his Brough Superior SS100 motorcycle in Dorset, close to his cottage, Clouds Hill, near Wareham.
Lawrence was involved in the build-up to the capture of Damascus in the final weeks of the war.
The most significant was his account of the Arab Revolt, ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom''.
From 1907 to 1910, Lawrence studied History at Jesus College, Oxford.
But by early 1918, Faisal's chief British liaison was Colonel Pierce Charles Joyce, and Lawrence's time was chiefly devoted to raiding and intelligence-gathering.
* 3 January 1917: Attack on an Ottoman outpost in the Hejaz.
Lawrence and Beeson monitored building sites in Oxford and presented their finds to the Ashmolean Museum.
On the advice of S. F. Newcombe, he held back until October, when he was commissioned on the General List and posted to the intelligence staff in Cairo before the end of the year.
Sarah was the daughter of Elizabeth Junner and John Lawrence, who worked as a ship's carpenter and was a son of the household in which Elizabeth had been a servant.
She was dismissed four months before Sarah was born.
On 17 May 1919, the Handley Page Type O carrying Lawrence on a flight to Egypt crashed at the airport of Roma-Centocelle.
The UK copyrights of Lawrence's works published in his lifetime and within 20 years of his death had expired by the end of 2005.
With the new photos, Thomas re-launched his show as ''With Allenby in Palestine and Lawrence in Arabia'' in early 1920; it was extremely popular.
The secret Sykes-Picot Agreement between France and Britain contradicted the promises of independence that he had made to the Arabs and frustrated his work.
It is unclear at what point Lawrence became aware of the treaty's contents.
The precise nature of the sexual contact is not specified.
His research led to the use of crash helmets by both military and civilian motorcyclists.
In both ''Seven Pillars'' and a 1919 letter to a military colleague, Lawrence describes an episode on 20 November 1917 while reconnoitring Dera'a in disguise when he was captured by the Ottoman military, heavily beaten, and sexually abused by the local Bey and his guardsmen.
This mission produced no useful result.
Such an uprising would have been very helpful to Britain in its war against the Ottomans, in particular greatly lessening the threat against the Suez Canal.
He often sent several letters a day.
In 1912 Lawrence worked briefly with Flinders Petrie at Kafr Ammar in Egypt.
As Lawrence left for military service in India at the end of 1926, he set up the "Seven Pillars Trust" with his friend D. G. Hogarth as a trustee, in which he made over the copyright and any surplus income of ''Revolt in the Desert''.
To the original Seven Pillars Trust, Prof. Lawrence assigned the copyright in ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom'', as a result of which it was given its first general publication.
In 1922, he retreated from public life and spent the years until 1935 serving as an enlisted man, mostly in the Royal Air Force, with a brief stint in the Army.
Lawrence entered Damascus around 9am on 1 October 1918 but was the third arrival of the day; the first was the 10th Australian Light Horse Brigade, led by Major A.C.N.
Sarah and Thomas did not marry, but lived together under the name Lawrence.
There have been allegations that the episode was an invention of Lawrence's and (with some evidence) that he exaggerated the severity of the injuries he claimed to have suffered.
Lawrence acknowledged having been helped in the editing of the book by George Bernard Shaw.
He corresponded extensively and was friendly with well-known artists, writers, and politicians.
There is no independent testimony, but the multiple consistent reports and the absence of evidence for outright invention in Lawrence's works make the account believable to his biographers.
On another occasion, he refers to "friends quivering together in the yielding sand with intimate hot limbs in supreme embrace".
He was renowned for his liaison role during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign and the Arab Revolt against the Ottoman Empire during the First World War.
In 1910 Lawrence was offered the opportunity to become a practising archaeologist in the Middle East, at Carchemish, in the expedition that D. G. Hogarth was setting up on behalf of the British Museum.
Accounts of the 1934 discovery of the Winchester Manuscript of the ''Morte'' include a report that Lawrence followed Eugene Vinaver—a Malory scholar—by motorcycle from Manchester to Winchester upon reading of the discovery in ''The Times''.
Aqaba fell to the Arab forces on 6 July, after a surprise overland attack, taking the Turkish defences from behind.
In October 1916 Lawrence was sent to the Hejaz on an intelligence-gathering mission led by Ronald Storrs.
His findings were regarded by the British as extremely valuable and there was serious consideration of awarding him a Victoria Cross; in the end, he was made Companion of the Order of the Bath and promoted to Major.
His extensive travel in the area and knowledge of Arabic made him an obvious choice.
At the age of 15, Lawrence and his schoolfriend Cyril Beeson cycled around Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire, visited almost every village's parish church, studied their monuments and antiquities, and made rubbings of their monumental brasses.
An English Heritage blue plaque marks Lawrence's childhood home at 2 Polstead Road, Oxford, and another appears on his London home at 14 Barton Street, Westminster.
During the closing years of the war, Lawrence sought to convince his superiors in the British government that Arab independence was in their interests—with mixed success.
The Bureau's chief was Gilbert Clayton who reported to Egyptian High Commissioner Henry McMahon.
While it is not known when Lawrence learned the details of Sykes-Picot, nor if and when he briefed Faisal on what he knew, there is good reason to think that both these things happened, and earlier rather than later.
The British replied with a letter from High Commissioner McMahon that was generally agreeable, while reserving commitments concerning the Mediterranean coastline and Holy Land.
The spot is marked by a small memorial at the side of the road.
In October 1915, the situation came to a crisis, as Sharif Hussein demanded an immediate commitment from Britain, with the threat that if this were denied, he would throw his weight behind the Ottomans.
Lawrence was a prolific writer throughout his life.
He was also a consistent advocate of an independent Arab Syria.
Faisal's rule as king, however, came to an abrupt end in 1920, after the battle of Maysaloun, when the French Forces of General Gouraud entered Damascus under the command of General Mariano Goybet, destroying Lawrence's dream of an independent Arabia.
He refers to "the openness and honesty of perfect love" on one occasion in ''Seven Pillars'', when discussing relationships between young male fighters in the war.
He purchased several small plots of land in Chingford; he built a hut and swimming pool there, and visited frequently.
He changed his name to T.&nbsp;E. Shaw and joined the Royal Tank Corps in 1923.
The list of his alleged "embellishments" in ''Seven Pillars'' is long, though many such allegations have been disproved with time, most definitively in Jeremy Wilson's authorised biography.
Johns rejected Lawrence's application as he correctly believed that "Ross" was a false name.
Soon after the outbreak of war he joined the British army and was stationed in Egypt.
He corresponded with many notable figures, including George Bernard Shaw, Edward Elgar, Winston Churchill, Robert Graves, Noël Coward, E. M. Forster, Siegfried Sassoon, John Buchan, Augustus John, and Henry Williamson.
To pay the inheritance tax, he sold the U.S. copyright of ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom'' (subscribers' text) outright to Doubleday Doran in 1935.
He met Joseph Conrad and commented perceptively on his works.
In 1894–96, the family lived at Langley Lodge (now demolished), set in private woods between the eastern borders of the New Forest and Southampton Water in Hampshire.
At that time, he was forced to return to Britain after rumours began to circulate that he was involved in espionage activities.
* 7 November 1917: Following a failed attack on the Yarmuk bridges, blew up a train on the railway between Deraa and Amman, suffering several wounds in the explosion and ensuing combat.
There were also strong objections from the Government of India which, although nominally part of the British government, acted independently.
A large portion of his output was epistolary.
The breadth and variety of his activities and associations, and his ability to describe them vividly in writing, earned him international fame as '''Lawrence of Arabia'''—a title used for the 1962 film based on his wartime activities.
With his body wrapped in the Union Flag, Lawrence's mother arranged with the Framptons to have him buried in their family plot in the separate burial ground of St Nicholas' Church, Moreton.
The battle took the lives of 400 Turks and captured more than 200 prisoners.
Lawrence was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his leadership at Tafileh and was promoted to lieutenant colonel.
A bronze bust of Lawrence was placed in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral on 29 January 1936, alongside the tombs of Britain's greatest military leaders.
Further, it implied that if the Arabs were to have any sort of state in Syria, they would have to conquer its four great cities: Damascus, Homs, Hama, and Aleppo.
Chapman had left his wife and first family in Ireland to live with Junner, and they called themselves Mr and Mrs Lawrence.
Within the Arabic-speaking Ottoman territories, there was a growing Arab-nationalist movement, including many Arabs serving in the Ottoman armed forces.
The Moreton estate, which borders Bovington Camp, was owned by Lawrence's cousins, the Frampton family.
In late December 1916, Faisal and Lawrence worked out a plan for repositioning the Arab forces in a way that prevented the Ottoman forces around Medina from threatening Arab positions and put the railway from Syria under threat.
The battle was a defensive engagement that turned into an offensive rout and was described in the official history of the war as a "brilliant feat of arms".
This would create a credible Pan-Islamic message that could have been very dangerous for Britain, which was under stress, at that moment in severe difficulties in the Gallipoli Campaign.
At least three of Lawrence's biographers (Malcolm Brown, John E. Mack, and Jeremy Wilson) have argued that this episode had strong psychological effects on Lawrence, which may explain some of his unconventional behaviour in later life.
In 1916, he was sent to Arabia on an intelligence mission and quickly became involved with the Arab Revolt, serving, along with other British officers, as a liaison to the Arab forces.
Between 1910 and 1914 he worked as an archaeologist, chiefly at Carchemish, in what is now Syria.
The expedition departed from Wejh on 9 May.
He undertook a needed but reluctant publicity exercise, which resulted in a best-seller.
He later told Hogarth that he had "made the Trust final, to save myself the temptation of reviewing it, if ''Revolt'' turned out a best seller."
In 1936 Prof. Lawrence split the remaining assets of the estate, giving Clouds Hill and many copies of less substantial or historical letters to the nation via the National Trust, and then set up two trusts to control interests in T. E. Lawrence's residual copyrights.
Lawrence's most important contributions to the Arab Revolt were in the area of strategy and liaison with British armed forces but he also participated personally in several military engagements:
Its vision was of Mesopotamia under British control serving as a granary for India; furthermore, it wanted to hold on to its Arabian outpost in Aden.
To the Letters and Symposium Trust, he assigned the copyright in ''The Mint'' and all Lawrence's letters, which were subsequently edited and published in the book ''T.
The Ashmolean's ''Annual Report'' for 1906 said that the two teenage boys "by incessant watchfulness secured everything of antiquarian value which has been found."
Medina was an attractive target for the revolt as Islam’s second-holiest site, and because its Ottoman garrison was weakened by disease and isolation.
Lawrence was instrumental in establishing a provisional Arab government under Faisal in newly liberated Damascus—which he had envisioned as the capital of an Arab state.
He was an advocate of a British landing at Alexandretta, which never came to pass.
Initially, Lawrence played only a supporting role in the show, but then Thomas realised that it was the photos of Lawrence dressed as a Bedouin that had captured the public's imagination, so he photographed him again in London in Arab dress.
He vowed not to take any money from it, and indeed he did not, as the sale price was one third of the production costs.
The dedication to his book ''Seven Pillars'' is a poem titled "To S.A." which opens:
In a letter to Charlotte Shaw, he wrote, "I've seen lots of man-and-man loves: very lovely and fortunate some of them were."
His Anglo-Irish father Thomas Chapman had left his wife Edith after he fell in love and had a son with Sarah Junner, a young Scotswoman who had been engaged as governess to his daughters.
Lawrence also visited Aqaba and Petra.
After the war, Lawrence served until 1922 as a diplomat, working both with the British government and with Faisal.
During his brief hospitalisation, he was visited by the King of Italy Victor Emmanuel III.
While Aqaba could have been captured by an attack from the sea, the narrow defiles leading inland through the mountains were strongly defended and would have been very difficult to assault.
Among the books that Lawrence is known to have carried with him on his military campaigns is Thomas Malory's ''Le Morte d'Arthur''.
In reality, this famous camel ride lasted for more than 70 hours and was interrupted by two long breaks for sleeping, which Lawrence omitted when he wrote his book.
Lawrence re-wrote ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom'' three times, once "blind" after he lost the manuscript while changing trains at Reading railway station.
They were in contact with Sharif Hussein, Emir of Mecca, who was negotiating with the British, offering to lead an Arab uprising against the Ottomans.
In November, it was decided to assign S. F. Newcombe to lead a permanent British liaison to Faisal's staff.
Following the outbreak of hostilities in August 1914, Lawrence did not immediately enlist in the British Army.
His brother Arnold thought that the beatings had been given for the purpose of breaking T.&nbsp;E.'s will.
Lawrence and one of his brothers became commissioned officers in the Church Lads' Brigade at St Aldate's Church.
This had the effect that the Ottomans could never make effective use of their troops at Medina, and were forced to dedicate many resources to defending and repairing the railway line.
Lawrence had rented and later bought Clouds Hill from the Framptons.
Hogarth arranged a "Senior Demyship", a form of scholarship, for Lawrence at Magdalen College, Oxford in order to fund Lawrence's work at £100/year.
During this time, he wrote and published his best-known work, ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom'', an autobiographical account of his participation in the Arab Revolt.
He died six days later on 19 May 1935.
He is a very inspiring gentleman adventurer."
Lawrence's public image resulted in part from the sensationalised reporting of the Arab revolt by American journalist Lowell Thomas, as well as from ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom''.
He was unhappy there and repeatedly petitioned to rejoin the RAF, which finally readmitted him in August 1925.
Lawrence was a keen motorcyclist and owned eight Brough Superior motorcycles at different times.
From Wales the family moved to Kirkcudbright, Galloway in southwestern Scotland, then Dinard in Brittany, then to Jersey.
Lawrence admitted that this was so and that the documents were false which he had provided.
In 2002, Lawrence was named 53rd in the BBC's list of the 100 Greatest Britons following a UK-wide vote.
Lawrence arrived in Cairo to take up service in the Arab Bureau on 15 December 1914.
In the summer of 1896, the Lawrences moved to 2 Polstead Road in Oxford, where they lived under the names of Mr and Mrs Lawrence until 1921.
At the RAF recruiting centre in Covent Garden, London, he was interviewed by a recruiting officer—Flying Officer W. E. Johns, later known as the author of the Biggles series of novels.
In 1919, he had been elected to a seven-year research fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, providing him with support while he worked on the book.
E. Lawrence by his Friends'' (edited by A. W. Lawrence, London, Jonathan Cape, 1937).
* 26 September 1918: Attack on retreating Ottomans and Germans near the village of Tafas; the Ottoman forces massacred the villagers and then Arab forces in return massacred their prisoners  with Lawrence's encouragement.
The residence was isolated, and young "Ned" Lawrence had many opportunities for outdoor activities and waterfront visits.
Doubleday still controls publication rights of this version of the text of ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom'' in the USA, and will continue to do until the copyright expires at the end of 2022 (publication plus 95 years).
* March 1917: Attack on the railway at Aba el Naam.
John Bruce first wrote on this topic, including some other claims that were not credible, but Lawrence's biographers regard the beatings as established fact.
He served for much of 1921 as an adviser to Winston Churchill at the Colonial Office.
When Newcombe arrived and Lawrence was preparing to leave Arabia, Faisal intervened urgently, asking that Lawrence's assignment become permanent.
* 23 January 1918: The battle of Tafileh, a region southeast of the Dead Sea, with Arab regulars under the command of Jafar Pasha al-Askari.
By the fourth reprint in 1927, the debt from ''Seven Pillars'' was paid off.
Lawrence left unpublished ''The Mint'', a memoir of his experiences as an enlisted man in the Royal Air Force (RAF).
After Aqaba, General Sir Edmund Allenby, the new commander-in-chief of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, agreed to his strategy for the revolt, stating after the war:
Several collections of his letters have been published.
The Negev was strategically important as, in the event of war, any Ottoman army attacking Egypt would have to cross it.
The resultant trust paid off the debt, and Lawrence then invoked a clause in his publishing contract to halt publication of the abridgment in the United Kingdom.
Mourners included Winston and Clementine Churchill, E. M. Forster, and Lawrence's youngest brother Arnold.
The situation during 1915 was complex.
In particular, the Arab strategy of northward extension makes perfect sense given the Sykes-Picot language that spoke of an independent Arab entity in Syria, which would only be granted if the Arabs liberated the territory themselves.
A fresh burst of publicity after the publication of ''Revolt in the Desert'' resulted in his assignment to a remote base in British India in late 1926, where he remained until the end of 1928.
In August 1919, Lowell Thomas launched a colourful photo show in London entitled ''With Allenby in Palestine'', which included a lecture, dancing, and music.
It was published posthumously, edited by his brother, Professor A. W. Lawrence.
The Sharif of Mecca has given him the status of one of his sons, and he is just the finely tempered steel that supports the whole structure of our influence in Arabia.
* March 1918: Attack on the railway near Aqaba.
'Harry' Olden, who formally accepted the surrender of the city from acting Governor Emir Said.
The expedition was led by the well-respected Sharif Nasir of Medina.
His friends have expressed the opinion that he was asexual, and Lawrence himself specifically denied, in multiple private letters, any personal experience of sex.
There is considerable evidence that Lawrence was a masochist.
''Revolt in the Desert'' was an abridged version of ''Seven Pillars'' that he began in 1926 and that was published in March 1927 in both limited and trade editions.
Thomas' shows made the previously obscure Lawrence into a household name.
In the preface to ''Seven Pillars'', Lawrence offered his "thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Bernard Shaw for countless suggestions of great value and diversity: and for all the present semicolons".
There were suggestions that Lawrence had been intimate with Dahoum, who worked with him at a pre-war archaeological dig in Carchemish, and fellow-serviceman R.A.M.
His last SS100 (Registration GW 2275) is privately owned but has been on loan to the National Motor Museum, Beaulieu and the Imperial War Museum in London.
In 1918, he cooperated with war correspondent Lowell Thomas for a short period.
Writing in 1997, Angus Calder noted that it is "astonishing" that earlier commentators discussing Lawrence's apparent masochism and self-loathing failed to consider the impact on Lawrence of having lost his brothers Frank and Will on the Western Front, along with many other school friends.
Lawrence travelled regularly between British HQ and Faisal, co-ordinating military action.
They had five sons; Thomas Edward was the second eldest.
The movement north to Damascus and eventually Aleppo is interesting in the context of the Sykes-Picot agreement.
For this, he worked from a notebook that he kept while enlisted, writing of the daily lives of enlisted men and his desire to be a part of something larger than himself: the Royal Air Force.
