The result, fueled by intermittent rediscovery of Eliot's occasional anti-Semitic rhetoric, has been a progressive downward revision of his once towering reputation.
At the time so many American students attended Merton that the Junior Common Room proposed a motion "that this society abhors the Americanization of Oxford".
The beginning of the Quartets ("Houses / Are removed, destroyed") had become a violent everyday experience; this creates an animation, where for the first time he talks of Love as the driving force behind all experience.
After leaving Merton, Eliot worked as a schoolteacher, most notably at Highgate School, a private school in London, where he taught French and Latin—his students included the young John Betjeman.
Eliot's well-earned reputation as a poet is established beyond all doubt, and making him out to be as unflawed as the Archangel Gabriel does him no favours."
In the early 1960s, by then in failing health, Eliot worked as an editor for the Wesleyan University Press, seeking new poets in Europe for publication.
Addressing some of the common criticisms directed against "The Waste Land" at the time, Gilbert Seldes stated, "It seems at first sight remarkably disconnected and confused... however a closer view of the poem does more than illuminate the difficulties; it reveals the hidden form of the work, and indicates how each thing falls into place."
''The Dry Salvages'' treats the element of water, via images of river and sea.
First, he had to overcome physical limitations as a child.
They were married at Hampstead Register Office on 26 June 1915.
Although Eliot did not finish the play, he did publish two scenes from the piece.
Auden, Stephen Spender, and Ted Hughes.
Post-war Europe under the Treaty of Versailles (which Eliot despised), the difficulty of hope and religious conversion, Eliot's failed marriage.
And the writers of ''Time'' magazine were similarly baffled by a challenging poem like "The Waste Land".
"The fact that these things occurred to the mind of Mr. Eliot is surely of the very smallest importance to anyone, even to himself.
Eliot biographer Peter Ackroyd comments that "for Eliot, ''Murder in the Cathedral'' and succeeding verse plays offered a double advantage; it allowed him to practice poetry but it also offered a convenient home for his religious sensibility."
''The Hollow Men'' appeared in 1925.
Julius's viewpoint has been supported by literary critics such as Harold Bloom, Christopher Ricks, George Steiner, Tom Paulin and James Fenton.
The stone, cut by designer Reynolds Stone, is inscribed with his life dates, his Order of Merit, and a quotation from his poem "Little Gidding", "the communication / of the dead is tongued with fire beyond / the language of the living."
This notion concedes that a poem means what it says, but suggests that there can be a non-subjective judgment based on different readers' different—but perhaps corollary—interpretations of a work.
Secondly, Eliot credited his hometown with fuelling his literary vision: "It is self-evident that St. Louis affected me more deeply than any other environment has ever done.
For a poet of his stature, Eliot produced a relatively small number of poems.
As he was often isolated, his love for literature developed.
After working as a philosophy assistant at Harvard from 1909 to 1910, Eliot moved to Paris where, from 1910 to 1911, he studied philosophy at the Sorbonne.
It was followed by some of the best-known poems in the English language, including ''The Waste Land'' (1922), "The Hollow Men" (1925), "Ash Wednesday" (1930), and ''Four Quartets'' (1945).
''The Hollow Men'' contains some of Eliot's most famous lines, notably its conclusion: ''This is the way the world ends''''Not with a bang but a whimper.''
Woods, one of his former Harvard professors, "My reputation in London is built upon one small volume of verse, and is kept up by printing two or three more poems in a year.
Cleo McNelly Kearns notes in her biography that Eliot was deeply influenced by Indic traditions notable the Upanishads.
Eliot's essay "The Metaphysical Poets", along with giving new significance and attention to metaphysical poetry, introduced his now well-known definition of "unified sensibility", which is considered by some to mean the same thing as the term "metaphysical".
When Eliot and Hayward separated their household in 1957, Hayward retained his collection of Eliot's papers, which he bequeathed to King's College, Cambridge, in 1965.
He first visited Marburg, Germany, where he planned to take a summer programme, but when the First World War broke out he went to Oxford instead.
He was instead spending long periods of time in London, in the company of Ezra Pound and "some of the modern artists whom the war has so far spared...
Less than four months later, Thayer introduced Eliot to Vivienne Haigh-Wood, a Cambridge governess.
These scenes, titled ''Fragment of a Prologue'' (1926) and ''Fragment of an Agon'' (1927), were published together in 1932 as ''Sweeney Agonistes''.
Eliot draws upon the theology, art, symbolism and language of such figures as Dante, and mystics St. John of the Cross and Julian of Norwich.
It strives to contain opposites: "The past and future / Are conquered, and reconciled."
He had argued that a poet must write "programmatic criticism", that is, a poet should write to advance his own interests rather than to advance "historical scholarship".
He said the results were gloomy and despairing and he destroyed them.
Eliot's style of writing in ''Ash-Wednesday'' showed a marked shift from the poetry he had written prior to his 1927 conversion, and his post-conversion style would continue in a similar vein.
Late in his career, Eliot focused much of his creative energy on writing for the theatre, and some of his critical writing, in essays like "Poetry and Drama," "Hamlet and his Problems," and "The Possibility of a Poetic Drama," focused on the aesthetics of writing drama in verse.
And then lines of poetry may come into being: not from the original impulse but from a secondary stimulation of the unconscious mind."
Reviewing the 2006 book, Paul Dean stated that he was not convinced by Raine's argument.
The Broadway production in New York of ''The Cocktail Party'' received the 1950 Tony Award for Best Play.
Much of it was a collaborative effort; Eliot accepted credit only for the authorship of one scene and the choruses.
He began to write poetry when he was fourteen under the influence of Edward Fitzgerald's ''Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam'', a translation of the poetry of Omar Khayyam.
This essay was an important influence over the New Criticism by introducing the idea that the value of a work of art must be viewed in the context of the artist's previous works, a "simultaneous order" of works (i.e., "tradition").
His subject matter would also become more focused on Eliot's spiritual concerns and his Christian faith.
The 'new evangels' of totalitarianism are presented as antithetic to the spirit of Christianity.
After Eliot's death, the book was adapted as the basis of the musical ''Cats'' by Andrew Lloyd Webber, first produced in London's West End in 1981 and opening on Broadway the following year.
Its reception in London can be gauged from an unsigned review in ''The Times Literary Supplement'' on 21 June 1917.
Eliot regarded ''Four Quartets'' as his masterpiece, and it is the work that led to his being awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
In 1917, he took a position at Lloyds Bank in London, working on foreign accounts.
Ronald Bush notes that the piece was at first correctly perceived as a work of jazz-like syncopation—and, like 1920s jazz, essentially iconoclastic."
Although the character Prufrock seems to be middle-aged, Eliot wrote most of the poem when he was only twenty-two.
For instance, the editors of ''The Norton Anthology of English Literature'' write, "There is no disagreement on Eliot's importance as one of the great renovators of the English poetry dialect, whose influence on a whole generation of poets, critics, and intellectuals generally was enormous.
Allen Tate perceived a shift in Eliot's method, writing that, "The mythologies disappear altogether in ''The Hollow Men''."
He was aware of this even early in his career.
The poem's groundwork of orthodox Christianity discomfited many of the more secular ''literati''.
Eliot and Wyndham Lewis also maintained a close friendship, leading to Lewis's later making his well-known portrait painting of Eliot in 1938.
He is a very penetrating influence, perhaps not unlike the east wind."
The wholeness is there, from the very beginning.'"
In a letter addressed to Ezra Pound, she covers an extensive list of her symptoms, which included a habitually high temperature, fatigue, insomnia, migraines, and colitis.
Viewed from Eliot's critical lens, ''The Waste Land'' likely shows his personal despair about World War I rather than an objective historical understanding of it.
/ The jew is underneath the lot.
Eliot died of emphysema at his home in Kensington in London, on 4 January 1965, and was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium.
The "continuous parallel between contemporaneity and antiquity" that is so characteristic of his mythical method remained in fine form.
About thirty years later Eliot commented on his religious views that he combined "a Catholic cast of mind, a Calvinist heritage, and a Puritanical temperament".
He writes, "Sometimes regarded as too academic (William Carlos Williams's view), Eliot was also frequently criticized for a deadening neoclassicism (as he himself—perhaps just as unfairly—had criticized Milton).
One: the Church of England offered Eliot some hope for himself, and I think Eliot needed some resting place.
I settle upon a particular emotional situation, out of which characters and a plot will emerge.
The poem is known for its obscure nature—its slippage between satire and prophecy; its abrupt changes of speaker, location, and time.
After ''The Waste Land'' (1922), he wrote that he was "now feeling toward a new form and style".
In a series of lectures delivered at the University of Virginia in 1933, published under the title ''After Strange Gods: A Primer of Modern Heresy'' (1934), Eliot wrote of societal tradition and coherence, "What is still more important than cultural homogeneity is unity of religious background, and reasons of race and religion combine to make any large number of free-thinking Jews undesirable."
S. Eliot, Anti-Semitism, and Literary Form'' (1996).
But during this post-war period, others, like Ronald Bush, observed that this time also marked the beginning of the decline in Eliot's literary influence: As Eliot's conservative religious and political convictions began to seem less congenial in the postwar world, other readers reacted with suspicion to his assertions of authority, obvious in ''Four Quartets'' and implicit in the earlier poetry.
I feel that there is something in having passed one's childhood beside the big river, which is incommunicable to those people who have not.
Eliot's reputation as a poet, as well as his influence in the academy, peaked following the publication of ''The Four Quartets''.
In an essay on Eliot published in 1989, the writer Cynthia Ozick refers to this peak of influence (from the 1940s through the early 1960s) as "the Age of Eliot" when Eliot "seemed pure zenith, a colossus, nothing less than a permanent luminary, fixed in the firmament like the sun and the moon".
''Burnt Norton'' is a meditative poem that begins with the narrator trying to focus on the present moment while walking through a garden, focusing on images and sounds like the bird, the roses, clouds, and an empty pool.
This first edition had an illustration of the author on the cover.
In the final section, the narrator contemplates the arts ("Words" and "music") as they relate to time.
A wall plaque commemorates him with a quotation from his poem "East Coker", "In my beginning is my end.
One project he had in mind was writing a play in verse, using some of the rhythms of early jazz.
It was defeated by two votes, after Eliot reminded the students how much they owed American culture.
In 1954, the composer Alan Rawsthorne set six of the poems for speaker and orchestra in a work entitled ''Practical Cats''.
He studied philosophy at Harvard College from 1906 to 1909, earning his bachelor's degree after three years, instead of the usual four.
In a private paper written in his sixties, Eliot confessed: "I came to persuade myself that I was in love with Vivienne simply because I wanted to burn my boats and commit myself to staying in England.
After Eliot's death, Valerie dedicated her time to preserving his legacy, by editing and annotating ''The Letters of T. S. Eliot'' and a facsimile of the draft of ''The Waste Land''.
To earn extra money, he wrote book reviews and lectured at evening extension courses.
Frank Kermode writes that the most important moment of Eliot's undergraduate career was in 1908 when he discovered Arthur Symons's ''The Symbolist Movement in Literature''.
Without Verlaine, Eliot wrote, he might never have heard of Tristan Corbière and his book ''Les amours jaunes'', a work that affected the course of Eliot's life.
This city had a monumental and life-altering effect on Eliot for multiple reasons, the most significant of which was his introduction to the influential American literary figure Ezra Pound.
From the Sanskrit ending of The Waste Land to the 'What Krishna meant' section of Four Quartets shows how much Indic religions and more specifically Hinduism made up his philosophical basic for his thought process.
The initial critical response to Eliot's "The Waste Land" was mixed.
Known to family and friends as Tom, he was the namesake of his maternal grandfather, Thomas Stearns.
From this background, the Quartets end with an affirmation of Julian of Norwich: "All shall be well and / All manner of thing shall be well."
These had the same poems (in a different order) except that "Ode" in the British edition was replaced with "Hysteria" in the American edition.
This one, ''Murder in the Cathedral'', concerning the death of the martyr, Thomas Becket, was more under Eliot's control.
After a short visit alone to his family in the United States, Eliot returned to London and took several teaching jobs, such as lecturing at  Birkbeck College, University of London.
The narrator's meditation leads him/her to reach "the still point" in which he doesn't try to get anywhere or to experience place and/or time, instead experiencing "a grace of sense".
In contrast to his first marriage, Eliot knew Fletcher well, as she had been his secretary at Faber and Faber since August 1949.
The Eliots were a Boston family with roots in Old and New England.
He became a warden of his parish church, Saint Stephen's, Gloucester Road, London, and a life member of the Society of King Charles the Martyr.
After this, he worked on more "commercial" plays for more general audiences: ''The Family Reunion'' (1939), ''The Cocktail Party'' (1949), ''The Confidential Clerk'', (1953) and ''The Elder Statesman'' (1958) (the latter three were produced by Henry Sherek and directed by E. Martin Browne).
Eliot's experiences as an air raid warden in the Blitz power the poem, and he imagines meeting Dante during the German bombing.
Among its best-known phrases are "April is the cruellest month", "I will show you fear in a handful of dust" and ''"Shantih shantih shantih"''.
in an elective program best described as comparative literature in three years, and an M.A.
He was also known for his seven plays, particularly ''Murder in the Cathedral'' (1935).
To me, it brought the state of mind out of which came ''The Waste Land''."
Eliot had no children with either of his wives.
Eliot never re-published this book/lecture.
During an interview in 1959, Eliot said of his nationality and its role in his work: "I'd say that my poetry has obviously more in common with my distinguished contemporaries in America than with anything written in my generation in England.
George Bell, the Bishop of Chichester, had been instrumental in connecting Eliot with producer E. Martin Browne for the production of ''The Rock'', and later commissioned Eliot to write another play for the Canterbury Festival in 1935.
Nevertheless, he concluded, "Ultimately, as both Raine and, to do him justice, Julius insist, however much Eliot may have been compromised as a person, as we all are in our several ways, his greatness as a poet remains."
I consider myself fortunate to have been born here, rather than in Boston, or New York, or London."
Such a link with primitive people importantly antedates his anthropological studies at Harvard.
By 1916, he had completed a doctoral dissertation for Harvard on "Knowledge and Experience in the Philosophy of F. H. Bradley", but he failed to return for the ''viva voce'' exam.
In 1925, he collected ''The Waste Land'' and the poems in ''Prufrock'' and ''Poems'' into one volume and added ''The Hollow Men'' to form ''Poems: 1909–1925''.
In another review of Raine's 2006 book, the literary critic Terry Eagleton also questioned the validity of Raine's defence of Eliot's character flaws as well as the entire basis for Raine's book, writing, "Why do critics feel a need to defend the authors they write on, like doting parents deaf to all criticism of their obnoxious children?
In 1925 Eliot left Lloyds to join the publishing firm Faber and Gwyer, later Faber and Faber, where he remained for the rest of his career, eventually becoming a director.
He was long a critic and admirer of Elizabethan and Jacobean verse drama; witness his allusions to Webster, Thomas Middleton, William Shakespeare and Thomas Kyd in ''The Waste Land''.
Eliot's essays were a major factor in the revival of interest in the metaphysical poets.
Thus, according to biographer John Worthen, during his time in England Eliot "was seeing as little of Oxford as possible".
Edwin Muir maintained that it is one of the most moving poems Eliot wrote, and perhaps the "most perfect", though it was not well received by everyone.
In 1915 he taught English at Birkbeck, University of London.
"In a peculiar sense an artist or poet ... must inevitably be judged by the standards of the past."
In 1967, on the second anniversary of his death, Eliot was commemorated by the installation of a large stone in the floor of Poets' Corner in London's Westminster Abbey.
He moved  from his native United States to England in 1914 at age 25, settling, working, and marrying there.
in English literature in the fourth.
Charles Powell was negative in his criticism of Eliot, calling his poems incomprehensible.
He would like to be something of a popular entertainer, and be able to think his own thoughts behind a tragic or a comic mask.
John Crowe Ransom wrote negative criticisms of Eliot's work but also had positive things to say.
Thomas Eliot's paternal grandfather, William Greenleaf Eliot, had moved to St. Louis, Missouri to establish a Unitarian Christian church there.
Wilson also pointed out some of Eliot's weaknesses as a poet.
This structural complexity is one of the reasons that the poem has become a touchstone of modern literature, a poetic counterpart to a novel published in the same year, James Joyce's ''Ulysses''.
Once he learned to read, the young boy immediately became obsessed with books and was absorbed in tales depicting savages, the Wild West, or Mark Twain's thrill-seeking Tom Sawyer.
His first published poem, "A Fable For Feasters", was written as a school exercise and was published in the ''Smith Academy Record'' in February 1905.
Some scholars have suggested that she and Russell had an affair, but the allegations were never confirmed.
Eliot lived in St. Louis, Missouri for the first sixteen years of his life at the house on Locust St. where he was born.
He himself wrote in his 1940 essay on W.B.
In a 1933 lecture he said "Every poet would like, I fancy, to be able to think that he had some direct social utility .
He attended lectures by Henri Bergson and read poetry with Henri Alban-Fournier.
A pageant play by Eliot called ''The Rock'' was performed in 1934 for the benefit of churches in the Diocese of London.
His work, in particular ''The Waste Land'', ''The Hollow Men'', and ''Ash Wednesday'' strongly influenced the poetry of two of the most significant post-War Irish language poets, Seán Ó Ríordáin and Máirtín Ó Díreáin, as well as ''The Weekend of Dermot and Grace'' (1964) by Eoghan O Tuairisc.
His father, Henry Ware Eliot (1843–1919), was a successful businessman, president and treasurer of the Hydraulic-Press Brick Company in St. Louis; his mother, Charlotte Champe Stearns (1843–1929), wrote poetry and was a social worker, a new profession in the early 20th century.
The last mentioned story significantly reflects his exploration of Igorot Village while visiting the 1904 World's Fair of St. Louis.
S.'''" '''Eliot'''  (26 September 1888 – 4 January 1965) was a British essayist, publisher, playwright, literary and social critic, and "one of the twentieth century's major poets".
It reaches out like a clear signal to the reader."
On 15 November 1922, he wrote to Richard Aldington, saying, "As for ''The Waste Land'', that is a thing of the past so far as I am concerned and I am now feeling toward a new form and style."
''East Coker'' continues the examination of time and meaning, focusing in a famous passage on the nature of language and poetry.
''Ash-Wednesday'' is the first long poem written by Eliot after his 1927 conversion to Anglicanism.
In a letter to Aiken late in December 1914, Eliot, aged 26, wrote, "I am very dependent upon women (I mean female society)."
By comparison, the narrator concludes that "Love is itself unmoving, / Only the cause and end of movement, / Timeless, and undesiring."
To her, the marriage brought no happiness.
Out of darkness, Eliot offers a solution: "I said to my soul, be still, and wait without hope."
However, the multifarious tributes from practicing poets of many schools published during his centenary in 1988 was a strong indication of the intimidating continued presence of his poetic voice."
The ''Harvard Advocate'' published some of his poems and he became lifelong friends with Conrad Aiken the American novelist.
It must also be acknowledged, as Chinmoy Guha showed in his book ''Where the Dreams Cross: T S Eliot and French Poetry'' (Macmillan, 2011), that he was deeply influenced by French poets from Baudelaire to Paul Valéry.
The poem follows the conscious experience of a man, Prufrock (relayed in the "stream of consciousness" form characteristic of the Modernists), lamenting his physical and intellectual inertia with the recurrent theme of carnal love unattained.
Another well-known example appears in the poem, "Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar".
3 Kensington Court Gardens, has had a blue plaque on it since 1986.
Hayward also collected Eliot's pre-Prufrock verse, commercially published after Eliot's death as ''Poems Written in Early Youth''.
The poem is often read as a representation of the disillusionment of the post-war generation.
He would like to convey the pleasures of poetry, not only to a larger audience, but to larger groups of people collectively; and the theatre is the best place in which to do it."
Valerie Eliot died on 9 November 2012 at her home in London.
Following graduation, Eliot attended Milton Academy in Massachusetts for a preparatory year, where he met Scofield Thayer who would later publish ''The Waste Land''.
In regard to "The Waste Land", Wilson admits its flaws ("its lack of structural unity"), but concluded, "I doubt whether there is a single other poem of equal length by a contemporary American which displays so high and so varied a mastery of English verse."
One of Eliot's biographers, Peter Ackroyd, commented that "the purposes of Eliot's conversion were two-fold.
Later he taught at the Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe, a state school in Buckinghamshire.
From 1946 to 1957, Eliot shared a flat with his friend John Davy Hayward, who collected and managed Eliot's papers, styling himself "Keeper of the Eliot Archive".
But secondly, it attached Eliot to the English community and English culture."
Despite moving away from the city, Eliot wrote to a friend that the "Missouri and the Mississippi have made a deeper impression on me than any other part of the world."
From 1938 to 1957 Eliot's public companion was Mary Trevelyan of London University, who wanted to marry him and left a detailed memoir.
With the important exception of ''Four Quartets'', Eliot directed much of his creative energies after ''Ash Wednesday'' to writing plays in verse, mostly comedies or plays with redemptive endings.
He also published three short stories in 1905, "Birds of Prey", "A Tale of a Whale" and "The Man Who Was King".
Escaping Oxford, Eliot spent much of his time in London.
In 1915, Ezra Pound, overseas editor of ''Poetry'' magazine, recommended to Harriet Monroe, the magazine's founder, that she publish "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock".
This, coupled with apparent mental instability, meant that she was often sent away by Eliot and her doctors for extended periods of time in the hope of improving her health, and as time went on, he became increasingly detached from her.
Pound instantly deemed Eliot "worth watching" and was crucial to Eliot's beginning career as a poet, as he is credited with promoting Eliot through social events and literary gatherings.
Interpreting the line as an indirect comparison of Jews to rats, Julius writes, "The anti-Semitism is unmistakable.
His style was to become less ironic, and the poems would no longer be populated by multiple characters in dialogue.
The ''Four Quartets'' cannot be understood without reference to Christian thought, traditions, and history.
Each poem is associated with one of the four classical elements: air, earth, water, and fire.
Their relationship became the subject of a 1984 play ''Tom & Viv'', which in 1994 was adapted as a film.
In my end is my beginning."
The apartment block where he died, No.
Although Eliot was still legally her husband, he never visited her.
It was Pound who helped most, introducing him everywhere."
The only thing that matters is that these should be perfect in their kind, so that each should be an event."
Eliot wrote ''The Cocktail Party'' while he was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study.
Published in 1930, it deals with the struggle that ensues when one who has lacked faith acquires it.
After going away to school in 1905, he only returned to St. Louis for vacations and visits.
Eliot was awarded a scholarship to Merton College, Oxford, in 1914.
In "Gerontion", Eliot writes, in the voice of the poem's elderly narrator, "And the jew squats on the window sill, the owner of my building / Spawned in some estaminet of Antwerp."
S. Eliot'' (2006), sought to defend Eliot from the charge of anti-Semitism.
Edmund Wilson, being one of the critics who praised Eliot, called him "one of our only authentic poets".
He was somewhat self-deprecating and minimising of his work and once said his criticism was merely a "by-product" of his "private poetry-workshop" But the critic William Empson once said, "I do not know for certain how much of my own mind Eliot invented, let alone how much of it is a reaction against him or indeed a consequence of misreading him.
In 1939, Eliot published a book of light verse, ''Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats'' ("Old Possum" was Ezra Pound's nickname for him).
Regarding his method of playwriting, Eliot explained, "If I set out to write a play, I start by an act of choice.
Yeats: "The kind of poetry that I needed to teach me the use of my own voice did not exist in English at all; it was only to be found in French."
