In 1836, a group of Conservatives took control of the federal government, but Tabasco liberals decided to rebel against this government until they were defeated.
This is one of the oldest coats of arms in the Americas.
Another feature of the site is sixty petroglyphs.
For this reason, the indigenous of this area was not generally converted to Catholicism unlike other parts of New Spain .
For this reason, it is also covered in small lakes, wetlands and rivers.
The average annual temperature is 27C with high temperatures averaging 36C, mostly in May and lows of 18.5C which present in January.
The state has about 150,000 families or about half a million people living in poverty, mostly due to lack of employment according to Sedesol.
The highway along the Gulf Coast linking eastern Tabasco with Veracruz and the Yucatan Peninsula was completed in 1956.
The technological progress was accompanied by poor and even slave-like conditions for many workers.
Typical dishes include those with iguana meat, Lepisosteus fish, beef puchero, smoked oysters, totopostes, pork with beans and tortillas made with banana and fresh corn.
It produces 556,371 barrels of crude oil and a 1,363 million cubic feet of natural gas per day.
The most important of these are El Carmen, Pajonal, La Machona and Mecoacán.
There is also important pasture, both natural and seeded.
As of the 2000s, only about 2% of the population has left to live abroad, mostly to the United States.
Tabasco is host to the boating marathon called the Mundo Maya on the Usumacinta and Grijalva rivers.
Recent major flooding includes events in 1975, 1990 and 1999.
Tabasco was a landing and crossing point for the conquest of southern Mexico and Guatemala, referenced by Hernán Cortés in one of his letters to the Spanish Crown.
This led to some mixing among the three races which has affected the ethnic appearance of the people of the state.
These and others in the state joined forces politically with Francisco I. Madero and a new Club Anti-reelecionista was formed in Huimanguillo.
La Venta was the most important civic-religious center of the Olmec civilization, the first major culture of Mesoamerica.
The state's population is more rural than the national average: 57% lives in urban areas, in contrast to 78% of Mexico's population in general.
Timber and agriculture made the elite in the state rich, with most of the rest of the population workers indebted to their employers.
Traje regional de gala
In the same time period, the level percentage of the population which was illiterate fell from 25.7% to 11%.
The Grutas de Coconá caves are classified as a natural monument with 422 hectares.
The site covers 577 hectares and with a total of 282 structures.
Flooding is a frequent occurrence, especially September and November.
In the 1950s, Carlos A. Madrazo became governor who promoted large public works, agricultural and industrial projects and initiated exploration for petroleum.
In the brackish and salt water lagoons various ocean species are found along with shellfish and mollusks along with bird species such as seagulls and pelicans.
"Baila Viejo" is performed in Tucta and Guaytalpa in the municipality of Nacajuca as well as the Atasta de Serra in Villahermosa.
The growth of the city from the 1970s on has brought development down from the hill onto the floodplains.
These areas are dominated by grasses and bushes along with some smaller trees such as jahuacte, cocoyol and small palm trees.
Traje regional ordinario
The Universidad Intercultural del Estado de Tabasco was founded in 2006 as a state university to offer higher education to those from lower socioeconomic classes and indigenous communities.
'''Tabasco''' (), officially the '''Free and Sovereign State of Tabasco''' (), is one of the 31 states which, with the Federal District, comprise the 32 Federal Entities of Mexico.
This resentment led to the Mexican Revolution.
The first to have success was Francisco de Montejo (Jr.) in the 1540s who assumed command of the city as part of the province of the Yucatán, governed by his father.
Hospital in various municipalities and various historic centers were reconstructed, especially that of Villahermosa.
This park was created in the 1950s by writer Carlos Pellicer to protect the most important pieces of the archeological site.
In the Chontalpa zone and in parts of the municipalities of Cental and Jonuta, there are swampy depressions extremely vulnerable to flooding from both river flow and from excessive rainfall.
For the rest of the colonial period, most of Tabasco would have no major events and no major commerce  in comparison to the rest of the country.
Hernán Cortés came the following year and fought the indigenous here at the Battle of Centla.
It was broken up by police but the following month 30,000 marched on Villahermosa to protest.
The state is located in the southeast of Mexico, bordering the states of Campeche, Chiapas and Veracruz with the Gulf of Mexico to the north and the country of Guatemala to the south and east.
Traditional masculine dress consists of a white shirt and pants, with black boots or shoes, black belt, a hat in a style called "chontal" and a red handkerchief around the neck.
Flooding has historically been an issue in the state, which has year round heavy rainfall and various rivers flowing through it.
The Centla Biosphere Reserve covers an area of 302,706 hectares.
The blouse is white with an embroidered band in bright colors often with flower and/or animal designs.
Santa María de la Victoria was attacked and sacked, forcing the settlement to move inland in 1598 to San Juan Bautista (Today Villahermosa), renamed Villa Hermosa by the Spanish Crown, which gave it the oldest coat of arms on the American mainland, today the seal of the state of Tabasco.
The reserve is home to a wide variety of wildlife species such as herons, storks, ibis, crocodiles, fresh water turtles, manatees and more.
These include "El Gigante" of Nacajuca performed on 14 August.
The site dates back to about 1000 BC and declined around 400 AD, replaced in importance by San Lorenzo.
New roads, bridges and a modern airport have been constructed with oil money, along with a Centro de Investigaciones de la Cultura Olmeca y Maya, el Teatro del Estado, a planetarium and a convention center in the capital.
The Chontalpa Ecological Park has 277 hectares.
It is based on flute and percussion, including drums made of tortoise shells and flutes/whistles made of ceramic.
Another is that there are a number of dams such as the Angostura, Chicoasén, Malpas and Peñitas, built for hydroelectricity and flood control but can overflow.
Jalapa is known for its sweets such as sweetened fruits in corn husks, often accompanied by a cacao and corn beverage called chorote.
Cattle accounts for about three quarters of the meat produced in the state.
On their first attempt to take Villahermosa upriver, they failed.
These efforts succeeded in getting Bandala reelected, replacing him with Policarpo Valenzuela, calming the situation in the state for a short while.
The state receives an average annual rainfall of 2,550mm.
He prohibited the production and sale of alcoholic beverages in the state.
Opponents of Garrido declared this a violation of due process and held their own elections.
It also includes a visit to the Comalcalco archeological site.
Shortly after, Tabasco joined the movement and proclaimed a Conservative government.
It is divided into seventeen municipalities.
The petroleum boom produced great wealth, but there has been disputes over the money earned from the facilities owned by PEMEX, the nation's oil company.
These basins encompass numerous rivers and streams which all eventually flow into the Gulf of Mexico.
Olmec Head, La Venta Park
There is also over 500 species of plants with some of the most important concentration of aquatic plants in Mesoamerica.
The main Olmec site in Tabasco is La Venta.
Its original name is not known and it is currently named after a nearby modern settlement.
The Cacao Route consists of various cacao haciendas, where guides give lessons on how the plant is cultivated and the cacao bean is harvested, then processed into chocolate.
Most of the commercially important crops are perennials, such as cacao, coconut, oranges, bananas and sugar cane.
Cascadas de Aguas Blancas
The River Route is based in the interior portion of the state, between the Grijalva and Usumacinta Rivers.
This regime is based on rural work customs which required starting the day before the sun rose.
This is followed by Ch’ol, Tzeltal, Maya, Zapoteco, Nahuatl and Tzotzil.
The Laguna del Camarón Ecological Park has 70 hectares.
It features the crafts of the area such as decorated containers made from gourds, its cuisine, especially river fish, the Chontal people of the area and the river boardwalk.
Livestock raising increased and general economic levels rose.
About ninety percent of industrial establishments are family owned, mostly dedicated to food processing in and around Villahermosa.
This site is related to the Zoque culture and was at its height between 250 and 400 AD.
Agriculture was the focus of programs called Plan Chontalpa and Plan Balacán-Tenosique and free health care clinics were built in rural areas.
It has its origins in 1880.
The cuisine is based on the foods of the ancient Mayas and Chontals, using plants and animals native to the region such as achiote, chili peppers, chipilin and banana leaves, with corn and beans serving as the base.
To date, the site is only partially explored.
Comalcalco is a Maya archeological site near the modern city of the same name, on a bank of the Mezcalapa River.
However, this government was short lived.
There are 860 wells in various municipalities extracting crude oil and natural gas.
Most the intact rainforest are found in the municipalities of Tenosique, Balancán, Macuspana, Teapa, Tacotalpa, Cárdenas and Huimanguillo.
At that time, the entire state had a population of only 36,000 in two towns, two villages, and various ranches and farms.
The Franciscans arrived in the 16th century for evangelization purposes, but they did not stay.
The most common cold chocolate beverage is pozol, served fresh or fermented.
Reforms to decentralize power away from Villahermosa was undertaken but in the 1990s, political instability remained with farmers, ranchers and others continuing to complain about how PEMEX was affecting their economic activities.
In the 1990s, various technical colleges were established in the state along with the Universidad Popular de la Chontalpa and another in Tenosique.
The Cacao Route focuses on the municipalities of Nacajuca, Jalpa de Méndez, Comalcalco and Paraíso.
Meanwhile, Various Tabascans formed a newspaper called ''El Dissidente'', which criticized the French installed government.
During the Mexican–American War, troops under Matthew C. Perry arrived to Tabasco in 1846.
The last prompted the creation of the Programa Integral de Control de Inundaciones (Integral Program for Flood Control) to build dams, dikes and other flood control measures.
Although the recent oil boom has helped to bring the state out of complete poverty, there is still areas in which this is a serious problem.
The PEMEX facilities have caused environmental damage, and damage to local farmers’ crops.
Those that migrate to the state mostly come from Chiapas, Veracruz and Campeche.
(amashito) Traditionally, people in Tabasco eat seven times a day, these meals are called "puntal" (after getting out of bed), breakfast, "refigerio," "apertivo," "comida," "merienda" and "cena."
One is the fishing village of Villa Sánchez Magallenes.
These structures include a Mesoamerican ball court, a main plaza and a sunken patio.
However, the Tabascans formed guerrilla groups and this along with the inhospitable climate forced the U.S. military to withdraw soon after.
Even though it produces significant quantities of petroleum and natural gas, poverty is still a concern.
These were mostly composed of wind instruments but the marimba and drums called temborileros were added.
The state has sixteen major institutes of higher education, with four universities, three technological colleges, seven teachers’ colleges an "instituto de estudios superiors" and one post graduate college.
The two major regions are called the Grijalva and the Usumacinta.
Tabasco has salt water and fresh water fishing along its shoreline and in the many rivers and small lakes but they are not extensively exploited, providing less than two percent of Mexico's total fish production.
It is divided into the Pantanos and Ríos subregions, which are both more rural than the Grijalva Region.
At the beginning of the 18th century, Tabasco and Veracruz united to combat the pirate threat, and succeeded in expelling them from the Isla del Carmen.
However, this development led to wide scale deforestation began in the latter decades of the 19th century with timber companies cutting large areas of rainforest.
The Centro or Villahermosa Route is centered on the state capital with its museums and historic buildings.
The state accounts for 3.4% of Mexico's national GDP.
These were in process of construction when the 2007 floods hit.
The struggle between Liberals, who wanted a federal government, and Conservatives, which wanted a centralized government, played out in Tabasco with various skirmishes between Ruiz de la Peña leading the Liberals and Marcelino Margalli for the Conservatives.
However, Jiménez was soon jailed and local authorities proclaimed allegiance to the Crown.
Most of the state is covered in rainforest as, unlike most other areas of Mexico, it has plentiful rainfall year round.
It was defended by local troops but they did not have the necessary supplies.
The Usumacinta Region is named after the main river on which the Centla, Jonuta, Emiliano Zapata, Balancán and Tenosique municipalities depend.
'''Traditional dress of Tabasco'''
Tabasco experienced significant economic development during the Diaz period in the late 19th century, with cacao and other products shipped worldwide.
Along these areas of forest are the beaches and wetlands of the state.
It is divided into three sub regions called Chontalpa, Centro and Sierra and includes the municipalities of Huimanguillo, Cárdenas, Comalcalco, Cunduacán, Paraíso, Jalpa de Méndez, Nacajuca, Centro, Jalapa, Teapa and Tacotalpa.
Chocolate is still found in preparations which have not changed since pre Hispanic times mostly as hot and cold beverages.
These rainforests contain species such as mahogany, cedar, various types of palms, "macayo," ceiba, willows and many more.
Reforma is also known as Morales or Moral.
His tenure as governor ended in 1935, when he was appointed the federal Secretary of Agriculture and he appointed Aureo L. Calles to take over.
The name Tabasco is not definitively known with a number of theories debated among linguists.
Political instability in the state and an outbreak of cholera forced Tabasco to rejoin the federation.
Most speak the Tabascan dialect of the Chontal language.
Most of the state's poor are concentrated in the Jonuta, Tacotalpa, Centla and Humanguillo municipalities as these lack any major industry.
He implemented an ambitious socialist program, organizing unions and consolidating power though his Radical Socialist Party (Partido Socialista Radical).
The Americans occupied the capital for another thirty five days, causing great destruction.
After Madero was assassinated, the politics of the state fractured, with various factions vying for the governor's position leading to insurrection and frequent government changes who were allied with the various armies vying for power nationally.
Anti Díaz sentiment began in the decade of 1900 with efforts to keep Bandala from being re-elected.
Most are located in the Villahermosa area but others can be found in Comalcalco, Huimanguillo, Balancán, Emiliano Zapata, Jalpa de Méndez, Jonuta and Teapa.
It has a coastline to the north with the Gulf of Mexico.
However, what exists today is only a fraction of what used to be, as much of the forest area has been overexploited by man, mostly through logging and slash and burn agriculture.
Because of the flat terrain, there are areas where rivers pool due to shallow depressions.
In the south there are some elevations which are part of the central mesa of Chiapas.
Tourism in the state is organized into various routes.
The main plazas with their ceremonial structures are similar to those found in Tikal and the towers of Río Bec.
Almost all of the river system of the state belongs to the Usumacinta River-based, the largest in Mexico and the Grijalva River basin, the second largest.
There are 86 traditional public markets.
Tropical savannah is mostly found in the southern part of the state, mixed in with areas of rainforest.
The name appears in the chronicles of Bernal Díaz del Castillo during the conquest era, who says it comes from the name of a river in the area.
It is divided in 17 municipalities and its capital city is Villahermosa.
There is little information about this Mayan sites but it had an established ruling lineage by 633 AD and was tied politically and economically with Pomoná, Palenque and Bonampak.
They include coconut palms, palo mulato, royal palm and pimento de Tabasco.
Three percent of the population speaks an indigenous language, which is lower than the national average of six percent.
In Comalcalco, attractions include the Comalcalco archeological site, cacao haciendas such as La Luz with its Cacao Museum, Jesús María, La Chonita and Cholula.
Oil and natural gas were discovered at this time and in 1974, the development of these resources began.
The Laguna de la Lima Reserve has 36.2 hectares.
Mammal species have declined because of deforestation, but still include spider monkeys, jaguars, pumas, raccoons, anteaters, deer, and wild boar.
The most important industry is petroleum refining, done by PEMEX in the Macuspana municipality.
Only 14.6% of the working population is in mining.
Other ships arrived soon after and the troops took possession of the port of Frontera.
The rest is hot and semi humid, located in the far northeast of the state.
The most important of these is El Madrigal, La Campana, La Corona, Pomaná, Coconá, Mono Pelado and El Tortuguero.
Paraíso is a small port with beaches and some resort facilities.
The total volume of fresh water flow in the state is about 125,000,000,000m3 with is about 35% of the flow of the entire country.
"Los Blanquitos" is also performed in Tenosique and symbolizes the struggle of black slaves during the colonial period.
They were the oldest Mesoamerican culture which dominated areas in what are now the states of Mexico, Guerrero, Oaxaca, Veracruz and Tabasco as well as parts of Central America, and considered to be the founding culture for all of Mesoamerica.
Patron saint days are still popular events in the state, with some of the more notable being San Isidro in Comalcalco and Nacajuca, James the Greater in Chontalpa, Our Lady of the Remedies in Nacajuca, Our Lady of the Assumption in Cupilco, Francis of Asissi in Tamulté de las Sabanas, events related with Lent in Atasta and Tamulté and the Saint Sebastian in Tenosique.
Jalpa de Méndez produces head cheese, longaniza sausage and another cured meat called butifarra.
In Jalpa de Méndez, the main attractions are its gourd handcrafts, the San Remo cigar factory, the La Encantada Turtle Farm and the Pomposú Juliva Wetlands on the Mezcalapa River.
Much of the rainforest has suffered degradation due to over logging and conversion of territory into farmland.
These include the Carlos Pellicer Museum (anthropology) Museum of Popular Culture, Museum of History and the La Venta site museum.
The site shows a number of the characteristics of Olmec culture, including depictions of jaguars, colossal heads and images of figures of rotund children.
Most of the territory is covered with tropical rainforest and wetlands.
Her work would later inspire José María Pino Suárez.
The main monuments are La Plaza Norte, La Gran Acropolis and the Eastern Acropolis.
Due to the climate, the Zebu breed of cattle does best and is mostly raised for meat.
This fueled resentment in the state and the rest of the country.
There are also exhibits on the flora and fauna of the area.
"El Caballito Blanco" depicts the struggles of the indigenous against the Spanish at the Battle of Centla.
The only rivers outside these basins are the Tonalá, on the border between Tabasco and Veracruz and some small rivers in Chontalpa.
The flood damage was made worse by the presence of human settlements on flood plains and the lack of hydraulic infrastructure on the Sierra and Usumacinta rivers.
In the early 16th century, the main ethnicities of Tabasco were the Mayas-Chontals, the Zoques, and the Popolocas, living in small villages with the Mayan language dominating.
The state is also home to La Venta, the major site of the Olmec civilization, considered to be the origin of later Mesoamerican cultures.
It has six important groups of buildings with residential areas extending over 175 hectares.
It was noted by him and by Bernal Díaz del Castillo for its abundance of cacao.
The structures of the site rest on a series of artificial terraces with twenty seven mounds.
The industry has put pressure on the state's infrastructure, housing and supplies of basic necessities.
Cardenas is near the ocean with various attractions.
Events relating to this were portrayed in the novel The Power and the Glory by Graham Greene.
Purely indigenous music has almost entirely disappeared, replaced by that of European influence.
Mining, mostly of petroleum and natural gas, provides most of the state's GDP.
There are also areas with savanna, beaches and mangrove forests.
The state covers 24,731km2, which is 1.3% of Mexico's total.
Today, the average schooling is 8.6 years or the third year of middle school, which is the national average.
Sites include he Río Puyacateno Park, Los Azufres Hacienda and Spa, the José Natividad Correa Tosca Museum and Coconá Caverns.
The savanna has wildlife such as rabbits, deer, foxes various species of birds.
The Mountain Adventure Route is in the highlands of the state with its forests, sulphurate waters and caves, centered on the town of Tapijulapa, which is noted for its handcrafts of wood and wicker.
Over 95% of the state's territory has a hot, wet climate.
Another important episode in the history of the state was the governorship of Tomás Garrido Canabal after the end of the Revolution.
