In addition to the indirect effects of the war, city's industrial zone, specially the oil refinery was also a major target for air strikes by Iraqi's air forces because of the closeness to the Iraqi border lines, and their strategic roles in the country's economy.
During the Middle Ages, a Jewish community existed in the town.
Prior to the forced ceding of Iran's Caucasian territories to Imperial Russia following the two Russo-Persian Wars of the first half of the 19th century, comprising what is now Georgia, southern Dagestan, Azerbaijan, and Armenia, Tabriz was the main city in the implementation of Iranian rule for its Caucasian territories due to its proximity.
Radiocarbon analysis by Allameh Tabatabi University has shown the background of the graves to be more than 3800 years old.
More likely the city has been destroyed multiple times either by natural disasters or by the invading armies.
He started with promises of modernization programs in Iran which was concentrated on the unification of the country, under the idea of ''one country, one nation''.
Thanks to the more liberal policies of the Khatami era (1998-2006,  a cultural renaissance took place and the local music was revitalized.
Dried fried nuts.png|Dried fried salted nuts
During this round of invasion Ottmans imprisoned many and killed about two hundred thousand of Tabriz inhabitants.
* Municipality of Tabriz
They often feature symmetrical and balanced designs.
The recent identity renaissance of Azeri speaking people has elevated the status of ashughs as the guardians of national culture.The new found unprecedented popularity and frequent concerts and performances in urban settings have resulted in rapid innovative developments aiming to enhance the urban-appealing aspects of this ashugh performances.
The cities other futsal team is Shahrdari Tabriz who play at the larger Shahid Poursharifi Arena.
Azerbaijan University is a general university.
Among them is the Iran Tractor Manufacturing Co (ITMCO) which is one of the biggest industrial complexes in the region.
The Islamic geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi says that Tabriz was a village before Rawwad from the tribe of Azd arrive at Tabriz.
Tabriz residents mostly commute by public bus, shuttle taxis, metro, bike, and personal cars.
(in Tabriz, six months of the year are winter and the other six months are a nuisance).
In 1514, after the Battle of Chaldiran, Tabriz was temporarily occupied by the Ottomans.
Part of Tabriz subway line 1 is operational since 2015 which goes from Shahgoli to Shahriyar.
Here a partial list of some of most notable people who born or lived in Tabriz.
* Jamee mosque of Tabriz
The Middle Persian name of the city was ''T'awrēš''.
Tabriz public bus lines connects its districts and some of its suburbs to city center of Tabriz.
File:Soviet six horse foot artillery team on the streets of Tabriz.jpg|Soviet artillery units passing through Tabriz, WWII.
who was always alert and awake at night
Their roots can be traced back to at least the 7th century according to the Turkic epic Dede Korkut.
Here is a list of most famous high schools in the city:
The city has a long and turbulent history with its oldest civilization sites dating back to 1,500 BC.
In recent years, however, mugham is gaining popularity among educated middle class young generation.
Tabriz is connected to  Tehran by Freeway 2 (Iran).
Sattar Khan and Bagher Khan, two Tabrizi reformists who led Tabriz people's solidarity against absolute monarchy, had a great role in achievement to the goals of Iran's constitutional revolution.
In later years of WWI, the Ottoman troops intervened and took control of the city by defeating the Russian troops stationed there.
The devastation continued on 1724-1725 by a crucial invasion of the city by Ottoman army.
There is also a service calls Telephone Taxi which operate by private companies.
* Daneshsara (faculty of education)
A main factor for this developments was the opening of academic style music classes in Tabriz by master Ashugs, such as Aşiq Imran Heydəri.
For instance, Nasir Atapur, from Tabriz, was the laureate of Mugam contest 2007.
* Roshdieh school is the first modern Iranian school, which was established by Haji-Mirza Hassan Roshdieh.
نیم نان و آب مهران رود و بس
After the Mongol invasion, Tabriz came to eclipse Maragheh as the later Ilkhanid Mongol capital of Azerbaijan until it was sacked by Timur in 1392.
File:House-of-Constitutional-Revolution.jpg|Constitution House of Tabriz
Generally, the brief picnic ends with drinking a few cups of tea that has been brewed on a smoking fire.
This is based on accounts of Vardan, the Armenian historian in 14th century.
File:Samad Behrangi.JPG|Samad Behrangi, social critic, folklorist, translator, and writer.
―''Bustan of Sadi''
File:Iranian Astrolab.jpg|A newly made bronze Astrolabe, as a sample of Ghalamzani in Tabriz
In old times the city notables, supported poets and writers by organizing periodical meetings.
This cycling tour is the most prestigious cycling tour in Iran.
Tabriz has been chosen as the capital for some rulers commencing from Atropates era and his dynasty.
File:Shah Goli and Pars hotel.JPG|Shah Goli Park
Students attend primary school for five years, middle school for three years, and secondary school for a final three years.
Like other part of Iran the official language  is Persian and most inhabitants are familiar with Persian language, which is the official language of Iran and the sole language of education.
This is the tall Arg of Tabriz City,
Howard Baskerville used to teach in Memorial school.
The club is usually a mid table team and has less support throughout the city.
However, due to the efforts of local industries to comply with the new limits on pollution, as per the Environmental National Code, the level of industrial pollution has been reduced to 558,167 tons of pollutants per year.
Tabriz retaken by the Iranian army.
The club won the Iranian Futsal Super League in 2014 and finished third in Asia.
The paintings date back to the early 14th century and show significant influence from Chinese and Chinese-influenced pictures.
The Georgians then pushed further, taking Khoy and Qazvin along the way.
The Tabriz National Library has the biggest collection of classic handwritten Persian literature in the northwest region of Iran.
It was established in Ilkhanid period.
Azerbaijan and Turkey have consulate offices in Tabriz.
* Ferdowsi high school is one of the largest and most prominent high schools in Tabriz.
One of the major establishments in the period of Pishevari's government was opening of the University of Tabriz which played a major role in the later political movements and protests in the region.
Although this is a significant improvement, air pollution remains a serious burden to overcome.
The city is famous for its handicrafts including hand-woven rugs and jewelry.
By this time, the Ottoman army led by Enver Pasha threatened the whole Russian army in the Caucasus region.
From 1375 to 1468, Tabriz was the capital of Qara Qoyunlu state in Azerbaijan, until defeat of Qara Qoyunlu ruler, Jahan Shah by Ag Qoyunlu warriors.
Four months after the constitutional revolution's success, in December 1911, the Russians started a campaign to invade Tabriz.
Behind ITMCO there are several other industrial complexes including Mashin Sazi Tabriz Co, Iran Diesel Engine Manufacturing Co (IDEM), Pump Iran, Tabriz Petrochemical Complex, Tabriz Oil Refinery and a couple of industrial regions which include hundreds of small industries.
Raised its outstanding height there!
* Constitutional Revolution House of Tabriz (Mashrouteh museum)
According to official census of 2006, the population of Tabriz is about 1,800,000.
This includes Dadash and Baradar Industrial Co. with the brand mark of Shoniz, which is one of the biggest factories of its kind in the region.
Reza Shah, brigadier-general of the Persian Cossack Brigade, declared himself the king of the country following a coup d'état.
Eynali was a barren mountain on top of which there was a huge white rectangular antenna facing Tabriz city.
He rebuilt the remnants of Tabriz and established a modern taxation system.
The annual precipitation is around , a good deal of which falls as snow during the winter months and rain in spring and autumn.
* Tabriz Museum of Natural History
File:Tabriz City Hall.jpg|Saat Tower
Tabriz is a hub for the major sports events in the region.
Tabriz National Library, also known as Central Library of Tabriz, is the most famous library in the city.
File:City Gate , Tabriz by Eugène Flandin.jpg|Sketch of the gate of Tabriz, Eugène Flandin 1841.
"Tabrizian style" painting was shaped in the era of Ilkhanids, Kara Koyunlu and the Safavids.
The culture, social values, language and the music is a mixture of what exists in rest of Iran.
File:Farhad Fakhraddini.jpg|Farhad Fakhreddini composer, conductor and founder of Iran’s National Orchestra.
The postwar situation further complicated by Soviets aid to set up a local government called Azerbaijan People's Government in northwest Iran having Tabriz as its capital.
File:Ghari Bridge.JPG|Ghari bridge
A fascinating fictional account of "Tabrizian style" painting in the Safavids era is narrated by  Orhan Pamuk in ''My Name Is Red''.
After revolution, the residents of the city were unsatisfied with the outcome, mainly because of the ignorance of the revolutionary government about the rights of the Azerbaijani minority .
File:Shamse Tabrizi.jpg|Shams Tabrizi, poet.
افراشته قامتِ رسايش را
After the retreat of the Russian army, Abbas Mirza, Qajar prince of crown, started a modernization scheme launched from Tabriz.
Most of the preserved historical sites in the city belong to Ilkhanid (of Mongol Empire), Safavid, and Qajar area, among them is the grand Bazaar of Tabriz which is inscribed as a World Heritage Site in 2010.
During this period the city enjoyed a lot of investment in industries and had transformed into a heavy industries hub in the northwest of Iran.
Chosen as a capital by Abaqa Khan, fourth ruler of the Ilkhanate, for its favored location in the northwestern grasslands, in 1295, his successor Ghazan Khan made it the chief administrative center of an empire stretching from Anatolia to the Oxus River and from the Caucasus to the Indian Ocean.
Tabriz is also an academic hub and a site for some of the most prestigious cultural institutes in the northwest of Iran.
The half loaf of bread and the water of Mehranrud river are enough!
شهر تبريز است و کوی دلبران
Currently, it is divided into three separate high schools, and the original building is under reconstruction.
Moreover, some of the historical monuments have been destroyed fully or partially within construction projects (the Ark of Tabriz is in danger of destruction now, because of the ongoing nearby construction project of Mosal'laye Emam).
Several lines are planned to connect districts of Tabriz to its city center however the construction is six year behind the plan.
File:Amir Nezam House 1.jpg|Amir Nezam House (Qajar museum)
There is a small, embattled Baha'i community in the city where one of the founders of their faith, Ali Muhammad Bab, was executed on July 9, 1850.
The inhabitants' overall evaluation of climate is pretty negative; there is a popular saying that "''Təbrizin alti ayii qişdir, altisi də qəmişdir''!"
File:Colonel pesian.JPG|Colonel Pessian, military commander and first Iranian pilot.
Safavid king, Abbas I of Persia retake Tabriz after which the city grows as a major commerce center, conducting trade with the Ottoman Empire, Russia, and the Caucasus.
Hundreds of public and private schools serve students using the Iranian education system.
The valley opens up into a plain that gently slopes down to the eastern shores of Lake Urmia,  to the west.
Within its long history Tabriz was always the origin for many Iranian illumination and modernization movements.
تا به تبریزم دو چیزم حاصل است
File:Jules Laurens 16.jpg|Painting of Blue mosque, Jules Laurens, 1872.
Other than carpets, the city is famous for several other handicrafts including silverwares, wood engraving, pottery and ceramics, Ghalamzani (Irania style of toreutics), Moarraq (Iranian style of Mosaic), Monabbat, embroider.
Tabriz is the largest economic center in Northwest of Iran.
After Abbas Mirza and Ivan Paskevich signed the peace treaty, which granted for the irrevocable cession of the last remaining Caucasian territories, the Russian army retreated from the city however the Russian political and military influence remained a major thing in Tabriz and north-northwestern Iran up to the fall of Russian empire in the early 20th century.
* Sahand University of Technology is established in 1989 and have majors in different fields of Engineering and Technology related sciences.
Among many different sports activities soccer and cycling got more attention because of the cities teams and international events which are held in the city.
Some of the high schools are famous because of their history or higher educational quality.
* Payam-e Noor University of Tabriz, is part of Payame Noor University network of remote educational university.
In nearby Ardebil, conquered by the Georgians as well, as many as 12,000 Muslims were killed.
Arg-Tabriz-USA.jpg|Ark of Tabriz and US flag in the days after constitutional revolution, 1911.
* Sharbatoglu house
The US consulate office closed after the 1979 Islamic revolution and the USSR's office closed after the collapse of the USSR in 1991.
In more recent years the presence of women is noticeable.
The predominant language spoken in Tabriz is Azeri Turkish (Azeri people call it Türkü or Türki language) which is a Turkic language mutually intelligible with modern Turkish.
Over years Tabriz became the center of  the famous school of Persian miniature painting.
The 13th-century manuscript Safina-yi Tabriz has poems in what its Tabriz-born author has called the Tabrizi language (Zabān-e-Tabrizi) which is similar to Farsi language.
In 1780, a major earthquake hit near Tabriz killing over 200,000 people.
In the 1980s, due to the Iraq-Iran war, like the rest of the country, most of the construction and development projects in the city were stopped in order to fund the war costs.
In recent years trees have been planted on mountain slopes and the place has the appearance of a vast park.
This University was part of Tabriz university till early 1980s.
However, this story has a popular origin and no ancient source has recorded such event.
* Saeb Tabrizi garden
Tabriz is the main site for four of Iran's Fortune 100 companies including: ITMCO, Palaz Moket, Kashi Tabriz, Shirin Asal, Aydin.
The city enjoys mild and fine climate in spring, dry and semi-hot in summer, humid and rainy in autumn and snowy cold in winter.
The government of Iran had planned to finish  of line No.1 of the network in 2006, but this was not achieved due to financial problems and currently only half of the track for the metro line has been laid.
* East-Azerbaijan State Palace
File:Revolutionists defending Davachi bridge, Tabriz (May 1, 1909).jpg|Constitutional revolutionists defending Davachi bridge against monarchists, May 1, 1909.
As long as I live in Tabriz, two things I need not worry of,
For the next 30 years, after the collapse of Azerbaijan's Soviet-backed government, Tabriz enjoyed a stable era until the revolution in 1979.
* Saheb ol Amr mosque
* Seventh-day Adventist Church, Armenian
It is excellently situated so the goods brought to here come from many regions.
Following Russia's retreat, the Ottomans captured the city once again for a few months until the decisive end of the war, and retreated thereafter.
In summer of 1721, a large earthquake shocked Tabriz, killing about eighty thousand of its residents.
The majority of the city's population are Azeri Turks, followed by Persians, Armenians and Assyrians.
ساربانا  بار   بگشا   ز اشتران
The first verses of a contemporary Ashug song, composed by Məhəmməd Araz, may well represent the essence of Ashugh music may clarify the said statement.
The allied forces then urged Reza Shah to abdicate and installed his son Mohammad Reza as the new king of the country.
File:TCarpet2.jpg|A sample of Tabriz rugs
* Museum of Ostad Bohtouni
At the final year of the World War II despite the declaration of the neutrality by the Iranian government, the country was occupied by the allied forces.
Latin merchants specially Genevis go there to buy the goods that come from foreign lands."
Tabriz is also a site for abundant food and some of the most famous chocolate factories in Iran which honored the city as the ''Chocolate City'' of Iran.
Between 1585 and 1603, Tabriz was under occupation by Ottomans.
File:House Hussein Khan, Tabriz by Eugène Flandin.jpg|A sketch of a 19th-century house in Tabriz, Eugène Flandin.
By escalation of the revolution in Russia, the Russian armies in Iranian Azerbaijan were evacuated, and the actual power passed into the hands of the local committee of the democrat party, with Ismail Nawbari at its head.
* Catholic church of Tabriz
Among them the famous ones are:
It also has daily and weekly flights to Istanbul, Tbilisi, and Baghdad.
A beloved lived in Tabriz away from sight,
Pishevari's government gave more freedom to speech and education in Azerbaijani language and promoted local cultural heritage and gained some popularity among the residents.
In recent years, Tabriz is much more stable and the new developments in the city are rapidly changing the face of the city.
The city has a couple of sports complexes.
''arxamca su səpir göydə bulutlar'' (Clouds sprinkle drops of rain)
After crushing the local resistance by invading Russian troops, they started suppressing the constitutional revolutionaries and residents of the city.
In the ramadan of 1208, Tabriz, as well as its adjacent cities and territories were conquered by the Kingdom of Georgia under Tamar the Great, as a response to the massacre of 12,000 Christians in the Georgian-controlled city of Ani on Easter day by Muslims.
A vast portion of the city's population is involved in small businesses like shoe making ateliers, stone-cutting, furniture ateliers, confectionery, printing and dry nuts.
The 14 weekly magazines and 8 main newspapers published in the city include: Amin, Mahd Azadi, Asr Azadi, Fajr Azarbaijan, Saeb Tabriz, Peyam Noor, Navaye Misho and Saheb.
* Behnam House (school of architecture)
Established in 1947, University of Tabriz is the most prestigious university in north-western Iran.
The ashugh music had survived in  mountainous region of Qaradağ and presently is identified as the characteristic form of music in all Azerbaijan.
From the 19th century, it became the most important city in the country in numerous respects.
With a population of 1.8 million, Tabriz is the biggest economic hub and the biggest metropolitan area in North West of Iran.
Furthermore, a couple of Iranian universities have branches in Tabriz, including: Imam Hossein University, Shahid Beheshti Training Teacher Center of Tabriz.
'''Tabriz'''  (, )  is the most populated city in the Iranian Azerbaijan, one of the historical capitals of Iran, and the present capital of East Azerbaijan Province.
* Salmasi house Measure museum
Tabriz was chosen as the capital by several rulers commencing from the time of Atropates.
A century long autocratic nation building policies of central governments in Iran has succeeded in cultural assimilation in the favor of a government sanctioned culture.
Tabriz is the World Carpet and Crafts City, also the city is selected by Organisation of Islamic Cooperation City of Tourism for 2018.
File:The Virgin Mary (Gerigury) church.jpg|Saint Mary Church of Tabriz
* Tabriz Railway Station
File:Musée mesures tabriz.jpg|Measure museum of Tabriz
Tabriz was a house for numerous Iranian writers, poets, and illumination movements.
During almost the entire Qajar period (up to 1925), it functioned as the seat for the crown prince as well.
File:Naser edin shah by Kamalolmolk.jpg|King Naser al-Din Shah Qajar.
The new Soviet-backed local government was run by Ja'far Pishevari and held power for one year starting from 1946.
The modernization and nationalization plan of Reza Shah continued until the surge of World War II.
The crown prince normally served as governor of Azerbaijan province as well.
Tabriz also have a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) line which runs through an  from ''Train Station'' in West of Tabriz to ''Baseej Square'' in far East of the city.
Within its long history it was a residence for many well known Iranian writers and poets.
File:Chay kenar - Tabriz.jpg|Chay kenar (river side) at night
* House of Seghat ol Islam
File:Behnam's House, Sahand University of Technology, Tabriz, Azerbaijan, Iran, 08-19-2006.jpg|Behnam House
There are a couple of research centers supported by Iranian government in the city including: East Azerbaijan Park of Science & Technology, Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Branch, Tabriz.
With escalation of the war the attacks turned to War of the Cities and the air attacks later turned into the random strikes on the residential areas of the city in the later phase of the war.
In older times, only groups of young men would climb near the shrine.
An interesting park-like popular location is Eynally Daği, a mountain at the north-east extremity of the city.
