The mutineers seized the ship and set the captain and most of those members of the crew who remained loyal to him adrift in a ship's boat.
The new king seemed little concerned with the affairs of the kingdom, and when in 1880 the governor Henri Isidore Chessé, supported by the Tahitian chiefs, pushed him to abdicate in favor of France, he accepted.
The Papeete Market sells local arts and crafts.
In 1891 Matthew Turner, an American shipbuilder from San Francisco who had been seeking a fast passage between the city and Tahiti, built the ''Papeete'', a two-masted schooner that made the trip in seventeen days.
This is a sign of the growing popularity of Rugby League in the Pacific Islands.
Taking advantage of the weakness of the Pōmare, local chiefs won back some of their power and took the hereditary title of Tavana (from the English word ‘governor’).
Once the treaty had been signed there began a struggle for influence between the English Protestants and the Catholic representatives of France.
The last test was conducted on 27 January 1996.
Or it can be the pahu, the ancient Tahitian standing drum covered with a shark skin and struck by the hands or with sticks.
In 1843, the Queen's Protestant advisor, Pritchard, persuaded her to display the Tahitian flag in place of the flag of the Protectorate.
Bonechea died on 20 January 1775 in Tahiti, where his grave was rediscovered in the 20th century.
In reaction to this powerful counter-attack, the inhabitants of the bay laid down offerings for the English, showing their wish for peace or to submit.
These chiefdoms were linked to each other by allegiances based on the blood ties of their leaders and on their power in war.
During his final stay he accompanied the chief Tū (nephew of the female chieftain "Oberea" (Purea)) on a warring expedition to Mo'orea ('Aimeo).
The annexation caused the Queen to be exiled to the Leeward Islands, and after a period of troubles, a real Franco-Tahitian war began in March 1844.
Within the framework of this treaty, France recognized the sovereignty of the Tahitian state.
It was also a place for ceremonies such as preparation for war, birth celebrations as well as burial rituals.
The war ended in December 1846 in favour of the French.
A symbol of their status were belts made of red feathers.
Then it continues along the west coast of Tahiti Nui through smaller villages.
The Tahitian national sport is Va'a.
Tahitian is now taught in schools; it is sometimes even a requirement for employment.
The ʻōteʻa is one of the few dances which existed in pre-European times as a male dance.
Rugby union in Tahiti is governed by the Fédération Tahitienne de Rugby de Polynésie Française which was formed in 1989.
He would keep an open door to a possible referendum in the future.
Another sport is surfing, with famous surfers such as Malik Joyeux and Michel Bourez.
The first contacts were difficult, since on the 24 and the 26 June 1767, some Tahitians in canoes tried to take the ship and beach it, possibly because they were afraid the English had intentions of staying permanently, or possibly to take possession of the metallic objects from the ship.
The Viceroy of Peru, Manuel de Amat y Juniet, following the instructions of the Spanish Crown, organized an expedition to settle and colonize the island in 1772, largely to prevent other powers from gaining a base in the Pacific from which to attack the coast of Peru, but also to evangelize.
The ''marae'' were at the centre of the spiritual and social life of the clan.
''Tahiti Iti'' has remained isolated, as its southeastern half (''Te Pari'') is accessible only to those travelling by boat or on foot.
The term passed into western languages as taboo.
On 26 October 1788, HMS ''Bounty'', under the command of Captain William Bligh, landed in Tahiti with the mission of carrying Tahitian breadfruit trees (Tahitian: ''uru'') to the Caribbean.
As a result of his alliance with the mutineers, he succeeded in considerably increasing his supremacy over the island of Tahiti.
However, clan leaders did not hold absolute power, and their role included consulting with general assemblies or councils, especially in times of war.
The Teva Clan was composed of the Teva i Uta (Teva of the Interior) and the Teva i Tai (Teva of the Sea), and was led by Amo and Purea.
It is an ethnographic museum that was founded in 1974 to conserve and restore Polynesian artifacts and cultural practices.
Newer dances include the hivinau and the pa'o'a.
The group dance called 'Aparima is often performed with the dancers dressed in pareo and maro.
It has been suggested that he actually saw the island of Rekareka to the south-east of Tahiti.
In 1819, Pōmare II, encouraged by the missionaries, introduced the first Tahitian legal code, known under the name of the Pōmare Legal Code, which consists of nineteen laws.
Tahiti is the economic, cultural and political centre of French Polynesia.
Many courses are available such as law, commerce, science, and literature.
In about 1810, Pōmare II married Teremo'emo'e daughter of the chief of Raiatea, in order to ally himself with the chiefdoms of the Leeward Islands.
The island consists of two roughly round portions centred on volcanic mountains and connected by a short isthmus named after the small town of Taravao, situated there.
The island is  across at its widest point and covers an area of .
The '''ote'a'' (sometimes written as ''otea'') is a traditional dance from Tahiti, where the dancers, standing in several rows, execute figures.
The conversion of Pōmare II to Protestantism in 1812 marks moreover the point when Protestantism truly took off on the island.
On 12 November 1815, thanks to these alliances, Pōmare II won a decisive battle at Fe’i Pī (Punaauia), notably against Opuhara, the chief of the powerful clan of Teva.
Portuguese navigator Pedro Fernandes de Queirós, serving the Spanish Crown in an expedition to Terra Australis, was perhaps the first European to set eyes on the island of Tahiti.
He allied himself more and more with the missionaries, and from 1803 they taught him reading and the Gospels.
Once his mission had been completed, Admiral Du Petit-Thouars sailed towards the Marquesas Islands, which he annexed in 1842.
The highest peak is Mont Orohena (Mou'a 'Orohena) ().
In 1839 the island was visited by the United States Exploring Expedition; one of its members, Alfred Thomas Agate, produced a number of sketches of Tahitian life, some of which were later published in the United States.
The indigenous Tahitians are of Polynesian ancestry comprising 70% of the population alongside Europeans, East Asians (mostly Chinese) and people of mixed heritage sometimes referred to as ''Demis''.
It was not until 1946 that the indigenous Tahitians were legally authorised to be French citizens.
Nowadays, the ʻōteʻa can be danced by men (ʻōteʻa tāne), by women (ʻōteʻa vahine), or by both genders (ʻōteʻa ʻāmui = united ʻō.).
Types of ''marae'' ranged from simple family platforms to larger edifices for leaders of high status, although all were considered ''tapu''.
Between this date right until the end of the 18th century, the name of the island was spelled phonetically “Taïti”.
There was a hierarchy of marae, progressing from simple family marae to royal marae.
Her son, Pōmare V, then succeeded her on the throne.
The Tahitians consistently achieve record-breaking and top times as world champion in this sport.
During the same period about a thousand Chinese, mainly Cantonese, were recruited at the request of a plantation owner in Tahiti, William Stewart, to work on the great cotton plantation at Atimaono.
On these visits Cook made harbour at Tautira Bay, which is sometimes known as Cook's Anchorage.
France's influence is limited to subsidies, education and security.
'''Tahiti''' (; ) is the largest island in the Windward group of French Polynesia; this overseas collectivity of the French Republic is sometimes referred to as an overseas country.
The administrative centre of the commune is the settlement of Mataiea.
Other ferries are the Aremiti 5 and the Aremiti 7 and these two ferries sail to Moorea in about half an hour.
A smaller drum, the faʻatete, can be used.
Tahiti's landscape features lush rainforests and many streams, including the Papenoo River on the north side.
Tahiti has also been represented at the World Championship of Pétanque.
On the 29 June 1880, he ceded Tahiti to France along with the islands that were its dependencies.
In 1818, the minister William Pascoe Crook founded the city of Papeete, which became the capital of the island.
Sales tax in Tahiti is called ''Taxe sur la Valeur Ajoutée'' (TVA or value added tax (V.A.T.)
In 1946, Tahiti and the whole of French Polynesia became an overseas territory (Territoire d'outre-mer).
The Tahiti national rugby union team has been active since 1971 but have only played 12 games since then.
The Paul Gauguin Museum is dedicated to the life and works of French artist Paul Gauguin (1848–1903) who painted famous works such as ''Two Tahitian Women'', ''Tahitian Women on the Beach'' and ''Where Do We Come From?
Tahiti was nevertheless a special colony, since all the subjects of the Kingdom of Pōmare would be given French citizenship.
In 2009, Tauatomo Mairau claimed the Tahitian throne, and attempted to re-assert the status of the monarchy in court.
The first years proved hard work for the missionaries, despite their association with the Pōmare, the importance of whom they were aware of thanks to the reports of earlier sailors.
In November 1835 Charles Darwin visited Tahiti aboard HMS ''Beagle'' on her circumnavigation, captained by Robert FitzRoy.
In 2010, Tahiti was chosen as the host of the 2013 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup, which was held in September 2013.
Tahiti is also home to a single winery, whose vineyards are located on the Rangiroa atoll.
The chief of the clan did not have absolute power.
On 8 October 2004, Flosse succeeded in passing a censure motion against the government, provoking a crisis.
On 2 April 1768, it was the turn of Louis-Antoine de Bougainville, completing the first French circumnavigation, to land in the Bay of Matavai.
Tahiti was originally settled by Polynesians between 300 and 800 CE.
The ari’i, considered descendants of the Polynesian gods, were full of mana (spiritual power).
In 2012, the national team won the OFC Nations Cup qualifying for the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup in Brazil and becoming the first team other than Australia or New Zealand to win it.
He was impressed by what he perceived to be the positive influence the missionaries had had on the sobriety and moral character of the population.
The northwestern portion is known as ''Tahiti Nui'' ("big Tahiti"), while the much smaller southeastern portion is known as ''Tahiti Iti'' ("small Tahiti") or ''Tai'arapū''.
106 CFP to the US Dollar in January 2015).
Daily consumption of imported oil products was 7,430 barrels per day, according to the US Energy Information Administration.
Unemployment affects about 13% of the active population, especially women and unqualified young people.
In 1890, Papeete became a commune of the Republic of France.
The more unrelated the ari’i were to the chief of the clan, the more autonomous they were, forming a counterweight to his authority.
Tahiti's west coast freeway keeps going until Teahupo'o where the freeway becomes a thin paved road.
The Birmingham born missionary George Pritchard, who was the acting British consul, became her main adviser and tried to interest her in the affairs of the kingdom.
(...) The bloody wars that these people used to carry out and human sacrifices have no longer taken place since 1816."
The interior of ''Tahiti Nui'' is almost entirely uninhabited.
At the same time, Protestantism quickly spread, thanks to the support of Pōmare II, and replaced the traditional beliefs.
There are also several ferries that transport people and goods throughout the islands.
In 1791, HMS ''Pandora'' under Captain Edward Edwards called at Tahiti and took custody of fourteen of the mutineers.
Four were drowned in the sinking of the ''Pandora'' on her homeward voyage, three were hanged, four were acquitted, and three were pardoned.
The crews introduced alcohol, arms and illnesses into the island, and encouraged prostitution, which brought with it venereal disease.
Tahiti has a freeway that runs across the west coast.
These exchanges created favorable conditions for the rise of the Pōmare Dynasty.
The island is located in the archipelago of the Society Islands in the central Southern Pacific Ocean, and is divided into two parts: The bigger, northwestern part ''Tahiti Nui'' and the smaller, southeastern part ''Tahiti Iti''.
The Tahiti Division Fédérale is the top division on the island and the Tahiti Championnat Enterprise is the second tier.
In a proper ʻōteʻa the story of the theme should pervade the whole dance.
The island was part of the Kingdom of Tahiti until its annexation by France in 1880, when it was proclaimed a colony of France.
The French statesman François Guizot, supported by King Louis-Philippe of France, had denounced annexation of the island.
There are two types of ʻaparima: the ʻaparima hīmene (sung handdance) and the ʻaparima vāvā (silent handdance), the latter being performed with music only and no singing.
In July 1768, Captain James Cook was commissioned by the Royal Society and on orders from the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to observe the transit of Venus across the sun, a phenomenon that would be visible from Tahiti on 3 June 1769.
The size of any marae is proportional to the influence of the family.
In August 1842, Admiral Du Petit-Thouars returned and landed in Tahiti.
The indigenous Tahitians are Polynesians, part of the greater family of Oceanic peoples, noted in their history and culture for their navigation skills, essential for trade and communications in their maritime environs.
In 2011, Tahiti was accepted into as a member of the Asia-Pacific Rugby League Federation.
This dance, easily recognized by its fast hip-shaking and grass skirts, is often confused with the Hawaiian hula, a generally slower more graceful dance which focuses more on the hands and storytelling than the hips.
The ''marae'' was a sacred place of worship constructed of raised stone platforms in open ground, performing a cultural function similar to such structures in other Polynesian societies.
Major sports in Tahiti include rugby union and association football and the island has fielded a national basketball team, which is a member of FIBA Oceania.
The Tahiti Cup is the islands' premier football knockout tournament and has been played for since 1938.
The chief Tū knew how to use their presence in the harbours favoured by sailors to his advantage.
Tahitian society was composed of chiefdoms and territories based on kinship and military power among various clans.
This freeway starts in Arue and continues across the Papeete urban area.
Tahiti is home to the University of French Polynesia (Université de la Polynésie Française).
The women no longer come aboard the vessel, and even when we meet them on land they are extremely reserved.
For women the themes are closer to home or from nature: combing their hair or the flight of a butterfly, for example.
The lowest and highest temperatures recorded in Papeete are , respectively.
In 1803, upon the death of Pōmare I, his son Vaira'atoa succeeded him and took the title of Pomare II.
They therefore created the Tahitian Legislative Assembly, which first sat on the 23 February 1824.
But the authority of the Queen, who was certainly less charismatic than her father, was challenged by the chiefs, who had won back an important part of their prerogatives since the death of Pōmare II.
Captain Bligh explains that this name was an homage to his eldest daughter Teriinavahoroa, who had died of tuberculosis, "an illness that made her cough (''mare'') a lot, especially at night (''pō'')".
He returned however to work towards indoctrinating the locals against the Roman Catholic French.
George Pritchard had been away at the time.
It was the end of Tahitian feudalism and the military aristocracy, which were replaced by an absolute monarchy.
By way of reprisal, Admiral Dupetit-Thouars announced the annexation of the Kingdom of Pōmare on the 6 November 1843 and set up the governor Armand Joseph Bruat there as the chief of the new colony.
These marae were at the heart of the religious and social life of the clans: that is where the gods were invoked, where the chiefs were enthroned, and where war and fishing expeditions were prepared, and where births and deaths were celebrated.
In retaliation, the English sailors opened fire on the canoes and on the crowds on the hills.
However, only about 20% of the population is thought to be in favor.
As a result, in 1838 France sent Admiral Abel Aubert Dupetit-Thouars to get reparation.
The French nevertheless still reigned over the Kingdom of Tahiti as masters.
In the 1820s, the entire population of Tahiti converted to Protestantism.
Wallis named the island King George Island.
They traditionally wore belts of red feathers, symbols of their power.
Tahiti is part of French Polynesia.
The clans were organized around ''marae'', open air cultic sites.
He sent two expeditions under the command of navigator Domingo de Bonechea in 1772 and in 1774.
According to other authors the first European to arrive in Tahiti was Spanish explorer Juan Fernández in his expedition of 1576–1577.
He threw Pritchard into prison, and later sent him back to Britain.
Tahiti also exports vanilla, fruits, flowers, monoi, fish, copra oil, and noni.
There is also the Collège La Mennais located in Papeete.
In the context of the republican assimilation, these councils tried their best to protect the traditional way of life of the local people, which was threatened by European influence.
After the establishment of the CEP (Centre d'Experimentation du Pacifique) in 1963, the standard of living in French Polynesia increased considerably and many Polynesians abandoned traditional activities and emigrated to the urban centre of Pape'ete.
In 1816 the London Missionary Society sent John Williams as a missionary and teacher, and starting in 1817, the Gospels were translated into Tahitian (''Reo Maohi'') and taught in the religious schools.
Tahiti’s currency, the French Pacific Franc (CFP, also known as XPF), is pegged to the Euro at 1 CFP = EUR .00838 (approx.
They represent about 70% of the island's population with the rest made up of Europeans, Chinese and those of mixed heritage.
Football in Tahiti is administered by the Fédération Tahitienne de Football and was founded in 1938.
The Bora Bora cruiseline sails to Bora Bora about once a week.
The drum can be one of the types of the tōʻere, a laying log of wood with a longitudinal slit, which is struck by one or two sticks.
Later it was to drop as low as 6,000.
He only stayed about ten days on the island, which he called “Nouvelle-Cythère “, or "New Cythera", because of the warm welcome he had received and the sweetness of the Tahitian customs.
Three weeks after leaving Tahiti, on 28 April 1789, the crew mutinied on the initiative of Fletcher Christian.
This estimate was later lowered to 35,000 by anthropologist Douglas L. Oliver, the foremost modern authority on Tahiti, at the time of first European contact in 1767.
During a press conference on 26 June 2006 during the second France-Oceania Summit, French President Jacques Chirac said he did not think the majority of Tahitians wanted independence.
They make up the largest population in French Polynesia.
Councils or general assemblies had to be called composed of the ari’i and the 'Īato'ai, especially in case of war.
The dancers make gestures, reenacting daily occupations of life.
The population is 183,645 inhabitants (2012 census), making it the most populous island of French Polynesia and accounting for 68.5% of its total population.
The power of the Pōmare had become more symbolic than real, time and time again Queen Pōmare, Protestant and anglophile, sought in vain the protection of England.
The French painter Paul Gauguin lived on Tahiti in the 1890s and painted many Tahitian subjects.
The former President of French Polynesia, Oscar Temaru, advocates full independence from France.
However, whether the island that he saw was actually Tahiti or not has not been fully ascertained.
In 1827, the young Pōmare III suddenly died, and it was his half-sister, 'Aimata, aged thirteen, who took the title of Pōmare IV.
During the first years of the Protectorate, the Protestants managed to retain a considerable hold over Tahitian society, thanks to their knowledge of the country and its language.
This emigration, across several hundred kilometres of ocean, was made possible by using outrigger canoes that were up to twenty or thirty meters long and could transport families as well as domestic animals.
Flights within French Polynesia and to New Caledonia are available from Aircalin and Air Tahiti; Air Tahiti has their headquarters at the airport.
During the First World War, the Papeete region of the island was attacked by two German warships.
Darwin praised the scenery, but was not flattering towards Tahiti's Queen Pōmare IV.
Captain Fitzroy negotiated payment of compensation for an attack on an English ship by Tahitians, which had taken place in 1833.
Cook, however, refused to offer him military support and was content with just visiting the island.
Elections for the Assembly of French Polynesia, the Territorial Assembly of French Polynesia, were held on 23 May 2004.
The freeway turns east toward Taravao where Tahiti Nui meets Tahiti Iti.
The dance is with music only, drums, but no singing.
Also in 1842, a European crisis involving Morocco escalated between France and Great Britain, souring their relations.
Some maps still bear the name ''Isla de Amat'' for Tahiti, named after Viceroy Amat who ordered the expedition.
In 2003, French Polynesia's status was changed to that of an overseas collectivity (Collectivité d'outre-mer) and in 2004 it was declared an overseas country (pays d'outre-mer or POM).
Tahitians are French citizens with complete civil and political rights.
French Polynesia imports its petroleum and has no local refinery or production.
One of the most widely recognized images of the islands is the world-famous Tahitian dance.
The first European to have visited Tahiti according to existing records was lieutenant Samuel Wallis, who was circumnavigating the globe in ''HMS Dolphin'', and landed on 17 June 1767 in Matavai Bay, situated on the territory of the chiefdom of Pare (Arue/Mahina), governed by the female chieftain "Oberea" (Purea).
The missionaries also took advantage of the situation in order to change the way in which powers were arranged, and to make the Tahitian monarchy closer to the English model of a constitutional monarchy.
This victory allowed Pōmare II to be styled Ari’i Rahi, or the king of Tahiti.
He then made friends with Tahitian chiefs who were hostile to the Pōmare family and favorable to a French protectorate.
Even though the standard of living is elevated (due mainly to French foreign direct investment), the economy is reliant on imports.
The Spanish mission on Tahiti was abandoned on 12 November that year after Charles III of Spain cancelled the mission as a consequence of his secular policy.
Here, gods were invoked and leaders enthroned.
Furthermore, the missionaries encouraged his wish to conquer his opponents, so that they would only have to deal with a single political contact, enabling them to develop Christianity in a unified country.
The Mo'orea Ferry operates from Papeete and takes about 45 minutes to travel to Moorea.
For example, the languages of Fiji and Polynesia all belong to the same Oceanic sub-group, Fijian-Polynesian, which itself forms part of the great family of the Austronesian Languages.
In 1863, they put an end to the British influence and replaced the British Protestant Missions with the Société des missions évangéliques de Paris (Society of Evangelical Missions of Paris).
