After completing his second term as President, Chen Shui-bian was charged with corruption and money laundering.
The indigenous Taiwanese aborigines number about 533,600 and are divided into 16 recognized groups.
UN Resolution 2758 (25 October 1971) recognized the People's Republic of China as China's sole representative in the United Nations.
This colonial period lasted 16 years until 1642, when the last Spanish fortress fell to Dutch forces.
After the election of the pan-Green's Chen Shui-bian as President in 2000, legislation repeatedly stalled because of deadlock with the Legislative Yuan, which was controlled by a pan-Blue majority.
The ROC remained under martial law from 1948 until 1987 and much of the constitution was not in effect.
When the People's Liberation Army won the Chinese Civil War, much of the National Revolutionary Army retreated to Taiwan along with the government.
Ma Ying-jeou, chairman of the KMT and former president of the ROC, has set out democracy, economic development to a level near that of Taiwan, and equitable wealth distribution as the conditions that the PRC must fulfill for reunification to occur.
According to a survey conducted in March 2009, 49% of the respondents consider themselves as Taiwanese only, and 44% of the respondents consider themselves as Taiwanese and Chinese.
The ROC government fled to Taiwan and continued to claim to be the legitimate government of all of China.
The two provincial governments were "streamlined", with their functions transferred to the central government (Fujian in 1956 and Taiwan in 1998).
Growth averaged more than 4% in the 2002–2006 period and the unemployment rate fell below 4%.
And in 2014, Taoyuan County was also upgraded to a special municipality.
The opposition Pan-Green Coalition is composed of the pro-independence DPP and Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU).
As the ROC military shares historical roots with the KMT, the older generation of high-ranking officers tends to have Pan-Blue sympathies.
Low income households maintain 100% premium coverage by the BNHI and co-pays are reduced for disabled or certain elderly peoples.
They were placed under Kaohsiung administration after the retreat to Taiwan.
Polarized politics has emerged in Taiwan with the formation of the Pan-Blue Coalition of parties led by the KMT, favoring eventual Chinese reunification, and the Pan-Green Coalition of parties led by the DPP, favoring an eventual and official declaration of Taiwanese independence.
Because of its conservative financial approach and its entrepreneurial strengths, Taiwan suffered little compared with many of its neighbors from the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
The Chen administration was dogged by public concerns over reduced economic growth, legislative gridlock due to a pan-blue, opposition-controlled Legislative Yuan and corruption involving the First Family as well as government officials.
County (縣 ''xiàn'') (13)
Pan-Blue members generally support the concept of the One-China policy, which states that there is only one China and that its only government is the ROC.
Members serve four-year terms.
Initially, the United States abandoned the KMT and expected that Taiwan would fall to the Communists.
In a poll of Taiwanese aged 20 and older taken by TVBS in March 2009, a majority of 64% opted for the status quo, while 19% favored independence and 5% favored "unification".
Ma took office on 20 May 2008, the same day that President Chen Shui-bian stepped down and was notified by prosecutors of possible corruption charges.
The four international seaports are the Port of Keelung, the Port of Kaohsiung, the Port of Taichung, and the Port of Hualien.
The latter numbers years starting from 1911, the year of the founding of the Republic of China.
The ROC has become a major foreign investor in the PRC, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam.
Meanwhile, the PRC continues to assert the One China policy, in which it is sole legal government of "China" and that Taiwan is a province of China.
Relations regarding this treasure have warmed recently; Beijing Palace Museum Curator Zheng Xinmiao said that artifacts in both Chinese and Taiwanese museums are "China's cultural heritage jointly owned by people across the Taiwan Strait."
Special municipality(直轄市 ''zhíxiáshì'') (6)
The shared cultural origin combined with several hundred years of geographical separation, some hundred years of political separation and foreign influences, as well as hostility between the rival ROC and PRC have resulted in national identity being a contentious issue with political overtones.
The island is characterized by the contrast between the eastern two-thirds, consisting mostly of rugged mountains running in five ranges from the northern to the southern tip of the island, and the flat to gently rolling Chianan Plains in the west that are also home to most of Taiwan's population.
Mainstream estimates of the number killed range from 18,000 to 30,000.
The KMT assets continue to be another major issue, as it was once the richest political party in the world.
When the KMT government fled to Taiwan it brought millions of taels (where 1&nbsp;tael ~1.2&nbsp;ozt) of gold and the foreign currency reserve of mainland China, which, according to the KMT, stabilized prices and reduced hyperinflation.
The Qing imperial government tried to reduce piracy and vagrancy in the area, issuing a series of edicts to manage immigration and respect aboriginal land rights.
It is estimated that some 50,000&nbsp;Taiwanese businesses and 1,000,000&nbsp;businesspeople and their dependents are established in the PRC.
On 11 February 2014, Mainland Affairs Council Head Wang Yu-chi traveled to Nanjing and met with Taiwan Affairs Office Head Zhang Zhijun, the first meeting between high-ranking officials from either side.
It also called for general use of "Taiwan" as the country's name, without abolishing its formal name, the Republic of China.
Taipei still keeps a large military apparatus relative to the island's population: defense expenditures for 2008 were NTD 334 billion (approximately U.S. $10.5 billion), which accounted for 2.94% of GDP.
Taiwanese and Chinese
It regards Taiwan as an independent, sovereign state synonymous with the ROC, opposes the definition that Taiwan is part of "China", and seeks wide diplomatic recognition and an eventual declaration of formal Taiwan independence.
Today, the Republic of China maintains a large and technologically advanced military, mainly as defense against the constant threat of invasion by the PRC under the Anti-Secession Law of the People's Republic of China.
From the late 1970s to the 1990s, however, Taiwan went through reforms and social changes that transformed it from an authoritarian state to a democracy.
Identity politics, along with the over one hundred years of political separation from mainland China, has led to distinct traditions in many areas, including cuisine and music.
On mainland China, the victorious Communists claimed they ruled the sole and only China (which they claimed included Taiwan) and that the Republic of China no longer existed.
This legacy has resulted in executive powers currently being concentrated in the office of the president rather than the premier, even though the constitution does not explicitly state the extent of the president's executive power.
In Taiwan, these issues generate debate among political parties and candidates.
It eventually led to the creation of a political camp led by ex-DPP leader Shih Ming-teh which believes the president should resign.
This brought the top-level divisions of the ROC to their current state:
Chiang Ching-kuo, Chiang Kai-shek's son and successor as the president, began to liberalize the political system in the mid-1980s.
Chinese medicine hospitals
The constitution of the Republic of China was drafted before the fall of mainland China to the Communist Party of China.
Tour buses that travel around Taiwan have several TV's, equipped not for watching movies, but primarily for singing Karaoke.
The defense package was stalled from 2001 to 2007 where it was finally passed through the legislature and the US responded on 3 October 2008, with a $6.5&nbsp;billion arms package including PAC III Anti-Air defense systems, AH-64D Apache Attack helicopters and other arms and parts.
He and his heirs, Zheng Jing, who ruled from 1662 to 1682, and Zheng Keshuang, who ruled less than a year, continued to launch raids on the southeast coast of mainland China well into the Qing dynasty era.
All are arms of the Pacific Ocean.
Still, the Taiwanese and aborigines were classified as second- and third-class citizens.
Under Lee, Taiwan underwent a process of localization in which Taiwanese culture and history were promoted over a pan-China viewpoint in contrast to earlier KMT policies which had promoted a Chinese identity.
Over subsequent decades, the Republic of China has become commonly known as "Taiwan", after the island that comprises 99% of the territory under its control.
On 7 November 2015, Ma Ying-jeou (in his capacity as ''Leader of Taiwan'') and Xi Jinping (in his capacity as ''Leader of Mainland China'') traveled to Singapore and met up, marking the highest-level exchange between the two sides since 1949.
There are two rail systems in Taiwan: Taiwan Railway Administration and Taiwan High Speed Rail.
In July 2013, the Department of Health was restructured as the Ministry of Health and Welfare.
From this point onwards, the Kuomintang was reduced to control of Taiwan, Kinmen, Matsu Islands, and two major islands of Dongsha Islands and Nansha Islands.
The Ami, Atayal, Bunun, Kanakanavu, Kavalan, Paiwan, Puyuma, Rukai, Saisiyat, Saaroa, Sakizaya, Sediq, Thao, Truku and Tsou live mostly in the eastern half of the island, while the Yami inhabit Orchid Island.
The PRC has threatened the use of military force as a response to any formal declaration by Taiwan of national independence or to any decision by PRC leaders that peaceful Chinese unification is no longer possible.
The border between taxpaying lands and "savage" lands shifted eastward, with some aborigines becoming sinicized while others retreated into the mountains.
Koxinga established the Kingdom of Tungning (1662–1683), with his capital at Tainan.
The PRC refuses to have diplomatic relations with any nation that recognizes the ROC, and requires all nations with which it has diplomatic relations to make a statement recognizing its claims to Taiwan.
academic medical centers
Current plans call for a transition to a predominantly professional army over the next decade.
With the emergence of the Taiwanese independence movement, the name "Taiwan" has been employed increasingly often on the island.
The World Games 2009 were held in Kaohsiung between 16 and 26 July 2009.
The PRC supports a version of the One-China policy, which states that Taiwan and mainland China are both part of China, and that the PRC is the only legitimate government of China.
Another survey, conducted in Taiwan in July 2009, showed that 82.8% of respondents consider the ROC and the PRC as two separate countries with each developing on its own.
Thus, in September 2007, the then ruling Democratic Progressive Party approved a resolution asserting separate identity from China and called for the enactment of a new constitution for a "''normal country''".
Since democratization and the lifting of martial law, a distinct Taiwanese identity (as opposed to Taiwanese identity as a subset of a Chinese identity) is often at the heart of political debates.
In 1683, following the defeat of Koxinga's grandson by an armada led by Admiral Shi Lang of southern Fujian, the Qing dynasty formally annexed Taiwan, placing it under the jurisdiction of Fujian province.
The Examination Yuan is in charge of validating the qualification of civil servants.
Taiwan also uses the lunar calendar for traditional festivals such as the Chinese New Year, the Lantern Festival, and the Dragon Boat Festival.
The Control Yuan is a watchdog agency that monitors (controls) the actions of the executive.
outpatient-only facilities
Those killed were mainly members of the Taiwanese elite.
In 1974, Chiang Ching-kuo implemented the Ten Major Construction Projects, the beginning foundations that helped Taiwan transform into its current export driven economy.
The 21st-largest economy in the world, its high-tech industry plays a key role in the global economy.
In 1993, a separate constitutional court was established to resolve constitutional disputes, regulate the activities of political parties and accelerate the democratization process.
The Pan-Blue and Pan-Green coalitions are presently the dominant political blocs in the Republic of China.
BNHI insurance coverage requires co-payment at the time of service for most services unless it is a preventative health service, for low-income families, veterans, children under three years old, or in the case of catastrophic diseases.
In keeping with this trend, some large government-owned banks and industrial firms are being privatized.
The average rainfall is 2,600&nbsp;mm per year for the island proper; the rainy season is concurrent with the onset of the summer East Asian Monsoon in May and June.
The relationship with the PRC and the related issues of Taiwanese independence and Chinese reunification continue to dominate politics.
Roughly 84% of Taiwan's population descends from Han Chinese who migrated from China between 1661 and 1895.
Taiwan, along with Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore, became known as one of the Four Asian Tigers.
The Chinese Professional Baseball League in Taiwan was established in 1989, and eventually absorbed the competing Taiwan Major League in 2003.
It is a special relationship.
It called also for general use of "''Taiwan''" as the country's name, without abolishing its formal name, the "Republic of China".
It uses this policy to prevent the international recognition of the ROC as an independent sovereign state, meaning that Taiwan participates in international forums under the name "Chinese Taipei".
Democratic reforms continued in the 1990s, with Lee Teng-hui re-elected in 1996, in the first direct presidential election in the history of the ROC.
Research, Development, and Evaluation Commission, Executive Yuan (April 2008)
The ROC began a force reduction program, Jingshi An (translated to streamlining program), to scale down its military from a level of 450,000 in 1997 to 380,000 in 2001. , the armed forces of the ROC number approximately 300,000, with nominal reserves totaling 3.6&nbsp;million .
General Rikichi Andō, governor-general of Taiwan and commander-in-chief of all Japanese forces on the island, signed the receipt and handed it over to General Chen Yi of the ROC military to complete the official turnover.
During this time, there were a number of conflicts between groups of Han Chinese from different regions of southern Fujian, particularly between those from Quanzhou and Zhangzhou, and between southern Fujian Chinese and aborigines.
From 1949 to the 1970s, the primary mission of the military was to "retake the mainland" through Project National Glory.
In 1950, with the outbreak of the Korean War, the United States began an aid program which resulted in fully stabilized prices by 1952.
The east and south of Taiwan are a complex system of belts formed by, and part of the zone of, active collision between the North Luzon Trough portion of the Luzon Volcanic Arc and South China, where accreted portions of the Luzon Arc and Luzon forearc form the eastern Coastal Range and parallel inland Longitudinal Valley of Taiwan respectively.
The KMT moved this collection from the Forbidden City in Beijing in 1933 and part of the collection was eventually transported to Taiwan during the Chinese Civil War.
The Taipei Metro and the Kaohsiung Mass Rapid Transit serve the Taipei metropolitan area and Kaohsiung, respectively.
In 2000, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won the presidency, ending KMT's continuous control of the government.
Additional people of Han origin include and descend from the 2 million Nationalists who fled to Taiwan following the communist victory on the mainland in 1949.
Also during this time, over 2,000 women were forced into sexual slavery for Imperial Japanese troops, now euphemistically called "comfort women."
, Pan-Blue members usually seek to improve relationships with mainland China, with a current focus on improving economic ties.
During World War II, tens of thousands of Taiwanese served in the Japanese military.
This name was also adopted into the Chinese vernacular (in particular, Hokkien, as ) as the name of the sandbar and nearby area (Tainan).
District (區 ''qū'') (170)
Due to diplomatic pressure, recognition gradually eroded and many countries switched recognition to the PRC in the 1970s.
The government health insurance program maintains compulsory insurance for citizens who are employed, impoverished, unemployed, or victims of natural disasters with fees that correlate to the individual and/or family income; it also maintains protection for non-citizens working in Taiwan.
In 1949, the Communist Party of China took full control of the mainland and founded the PRC.
Mandarin is the official national language and is spoken by the vast majority of the population of Taiwan.
For example, 3 May 2004, may be written 2004-05-03 or 93–05–03.
International recognition of the ROC gradually eroded as most countries switched their "China" recognition to the PRC.
It interprets the constitution and other laws and decrees, judges administrative suits, and disciplines public functionaries.
Further, he stated that the sovereignty issues between the two cannot be resolved at present, but he quoted the "1992 Consensus", currently accepted by both the Kuomintang and the Communist Party of China, as a temporary measure until a solution becomes available.
Province (省 ''shěng'') (2) (Streamlined)
However, though the ROC has sought to participate in the WHO since 1997, their efforts have consistently been blocked by the PRC, until 2010, when they were invited as observers to attend the World Health Assembly, under the name "Chinese Taipei".
Units which surrendered and remained in mainland China were either disbanded or incorporated into the People's Liberation Army.
On a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis, its GDP per capita in early 1960s was $1,353 (in 1990 prices).
The People's Republic of China (PRC) claims that the Republic of China government is illegitimate, referring to it as the "Taiwan Authority".
As the Chinese Civil War continued without truce, the government built up military fortifications throughout Taiwan.
Although Mandarin is the language of instruction in schools and dominates television and radio, non-Mandarin Chinese varieties have undergone a revival in public life in Taiwan, particularly since restrictions on their use were lifted in the 1990s.
, there were 14,993 temples in Taiwan, approximately one place of worship per 1,500 residents.
Lee's reforms included printing banknotes from the Central Bank rather than the Provincial Bank of Taiwan, and streamlining the Taiwan Provincial Government with most of its functions transferred to the Executive Yuan.
Furthermore, Taipei will host the Summer Universiade in 2017.
This became a major issue in the 2004 presidential election.
TVBS Poll Center (October 2012)
She is the youngest player ever, male or female, to win five major championships and had been ranked number 1 in the Women's World Golf Rankings  for 109 consecutive weeks from 2011 to 2013.
Since the 1990s, a number of Taiwan-based technology firms have expanded their reach around the world.
The entertainment counterpart of a KTV is an MTV, being found much less frequently out of the city.
Chinese medicine clinics
It can be considered a standing commission for administrative inquiry and can be compared to the Court of Auditors of the European Union or the Government Accountability Office of the United States.
They also provide a service for mailing packages.
Subsequent taekwondo competitors such as Yang Shu-chun have strengthened Taiwan's taekwondo culture.
In the 2004 Olympics, Chen Shih-hsin and Chu Mu-yen won the first two gold medals in women's flyweight event and men's flyweight event, respectively.
Taiwan's highest point is Yu Shan (Jade Mountain) at ; Taiwan is the world's fourth-highest island.
Taiwan has its own Center for Disease Control, and during the SARS outbreak in March 2003 there were 347&nbsp;confirmed cases.
The political and legal statuses of Taiwan are contentious issues.
There are various names for the island of Taiwan in use today, derived from explorers or rulers by each particular period.
The aboriginal languages on Taiwan show much greater diversity than the rest of Austronesian put together, leading linguists to propose Taiwan as the Urheimat of the family, from which seafaring peoples dispersed across Southeast Asia and the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
The ROC administration of Taiwan under Chen Yi was strained by increasing tensions between Taiwanese-born people and newly arrived mainlanders, which were compounded by economic woes, such as hyperinflation.
The armed forces' primary concern at this time, according to the ''National Defense Report'', is the possibility of an invasion by the PRC, consisting of a naval blockade, airborne assault, and/or missile bombardment.
Han Chinese began settling in the Penghu islands in the 13th century, but Taiwan's hostile tribes and its lack of trade resources valued in that era rendered it unattractive to all but "occasional adventurers or fishermen engaging in barter" until the 16th century.
The president replied that the relations are neither between two Chinas nor two states.
The political scene is generally divided into two major camps in terms of views on how Taiwan should relate to China or the PRC, referred to as cross-Strait relations.
Besides baseball, basketball is Taiwan's major sport.
However, since its retreat, the ROC has controlled only Taiwan Province and some islands of Fujian Province.
One of Taiwan's greatest attractions is the National Palace Museum, which houses more than 650,000 pieces of Chinese bronze, jade, calligraphy, painting, and porcelain and is considered one of the greatest collections of Chinese art and objects in the world.
It is the main political difference between two camps: the Pan-Blue Coalition, composed of the pro-unification Kuomintang, People First Party (PFP), and New Party, who believe that the ROC is the sole legitimate government of "China" (including Taiwan) and supports eventual Chinese reunification.
Reflecting the continuing controversy surrounding the political status of Taiwan, politics continues to play a role in the conception and development of a Taiwanese cultural identity, especially in the prior dominant frame of a Taiwanese and Chinese dualism.
The government also implemented a policy of import-substitution, attempting to produce imported goods domestically.
The upper part of the crust on the island is primarily made up of a series of terranes, mostly old island arcs which have been forced together by the collision of the forerunners of the Eurasian Plate and the Philippine Sea Plate.
After the death of Chiang Ching-kuo in January 1988, Lee Teng-hui succeeded him as president.
Two of the most famous Taiwanese baseball pitchers are Chien-Ming Wang and Wei-Yin Chen; both are starting pitchers in Major League Baseball.
The East China Sea lies to the north, the Philippine Sea to the east, the Bashi Channel of the Luzon Strait directly to the south, and the South China Sea to the southwest.
The entire island experiences hot, humid weather from June through September.
Direct weekend charter flights between Taiwan and mainland China began in July 2008 under the current KMT government, and the first direct daily charter flights took off in December 2008.
In the early 17th century, the Dutch East India Company established a commercial post at Fort Zeelandia (modern-day Anping, Tainan) on a coastal sandbar they called "Tayouan".
It also decided to modernize both defensive and offensive capabilities.
The French evacuated both Keelung and the Penghu archipelago after the end of the war.
Through its rapid development, the entire Formosan mainland eventually became known as "Taiwan".
There is no trial by jury but the right to a fair public trial is protected by law and respected in practice; many cases are presided over by multiple judges.
Of the 14 extant languages, five are considered moribund.
By 2011 per-capita GNP, adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP), had risen to $37,000, contributing to a Human Development Index (HDI) equivalent to that of other developed countries.
As of 2015, the CPBL has four teams with average attendance over 5,000 per game.
In addition, the ROC government took to Taipei many national treasures and much of China's gold reserves and foreign currency reserves.
In recent years, the concept of Taiwanese multiculturalism has been proposed as a relatively apolitical alternative view, which has allowed for the inclusion of mainlanders and other minority groups into the continuing re-definition of Taiwanese culture as collectively held systems of meaning and customary patterns of thought and behavior shared by the people of Taiwan.
Thus, there is little incentive for the president and the legislature to negotiate on legislation if they are of opposing parties.
The president and vice-president of the Judicial Yuan and additional thirteen justices form the Council of Grand Justices.
European settlements and the Kingdom of Tungning were established shortly before China annexed the island.
The first line of defense against invasion by the PRC is the ROC's own armed forces.
Unlike its neighbors, South Korea and Japan, the Taiwanese economy is dominated by small and medium-sized businesses, rather than the large business groups.
This provision does not currently apply to any county, although it previously applied to Taipei County (now New Taipei City) and Taoyuan County (now Taoyuan City).
During this period the human and natural resources of Taiwan were used to aid the development of Japan and the production of cash crops such as rice and sugar greatly increased.
Current ROC military doctrine is to hold out against an invasion or blockade until the US military responds.
With the advent of democratization, the issue of the political status of Taiwan gradually resurfaced as a controversial issue where, previously, the discussion of anything other than unification under the ROC was taboo.
A year later, Chiang Ching-kuo lifted martial law on the main island of Taiwan (martial law was lifted on Penghu in 1979, Matsu island in 1992 and Kinmen island in 1993).
Neighborhood (鄰 ''lín'')
In 2009, Taiwan hosted two international sporting events on the island.
The Penghu Islands,  west of the main island, have an area of .
The use of two different calendar systems in Taiwan may be confusing, in particular for foreigners.
Part of the rationale for campaigning for closer economic ties with the PRC stems from the strong economic growth China attained since joining the World Trade Organization.
The Kuomintang continued to claim sovereignty over all "China", which it defined to include mainland China, Taiwan, Outer Mongolia and other areas.
Taiwan participates in international sporting organizations and events under the name of "Chinese Taipei" due to its political status.
In the latest survey conducted by National Chengchi University in 2014 and published in early 2015, 60.6% of respondents identified themselves exclusively as Taiwanese, 32.5% identified themselves as both Taiwanese and Chinese and 3.5% identified themselves as Chinese.
The highest court, the Supreme Court, consists of a number of civil and criminal divisions, each of which is formed by a presiding judge and four associate judges, all appointed for life.
Both TECRO and TECO are "unofficial commercial entities" of the ROC in charge of maintaining diplomatic relations, providing consular services (i.e.
Today Taiwan has a dynamic, capitalist, export-driven economy with gradually decreasing state involvement in investment and foreign trade.
After Japan's surrender in 1945, the ROC took governance of Taiwan.
As the Qing dynasty was defeated in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), Taiwan, along with Penghu and Liaodong Peninsula, were ceded in full sovereignty to the Empire of Japan by the Treaty of Shimonoseki.
In January 2010, the Obama administration announced its intention to sell $6.4 billion worth of military hardware to Taiwan.
