Since the end of the war, newly established political stability and foreign aid have allowed the country's economy to grow.
The Tajikistan national football team competes in FIFA and AFC competitions.
The Government has declared two Islamic holidays, Eid ul-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, as state holidays.
Most international freight traffic is carried by train.
Failure to register can result in large fines and closure of place of worship.
Public education in Tajikistan consists of 11 years of primary and secondary education but the government has plans to implement a 12-year system in 2016.
In 2010 the country experienced an outbreak of polio that caused more than 457 cases of polio in both children and adults, and resulted in 29 deaths before being brought under control.
The Emirate of Bukhara remained intact until the 20th century but during the 19th century, for the second time in world history, a European power (the Russian Empire) began to conquer parts of the region.
In 1997, a ceasefire was reached between Rahmon and opposition parties under the guidance of Gerd D. Merrem, Special Representative to the Secretary General, a result widely praised as a successful United Nations peace keeping initiative.
All citizens of Tajikistan are called Tajikistanis.
Sunni Islam of the Hanafi school has been officially recognized by the government since 2009.
This improved Tajikistan's position among other Central Asian countries (namely Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan), which seem to have degraded economically ever since.
It is often played at Nowruz celebrations.
The official and vernacular language of Tajikistan is Tajik although Russian is routinely used in business and communication.
Tajikistan is an active member of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO).
The current economic situation remains fragile, largely owing to corruption, uneven economic reforms, and economic mismanagement.
According to the Institute for War & Peace Reporting, access is blocked to local and foreign websites including avesta.tj, Tjknews.com, ferghana.ru, centrasia.ru and journalists are often obstructed from reporting on controversial events.
And in 2012, the presidents of Tajikistan, Afghanistan, and Iran signed an agreement to construct roads and railways as well as oil, gas, and water pipelines to connect the three countries.
In January 2012, 680,152 of the people living in Tajikistan were living with food insecurity.
Life expectancy at birth was estimated to be 66.38 years in 2012.
Another popular sport is buzkashi, a game played on horseback, like polo.
Pakistan lies to the south, separated by the narrow Wakhan Corridor.
North-western Gorno-Badakhshan, stretches in the north-south direction
Some small scale industrial development also occurred during this time along with the expansion of irrigation infrastructure.
Dushanbe is located on the southern slopes above the Kofarnihon valley.
The Bolsheviks prevailed after a four-year war, in which mosques and villages were burned down and the population heavily suppressed.
After the Russian Revolution of 1917 guerrillas throughout Central Asia, known as ''basmachi'', waged a war against Bolshevik armies in a futile attempt to maintain independence.
Two rounds of Soviet purges directed by Moscow (1927–1934 and 1937–1938) resulted in the expulsion of nearly 10,000 people, from all levels of the Communist Party of Tajikistan.
The territory that now constitutes Tajikistan was previously home to several ancient cultures, including the city of Sarazm of the Neolithic and the Bronze Age, and was later home to kingdoms ruled by people of different faiths and cultures, including the Oxus civilization, Andronovo culture, Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism and Islam.
many highway and tunnel construction projects are underway or have recently been completed.
It is, however, a dominant-party system, where the People's Democratic Party of Tajikistan routinely has a vast majority in Parliament.
The primary sources of income in Tajikistan are aluminium production, cotton growing and remittances from migrant workers.
Estimates of out of school children range from 4.6% to 19.4% with the vast majority being girls.
Emomali Rahmon came to power in 1992, defeating former prime minister Abdumalik Abdullajanov in a November presidential election with 58% of the vote.
There have been talks with Russia concerning use of the Ayni facility, and Russia continues to maintain a large base on the outskirts of Dushanbe.
Although the Jadidists were pro-modernization and not necessarily anti-Russian the Russians viewed the movement as a threat.
Approximately 87%–95% of them are Sunni and roughly 3% are Shia and roughly 7% are non-denominational Muslims.
International assistance also was necessary to address the second year of severe drought that resulted in a continued shortfall of food production.
The presidential election held on November 6, 2006 was boycotted by "mainline" opposition parties, including the 23,000-member Islamic Renaissance Party.
Religious groups who do not have a physical structure are not allowed to gather publicly for prayer.
Tajiks (Persians) who speak Tajik (a dialect of Persian) are the main ethnic group, although there are sizable minorities of Uzbeks and Russians, whose numbers are declining due to emigration.
It lies mostly between latitudes 36° and 41° N (a small area is north of 41°), and longitudes 67° and 75° E (a small area is east of 75°).
However, fighting erupted again in July 2012.
In FY 2000, international assistance remained an essential source of support for rehabilitation programs that reintegrated former civil war combatants into the civilian economy, which helped keep the peace.
The government insisted that only minor violations had occurred, which would not affect the will of the Tajik people.
Numbers of large mosques appropriate for Friday prayers are limited and some feel this is discriminatory.
It is covered by mountains of the Pamir range, and more than fifty percent of the country is over  above sea level.
Consequently, some peasants fought collectivization and revived the Basmachi movement.
The Pamiri people of Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Province in the southeast, bordering Afghanistan and China, though considered part of the Tajik ethnicity, nevertheless are distinct linguistically and culturally from most Tajiks.
The OSCE claimed that the Tajik Government censored Tajik and foreign websites and instituted tax inspections on independent printing houses that led to the cessation of printing activities for a number of independent newspapers.
More than 70% of the female population lives in traditional villages.
More than 500,000 residents fled during this time because of persecution, increased poverty and better economic opportunities in the West or in other former Soviet republics.
Northwestern Gorno-Badakhshan.
According to a UNICEF-supported survey, about 25 percent of girls in Tajikistan fail to complete compulsory primary education because of poverty and gender bias, although literacy is generally high in Tajikistan.
Bobojon Ghafurov, Tajikistan's First Secretary of the Communist Party of Tajikistan from 1946–1956 was the only Tajikistani politician of significance outside of the country during the Soviet Era.
In recent years Tajikistan has pursued agreements with Iran and Pakistan to gain port access in those countries via Afghanistan.
Ibn Sina Peak (Lenin Peak)
Freedom of the press is ostensibly officially guaranteed by the government, but independent press outlets remain restricted, as does a substantial amount of web content.
The elections took place shortly after the end of the war, and Tajikistan was in a state of complete devastation.
of which 70% are under the age of 30 and 35% are between the ages of 14 and 30.
In 1924, the Tajik Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was created as a part of Uzbekistan, but in 1929 the Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic (Tajik SSR) was made a separate constituent republic, however the predominantly ethnic Tajik cities of Samarkand and Bukhara remained in the Uzbek SSR.
The estimated number of Yaghnobis is now about 25,000.
The Islamic Renaissance Party (IRP), a major combatant in the 1992–1997 Civil War and then-proponent of the creation of an Islamic state in Tajikistan, constitutes no more than 30% of the government by statute.
The majority of the population follow Sunni Islam.
Registration with the SCRA requires a charter, a list of 10 or more members, and evidence of local government approval prayer site location.
The ethnic German population of Tajikistan has also declined due to emigration and was 38,853 in 1979, and it has almost vanished since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Elections in 2006 were again won by Rahmon (with 79% of the vote) and he began his third term in office.
The Constitution mentioned Russian as the "language for inter-ethnic communication", but an amendment passed in 2009 was thought to remove all Russian's official roles, but it was later clarified that the status was later re-instated and Russian has returned to its status, being a language permissible for law-making, although all official communications should formally first take place in Tajik.
In 2009 nearly one million Tajik men and many women worked abroad (mainly in Russia).
UNODC is working with Tajikistan to strengthen border crossings, provide training, and set up joint interdiction teams.
Peak Korzhenevskaya
The only major areas of lower land are in the north (part of the Fergana Valley), and in the southern Kofarnihon and Vakhsh river valleys, which form the Amu Darya.
Independence Peak (Revolution Peak)
Despite Russian troops quickly bringing Khujand back under control, clashes continued throughout the year in various locations in Tajikistan.
The Amu Darya and Panj rivers mark the border with Afghanistan, and the glaciers in Tajikistan's mountains are the major source of runoff for the Aral Sea.
The railroad system totals only  of track, all of it  broad gauge.
In 2015, Russia sent more troops to Tajikistan.
In contrast to the mostly Sunni Muslim residents of the rest of Tajikistan, the Pamiris overwhelmingly follow the Ismaili branch of Shia Islam, and speak a number of Eastern Iranian languages, including Shughni, Rushani, Khufi and Wakhi.
Mountains cover more than 90% of the country.
The aim of the game is to grab a 50&nbsp;kg dead goat, ride clear of the other players, get back to the starting point and drop it in a designated circle.
It has a transition economy that is highly dependent on remittances, aluminium and cotton production.
Russian Imperialism led to the Russian Empire's conquest of Central Asia during the late 19th century's Imperial Era.
Soviet authorities started a campaign of secularization, practicing Islam, Judaism, and Christianity was discouraged and repressed, and many mosques, churches, and synagogues were closed.
Nearly 47% of Tajikistan's GDP comes from immigrant remittances (mostly from Tajiks working in Russia).
Tajikistan is a presidential republic consisting of four provinces.
The total length of transmission line is 750&nbsp;km while the project is planned to be on Public-Private Partnership basis with the support of WB, IFC, ADB and IDB.
Elections were held in 1999, though they were criticized by opposition parties and foreign observers as unfair and Rahmon was re-elected with 98% of the vote.
Four Tajikistani athletes have won Olympic medals for their country since independence.
Central Gorno-Badakhshan, south-east of Ismoil Somoni Peak
It was granted affiliate membership of the Asian Cricket Council in the same year.
The Kushan Empire, a collection of Yuezhi tribes, took control of the region in the first century CE and ruled until the 4th century CE during which time Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Manichaeism were all practiced in the region.
Forced migrations in the 20th century decimated their numbers.
Tajik migrant workers abroad, mainly in Russia, have become by far the main source of income for millions of Tajikistan's people and with the 2014–2015 downturn in the Russian economy the World Bank has predicted large numbers of young Tajik men will return home and face few economic prospects.
According to some estimates about 20% of the population lives on less than US$1.25 per day.
One plays it on one's own and in teams.
It was temporarily under the control of the Tibetan empire and Chinese from 650–680 and then under the control of the Umayyads in 710.
The state's Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare reported that 104,272 disabled people are registered in Tajikistan (2000).
Khorog Airport is a domestic airport and also the only airport in the sparsely populated eastern half of the country.
Tajikistan's rivers, such as the Vakhsh and the Panj, have great hydropower potential, and the government has focused on attracting investment for projects for internal use and electricity exports.
It is now the main base of the Tajikistan air force.
The area has been ruled by numerous empires and dynasties, including the Achaemenid Empire, Sasanian Empire, Hephthalite Empire, Samanid Empire, Mongol Empire, Timurid dynasty, and the Russian Empire.
Central Asia continued in its role as a commercial crossroads, linking China, the steppes to the north, and the Islamic heartland.
The government of Tajikistan and the World Bank considered activities to support this part of the population described in the World Bank's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.
In practice, no public criticism of the regime is tolerated and all direct protest is severely suppressed and does not receive coverage in the local media.
During Genghis Khan's invasion of Khwarezmia in the early 13th century the Mongol Empire took control over nearly all of Central Asia.
In May 2015, Tajikistan's national security suffered a serious setback when Colonel Gulmurod Khalimov, commander of the special-purpose police unit (OMON) of the Interior Ministry, defected to the Islamic State.
Cotton accounts for 60% of agricultural output, supporting 75% of the rural population, and using 45% of irrigated arable land.
Tajikistan is landlocked, and is the smallest nation in Central Asia by area.
The Pamiris of Badakhshan, a small population of Yaghnobi people, and a sizeable minority of Ismailis are all considered to belong to the larger group of Tajiks.
Many Tajiks also speak Russian as their second language.
"Longtime observers of Tajikistan often characterize the country as profoundly averse to risk and skeptical of promises of reform, a political passivity they trace to the country’s ruinous civil war," Ilan Greenberg wrote in a news article in ''The New York Times'' just before the country's November 2006 presidential election.
The aluminium industry is represented by the state-owned Tajik Aluminum Company – the biggest aluminium plant in Central Asia and one of the biggest in the world.
Out of those, 676,852 were at risk of Phase 3 (Acute Food and Livelihoods Crisis) food insecurity and 3,300 were at risk of Phase 4 (Humanitarian Emergency).
Later the Hephthalite Empire, a collection of nomadic tribes, moved into the region and Arabs brought Islam in the early eighth century.
The facilities are limited, however.
There are also Uzbek, Kyrgyz and Russian minorities.
The recently constructed Qurghonteppa–Kulob railway connected the Kulob District with the central area of the country.
All but 25,000 of the more than 400,000 ethnic Russians, who were mostly employed in industry, fled to Russia.
There are reports that registration on the local level is sometimes difficult to obtain.
Major projects include rehabilitation of the Dushanbe – Chanak (Uzbek border), Dushanbe – Kulma (Chinese border), Kurgan-Tube – Nizhny Pyanj (Afghan border) highways and construction of tunnels under the mountain passes of Anzob, Shakhristan, Shar-Shar and Chormazak.
In 1989, ethnic Russians in Tajikistan made up 7.6% of the population, but they are now less than 0.5%, after the civil war spurred Russian emigration.
Russian border troops were stationed along the Tajik–Afghan border until summer 2005.
On August 21, 2001, the Red Cross announced that a famine was striking Tajikistan, and called for international aid for Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, however access to food remains a problem today.
In the 1940s, the Jewish community of Tajikistan numbered nearly 30,000 people.
Public spending on education was relatively constant between 2005–2012 and fluctuated from 3.5% to 4.1% of GDP significantly below the OECD average of 6%.
Despite repeated efforts by the Tajik government to improve and expand health care, the system remains extremely underdeveloped and poor, with severe shortages of medical supplies.
Tajikistan gave Iran its support in Iran's membership bid to join the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, after a meeting between the Tajik President and the Iranian foreign minister.
Around 1.2 million people were refugees inside and outside of the country.
The ceasefire guaranteed 30% of ministerial positions would go to the opposition.
The suffix "-stan" is Persian for "place of" or "country" and Tajik is, most likely, the name of a pre-Islamic (before the seventh century A.D.) tribe.
Membership in Hizb ut-Tahrir, a militant Islamic party which today aims for an overthrow of secular governments and the unification of Tajiks under one Islamic state, is illegal and members are subject to arrest and imprisonment.
It is bordered by Afghanistan to the south, Uzbekistan to the west, Kyrgyzstan to the north, and China to the east.
Khorugh, capital of Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region, is the location of highest altitude where bandy has been played.
According to the Library of Congress's 1997 Country Study of Tajikistan, it is difficult to definitively state the origins of the word "Tajik" because the term is "embroiled in twentieth-century political disputes about whether Turkic or Iranian peoples were the original inhabitants of Central Asia."
The remaining 2% of the population are followers of Russian Orthodoxy, Protestantism, Zoroastrianism and Buddhism.
Following the war and Stalin's reign attempts were made to further expand the agriculture and industry of Tajikistan.
Between 1864 and 1885 Russia gradually took control of the entire territory of Russian Turkestan, the Tajikistan portion of which had been controlled by the Emirate of Bukhara and Khanate of Kokand.
GBAO, near the border to Afghanistan in the northern ridge of the Karakoram Range
Football is a popular sport in Tajikistan.
Extreme south-west of GBAO, near the border to Afghanistan.
He was followed in office by Tursun Uljabayev (1956–61), Jabbor Rasulov (1961–1982), and Rahmon Nabiyev (1982–1985, 1991–1992).
Between 1927 and 1934, collectivization of agriculture and a rapid expansion of cotton production took place, especially in the southern region.
Tajikistan has two major airlines (Somon Air and Tajik Air) and is also serviced by over a dozen foreign airlines.
Drug money corrupts the country's government; according to some experts the well-known personalities that fought on both sides of the civil war and have held the positions in the government after the armistice was signed are now involved in the drug trade.
Southern border in the northern ridge of the Karakoram Range
Further violence occurred in July 1916 when demonstrators attacked Russian soldiers in Khujand over the threat of forced conscription during World War I.
The following year, the Soviet Union collapsed, and Tajikistan declared its independence.
The United Nations reported that the level of spending was "severely inadequate to meet the requirements of the country’s high-needs education system."
Modern Tajikistan fell under the rule of the Khanate of Bukhara during the 16th century and with the empire's collapse in the 18th century it came under the rule of both the Emirate of Bukhara and Khanate of Kokand.
Relationships between religious groups are generally amicable, although there is some concern among mainstream Muslim leaders that minority religious groups undermine national unity.
After the region's conquest by Alexander the Great it became part of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom, a successor state of Alexander's empire.
Ismoil Somoni Peak (highest)
Since the September 11, 2001 attacks, French troops have been stationed at the Dushanbe Airport in support of air operations of NATO's International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
The principal segments are in the southern region and connect the capital with the industrial areas of the Hisor and Vakhsh valleys and with Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan and Russia.
The World Bank Tajikistan Policy Note 2006 concludes that remittances have played an important role as one of the drivers of Tajikistan's robust economic growth during the past several years, have increased incomes, and as a result helped significantly reduce poverty.
Rugby union in Tajikistan is a minor but growing sport.
Almost immediately after independence, Tajikistan was plunged into a civil war that saw various factions, allegedly backed by Russia and Iran, fighting one another.
Akademiya Nauk Range
Their arrival in Transoxania signaled a definitive shift from Iranian to Turkic predominance in Central Asia, but gradually the Kara-khanids became assimilated into the Perso-Arab Muslim culture of the region.
The main urban centers in today's Tajikistan include Dushanbe (the capital), Khujand, Kulob, Panjakent, Qurghonteppa, Khorugh and Istaravshan.
Most of Tajikistan's 8 million people belong to the Tajik ethnic group, who speak Tajik (a dialect of Persian).
Tajikistan is officially a republic, and holds elections for the presidency and parliament, operating under a presidential system.
During the late 19th Century the Jadidists established themselves as an Islamic social movement throughout the region.
The Silk Road passed through the region and following the expedition of Chinese explorer Zhang Qian during the reign of Wudi (141–87 BCE) commercial relations between Han China and Sogdiana flourished.
The Prime Minister is Kokhir Rasulzoda, the First Deputy Prime Minister is Matlubkhon Davlatov and the two Deputy Prime Ministers are Murodali Alimardon and Ruqiya Qurbanova.
A great majority of Muslims fast during Ramadan, although only about one third in the countryside and 10% in the cities observe daily prayer and dietary restrictions.
In 2014 Tajikistan was the world's most remittance dependent economy with remittances accounting for 49% of GDP and expected to fall by 40% in 2015 due to the economic crisis in Russia.
Tajikistan holds third place in the world for heroin and raw opium confiscations (1216.3&nbsp;kg of heroin and 267.8&nbsp;kg of raw opium in the first half of 2006).
By 1997, the war had cooled down, and a central government began to take form, with peaceful elections in 1999.
The Yaghnobi people live in mountainous areas of northern Tajikistan.
Migration from Tajikistan and the consequent remittances have been unprecedented in their magnitude and economic impact.
Between 60,000(4%) and 120,000(8%) of Tajikistan's 1,530,000 citizens were killed during World War II.
As a consequence of the conflict and Soviet agriculture policies, Central Asia, Tajikistan included, suffered a famine that claimed many lives.
The Government of India rebuilt the Ayni Air Base, a military airport located 15&nbsp;km southwest of Dushanbe, at a cost of $70 million, completing the repairs in September 2010.
Tajikistan is home to the Nurek Dam, the highest dam in the world.
Tajikistan's mountains provide many opportunities for outdoor sports, such as hill climbing, mountain biking, rock climbing, skiing, snowboarding, hiking, and mountain climbing.
Drug trafficking is the major illegal source of income in Tajikistan as it is an important transit country for Afghan narcotics bound for Russian and, to a lesser extent, Western European markets; some opium poppy is also raised locally for the domestic market.
Other projects at the development stage include Sangtuda-2 by Iran, Zerafshan by the Chinese company SinoHydro, and the Rogun power plant that, at a projected height of , would supersede the Nurek Dam as highest in the world if it is brought to completion.
The most recent elections, in February 2010, saw the ruling PDPT lose four seats in Parliament, yet still maintain a comfortable majority.
There is a relatively large number of tertiary education institutions including Khujand State University which has 76 departments in 15 faculties, Tajikistan State University of Law, Business, & Politics, Khorugh State University, Agricultural University of Tajikistan, Tajik National University, and several other institutions.
Emomalii Rahmon has held the office of President of Tajikistan continually since November 1994.
The infant mortality rate was approximately 37 deaths per 1,000 children in 2012.
Traditional homelands of Tajik people included present-day Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Uzbekistan.
There are also international flights, mainly to Russia, from Khujand Airport in the northern part of the country as well as limited international services from Kulob Airport, and Qurghonteppa International Airport.
Most, but not all, universities were established during the Soviet Era.
Tajikistan has a population of 7,349,145 (July 2009 est.)
The country's main airport is Dushanbe International Airport which as of April 2015, had regularly scheduled flights to major cities in Russia, Central Asia, as well as Delhi, Dubai, Frankfurt, Istanbul, Kabul, Tehran, and Ürümqi amongst others.
North-western edge of Gorno-Badakhshan (GBAO), south of the Kyrgyz border
Tajikistan artisans created the Dushanbe Tea House, which was presented in 1988 as a gift to the sister city of Boulder, Colorado.
Sogdians played a major role in facilitating trade and also worked in other capacities, as farmers, carpetweavers, glassmakers, and woodcarvers.
Isolated in the highest parts of the Pamir Mountains, they have preserved many ancient cultural traditions and folk arts that have been largely lost elsewhere in the country.
A civil war was fought almost immediately after independence, lasting from 1992 to 1997.
Tajikistan's economy grew substantially after the war.
The top clubs in Tajikistan compete in the Tajik League.
tertiary education enrollment was 17%, significantly below the sub-regional average of 37%.
The estimated dead numbered over 100,000.
In 2009 Tajikistan had 26 airports, 18 of which had paved runways, of which two had runways longer than 3,000 meters.
Between 1926 and 1959 the proportion of Russians among Tajikistan's population grew from less than 1% to 13%.
United States Army and Marine Corps personnel periodically visit Tajikistan to conduct joint training missions of up to several weeks duration.
In less than a century the Mongol Empire broke up and modern Tajikistan came under the rule of the Chagatai Khanate.
