In June 2008, Afghan officials accused Pakistan's intelligence service of plotting a failed assassination attempt on President Hamid Karzai; shortly thereafter, they implied the ISI's involvement in a July 2008 Taliban attack on the Indian embassy.
They were all ready to buy in to the process ... to work under the king's banner for an ethnically balanced Afghanistan."
Rashid described the Taliban government as "a secret society run by Kandaharis ... mysterious, secretive, and dictatorial."
Taliban leaders "repeatedly told" Rashid that "if they gave women greater freedom or a chance to go to school, they would lose the support of their rank and file."
John P. O'Neill was a counter-terrorism expert and the Assistant Director of the FBI until late 2001.
The author Ahmed Rashid suggests that the devastation and hardship of the Soviet invasion and the following period influenced Taliban ideology.
The ISI helped with the construction of training camps for both the Taliban and Al-Qaeda.
Consequently, the ministries "by and large ceased to function."
He retired from the FBI and was offered the position of director of security at the World Trade Center (WTC).
One result of the banning of employment of women by the Taliban was the closing down in places like Kabul of primary schools not only for girls but for boys, because almost all the teachers there were women.
During one Taliban and al-Qaeda offensive in 1999 in the Shomali Plains alone, more than 600 women were kidnapped.
The Hazaras are not Muslims and now have to kill Hazaras.
In 1999 the UN had passed resolution 1267 which had banned all international flights by Ariana apart from preapproved humanitarian missions.
It is alleged that Afghan Taliban relied on support by the Pakistani army in the past and are still supported by them today in their campaign to control Afghanistan.
400,000 to one million Afghans fled from the Taliban to the area of Massoud.
By 2001, when the Afghan Interim Administration took power the country's infrastructure was in ruins, Telecommunications had failed, the road network was destroyed and Ministry of Finance buildings were in such a state of disrepair some were on the verge of collapse.
Sohaila, a young woman who was convicted of walking with a man who was not a relative, was charged with adultery.
In 1999 the town of Bamian was taken, hundreds of men, women and children were executed.
On November 26, 2009, in an interview with CNN's Christiane Amanpour, President Hamid Karzai said there is an "urgent need" for negotiations with the Taliban, and made it clear that the Obama administration had opposed such talks.
The Taliban strictly enforced its ideology in major cities like Herat, Kabul, and Kandahar.
The president of the European Parliament, Nicole Fontaine, called him the "pole of liberty in Afghanistan".
(Commander of the Faithful), in a pledge of support.
During their rule from 1996 to 2001, the Taliban and their allies committed massacres against Afghan civilians, denied UN food supplies to 160,000 starving civilians and conducted a policy of scorched earth, burning vast areas of fertile land and destroying tens of thousands of homes.
Military reverses that trapped them behind lines or led to their deaths increased the chaos in the national administration.
The outside world and most Afghans did not even know what their leaders looked like, since photography was banned.
An account of the meeting by author and journalist Sebastian Junger says: "In 2000, when I was there ...
Later that year, two militia commanders killed civilians while fighting for the right to sodomize a young boy.
By 2000 Afghanistan accounted for an estimated 75% of the world's supply and in 2000 grew an estimated 3276 tonnes of opium from poppy cultivation on 82,171 hectares.
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar received operational, financial and military support from Pakistan.
An estimated 300 people were murdered, along with two delegations of Hazara elders who had tried to intercede.
The Mazar, Herat, and Shomali valley offensives displaced more than three-quarters of a million civilians, using "scorched earth" tactics to prevent them from supplying the enemy with aid.
This included the offices of Ariana Afghan Airlines.
Under the leadership of Mohammed Omar, the movement spread throughout most of Afghanistan, sequestering power from the Mujahideen warlords, whose corruption and despotism Afghans had tired of.
Polio vaccines were banned in the North Waziristan region of Pakistan in June 2012  and in December 2012, Taliban assassins killed four female UN polio-workers in Pakistan because they were thought to be spies.
However, not all Taliban commanders engaged in human trafficking.
The other nations including the United Nations recognized the government of the Islamic State of Afghanistan (parts of whom were part of the United Front (Northern Alliance) as the legitimate government of Afghanistan.
For us consultation is not necessary.
At the national level, "all senior Tajik, Uzbek and Hazara bureaucrats" were replaced "with Pashtuns, whether qualified or not."
The UN operates on the basis of international law, not Sharia, and the UN did not recognize the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan.
Regular Pakistani army troops fought alongside the Afghan Taliban in the War in Afghanistan (1996–2001).
India did not recognize the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and instead maintained close strategic and military ties with the Northern Alliance so as to contain the rise of Taliban during the 1990s.
The Kharijites were particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to Takfir, whereby they declared other Muslims to be unbelievers and therefore deemed them worthy of death.
Human Rights Watch cites no human rights crimes for the forces under direct control of Massoud for the period from October 1996 until the assassination of Massoud in September 2001.
Indian officials also blamed the ISI for the bombing of the Indian embassy.
The Kabul money markets responded positively during the first weeks of the Taliban occupation.
The accord created the Islamic State of Afghanistan and appointed an interim government for a transitional period.
Discussion was followed by a building of a consensus by the "believers".
The city of Herat under the rule of Islamic State ally Ismail Khan also witnessed relative calm.
The Afghan Taliban and the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan differ greatly in their history, leadership and goals although they share a common interpretation of Islam and are both predominantly Pashtun.
Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf – then as Chief of Army Staff – was responsible for sending thousands of Pakistanis to fight alongside the Taliban and Bin Laden against the forces of Ahmad Shah Massoud.
Between 1996 and 1999 Mullah Omar reversed his opinions on the drug trade, apparently as it only harmed kafirs.
Around September 1997 the heads of three UN agencies in Kandahar were expelled from the country after protesting when a female attorney for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees was forced to talk from behind a curtain so her face would not be visible.
The Taliban were largely founded by Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) during 1994.
Bin Laden sent Arab and Central Asian Al-Qaeda militants to join the fight against the United Front, among them his Brigade 055.
According to Ahmed Rashid, "no Afghan had adopted the title since 1834, when King Dost Mohammed Khan assumed the title before he declared jihad against the Sikh kingdom in Peshawar.
But Dost Mohammed was fighting foreigners, while Omar had declared jihad against other Afghans."
In 2001 Laura Bush in a radio address condemned the Taliban's brutality to women.
On September 10, 2001, O'Neill told two of his friends, "We're due.
When they took control of Kandahar in 1994, they forced the surrender of dozens of local Pashtun leaders who had presided over a situation of complete lawlessness and atrocities.
Taliban decision-makers, particularly Mullah Omar, seldom if ever talked directly to non-Muslim foreigners, so aid providers had to deal with intermediaries whose approvals and agreements were often reversed.
Most post-invasion Taliban fighters were new recruits, mostly drawn from local madrasas.
They did not hold elections, as their spokesman explained:
According to Human Rights Watch:
I happened to be there in a very interesting time.
In the last week of May 2011, eight security personnel and civilians fell victim to four hundred armed Taliban who attacked Shaltalo check post in Dir, a frontier District of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, located few kilometers away from Afghan border.
The Taliban moved its militias near the hijacked aircraft, supposedly to prevent Indian special forces from storming the aircraft, and stalled the negotiations between India and the hijackers for days.
On August 1, 1997 the Taliban launched an attack on Sheberghan, the main military base of Abdul Rashid Dostum.
Pakistan states that it dropped all support for the group after the September 11 attacks.
On November 15, they released eight Western aid workers after three months in captivity.
But he said reconciliation must be on the Afghan government's terms, and that the Taliban must be subject to the sovereignty of the government.
On August 8, 1998 the Taliban launched an attack on Mazar-i Sharif.
According to Ali A. Jalali and Lester Grau, the Taliban "received extensive support from Pashtuns across the country who thought that the movement might restore their national dominance.
Zaeef also claimed that "4,000 Jews working in the Trade Center had prior knowledge of the suicide missions, and 'were absent on that day.'"
UN officials stated that there had been "15 massacres" between 1996 and 2001.
By the middle of September there were 250,000 Iranian personnel stationed on the border.
The Taliban ambassador to Pakistan, Abdul Salem Zaeef, responded to the ultimatum by demanding "convincing evidence" that Bin Laden was involved in the attacks, stating "our position is that if America has evidence and proof, they should produce it."
Their ideology was a departure from the Islamism of the anti-Soviet mujahideen rulers they replaced who tended to be mystical Sufis, traditionalists, or radical Islamicists inspired by the Muslim Brotherhood (Ikhwan).
"These are the same type of war crimes as were committed in Bosnia and should be prosecuted in international courts", one UN official was quoted as saying.
International officials who met with representatives of the new alliance, which Pulitzer Prize winner Steve Coll referred to as the "grand Pashtun-Tajik alliance", said, "It's crazy that you have this today ... Pashtuns, Tajiks, Uzbeks, Hazara ...
''The New York Times'' later reported that there were credible links between the hijackers and the Taliban.
Resentment was increasingly gathering against Taliban rule from the bottom of Afghan society, including the Pashtun areas.
Several hundred Arab Afghan fighters sent by bin Laden assisted the Taliban in the Mazar-e-Sharif slaughter.
Former Pakistani president Pervez Musharraf wrote in his memoirs that Richard Armitage, the former US deputy secretary of state, said Pakistan would be "bombed back to the stone-age" if it continued to support the Taliban,  although Armitage has since denied using the "stone age" phrase.
It is said that the Taliban did not include scholars learned in Islamic law and history.
According to the United Nations, the Taliban and their allies were responsible for 76% of Afghan civilian casualties in 2010, 80% in 2011, and 80% in 2012.
The first attempt on Massoud's life had been carried out by Hekmatyar and two Pakistani ISI agents in 1975, when Massoud was only 22 years old.
In the area of Massoud, women and girls did not have to wear the Afghan burqa.
They burned orchards, crops and destroyed irrigation systems, and forced more than 100,000 people from their homes with hundreds of men, women and children still unaccounted for.
The report also linked high-level members of the Pakistani government with the Taliban.
In 2010 the U.S. and Europe announced support for President Karzai's latest attempt to negotiate peace with the Taliban.
Cabinet ministers and deputies were mullahs with a "madrasah education."
Several Taliban and al-Qaeda commanders ran a network of human trafficking, abducting women and selling them into sex slavery in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
We believe that this is in line with the Sharia.
The report, based on interviews with Taliban commanders in Afghanistan, was written by Matt Waldman, a fellow at Harvard University.
In February 1998, religious police forced all women off the streets of Kabul, and issued new regulations ordering people to blacken their windows, so that women would not be visible from the outside.
In 2011, Alex Strick van Linschoten and Felix Kuehn at New York University's Center on International Cooperation claimed that the two groups did not get along at times before the September 11 attacks, and they have continued to fight since on account of their differences.
I sense a shift, and I think things are going to happen ...
In at least two known instances, Massoud personally intervened against cases of forced marriage.
The most senior Hazara and Uzbek leader were also part of the process.
The most often-repeated story and the Taliban's own story of how Mullah Omar first mobilized his followers is that in the spring of 1994, neighbors in Singesar told him that the local governor had abducted two teenage girls, shaved their heads, and taken them to a camp where they were raped.
There was a further massacre at the town of Yakaolang in January 2001.
The Taliban has often targeted health officials that work to immunise children against polio due to fears of the vaccine, including the fear that it is used to gather intelligence about their organisation.
United States along with the accusations of supporting Taliban has also called Pakistan as an indispensable ally.
After Bhutto became prime minister, Rehman "had access to the government, the army and the ISI," whom he influenced to help the Taliban.
Critics complained that this "lack of local representation in urban administration made the Taliban appear as an occupying force."
Rare ceasefires, usually negotiated by representatives of the Islamic State's newly appointed Defense Minister Ahmad Shah Massoud, President Sibghatullah Mojaddedi and later President Burhanuddin Rabbani (the interim government), or officials from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), commonly collapsed within days.
Omar's original commanders were "a mixture of former small-unit military commanders and madrassa teachers."
Pakistan, however, started to provide stronger military support to the Taliban.
Mullah Omar started his movement with fewer than 50 armed madrassah students in his hometown of Kandahar.
For example, they did not destroy the graves of Sufi pirs (holy men), and emphasized dreams as a means of revelation.
He went on to further claim that about 70% of the Taliban are angry with al-Qaeda, revealing the icy relationship between the two groups.
A range of officials inside and outside Pakistan have stepped up suggestions of links between the ISI and terrorist groups in recent years.
In rural areas the Taliban had little direct control, and promoted village jirgas, so it did not enforce its ideology as stringently in rural areas.
There was also an environmental toll to the country, heavy deforestation from the illegal trade in timber with hundreds of acres of pine and cedar forests in Kunar Province and Paktya being cleared.
Critics complained that most Afghans followed a different, less strict, and less intrusive interpretation of Islam.
Wrapping himself in the relic, he appeared on the roof of a building in the center of Kandahar while hundreds of Pashtun mullahs below shouted "Amir al-Mu'minin!"
The "regular army" resembled a lashkar or traditional tribal militia force with only 25,000 men (of whom 11,000 were non-Afghans).
The Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan was established in 1996 and the Afghan capital transferred to Kandahar.
Although, they have been linked with Waziristan-based Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), the connection between these two groups was of symbolic nature.
Saudi Arabia expelled the Taliban envoy in protest over the refusal to turn over bin Laden, and after Mullah Omar allegedly insulted the Saudi royal family.In mid-October the U.N. Security Council voted unanimously to ban commercial aircraft flights to and from Afghanistan, and freeze its bank accounts worldwide.
According to Guantanamo Bay charge sheets, the United States Department of Defense believes the Taliban may maintain a 40-man undercover unit called "Jihad Kandahar", which is used for undercover operations, including targeted killings.
The Taliban emerged in 1994 as one of the prominent factions in the Afghan Civil War, and largely consisted of students recently trained in madrassas in Pakistan.
On December 6, U.S. officials indicated that they have not ruled out talks with the Taliban.
On July 6, 1999 then president Bill Clinton signed into effect executive order 13129.
On the night of November 12, the Taliban retreated south from Kabul.
Within months however 15,000 students arrived from the madrassas in Pakistan.
The military spokesperson said that not a single bullet or financial support had been given to Taliban.
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said "to a certain extent, they play both sides."
The religious police routinely carried out inhumane abuse on women.
The document further states that the parents of those Pakistani nationals "know nothing regarding their child's military involvement with the Taliban until their bodies are brought back to Pakistan."
The role of the Pakistani military has been described by international observers as well as by the anti-Taliban leader Ahmad Shah Massoud as a "creeping invasion".
For their leadership, rigid fundamentalism was a matter not only of principle, but also of political survival.
Women were raped, and thousands of people were locked in containers and left to suffocate.
A publication by George Washington University describes:
Instead there will be an Amir al-Mu'minin.
Already in 1999 he started the training of police forces which he trained specifically in order to keep order and protect the civilian population in case the United Front would be successful.
Officially Pakistan denied supporting the Taliban militarily.
From 1996 to 2001 the Al-Qaeda of Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri became a state within the Taliban state.
During 2008 the United Kingdom announced plans to pay Taliban fighters to switch sides or lay down arms; the proceeding year the U.K. government supported negotiations with the Taliban.
Jean-José Puig describes how Massoud often led prayers before a meal or at times asked his fellow Muslims to lead the prayer but also did not hesitate to ask a Christian friend Jean-José Puig or the Jewish Princeton University Professor Michael Barry: "Jean-José, we believe in the same God.
After the creation of the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan in 2007, headed by Baitullah Mehsud,  its members have officially defined goals to establish their rule over Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas.
''Time'' magazine writes: "The Taliban often argued that the restrictions they placed on women were actually a way of revering and protecting the opposite sex.
Amrullah Saleh, the former director of Afghanistan's intelligence service, told Reuters that the ISI was "part of a landscape of destruction in this country".
"Without a change in Pakistani behaviour it will be difficult if not impossible for international forces and the Afghan government to make progress against the insurgency."
In early 2001 Massoud employed a new strategy of local military pressure and global political appeals.
As of 2007 the economy had begun to recover, with estimated foreign reserves of three billion dollars and a 13% increase in economic growth.
Many of these activities were hitherto lawful in Afghanistan.
For example, it made no comment when the Taliban captured Herat in 1995, and expelled thousands of girls from schools.
Even Pashtun intellectuals in the West, who differed with the Taliban on many issues, expressed support for the movement on purely ethnic grounds."
They imposed a 50% tax on any company operating in the country, and those who failed to pay were attacked.
The Taliban gave a safe passage to the hijackers and the released militants.
They engage the Pakistani army in heavy combat operations.
Ahmed Rashid also explained that the Afghan Transit Trade agreed on by Pakistan was "the largest official source of revenue for the Taliban."
From 1996 to 2001, the organization of Osama Bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri had become a virtual state within the Taliban state.
These operations along with the trade from the Golden Crescent financed the war in Afghanistan and also had the side effect of destroying start up industries in Pakistan.
Nuruludah, a Taliban commander, is quoted as saying that in the Shomali Plains, he and 10 of his men freed some women who were being abducted by Pakistani members of al-Qaeda.
Numerous U.S. officials have also accused the ISI of supporting terrorist groups including the Afghan Taliban.
30 Taliban (with only 16 rifles) freed the girls, and hanged the governor from the barrel of a tank.
In 2010, the U.N lifted sanctions on the Taliban, and requested that Taliban leaders and others be removed from terrorism watch lists.
Humayun Tandar, who took part as an Afghan diplomat in the 2001 International Conference on Afghanistan in Bonn, said that "strictures of language, ethnicity, region were also stifling for Massoud.
They joined with the Afghan United Front (Northern Alliance) to prepare for the subsequent arrival of U.S. Special Operations forces.
While Massoud united the Tajiks, Hazara and Uzbeks as well as some Pashtun commanders under his United Front command, the famed Pashtun commander Abdul Haq received increasing numbers of defecting Pashtun Taliban as "Taliban popularity trended downward".
He stated that the Taliban and Al-Qaeda had introduced "a very wrong perception of Islam" and that without the support of Pakistan and Bin Laden the Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year.
Militias controlling the different areas often surrendered without a fight.
A 1998 document by the U.S. State Department confirms that "20–40 percent of regular Taliban soldiers are Pakistani."
''The New York Times'' quoted a spokesman for the Afghan Taliban stating that:
Also contributing to the mix was the militant Islamism and extremist jihadism of Osama bin Laden.
In September 2001 – before the 11 September attacks against the United States – the Taliban allegedly authorized Afghan peasants to sow opium again.
On February 8, 2009, U.S. commander of operations in Afghanistan General Stanley McChrystal and other officials said that the Taliban leadership was in Quetta, Pakistan, though the Pakistani government, an official U.S. ally, denied this.
During 2000, British Intelligence reported that the ISI was taking an active role in several Al-Qaeda training camps.
On June 15, 2014 Pakistan army launches operation ‘Zarb-e-Azb’ in North Waziristan to remove and root-out Taliban from Pakistan.
They were allowed to work and to go to school.
In 1998, Iran accused Pakistan of sending its air force to bomb Mazar-i-Sharif in support of Taliban forces and directly accused Pakistani troops for "war crimes at Bamiyan".
On September 9, 2001, Massoud, then aged 48, was the target of a suicide attack by two Arabs posing as journalists at Khwaja Bahauddin, in the Takhar Province of Afghanistan.
As a part of the deal to free the plane, India released three militants.
Reports in which NATO states accused Iran of supplying and training some Taliban insurgents started coming forward since 2004/2005.
Others were taken to Khost, where bin Laden had several training camps."
As the Taliban's Attorney General Maulvi Jalil-ullah Maulvizada put it:
The Taliban also used targeted killings.
Sufi Muhammad is in Pakistani government custody, however, Molvi Fazalullah is believed to be in Afghanistan.
Sanction for the title traditionally required the support of all of the country's ulema, whereas only some 1,200 Pashtun Taliban-supporting Mullahs had declared Omar the Amir.
Horrific crimes were committed by criminals and individuals inside different factions.
In the following crisis between Iran and the Taliban, the Iranian government amassed up to 200,000 regular troops on the Afghan-Iranian border.
Massoud, who had survived countless assassination attempts over a period of 26 years, died in a helicopter taking him to a hospital.
Meanwhile, southern Afghanistan was neither under the control of foreign-backed militias nor the government in Kabul, but was ruled by local leaders such as Gul Agha Sherzai and their militias.
The Taliban's first major military activity was in 1994, when they marched northward from Maiwand and captured Kandahar City and the surrounding provinces, losing only a few dozen men.
The Taliban repeatedly offered Massoud a position of power to make him stop his resistance.
A Bush administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, rejected the Taliban offer, and stated that the U.S. would not negotiate their demands.
The killings of the Diplomats had been carried out by Sipah-e-Sahaba a Pakistani Sunni group with close ties to the ISI.
The Taliban did not issue press releases, policy statements, or hold regular press conferences.
The UN agreed that NATO would act on its behalf, focusing on counter-terrorist operations in Afghanistan after the Taliban had been "defeated".
They also frequently used the pre-Islamic Pashtun tribal code, Pashtunwali in deciding certain social matters, which often contradicted the Qu'ran.
In July 2001, several countries, including the United States, accused Pakistan of being "in violation of U.N. sanctions because of its military aid to the Taliban."
Other commentators viewed Islamabad's shift from war to diplomacy as an effort to appease growing discontent.
Some were trucked to Peshawar with the apparent complicity of Pakistani border guards.
Amnesty International, referring to the Taliban offensive, wrote in a 1995 report:
The report by the United Nations quotes "eyewitnesses in many villages describing Arab fighters carrying long knives used for slitting throats and skinning people".
In the meantime, the United States and Saudi Arabia joined the struggle against the Soviet Union by providing all the funds.
Taxes on opium exports became one of the mainstays of Taliban income and their war economy.
These observers maintained that policy should focus on "hearts and minds" and on economic reconstruction, which could profit from switching from interdicting to diverting poppy production—to make medicine.
