Upon her death, Bankhead was credited with nearly 300 film, stage, television, and radio roles.
Decades of sustained interest in Bankhead eventually realized itself in a renewed appreciation for her body of work — validating anew the artist behind the famous (or perhaps infamous) woman so far ahead of her time.
In 1912, both girls were enrolled in the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Manhattanville, New York, when Tallulah was 10.
I don't scare easy."
Although she had become a heavy smoker (reportedly 150 cigarettes/day), heavy drinker, and consumer of sleeping pills (she was a lifelong insomniac), Bankhead continued to perform in the 1950s and 1960s on Broadway, radio, television, and in the occasional film.
In 1933, Bankhead nearly died following a five-hour emergency hysterectomy due to venereal disease.
Bankhead called it "the best role I ever had in the theater".
At the Algonquin, Bankhead befriended actress Estelle Winwood.
Williams had wanted Bankhead for the original production, but she turned it down.
I couldn't believe I was seeing such reality.
The 1978 film ''Magic'' references her with the line by the show business agent Ben Green (Burgess Meredith): "Hey kid, I have lived through Tallulah Bankhead and the death of Vaudeville.
Bankhead did abstain from drinking, but only because she had promised her father that she would stay away from alcohol.
Bankhead, at 62 and audibly suffering from breathing difficulties from emphysema in the interview, frankly spoke of how hopeless she would be on a desert island, admitting that she "couldn’t put a key in the door, dahling.
The audience had been giggling at the absurd plot even before this simian had at me.
As a child, Bankhead was described as "extremely homely" and overweight, while her sister was slim and prettier.
Bankhead was Irving Rapper's first choice for the Laurette Taylor role in ''The Glass Menagerie''.
Tennessee Williams himself (they were close friends) called her Blanche "the worst I have seen", accusing her of ruining the role to appease her fans who wanted camp.
Tallulah hailed from the Brockman Bankheads, a prominent Alabama political family — her grandfather and uncle were U.S.
The cause of death was pleural pneumonia, complicated by emphysema due to cigarette smoking, malnutrition, and possibly a strain of the flu which was endemic at that time.
Her eyes were still fine, and there was still beauty in the bone structure of her face beneath the wrinkles and ravages of hard living.
Bankhead as Regina was lauded as "one of the most electrifying performances in American theater history".
Tallulah Brockman Bankhead was born on January 31, 1902, in Huntsville, Alabama, to William Brockman Bankhead and Adelaide Eugenia "Ada" Bankhead (née Sledge).
For these and other offhand remarks, Bankhead was cited in the Hays Committee's "Doom Book", a list of 150 actors and actresses considered "unsuitable for the public" which was presented to the studios.
She soon realized her place was on stage rather than screen, and had roles in ''39 East'' (1919), ''Footloose'' (1919), ''Nice People'' (1921), ''Everyday'' (1921),
In 1919, after roles in three other silent films, ''When Men Betray'' (1918), ''Thirty a Week'' (1918), and ''The Trap'' (1919), Bankhead made her stage debut in ''The Squab Farm'' at the Bijou Theatre in New York.
However, the initial reviews had decided the production's fate, and the producer pulled the plug after 15 performances.
She rented a home at 1712 Stanley Street, in Hollywood, and began hosting parties that were said to "have no boundaries".
Bankhead became an icon of the tempestuous, flamboyant actress, and her unique voice and mannerisms are often subject to imitation and parody.
Orville and Wilbur Wright."
She became good friends with Tennessee Williams, who was immediately struck upon meeting her, describing her as "resulting from the fantastic crossbreeding of a moth and a tiger".
The search for Scarlett O'Hara was documented in the "The Scarlet O'Hara Wars" episode of the miniseries ''Moviola'', where the very similar Carrie Nye played Bankhead, being nominated for an Emmy Award.
Her legend, which had once nourished her, nearly ruined her.
The director remarked that her performance exceeded Jessica Tandy and Vivien Leigh's in the role.
Her sister, at 16, was getting married, but Bankhead sought a career in acting.
Tallulah and Eugenia's grandmother and aunt were beginning to find the girls difficult to handle.
Lifetime achievement
The costume designer Edith Head had explicitly admitted to styling Channing's appearance to that of Bankhead.
She was the godmother of Brook and Brockman Seawell, children of her lifelong friend, actress Eugenia Rawls, and Rawls's husband, Donald Seawell.
Jim Bailey originated the role of Bankhead in the play ''Tallulah and Tennessee'' in 1999.
She soon moved into the Algonquin Hotel, incidentally a hotspot for the artistic and literary elite of the era, where she quickly charmed her way into the famed Algonquin Round Table of the hotel bar.
Valerie Harper starred as Bankhead in ''Looped'', which premiered at The Pasadena Playhouse.
While in London, Bankhead bought herself a Bentley, which she loved to drive.
The musical was based on a book by Willie Rushton.
Selznick sent Kay Brown to Bankhead to discuss the possibility of Bankhead playing prostitute Belle Watling in the film, which she turned down.
"In the second act&nbsp;...
At the Algonquin Hotel, Bankhead left prominent impressions upon playwrights such as Zoe Akins and Rachel Crothers.
About her work in Wilder's classic, the ''New York Sun'' wrote: "Her portrayal of Sabina has comedy and passion.
The Bankhead Theater (Livermore Performing Arts Center) has her namesake.
She also met Ethel Barrymore, who attempted to persuade her to change her name to Barbara.
Bankhead was baptized next to her mother's coffin.
The critic Brooks Atkinson was more candid: "Since Miss Bankhead lived as she wanted to, there is no point in deploring the loss of a talented actress".
For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Bankhead has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6141 Hollywood Blvd.
The show won the 1925 Pulitzer Prize.
Finding she had a gift for mimicry, she entertained her classmates by imitating the school teachers.
Only  when she left the hospital, she stoically said to her doctor, "Don't think this has taught me a lesson!"
Though she always hated being alone, her struggle with loneliness began to lapse into a depression.
Selznick also reportedly believed that at age 36, she was too old to play Scarlett, who is 16 at the beginning of the film (the role eventually went to Vivien Leigh).
Bankhead's voice and  personality inspired voice actress Betty Lou Gerson's work on the character Cruella De Vil in Walt Disney Pictures' ''One Hundred and One Dalmatians'', which the studio calls "a manic take-off on famous actress Tallulah Bankhead."
How she contrives both, almost at the same time, is a mystery to mere man."
Rock musician/actor Suzi Quatro portrayed Bankhead in a musical named ''Tallulah Who?''
'', which she had turned down.
''Variety'' Award for Best Actress of the Year
Bankhead claimed that her "first performance" was witnessed by none other than the Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur.
Now it became hysterical.
What did Tallulah do in this crisis?
For example, in her autobiography, Bankhead described the opening night of a play called ''Conchita'':
Her 1932 movie ''Devil and the Deep'' is notable for the presence of three major co-stars, with Bankhead receiving top billing over Gary Cooper, Charles Laughton, and Cary Grant; it is the only film with Cooper and Grant as the film's leading men.
She took heavy painkillers, but these dried her mouth, and most critics thought that Tallulah's line readings were unintelligible.
Bankhead's first film was ''Tarnished Lady'' (1931), directed by George Cukor and the pair became fast friends.
Although her screen test for the role in black-and-white was superb, she photographed poorly in Technicolor.
While viewing the inauguration parade, she booed the South Carolina float which carried then-Governor and segregationist Strom Thurmond, who had recently run against Truman on the Dixiecrat ticket, splitting the Democratic vote.
He recalled of their interview, "She was a very frail and ailing old lady, and I was shocked to see how old and ill she looked as I helped her out of a taxi.
Her Aunt Marie gave the famous brothers a party at her home near Montgomery, Alabama, in which the guests were asked to entertain.
Her hands shook, and when she wished to go to the loo she had to ask Monica Chapman to accompany her to help her with her clothing."
I was absolutely floored by her performance.
Bankhead continued to play in various performances over the next few years, gaining excellent notices for her portrayal of Elizabeth in a revival of Somerset Maugham's ''The Circle''.
On December 12, 1968, Bankhead died in St. Luke's Hospital in Manhattan at 7:45&nbsp;am, aged 66.
Primarily an actress of the stage, Bankhead did have one hit on film (Alfred Hitchcock's ''Lifeboat''), as well as a brief but successful career on radio.
She would telephone a taxi-cab and pay the driver to drive to her destination while she followed behind in her car.
The Library of Congress houses numerous works of Bankhead.
For the most part, Bankhead was lauded even in her failed vehicles, and she was considered by critics to be a rare and unique talent.
She was nominated for a Tony award for her performance in ''Midgie Purvis'', and won the New York Film Critics Award for Best Actress in a Film for her work in ''Lifeboat''.
In 1956, Bankhead appeared as Blanche DuBois (a character inspired by her) in a revival of Tennessee Williams's ''A Streetcar Named Desire'' (1956).
Tallulah Bankhead is regarded as one of the greatest stage actresses of the century, acclaimed for her natural eloquence and dynamism.
Bankhead earned her greatest acclaim for two classic roles she originated: Regina in Lillian Hellman's ''The Little Foxes'' and Sabina in Thorton Wilder's ''The Skin of our Teeth''.
In 1928, she was honored as one of the 10 most remarkable women in London.
On her deathbed, Ada told her sister-in-law to "take care of Eugenia, Tallulah will always be able to take care of herself".
She called the B-movie horror flick "a piece of shit", though her performance in it was praised by critics and remains popular as a cult film and with her fans.
The following year, Bankhead was born on her parents' wedding anniversary, in the second floor of what is now known as the Isaac Schiffman Building; a marker was erected to commemorate the site, and in 1980, the building was placed on the National Register of Historic Places.
After watching a performance at a circus, she taught herself how to cartwheel, and frequently cartwheeled about the house, sang, and recited literature that she had memorized.
Their father, William, who was working from their Huntsville home as a lawyer, proposed enrolling the girls in a convent school (although her father was a Methodist and her mother an Episcopalian).
She was dubbed one of the "Four Riders of the Algonquin", consisting of Bankhead, Estelle Winwood, Eva Le Gallienne, and Blyth Daly (all lesbians or bisexual).
Bankhead's famously husky voice (which she described as "mezzo-basso") was the result of chronic bronchitis due to childhood illness.
Bankhead filed for divorce in Reno, Nevada, in May 1941.
In the interview, Plomley spoke of Bankhead's glory days as the most celebrated actress of 1920s London.
She received glowing reviews, but the play itself suffered from numerous rewrites and failed to last beyond a month.
A lot of these impromptu romances have been climaxed in a fashion not generally condoned.
Bankhead returned to the United States in 1931, but Hollywood success eluded her in her first four films of the 1930s.
"I won the prize for the top performance, with an imitation of my kindergarten teacher", Bankhead wrote.
She also appeared on NBC's famous lost ''Tonight Show'' Beatles interview that aired on May 14, 1968.
But, darling, I think you'd better put Shakespeare first."
She did, however, describe herself as "ambisextrous".
It was a physically demanding role and Bankhead insisted on doing the stunts herself, including sliding down a staircase bannister.
I turned a cartwheel!
During the run, she was featured on the cover of ''Life''.
William B. Bankhead was devastated by his wife's death, which sent him into a bout of depression and alcoholism.
Among Bankhead's awards were a New York Drama Critics Award for Best Performance by an actress in ''The Skin of Our Teeth'' in 1942, as well as a ''Variety'' award in ''The Little Foxes'' and ''Skin''.
"But Jack Warner rejected the idea because of his fear of her drinking..." Though she promised not to drink during shooting, he refused to give her the part.
In London, she appeared in over a dozen plays over the next eight years, most famously, ''The Dancers''.
Her last appearances onscreen came in March 1967 as the villainous Black Widow in the ''Batman'' TV series, and on the December 17, 1967, episode of ''The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour'' comedy-variety TV series, in the "Mahta Harry" skit.
If there's anything the matter with me now, it's not Hollywood or Hollywood's state of mind&nbsp;...
Restless, Bankhead moved to London.
She was described as a performer and an exhibitionist from the beginning, discovering an early age that theatrics gained her the attention she desired.
In the 1969 film Goodbye, Mr. Chips, actress Siân Phillips portrays Ursula Mossbank, a character clearly inspired by the Bankhead mystique and mannerisms, but no suggestion is made in the film that that character is supposed to be Bankhead herself.
She excelled in both serious and comedic roles, and for over two decades, she was among the most celebrated actresses in Broadway or London's West End, praised in the superlative "perhaps the greatest actress this country has ever produced."
Bankhead quickly matured into a southern belle.
Congressman William Bankhead sent in a letter to the magazine with her duplicate photo.
The good doctor's clinical notes were old hat to me&nbsp;...
and Mrs. Antrobus'', and also husband and wife offstage).
However, she forgot to send in her name or address with the picture.
In 1923, she made her debut on the London stage at Wyndham's Theatre.
Tallulah's support of liberal causes such as civil rights broke with the tendency of the Southern Democrats to support a more conservative agenda and she often openly opposed her own family publicly.
After rehearsals, the filming of the episode proceeded without a hitch and Ball congratulated Bankhead on her performance.
Her superbly multifaceted performance was acknowledged as her best on film and won her the New York Film Critics Circle award.
John Gruen's ''Menotti: A Biography'' notes an incident in which Jane Bowles chased Bankhead around Capricorn, Gian Carlo Menotti and Samuel Barber's Mount Kisco estate, insisting that Bankhead needed to play the lesbian character Inès in Jean-Paul Sartre's ''No Exit'' (which Paul Bowles had recently translated).
Williams wrote four female roles for her, Myra Torrance in ''Battle of Angels'', Blanche DuBois in ''A Streetcar Named Desire'', Princess Kosmonopolis in ''Sweet Bird of Youth'', and Flora Goforth in ''The Milk Train Doesn't Stop Here Anymore''.
Ten Most Remarkable Women In London
After Truman was elected, Bankhead was invited to sit with the President during his inauguration.
Her last motion picture was in a British horror film, ''Fanatic'' (1965).
There he paused, peered out at the audience, then waved my wig over his head&nbsp;...
Other actresses to portray Bankhead include Eugenia Rawls (in her one-woman stage show ''Tallulah, A Memory''), Kathleen Turner (in Sandra Ryan Heyward's one-woman touring show ''Tallulah'' in the late 1990s), Carrie Nye (on television in ''The Scarlett O'Hara War''), and Helen Gallagher in an off-Broadway musical, ''Tallulah!''
Her grandmother often threw a bucket of water on her to calm her down during these outbursts.
Bankhead locked herself in the bathroom and kept insisting, "That lesbian!
Her last coherent words reportedly were a garbled request for "Codeine&nbsp;...
The matter with me is, I WANT A MAN!&nbsp;... Six months is a long, long while.
''The Skin of Our Teeth
It's the greatest test I've ever made or seen in my life.
I'm serious about love.
Bankhead earned another ''Variety'' award and the New York Drama Critics' Award for Best Performance by an Actress followed her role in Thornton Wilder's ''The Skin of Our Teeth'', in which Bankhead played Sabina, the housekeeper and temptress, opposite Fredric March and Florence Eldridge (''Mr.
Bankhead and playwright Hellman, both formidable women, feuded over the Soviet Union's invasion of Finland.
Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play
Bankhead learned that she was one of the winners while browsing the magazine at her local drug store.
''Variety'' Award for Best Actress of the Year
Like her family, Bankhead was a Democrat, but broke with many Southerners by campaigning for Harry Truman's reelection in 1948.
At the height of her career, she was a "living legend", Broadway's most original leading lady.
Sitting behind the interview desk and beside Joe Garagiola, who was substituting for an absent Johnny Carson, she took an active role during the interview, questioning Paul McCartney and John Lennon.
Bankhead was known for her husky voice, outrageous personality, and devastating wit.
''Fanatic'' was released in the U.S. as ''Die!
She later made appearances on television, some of which have become classics.
Her photo in the magazine was captioned "Who is She?
Following the release of the Kinsey reports, she was once quoted as stating, "I found no surprises in the Kinsey report.
I wouldn't know a thing about it."
However, Bankhead did not go gently into the night — the legend which had ruined her career made her an enormously popular icon in both the theatrical and particularly the gay community.
I go into them impulsively.
In her later years, Bankhead had serious accidents and several psychotic episodes from sleep deprivation and hypnotic drug abuse.
Bankhead behaved herself on the set and filming went smoothly, but she found film-making to be very boring and did not have the patience for it.
Bankhead was (posthumously) one of the original members of the American Theater Hall of Fame inducted upon its establishment in 1972.
American Theater Hall of Fame
Her fame as an actress was ensured in 1924 when she played Amy in Sidney Howard's ''They Knew What They Wanted''.
The play's run made Bankhead a fortune.
Only 70 lb (32&nbsp;kg) when she left the hospital, she stoically said to her doctor, "Don't think this has taught me a lesson!".
Bankhead had no children, but she had four abortions before she was 30.
Though Bankhead's career slowed in the mid-1950s, she never faded from the public eye.
Bankhead immediately telegraphed her father, vowing never to speak with a magazine reporter again.
Bankhead married actor John Emery, the son of stage actors Edward Emery (''circa'' 1861–1938) and Isabel Waldron (1871–1950), on August 31, 1937, at her father's home in Jasper, Alabama.
She was buried in Saint Paul's Churchyard, near Chestertown, Maryland, where her sister lived.
Returning to Broadway, Bankhead's career stalled at first in unmemorable plays.
Originating some of the 20th-century theater's preeminent roles in comedy and melodrama, she gained acclaim as an actress on both sides of the Atlantic.
In 1934, after recuperating in Alabama, she returned to England.
The human drama, the play of a woman's great valor and an artist's truth, her own, far superseded, and even eclipsed, to my eye, the performance of my own play."
Despite Meredith Willson's Orchestra and Chorus and top guest stars from Broadway, Hollywood, and radio, ''The Big Show'', which earned rave reviews, failed to do more than dent Jack Benny and Edgar Bergen's ratings.
The first annual Gay Pride Festival in New Orleans, held in 1979, was dedicated to Bankhead.
She was not very competent with directions and constantly found herself lost in the London streets.
I've had many momentary love affairs.
Rumors about Bankhead's sex life have lingered for years, and she was linked romantically with many notable female personalities of the day, including Greta Garbo, Marlene Dietrich, Katherine Cornell, Eva Le Gallienne, Hope Williams ("who had a boy's body"), Beatrice Lillie, and Alla Nazimova, as well as writer Mercedes de Acosta and singer Billie Holiday.
Although Bankhead was not very interested in making films, the opportunity to make $50,000 per film was too good to pass up.
The day her divorce became final, Bankhead told a reporter, "You can definitely quote me as saying there will be no plans for a remarriage."
I can't do a ''thing'' for myself."
''Danger'' (1922), ''Her Temporary Husband'' (1922), and ''The Exciters'' (1922).
I haven't had an affair for six months.
She is credited with having helped Truman immeasurably by belittling his rival, New York's Governor Thomas E. Dewey.
It was finalized on June 13, 1941.
Obituaries on her passing reflected on how far she had fallen from her former grandeur, à la John Barrymore.
George Harrison and Ringo Starr were not present and were in England at the time, as noted during the interview.
At 15, Bankhead submitted her photo to ''Picture Play'', which was conducting a contest and awarding a trip to New York plus a part in a movie to 12 winners based on their photographs.
Their first child, Ada Eugenia, was born on January 24, 1901.
In 1933, Bankhead nearly died following a five-hour emergency hysterectomy due to venereal disease, which she claimed she had contracted from George Raft.
She chose this role over the lead in ''Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?
Bankhead was absolutely natural, so moving, so touching without even trying.
From that time, Bankhead could command 10% of the gross and was billed larger than any other actor in the cast, although she usually granted equal billing to Estelle Winwood, a frequent co-star and close friend from the 1920s until Bankhead's death in 1968.
She had suffered a severe burn on her right hand from a match exploding while she lit a cigarette, and it was aggravated by the importance of jewelery props in the play.
Among her last radio appearances was in an episode of the BBC's ''Desert Island Discs'' with Roy Plomley.
Her mother, Adelaide "Ada" Eugenia, was a native of Como, Mississippi, and was engaged to another man when she met William Bankhead, on a trip to Huntsville, Alabama, to buy her wedding dress.
Later in 1932, Bankhead starred opposite Robert Montgomery in ''Faithless''.
A space satellite named for her was launched in 1963, and Wernher von Braun invited her to witness the launching.
The next season, NBC installed her as one of a half-dozen rotating hosts of NBC's ''The All Star Revue'' on Saturday nights.
Instead I received an ovation."
Bankhead appeared in a revival of Noël Coward's ''Private Lives'', taking it on tour and then to Broadway for the better part of two years.
Bankhead has also been portrayed by a male actor.
After only a short stay, she was called back to New York to play in ''The Little Foxes''.
