This section briefly outlines past and current movements and their view of the Talmud's role.
#Falsification of scripture
There is a quoted Talmudic passage, for example, where Jesus of Nazareth is sent to Hell to be boiled in excrement for eternity.
The term "pilpul" was increasingly applied derogatorily to novellae deemed casuistic and hairsplitting.
Known as the ''Vilna Edition Shas'', this edition (and later ones printed by his widow and sons, the Romm publishing house) has been used in the production of more recent editions of Talmud Bavli.
The Babylonian Talmud was compiled about the year 500, although it continued to be edited later.
A ''sugya'' may, and often does, range widely off the subject of the mishnah.
The English pages are elucidated and heavily annotated; each Aramaic/Hebrew page of Talmud typically requires three English pages of translation.
#Absurd or sexually immoral content
A maxim in Pirkei Avot advocates its study from the age of 15.
The "Talmud" in this case is usually one of several possible volumes, the earliest translated into Korean from the Japanese.
The external history of the Talmud includes also the literary attacks made upon it by some Christian theologians after the Reformation, since these onslaughts on Judaism were directed primarily against that work, the leading example being Eisenmenger's ''Entdecktes Judenthum'' (Judaism Unmasked) (1700).
Because of their location, the sages of these Academies devoted considerable attention to analysis of the agricultural laws of the Land of Israel.
A page number in the Talmud refers to a double-sided page, known as a ''daf''; each daf has two ''amudim'' labeled   and , sides A and B (Recto and Verso).
Accordingly, traditionalists argue that Ravina’s death in 475 CE is the latest possible date for the completion of the redaction of the Talmud.
Ownership and reading of the Talmud is not widespread among Reform and Reconstructionist Jews, who usually place more emphasis on the study of the Hebrew Bible or Tanakh.
On this view the text did not reach its final form until around 700.
In so doing, the Gemara will highlight semantic disagreements between Tannaim and Amoraim (often ascribing a view to an earlier authority as to how he may have answered a question), and compare the Mishnaic views with passages from the Baraita.
Nevertheless, the influence of the Brisker method is great.
One can ask questions such as: Do a given section's sources date from its editor's lifetime?
However, even on the most traditional view a few passages are regarded as the work of a group of rabbis who edited the Talmud after the end of the Amoraic period, known as the ''Savoraim'' or ''Rabbanan Savora'e'' (meaning "reasoners" or "considerers").
A '''', including ''baraita'' or ''tosefta'', will typically comprise a detailed proof-based elaboration of a Mishnaic statement, whether halakhic or aggadic.
After the death of Hai Gaon, however, the center of Talmud scholarship shifts to Europe and North Africa.
One edition, by Rabbi Yosef Amar, represents the Yemenite tradition, and takes the form of a photostatic reproduction of a Vilna-based print to which Yemenite vocalization and textual variants have been added by hand, together with printed introductory material.
See his ''Yehi Yosef'' (Jerusalem, 1991) p.&nbsp;132 "This passage does not bear the signature of the editor of the Talmud!"
Generally, however, Conservative Jews study the Talmud as a historical source-text for Halakha.
One area of Talmudic scholarship developed out of the need to ascertain the Halakha.
The term "Talmud" normally refers to the collection of writings named specifically the '''Babylonian Talmud''' ''(Talmud Bavli)'', although there is also an earlier collection known as the '''Jerusalem Talmud''', or '''Palestinian Talmud''' ''(Talmud Yerushalmi)''.
5)  Eventually their work came to be one of the formative parts of Conservative Judaism.
All these works and their commentaries are printed in the Vilna and many subsequent editions of the Talmud.
A further attack on the Talmud took place in Poland (in what is now Ukrainian territory) in 1757, when Bishop Dembowski, at the instigation of the Frankists, convened a public disputation at Kamianets-Podilskyi, and ordered all copies of the work found in his bishopric to be confiscated and burned.
Teshuvot Geonim Kadmonim, section 78, deals with mistaken biblical readings in the Talmud.
The translation was carried out by a group of 90 Muslim and Christian scholars.
Since then many Orthodox rabbis have approved of his work, including Rabbis Shlomo Kluger, Yoseph Shaul Ha-Levi Natanzohn, Yaaqov Ettlinger, Isaac Elhanan Spektor and Shimon Sofer.
The Disputation of Paris led to the condemnation and the first burning of copies of the Talmud in Paris in 1242.
File:Knesset Menorah Jochanan ben Sakkai.jpg|''Jewish Mysticism: Jochanan ben Sakkai'', bronze relief from the Knesset Menorah
But the popular new method of Talmud study was not without critics; already in the 15th century, the ethical tract ''Orhot Zaddikim'' ("Paths of the Righteous" in Hebrew) criticized pilpul for an overemphasis on intellectual acuity.
Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, Conservative Judaism accepts the Talmud as authoritative, while Samaritan, Karaite, Reconstructionist, and Reform Judaism do not.
Another important function of Gemara is to identify the correct Biblical basis for a given law presented in the Mishnah and the logical process connecting one with the other: this activity was known as ''talmud'' long before the existence of the "Talmud" as a text.
The Brisker method is highly analytical and is often criticized as being a modern-day version of pilpul.
The '''Talmud''' (; Hebrew:  '''' "instruction, learning", from a root '''' "teach, study") is a central text of Rabbinic Judaism.
The earliest Talmud commentaries were written by the Geonim ( 800 - 1000, CE) in Babylonia.
The Rashi commentary appears in Rashi script with vowels and punctuation.
The ''sugya'' is not punctuated in the conventional sense used in the English language, but by using specific expressions that help to divide the sugya into components, usually including a statement, a question on the statement, an answer, a proof for the answer or a refutation of the answer with its own proof.
Censorship of the Talmud and other Hebrew works was introduced by a papal bull issued in 1554; five years later the Talmud was included in the first Index Expurgatorius; and Pope Pius IV commanded, in 1565, that the Talmud be deprived of its very name.
It is available also on CD-ROM.
New categories and distinctions (''hillukim'') were therefore created, resolving seeming contradictions within the Talmud by novel logical means.
Further variant readings can often be gleaned from citations in secondary literature such as commentaries, in particular those of Alfasi, Rabbenu Ḥananel and Aghmati, and sometimes the later Spanish commentators such as Nachmanides and Solomon ben Adret.
Statements in the Mishnah are typically terse, recording brief opinions of the rabbis debating a subject; or recording only an unattributed ruling, apparently representing a consensus view.
Investigation of questions such as these are known as ''higher textual criticism''.
On the other hand, many of the 19th century's strongest critics of Reform, including strictly orthodox Rabbis such as Zvi Hirsch Chajes, utilized this new scientific method.
Pilpul practitioners posited that the Talmud could contain no redundancy or contradiction whatsoever.
The first edition of the expurgated Talmud, on which most subsequent editions were based, appeared at Basel (1578–1581) with the omission of the entire treatise of 'Abodah Zarah and of passages considered inimical to Christianity, together with modifications of certain phrases.
Here the argument from silence is very convincing."
The Babylonian version also contains the opinions of more generations because of its later date of completion.
This work is an English edition of Rabbi Steinsaltz' complete Hebrew language translation of and commentary on the entire Talmud.
Full-scale attacks on the Talmud took place in the 13th century in France, where Talmudic study was then flourishing.
Neither the Jerusalem nor the Babylonian Talmud covers the entire Mishnah: for example, a Babylonian Gemara exists only for 37 out of the 63 tractates of the Mishnah.
By the 18th century, pilpul study waned.
Three years later, in 1523, Bomberg published the first edition of the Jerusalem Talmud.
Conservative Judaism similarly emphasizes the study of Talmud within its religious and rabbinic education.
The influence of the Babylonian Talmud has been far greater than that of the ''Yerushalmi''.
Some modern scholars use the term ''Stammaim'' (from the Hebrew ''Stam'', meaning "closed", "vague" or "unattributed") for the authors of unattributed statements in the Gemara.
Most modern editions are either copies of or closely based on the Vilna edition, and therefore still omit most of the disputed passages.
The margins include color maps, illustrations and notes based on Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz’s Hebrew language translation and commentary of the Talmud.
The standard collection for Spain was that of Rabbenu Asher ("Tosefot Harosh").
Traditionally, this Talmud was thought to have been redacted in about the year 350 by Rav Muna and Rav Yossi in the Land of Israel.
Often the explanations of ''Tosafot''  differ from those of Rashi.
The emendations of Yoel Sirkis and the Vilna Gaon are included in all standard editions of the Talmud, in the form of marginal glosses entitled ''Hagahot ha-Bach'' and ''Hagahot ha-Gra'' respectively; further emendations by Solomon Luria are set out in commentary form at the back of each tractate.
The law as laid down in the two compilations is basically similar, except in emphasis and in minor details.
The central concept of Karaism is the rejection of the Oral Torah, as embodied in the Talmud, in favor of a strict adherence to the Written Torah only.
The ''Tosafot'' are collected commentaries by various medieval Ashkenazic Rabbis on the Talmud (known as ''Tosafists'' or ''Ba'alei Tosafot'').
On the other hand, because of the centuries of redaction between the composition of the Jerusalem and the Babylonian Talmud, the opinions of early ''amoraim'' might be closer to their original form in the Jerusalem Talmud.
Incomplete—24 volumes and a reference guide.
After thirty years the Vatican, which had first permitted the Talmud to appear in print, undertook a campaign of destruction against it.
Authors referred to their own commentaries as "al derekh ha-peshat" (by the simple method) to contrast them with pilpul.
Examples of such traditions were statements that the Messiah was born around the time of the destruction of the Temple, and that the Messiah sat at the right hand of God.
Despite its incomplete state, the Jerusalem Talmud remains an indispensable source of knowledge of the development of the Jewish Law in the Holy Land.
It is not clear why this is, as the laws were not directly applicable in either country following the Temple's 70 CE destruction.
The title is assumed to be a corruption of ''Dibre David'', a work published in 1671.
Tradition ascribes the compilation of the Babylonian Talmud in its present form to two Babylonian sages, Rav Ashi and Ravina II.
Almost all printings since Bomberg have followed the same pagination.
These commentaries could be read with the text of the Talmud and would help explain the meaning of the text.
Today many more manuscripts have become available, in particular from the Cairo Geniza.
It was also an important resource in the study of the Babylonian Talmud by the Kairouan school of Chananel ben Chushiel and Nissim ben Jacob, with the result that opinions ultimately based on the Jerusalem Talmud found their way into both the Tosafot and the Mishneh Torah of Maimonides.
In addition to the six Orders, the Talmud contains a series of short treatises of a later date, usually printed at the end of Seder Nezikin.
The first collaborative book was ''5,000 Years of Jewish Wisdom: Secrets of the Talmud Scriptures'', created over a three-day period in 1968 and published in 1971.
Orthodox Judaism continues to stress the importance of Talmud study as a central component of Yeshiva curriculum, in particular for those training to become Rabbis.
Modern editions such as those of the Oz ve-Hadar Institute correct misprints and restore passages that in earlier editions were modified or excised by censorship but do not attempt a comprehensive account of textual variants.
In the Vilna edition of the Talmud there are 5,894 folio pages.
Alfasi's work was highly influential, attracted several commentaries in its own right and later served as a basis for the creation of halakhic codes.
Rav Ashi was president of the Sura Academy from 375-427.
Many attacks come from antisemitic sources, particularly Christians such as Justinas Pranaitis, Elizabeth Dilling or David Duke.
In the three centuries following the redaction of the Mishnah, rabbis in Israel and Babylonia analyzed, debated, and discussed that work.
In this translation, each English page faces the Aramaic/Hebrew page.
Sometimes the misrepresentation is deliberate, and other times simply due to an inability to grasp the subtle and sometimes confusing narratives in the Talmud.
In the 19th century Raphael Nathan Nota Rabinovicz published a multi-volume work entitled ''Dikdukei Soferim'', showing textual variants from the Munich and other early manuscripts of the Talmud, and further variants are recorded in the Complete Israeli Talmud and ''Gemara Shelemah'' editions (see Printing, above).
Many different editions followed in both Korea and China, often by black-market publishers.
The Oral Torah was far from monolithic; rather, it varied among various schools.
Thus, Jews viewed Christians as misguided and in error, but not among the "heathens" or "pagans" discussed in the Talmud.
See also: ''The Conservative Jewish view of the Halakha''.
One such example concerns the line "If a Jew be called upon to explain any part of the rabbinic books, he ought to give only a false explanation.
Following the formation of the modern state of Israel there is some interest in restoring ''Eretz Yisrael'' traditions.
Another influential medieval Halakhic work following the order of the Babylonian Talmud, and to some extent modelled on Alfasi, was "the ''Mordechai''", a compilation by Mordechai ben Hillel ( 1250 – 1298).
The rest of the Gemara, including the discussions of the Amoraim and the overall framework, is in a characteristic dialect of Jewish Babylonian Aramaic.
Some modern editions of the Talmud contain some or all of this material, either at the back of the book, in the margin, or in its original location in the text.
The oldest full manuscript of the Talmud, known as the Munich Talmud (Cod.hebr.
Hebrew continued to be used for the writing of religious texts, poetry, and so forth.
One of the main goals of the ''Tosafot'' is to explain and interpret contradictory statements in the Talmud.
The question as to when the Gemara was finally put into its present form is not settled among modern scholars.
(commenced Leipzig, 1897–1909, edition completed, following emigration to England in 1933, by 1936).
By this time Christianity had become the state religion of the Roman Empire and Jerusalem the holy city of Christendom.
The most famous two were the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel.
During the period of the Tannaim (rabbis cited in the Mishnah), the spoken vernacular of Jews in Judaea was a late form of Hebrew known as Rabbinic or Mishnaic Hebrew, whereas during the period of the Amoraim (rabbis cited in the Gemara), which began around 200 CE, the spoken vernacular was Aramaic.
Bomberg's edition was considered relatively free of censorship.
In general, all valid opinions, even the non-normative ones, were recorded in the Talmud.
Some early commentators such as Rabbenu Gershom of Mainz (10th century) and Rabbenu Ḥananel (early 11th century) produced running commentaries to various tractates.
Aggadic statements are not legally related, but rather are exegetical, homiletical, ethical, or historical in nature.
The Tosafot commentaries were collected in different editions in the various schools.
* The Noé Edition of the ''Koren Talmud Bavli'', Adin Steinsaltz, Koren Publishers Jerusalem.
Over time, the approach of the Tosafists spread to other Jewish communities, particularly those in Spain.
Following Ambrosius Frobenius's publication of most of the Talmud in installments in Basel, Immanuel Benveniste published the whole Talmud in installments in Amsterdam 1644–1648, Though according to Raphael Rabbinovicz the Benveniste Talmud may have been based on the Lublin Talmud and included many of the censors' errors.
Medieval Ashkenazic Jewry produced another major commentary known as Tosafot ("additions" or "supplements").
For both these reasons it is regarded as a more comprehensive collection of the opinions available.
* The Jerusalem Talmud covers all the tractates of Zeraim, while the Babylonian Talmud covers only tractate Berachot.
The earliest recorded oral Torah may have been of the midrashic form, in which halakhic discussion is structured as exegetical commentary on the Pentateuch.
Criticism of the Talmud is widespread, in great part through the internet.
Talmudic study amongst the laity is widespread in Orthodox Judaism, with daily or weekly Talmud study particularly common in Haredi Judaism and with Talmud study a central part of the curriculum in Orthodox Yeshivas and day schools.
Using a different style, Rabbi Nathan b. Jechiel created a lexicon called the ''Arukh'' in the 11th century to help translate difficult words.
It was compiled in the 4th century CE in Galilee.
Talmud contains biblical exegesis and commentary on Tanakh that will often clarify elliptical and esoteric passages.
Traditionally Talmudic statements are classified into two broad categories, ''halakhic'' and ''aggadic'' statements.
''Gemara'' means “completion” (from the Hebrew '''' : "to complete") or "learning" (from the Aramaic: "study").
This same Pablo Christiani made an attack on the Talmud that resulted in a papal bull against the Talmud and in the first censorship, which was undertaken at Barcelona by a commission of Dominicans, who ordered the cancellation of passages deemed objectionable from a Christian perspective (1264).
Defenders of the Talmud argue that many of these criticisms, particularly those in antisemitic sources, are based on quotations that are taken out of context, and thus misrepresent the meaning of the Talmud's text.
Correspondingly, two bodies of analysis developed, and two works of Talmud were created.
The rabbis of the Gemara are known as  (sing. ''''
It arose within two centuries of the completion of the Talmud.
In 1707 some copies of the Talmud were confiscated in the province of Brandenburg, but were restored to their owners by command of Frederick, the first king of Prussia.
But an alternative form, organized by subject matter instead of by biblical verse, became dominant about the year 200 CE, when Rabbi Judah the Prince redacted the Mishnah ().
Its language contains many Greek and Persian words that became obscure over time.
Tokayer and Kase published a number of other books on Jewish themes together in Japanese.
In what ways do different sections derive from different schools of thought within early Judaism?
The criticisms of the Talmud in many modern pamphlets and websites are often recognisable as verbatim quotes from one or other of these.
Each tractate is divided into chapters (''perakim''; singular: ''perek''), 517 in total, that are both numbered according to the Hebrew alphabet and given names, usually using the first one or two words in the first mishnah.
The Gemara mainly focuses on elucidating and elaborating the opinions of the Tannaim.
This translation is published both on its own and in a parallel text edition, in which each English page faces the Aramaic/Hebrew page.
Reform Jews saw the Talmud as a product of late antiquity, having relevance merely as a historical document.
It is traditionally known as the ''Talmud Yerushalmi'' ("Jerusalem Talmud"), but the name is a misnomer, as it was not prepared in Jerusalem.
By far the best known commentary on the Babylonian Talmud is that of Rashi (Rabbi Solomon ben Isaac, 1040–1105).
The reason might be that most laws from the Orders Zeraim (agricultural laws limited to the land of Israel) had little practical relevance in Babylonia and were therefore not included.
This kind of study reached its height in the 16th and 17th centuries when expertise in pilpulistic analysis was considered an art form and became a goal in and of itself within the yeshivot of Poland and Lithuania.
Opened from the Hebrew side, this edition features the traditional Vilna page with vowels and punctuation in the original Aramaic text.
The work begun by Rav Ashi was completed by Ravina, who is traditionally regarded as the final Amoraic expounder.
One feature of this method is the use of Maimonides' ''Mishneh Torah'' as a guide to Talmudic interpretation, as distinct from its use as a source of practical ''halakha''.
The Anti-Defamation League's report on this topic states that antisemitic critics of the Talmud frequently use erroneous translations or selective quotations in order to distort the meaning of the Talmud's text, and sometimes fabricate passages.
Henry Malter's edition of ''Ta'anit''), but there is no modern critical edition of the whole Talmud.
In a series of articles in his magazine ''Jeschurun'' (reprinted in Collected Writings Vol.
The term ''pilpul'' was applied to this type of study.
Some modern scholars have questioned this connection: for more detail see Jerusalem Talmud: Place and date of composition.
Donin also selected an injunction of the Talmud that permits Jews to kill non-Jews.
To what extent does a section have earlier or later sources?
The collection of controversies, dissertations, and prescriptions commonly designated by the name Talmud possesses for us no authority, from either the dogmatic or the practical standpoint.
An American Translation'', Jacob Neusner, Tzvee Zahavy, others.
Written as a running commentary, it provides a full explanation of the words, and explains the logical structure of each Talmudic passage.
A 15th-century Spanish rabbi, Jacob ibn Habib (d. 1516), composed the Ein Yaakov.
Criticisms also arise from Muslim sources, Jewish sources, and atheists and skeptics.
There is a whole literature on the procedural principles to be used in settling the practical law when disagreements exist: see under #Logic and methodology below.
The Talmud contains possible references to Jesus Christ and his disciples, while the Christian canon makes mention of Talmudic figures and contains teachings that can be paralleled within the Talmud and Midrash.
There are occasional quotations from older works in other dialects of Aramaic, such as Megillat Taanit.
(See eras within Jewish law.)
The increasing study of the Talmud in Poland led to the issue of a complete edition (Kraków, 1602-5), with a restoration of the original text; an edition containing, so far as known, only two treatises had previously been published at Lublin (1559–76).
It is written in Tannaitic Hebrew and Jewish Babylonian Aramaic and contains the teachings and opinions of thousands of rabbis (dating from before the Common Era through the fifth century CE) on a variety of subjects, including Halakha (law), Jewish ethics, philosophy, customs, history, lore and many other topics.
Orthodox scholar Daniel Sperber writes in "Legitimacy, of Necessity, of Scientific Disciplines" that many Orthodox sources have engaged in the historical (also called "scientific") study of the Talmud.
The Jerusalem Talmud has not received much attention from commentators, and such traditional commentaries as exist are mostly concerned with comparing its teachings to those of the Talmud Bavli.
In the 1870s and 1880s Rabbi Raphael Natan Nata Rabbinovitz engaged in historical study of Talmud Bavli in his ''Diqduqei Soferim''.
Among the founders of the Tosafist school were Rabbi Jacob ben Meir (known as Rabbeinu Tam), who was a grandson of Rashi, and, Rabbenu Tam's nephew, Rabbi Isaac ben Samuel.
* ''Schottenstein Edition of the Talmud'', Mesorah Publications (73 volumes).
At the Disputation of Tortosa in 1413, Geronimo de Santa Fé brought forward a number of accusations, including the fateful assertion that the condemnations of "pagans," "heathens," and "apostates" found in the Talmud were in reality veiled references to Christians.
The starting point for the analysis is usually a legal statement found in a Mishnah.
Another important work is the ''Sefer ha-Mafteaḥ'' (Book of the Key) by Nissim Gaon, which contains a preface explaining the different forms of Talmudic argumentation and then explains abbreviated passages in the Talmud by cross-referring to parallel passages where the same thought is expressed in full.
A third such work was that of Rabbi Asher ben Yechiel (d. 1327).
In addition to the ''Mishnah'' and ''Gemara'', Bomberg's edition contained the commentaries of Rashi and Tosafot.
It is also traditionally referred to as '''''''''' (), a Hebrew abbreviation of '''', the "six orders", a reference to the six orders of the Mishnah.
Both Pablo Christiani and Geronimo de Santa Fé, in addition to criticizing the Talmud, also regarded it as a source of authentic traditions, some of which could be used as arguments in favour of Christianity.
South Koreans reportedly hope to emulate Jews' high academic standards by studying Jewish literature.
This work was launched in 2012.
In the main, this is because the influence and prestige of the Jewish community of Israel steadily declined in contrast with the Babylonian community in the years after the redaction of the Talmud and continuing until the Gaonic era.
They described the Oral Torah as the result of a historical and exegetical process, emerging over time, through the application of authorized exegetical techniques, and more importantly, the subjective dispositions and personalities and current historical conditions, by learned sages.
(See Jay Harris ''Guiding the Perplexed in the Modern Age'' Ch.
Are Talmudic disputes distinguishable along theological or communal lines?
Other burnings took place in other Italian cities, such as the one instigated by Joshua dei Cantori at Cremona in 1559.
The result of these accusations was a struggle in which the emperor and the pope acted as judges, the advocate of the Jews being Johann Reuchlin, who was opposed by the obscurantists; and this controversy, which was carried on for the most part by means of pamphlets, became in the eyes of some a precursor of the Reformation.
In 1415, Antipope Benedict XIII, who had convened the Tortosa disputation, issued a papal bull (which was destined, however, to remain inoperative) forbidding the Jews to read the Talmud, and ordering the destruction of all copies of it.
Complicated logical arguments were used to explain minor points of contradiction within the Talmud.
Its final redaction probably belongs to the end of the 4th century, but the individual scholars who brought it to its present form cannot be fixed with assurance.
Karaism developed as a reaction against the Talmudic Judaism of Babylonia.
The translation of the Talmud from Hebrew to non-Jewish languages stripped Jewish discourse from its covering, something that was resented by Jews as a profound violation.
Overall, Hebrew constitutes somewhat less than half of the text of the Talmud.
The convention of referring to the work as "Shas" (''shishah sidre Mishnah'') instead of "Talmud" dates from this time.
