The available literature from this period was categorised and compiled in the 10th century into two categories based roughly on chronology.
Tamil Nadu is one of the leading States in the textile sector and it houses the country's largest spinning industry accounting for almost 80 per cent of the total installed capacity in India.
Alanganallur is famous for its Jallikattu contest usually held on 3rd day of Pongal.
The Bhakti movement originated in Tamil speaking region of south India and spread northwards through India.
Among Muslims, 97.5 per cent are Sunni and the rest are Shias.
With cheap and quality tertiary medical care available in Chennai, Madurai, Coimbatore and Vellore, Tamil Nadu has the largest numbers in medical tourism in India.
* North east monsoon from October to December, with dominant north east winds;
Tamil Nadu is also the home of the double Oscar Winner A.R.
Annual food grains production in the year 2007–08 was 10035,000 mt.
Tamil Nadu is mostly dependent on monsoon rains, and thereby is prone to droughts when the monsoons fail.
The Sunnis adhere to either Hanafi or Shafi schools of thought.
The Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu (SDAT), a government body, is vested with the responsibility of developing sports and related infrastructure in the state.
Cricket contests between local clubs, franchises and teams are popular in the state.
The first day, Bhogi Pongal, is celebrated by throwing away and destroying old clothes and materials by setting them on fire to mark the end of the old and emergence of the new.
* south west monsoon from June to September, with strong southwest winds;
Rahman who has composed film music in Tamil, Telugu, Hindi films, English and Chinese films, was once referred to by ''Time'' magazine as "The Mozart of Madras".
The kings of ancient Thamizhagam created sangams for Iyal Isai Nadagam (Literature, Music and Drama).
This is nearly 2.5 times higher than the density of all-India road network.
Tamil Nadu's sugarcane yield per hectare is the highest in India.
Meanwhile, to the south, the fall of the Thanjavur Nayaks led to a short lived Thanjavur Maratha kingdom.
are the best examples of Pandyan temple architecture.
Major national and global IT Companies such as Syntel, Infosys, Wipro, HCL, Tata Consultancy Services, Verizon, Hewlett-Packard, Amazon.com, eBay, PayPal, IBM, Accenture, Ramco Systems, Computer Sciences Corporation, Cognizant Technology solutions, Tech Mahindra, Polaris, Aricent, MphasiS, Mindtree, Hexaware Technologies and many others have offices in Tamil Nadu.
Tamil Nadu is the second largest software exporter by value in India.
Tamil Nadu is a land most known for its monumental ancient Hindu temples and classical form of dance Bharata Natyam.
Mahamagam a bathing festival at Kumbakonam in Tamil Nadu is celebrated once in 12 years.
The government of Tamil Nadu distributed free televisions to families in 2006 at an estimated cost  of which has led to high penetration of TV services.
St. Thomas Mount in Chennai, the place where St. Thomas, one of the disciples of Jesus, was believed to have been martyred, is an important pilgrimage site for Indian Christians.
Tamil Nadu has a well-developed rail network as part of Southern Railway.
Odhuvars, Sthanikars or Kattalaiyars offer short musical programmes in the temples by singing the devotional Thevaram songs.
In 1762, a tripartite treaty was signed between Thanjavur Maratha, Carnatic and the British by which Thanjavur became a vassal of the Nawab of the Carnatic which eventually ceded to British.
The sex ratio of the state is 995 with 36,137,975 males and 36,009,055 females.
The state has 51,837,507 literates, making the literacy rate 80.33 per cent.
There are 2,614 Hand Processing Units (25 per cent of total units in the country) and 985 Power Processing Units (40 per cent of total units in the country) in Tamil Nadu.
The Thiruvalluvar calendar is 31 years ahead of the Gregorian calendar, i.e.
Swamikannu Vincent, who had built the first cinema of South India in Coimbatore, introduced the concept of "Tent Cinema" in which a tent was erected on a stretch of open land close to a town or village to screen the films.
Tennis is also a popular sport in Tamil Nadu with notable international players including Ramesh Krishnan, Ramanathan Krishnan, Vijay Amritraj and Mahesh Bhupathi.
Gobichettipalayam, Pollachi, Udumalpet, Theni and Vedasandur are known for its cotton spinning mills.
Sankarankovil, Andipatti, Tiruchengodu, Paramakudi, Kurinjipadi, Chennimalai, Komarapalayam are major handloom centres.
Kanyakumari, the southernmost tip of peninsular India, is famous for its beautiful sunrise, Vivekananda Rock Memorial and Thiruvalluvar's statue built off the coastline.
Veeran Sundaralingam (1700–1800) was the General of Kattabomman Nayakan's palayam, who died in the process of blowing up a British ammunition dump in 1799 which killed more than 150 British soldiers to save Kattapomman Palace.
Before her death, Queen Velu Nachi granted powers to the Maruthu brothers to rule Sivaganga.
It is bounded by the Eastern Ghats on the north, by the Nilgiri, the Anamalai Hills, and Kerala on the west, by the Bay of Bengal in the east, by the Gulf of Mannar and the Palk Strait on the southeast, and by the Indian Ocean on the south.
Among states in India, Tamil Nadu is one of the leaders in livestock, poultry and fisheries production.
Though conforming generally to the iconographic conventions established by long tradition, the sculptors worked with great freedom in the 11th and the 12th centuries to achieve a classic grace and grandeur.
The date of the celt was estimated at between 1500 BC and 2000 BC.
The first month in the Tamil calendar is Chittirai and the first day of this month in mid-April is celebrated as ''Tamil New Year''.
The state is home to the core schools of medieval and modern Hinduism as well as several non-mainstream Hindu movements.
Coimbatore is the second largest software producer in the state, next to Chennai, followed by Madurai
Karunanidhi's leadership was soon challenged by MG Ramachandran, popularly known as MGR.
The present Governor, Chief Minister and the Chief Justice are Vidyasagar Rao (acting governor), J.Jayalalithaa and Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul respectively.
The state has two distinct periods of rainfall:
According to estimates, about 50 per cent of the HR required for the IT and ITES industry was being sourced from the State.
Tamil cuisine is typical of south Indian cuisine, in that rice and rice-derived dishes form the major portion of a diet (see rice and curry).
After the death of MGR, AIADMK was defeated in 1989 assembly polls because of the split of the party into two factions headed by Janaki (wife of MGR) and Jayalalithaa.
British constructed Fort St. George and established a trading post at Madras.
In the south, Nawabs granted taxation rights to the British which led to conflicts between British and the Palaiyakkarar, which resulted in series of wars called Polygar war to establish independent states by the aspiring Palaiyakkarar.
Sangam literature refers these provinces as "koduntamil mandalam" which were not exactly political or socio-cultural units but linguistic agglomerations like Kongu Nadu, Puzhinadu, Thondai Nadu, Nanjilnadu, Ay Nadu and Venadu.
Tyagi''Aaradhanai'' (worship) takes place every year in the month of Marghazhi in Thiruvaiyaru all carnatic musicians render their obesiance to Saint Thyagarajar by singing his compositions.
Coimbatore is also referred to as "the Pump City" as it supplies two-thirds of India's requirements of motors and pumps.
Bharat Heavy Electricals, one of India's largest electrical equipment manufacturing companies, has manufacturing plants at Tiruchirapalli and Ranipet.
Ennore Port handles all the coal and ore traffic in Tamil Nadu.
Kanyakumari is famous for rubber production.
The Vellore mutiny on 10 July 1806 was the first instance of a large-scale and violent mutiny by Indian sepoys against the British East India Company, predating the Indian Rebellion of 1857 by half a century.
Namakkal is also one of the major centres of egg production in India.
The SDAT owns and operates world class stadiums and organises sporting events.
The eastern parts are fertile coastal plains and the northern parts are a mix of hills and plains.
Apart from the major festivals, in every village and town of Tamil Nadu, the inhabitants celebrate festivals for the local gods once a year and the time varies from place to place.
In 1972, he split from DMK and formed the Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (ADMK) and later renamed the party as All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam.
The Agasthyamalai Biosphere Reserve is in the south west of the state bordering Kerala in the Western Ghats.
Rice is the staple food of Tamils and is typically eaten mixed with sambhar (with or without ghee), vegetarian or non-vegetarian kulambu, rasam, curd and buttermilk.
The Tamil Nadu Police Force is over 140 years old.
The Santhome Basilica, built atop the site widely believed by Christians to have been the tomb of St. Thomas, and the Vailankanni Basilica of Our Lady of Good Health are churches revered by Christians in India.
He was captured by the British at the end of the war and hanged near Kayattar in 1799.
Three dynasties, namely the Chera, Chola and Pandya, ruled the area of present-day Tamil Nadu and Kerala.
It is the oldest Indian literature amongst all others.
The per capita income at current price is  72,993.
Besides civilian airports, the state has four air bases of the Indian Air Force namely Thanjavur AFS, Tambram AFS, Coimbatore AFS and Madurai AFS and two naval air stations INS Rajali and INS Parundu of Indian Navy.
In 1578, the Portuguese published a Tamil book in old Tamil script named 'Thambiraan Vanakkam', thus making Tamil the first Indian language to be printed and published.
This is one of the world's oldest & richest musical traditions.
Christians are mainly concentrated in the southern districts of Kanyakumari, Thoothukudi and Tirunelveli.
The state has a range of flora and fauna with many species and habitats.
Chennai has a well-established suburban railway network and is constructing a Chennai Metro with phase1 operational since July 2015 .
Terukkuttu or Kattaikkuttu is a traditional form of Tamil street theatre folk dance/drama.
Tamil Nadu is home to five declared National parks located in Anamalai, Mudumalai, Mukurithi, Gulf of Mannar and Guindy located in the centre of Chennai city.
People from all the corners of the country come to Kumbakonam for the festival.
Legislative powers given to the Governor's council under the Indian Councils Act 1861 and 1909 Minto-Morley Reforms eventually led to the establishment of the Madras Legislative Council.
The Nilgiri hills, Palani hills, Shevaroy hills, Megamalai hills, Kolli Hills, Cumbum valley and Cardamom hills are all abodes of thick forests and wildlife.
Cable used to be the preferred mode of reaching homes controlled by government run operator Arasu Cable.
Popular forms of Tamil folk music include the , a form of music performed with a bow,the urumee mellam or Naiyandi mellam which incorporates the use of the urumee and the , ballads that convey folklore and folk history.
Tamil Nadu has been a pioneering state of E-Governance initiatives in India.
During the 9th century, the Chola dynasty was once again revived by Vijayalaya Chola, who established Thanjavur as Chola's new capital by conquering central Tamil Nadu from Mutharaiyar and the Pandya king Varagunavarman II.
Sterlite Industries has a copper smelter at Tuticorin and an aluminium plant in Mettur.
File:Periplous of the Erythraean Sea.svg| Map of ancient oceanic trade, and ports of Tamilakam.
Among the existing specimens in museums around the world and in the temples of southern India the fine figures of Siva in various forms, Vishnu and his consort Lakshmi, and the Siva saints are the examples of Chola fgbronze.
The analysis of primary school education in the state by Pratham shows a low drop-off rate but poor quality of state education compared to other states.
The reason for victory of the Justice Party in elections was the non-participation of the INC, demanding complete independence of India.
Tamil Nadu dominates the list of largest Hindu Temples in the world which include the Srirangam Ranganathaswamy temple, Madurai Meenakshi Amman Temple, Ekambareswarar Temple at Kanchipuram, Chidambaram Nataraja Temple, Tiruvannamalai Arunachaleswar Temple, Brihadeeswarar Temple at Tanjore among others.
Tamil Nadu has four international airports namely Chennai International Airport, Coimbatore International Airport, Tiruchirapalli International Airport and Madurai International Airport.
Tamil Nadu has a long tradition of venerable culture.
The first private Tamil channel, Sun TV was founded in 1993 by Kalanidhi Maran.
The best example of this can be seen in the form of Nataraja the Divine Dancer .
Bharatanatyam is a traditional dance-form known for its grace, purity, tenderness, and sculpturesque poses.
Tamil Nadu is also home to the Tamil film industry also known as "Kollywood", which released the most number of films in India in 2013.
Chennai International Airport is a major international airport and aviation hub in South Asia.
The categories are: Pathinenmaelkanakku (''The Major Eighteen Anthology Series'') comprising Eṭṭuttokai (''The Eight Anthologies'') and the Pattupattu (''Ten Idylls'') and Pathinenkilkanakku (''The Minor Eighteen Anthology Series'').
File:SouttoukenyJewelry2ndCenturyBCE.jpg| Souttoukeny jewellery, 2nd century B.C.
Gregorian 2000 is Thiruvalluvar 2031.
They reconstructed some of the well-known temples in Tamil Nadu such as the Meenakshi Temple.
Hundreds of leather and tannery industries are located around Dindigul Erode and Vellore, its nearby towns such as Ranipet, Melvisharam, Pernambut, Ambur, Vaniyambadi and Perundurai.
Tamil television serials form a major prime time source of entertainment and are directed usually by one director unlike American television series, where often several directors and writers work together.
Modern motor racing events are held at the Irungattukottai Race Track owned and operated by Madras Motor Sports Club near Sriperumbudur and Kari Motor Speedway in Coimbatore.
Later on J. Jayalalithaa took control of the party.
The bordering states are Kerala to the west, Karnataka to the north west and Andhra Pradesh to the north.
The present government is headed by J. Jayalalithaa of the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam.
File:Kanchi Kailasanathar Temple side walk path.jpeg|Kanchi Kailasanathar Temple
From the current 17MW installed Solar power, Tamil Nadu government's new policy aims to increase the installed capacity to 3000MW by 2016.
The Sangam literature collection contains 2381 poems composed by 473 poets, some 102 of whom remain anonymous.
48.4 per cent of the state's population live in urban areas, the highest among large states in India.
He defeated Mahipala, the king of Bengal, and to commemorate his victory he built a new capital and named it Gangaikonda Cholapuram.
The top engineering colleges in Tamil Nadu have been a major recruiting hub for the IT firms.
Bharatanatyam is a classical dance form originating from Tamil Nadu.
The state had come under the President's rule on four occasions&nbsp;– first from 1976 to 1977, next for a short period in 1980, then from 1988 to 1989 and the latest in 1991.
Rajendra Chola's navy went even further, occupying coasts from Burma (now ) to Vietnam, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Sumatra, Java, Malaya, Philippines in South East Asia and Pegu islands.
Tamil Nadu has three major seaports located at Chennai, Ennore and Tuticorin, as well as seven other minor ports including Cuddalore and Nagapattinam.
Tirupur is the country's largest exporter of knitwear.
The earliest epigraphic records found on rock edicts and ''hero stones'' date from around the 3rd century BC.
Besides these three dynasties, the Sangam era Tamilakam (Tamil homeland) was also divided into various provinces named 'nadu', meaning 'country'.
The Church of South India and the Pentecostal Mission Church are headquartered in Chennai.
The per capita income in 2007–2008 for the state was  72,993 ranking third among states with a population over 10 million and has steadily been above the national average.
Tamil Nadu is home to many natural resources.
Notable example of Tamil poetry include the ''Tirukkural'' written by Tiruvalluvar before 2000 years.
Salem Airport and Tuticorin Airport are domestic airports.
By 1693, the French established in trading posts at Pondichéry.
+ Gross State Domestic Product in  Crores at Constant Prices
Rajaraja Chola conquered all of peninsular south India and parts of Sri Lanka.
Most of these festivals are related to the goddess Maariyamman, the mother goddess of rain.
Chennai Central is gateway for train towards north whereas Chennai Egmore serves as gateway for south.
Muhammad Ali Khan Wallajah surrendered much of his territory to the East India Company which firmly established the British in the northern parts.
In terms of production, Tamil Nadu accounts for 10 per cent in fruits and 6 per cent in vegetables, in India.
The Chola dynasty ruled the northern and central parts of Tamil Nadu from their capital, Uraiyur; and the Pandya dynasty ruled southern Tamil Nadu, from capitals at Korkai and Madurai.
These are the earliest specimen of Dravidian temples under the Cholas.
The emblem of Government of Tamil Nadu depicts the Gopuram (gateway tower) of the Andal Temple at Srivilliputhur.
In 2004–2005, the poverty line was set at  351.86/month for rural areas and  547.42/month for urban areas.
At its peak, the empire spanned almost .
In 1969, Madras State was renamed Tamil Nadu, meaning "Tamil country".
Traditional Tamil grammar consists of five parts, namely '''', ''sol'', '''', ''yāppu'', ''''.
The chieftains of these Palayams were known as Palaiyakkarar (or 'polygar' as called by British) and were ruling under the nawabs of the Carnatic.
The period of their rule is sometimes referred to as the "Dark Age" in Tamil history and little is known about it.
According to official data, the textile industry in Tamil Nadu accounts for 17 per cent of the total invested capital in all the industries.
Pongal, also called as ''Tamizhar Thirunaal'' (festival of Tamils) or Makara Sankranti elsewhere in India, a four-day harvest festival is one of the most widely celebrated festivals throughout Tamil Nadu.
There are regional sub-varieties namely Chettinadu, Kongunadu, Nanjilnadu, Madurai, Tirunelveli varieties etc.
The World Bank is currently assisting the state in reducing poverty, High drop-out and low completion of secondary schools continue to hinder the quality of training in the population.
It is the fourth largest urban agglomeration in India and is also one of the major Metropolitan cities of India.
Snooker was invented by General Sir Frederick Roberts at the Ooty Club in Ooty, a hill station in the state.
Thevar's prominent exploits were his confrontations with Marudhanayagam, who later rebelled against the British in the late 1750s and early 1760s.
Headquartered at Chennai, the Southern Railway network extends over a large area of India's southern peninsula, covering the states of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Puducherry, a small portion of Karnataka and a small portion of Andhra Pradesh.
Carnatic music is the classical music form of southern India.
Annadurai, the party was split.
The Nilgiri Mountain Railway is one of the UNESCO World Heritage Site connecting Ooty on the hills and Mettupalayam in the foot hills which is in turn connected to Coimbatore city.
Government is the major investor in the state with 51 per cent of total investments, followed by private Indian investors at 29.9 per cent and foreign private investors at 14.9 per cent.
However, it has a high level of poverty especially in the rural areas.
Since the state is entirely dependent on rains for recharging its water resources, monsoon failures lead to acute water scarcity and severe drought.
The state accounts for 70 per cent of leather tanning capacity in India and 38 per cent of leather footwear and components.
The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve located in the Western Ghats and Nilgiri Hills comprises part of adjoining states of Kerala and Karnataka.
The world-famous idly-dosai-sambar-vadai is a symbol and as well as an identity for the modern day Tamil cuisine.
The celebrated Nataraja temple at Chidambaram and the Sri Ranganathaswami Temple at Srirangam held special significance for the Cholas which have been mentioned in their inscriptions as their tutelary deities.
The state is the largest producer of bananas, turmeric, flowers, tapioca, the second largest producer of mango, natural rubber, coconut, groundnut and the third largest producer of coffee, sapota, Tea and Sugarcane.
The first talkie was a multi-lingual film, ''Kalidas'', which released on 31 October 1931, barely 7 months after India's first talking picture ''Alam Ara''.
Sankarankovil, Negamam, Cinnalapatti, Woraiyur, Pochampalli are famous for its soft cotton saree weaving.
These items are eaten along with sambar, varieties of chatni or podi (spice powder).
Tamil Nadu is divided into seven agro-climatic zones: north east, north west, west, southern, high rainfall, high altitude hilly, and Kaveri Delta (the most fertile agricultural zone).
Dheeran Chinnamalai (1756–1805), Polygar chieftain of Kongu and feudatory of Tipu Sultan who fought the British in the Second Polygar War.
Motor racing between the 1960s and 1980s was conducted at Sholavaram, a track used as a World War II air strip.
When it comes to yarn production, the State contributes 40 per cent of the total production in the country.
Now, Tamil Nadu is listening Rap music.
The first of its kind was established in Madras, called "Edison's Grand Cinemamegaphone".
The DMK decided to enter politics in 1956.
Tamil is the official language of Tamil Nadu.
The total cultivated area in the State was 5.60&nbsp;million hectares in 2009–10.
It ranks third in foreign direct investment (FDI) approvals (cumulative 1991–2002) of  225,826 million ($5,000&nbsp;million), next only to Maharashtra and Delhi constituting 9.12 per cent of the total FDI in the country.
File:Sunrise in Kanyakumari.JPG| Kanyakumari with Vivekananda Rock Memorial and Thiruvalluvar statue
Unique cultural features like Bharatanatyam (dance), Tanjore painting, and Tamil architecture were developed and continue to be practised in Tamil Nadu.
This was due to the fact that electric carbons were used for motion picture projectors.
After winning the Polygar wars in 1801, the East India Company consolidated most of southern India into the Madras Presidency.
Jointly with the Tata Group, the state owns the world's sixth largest manufacturer of watches, under the brand name of Titan, at Hosur.
Over 11% of the ''S&P CNX 500'' conglomerates have corporate offices in Tamil Nadu.
These include Nayanmars Saivism, Saiva Siddhanta, Alvar Vaishnavism, Sri Vaishnavism and Ayya-Vazhi.
File:Srirangam Jambukeshwara temple 5.jpg|Jambukeswarar Temple, Thiruvanaikaval
Coimbatore is one of the major centres of jewellery and poultry.
Most of these traditional sports are associated with festivals of land like Thai Pongal and mostly played in rural areas.
Much of Tamil grammar is extensively described in the oldest known grammar book for Tamil, the ''Tolkāppiyam''.
Jains make up 0.13 per cent of the population.
The centenary old Pamban Bridge over sea connecting Rameswaram in Pamban island to mainland is an engineering marvel.
Poverty in the state dropped from 51.7 per cent in 1983 to 21.1 per cent in 2001 For the period 2004–2005, the Trend in Incidence of Poverty in the state was 22.5 per cent compared with the national figure of 27.5 per cent.
Tamil Nadu is one of the states where law and order has been maintained largely successfully.
Tamil Nadu is also a leading state in the production of flowers with the total production of horticultural crops standing at  9947,000 during 2003–04.
Tamil Nadu has six 18-hole golf courses, the most popular of which are Kodaikanal Golf Club, established in 1895, Ooty Golf Course, established in 1896, and Gymkhana Club, Chennai.
The Justice Party which was under E.V.Ramaswamy was renamed Dravidar Kazhagam in 1944.
Later, South Indian Liberal Federation was adopted as its official name.
Other major Hindu festivals including Deepavali (Death of Narakasura), Ayudha Poojai, Saraswathi Poojai (Dasara), Krishna Jayanthi and Vinayaka Chathurthi are also celebrated.
