The Sachems were expelled and Tammany Hall continued to oppose Clinton.
Following Tweed's arrest, Tammany survived but was no longer controlled just by Protestants and was now dependent on leadership from bosses of Irish descent.
The Society's new building, located in Manhattan on East 17th Street and Union Square East, was finished and occupied by 1929.
In 1932, Mayor Jimmy Walker was forced from office when his bribery was exposed.
However, Tammany Hall also served as an engine for graft and political corruption, perhaps most infamously under William M. "Boss" Tweed in the mid-19th century.
His success at revitalizing the machine was such that in the election of 1874, the Tammany candidate, William H. Wickham, unseated the unpopular reformist incumbent, William F. Havemeyer, and Democrats generally won their races, delivering control of the city back to Tammany Hall.
Under Tweed's regime, "naturalization committees" were established.
Roosevelt and his lead campaign manager James Farley stripped Tammany of federal patronage, which had been expanded under the New Deal—and passed it instead to Ed Flynn, boss of the Bronx who had kept his district clean of corruption.
The museum was unsuccessful, and the Society severed its connections with it in 1795.
Consolidation in 1898 multiplied the power of these reform groups, so long as they could agree on a common agenda, Such as consolidation itself.
During DeSapio's reign, Costello was the main person who influenced the decisions made by Tammany Hall officials.
Until his death in 1828, Clinton would remain Governor of New York, with the exception of the two-year-period 1823–1824, and Tammany Hall's influence waned.
By the mid-1960s Tammany Hall ceased to exist.
Grant allowed Croker free run of the city's contracts and offices, creating a vast patronage machine beyond anything Tweed had ever dreamed of, a status which continued under Grant's successor, Thomas Francis Gilroy.
To counter both George and Hewitt, the Republicans put up Theodore Roosevelt, the former state assemblyman.
Ed Flynn, a protégé of Murphy who became the boss in the Bronx, said Murphy always advised that politicians should have nothing to do with gambling or prostitution,  and should steer clear of involvement with the police department or the school system.
The Tammany Hall "ward boss" served as the local vote gatherer and provider of patronage.
Grant, who became the first New York-born Irish-American mayor.
Many historians believe that without Tammany, President John Adams might have won New York State's electoral votes and won reelection.
In 2015, a scaled-back version of the glass dome was approved by the commission.
Unlike previous Tammany "bosses", however, DeSapio had promoted himself as a reformer and always made his decisions known to the public.
A new challenge to Tammany came from William Randolph Hearst, a powerful newspaper publisher who wanted to be president.
The New Tammany appeared to be more respectable, and less obviously connected to saloon-keepers and gang leaders, and the clubhouses, one in every Assembly District, were also a more efficient way of providing patronage work to those who came looking for it; one simply had to join the club, and volunteer to put in the hours needed to support it.
A brief resurgence in Tammany power in the 1950s under the leadership of Carmine DeSapio was met with Democratic Party opposition led by Eleanor Roosevelt, Herbert Lehman, and the New York Committee for Democratic Voters.
Democrats who once praised De Sapio now excoriated him.
The feud began in 1802 after he accused Aaron Burr of being a traitor to the Democratic-Republican Party.
The Tammany Society emerged as the center for Democratic-Republican Party politics in the city in the early 19th century.
Campaigns to topple Tweed by the ''New York Times'' and Thomas Nast of ''Harper's Weekly'' began to gain traction in the aftermath of the riot, and disgruntled insiders began to leak the details of the extent and scope of the Tweed Ring's avarice to the newspapers.
In an example of their involvement in the lives of citizens, in the course of one day, Tammany figure George Washington Plunkitt assisted the victims of a house fire; secured the release of six "drunks" by speaking on their behalf to a judge; paid the rent of a poor family to prevent their eviction and gave them money for food; secured employment for four individuals; attended the funerals of two of his constituents (one Italian, the other Jewish); attended a Bar Mitzvah; and attended the wedding of a Jewish couple from his ward.
The Tweed ring at its height was an engineering marvel, strong and solid, strategically deployed to control key power points: the courts, the legislature, the treasury and the ballot box.
More than that, Croker realized that he could utilize the techniques of the well-organized election campaign that ULP had run.
He died in Ludlow Street Jail, and political reformers took over the city and state governments.
The mayoral election of 1886 was a seminal one for the organization.
However, DeSapio's close ties with the city's lead mobster Frank Costello, Luciano's self-appointed successor, helped establish him as a corrupt figure.
In pre-New Deal America, the extralegal services that Tammany and other urban political machines provided often served as a rudimentary public welfare system.
The Livingstone family, led by former New York City mayor Edward Livingston, backed New York Governor Morgan Lewis and presented a significant challenge to Clinton.
George was initially hesitant about running for office, but was convinced to do so after Tammany secretly offered him a seat in Congress if he would stay out of the mayoral race.
Tweed was arrested and tried in 1872.
The '''Tammany Society''', also known as the '''Society of St. Tammany''', the '''Sons of St. Tammany''', or the '''Columbian Order''', was founded in New York on May 12, 1789, originally as a branch of a wider network of Tammany Societies, the first having been formed in Philadelphia in 1772.
In the end, Hewitt won the election, with George out-polling Roosevelt, whose total was some 2,000 votes less than the Republicans had normally received.
The politics of the consolidated city from 1898 to 1945 revolved around conflicts between the political machines and the reformers.
Despite their second-place finish, things seemed bright for the future of the labor political movement, but the ULP was not to last, and was never able to bring about a new paradigm in the city's politics.
In 1927 the building on 14th Street was sold, to make way for the new tower being added to the Consolidated Edison Company Building.
The first Grand Sachem, as the leader was titled, was William Mooney, an upholsterer of Nassau Street.
His extended tenure weakened Tammany in a way that previous reform mayors had not.
The Burrites thought this assured the reinstatement of their political chief, but the Tammany Hall Sachems turned on them and agreed to work to bring them into Clinton's fold rather than have them work together with Clintonites as a joint-union.
In the early twentieth century Murphy and Sullivan promoted Tammany as a reformed agency dedicated to the interests of the working class.
After the new charter went into effect in 1938, the ward system which had allowed only a small number of people to serve on the City Council since 1686 ceased to exist, and the new 26-member New York City Council now had certain functions governed by the Board of Estimate.
Roosevelt stripped Tammany of federal patronage.
The reformers were never unified; they operated through a complex network of independent civic reform groups, each focused its lobbying efforts on its own particular reform agenda.
In the process Robert F. Wagner became a powerful United States Senator, and Al Smith served multiple terms as governor and was the Democratic presidential candidate in 1928.
Burr used Tammany Hall influence in the election of 1800, in which he was elected Vice President of the United States.
In quiet times the machines had the advantage of the core of solid supporters and usually exercised control of city and borough affairs; they also played a major role in the state legislature in Albany.
With the Republican boss, Thomas Platt, adopting the same methods, the two men between them essentially controlled the state.
There was no citywide machine.
Following the disclosures, the Federalists won control of the state legislature and the Democratic-Republican Party barely maintained control of the local government in New York City.
In 1894, Tammany suffered a setback when, fueled by the public hearings on police corruption held by the Lexow Committee based on the evidence uncovered by the Rev.
The new image deflected attacks and built up a following among the emerging ethnic middle-class.
The society adopted many Native American words and also their customs, going so far as to call its hall a wigwam.
Tammany Hall's influence waned from 1930 to 1945 when it engaged in a losing battle with Franklin D. Roosevelt, the state's governor (1928–33) and the United States president (1933–45).
Tammany's influence was also extended once again to the state legislature, where a similar patronage system to the city's was established after Tammany took control in 1892.
Still, Tammany could not be kept down for long, and in 1898 Croker, aided by the death of Henry George – which took the wind out of the sails of the potential re-invigoration of the political labor movement – shifted the Democratic Party enough to the left to pick up labor's support, and pulled back into the fold those elements outraged by the reformers' attempt to outlaw Sunday drinking and otherwise enforce their own authoritarian moral concepts on immigrant populations with different cultural outlooks.
Hearst was elected to Congress with Tammany support, was defeated for mayor after bitter a contest with Tammany, and won Tammany support for his unsuccessful quest for the governorship of New York.
Republican Fiorello La Guardia was elected mayor on a Fusion ticket and became the first anti-Tammany mayor to be re-elected.
In 1803, Clinton left the United States Senate and became Mayor of New York City.
Tammany depended for its power on government contracts, jobs, patronage, corruption, and ultimately the ability of its leaders to control nominations to the Democratic ticket and swing the popular vote.
La Guardia was elected in 1933.
Despite the advantages of their new headquarters, it had limitations as well, and in 1812 Tammany moved again, this time to a new five-story $55,000 building it constructed at the corner of Nassau and Frankfort Streets, just a few blocks away.
The name "Tammany" comes from Tamanend, a Native American leader of the Lenape.
By 1798, the society's activities had grown increasingly political.
Croker mended fences with labor as well, pushing through legislation which addressed some of the inequities which had fueled the labor political movement, making Tammany once again appear to be the "Friend of the Working Man" – although he was careful always to maintain a pro-business climate of ''laissez-faire'' and low taxes.
The patronage Tammany Hall provided to immigrants, many of whom lived in extreme poverty and received little government assistance, covered three key areas.
The fact that DeSapio was of Italian descent also demonstrated that Tammany was no longer dominated by Irish-American politicians.
Eventually Tammany emerged as the center of Democratic-Republican Party politics in the city.
Several Tammany Hall officials affiliated with Hines and Luciano were also successfully prosecuted by Dewey as well.
Tammany Hall also served as a social integrator for immigrants by familiarizing them with American society and its political institutions and by helping them become naturalized citizens.
Tammany Hall soon realized its influence over the local political scene was no match for that of Clinton, in part because Burr's support among New York City's residents greatly faded after he shot and killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel.
Tammany had no expectation of George being elected, but knew that his candidacy and the new party were a direct threat to their own status as the putative champions of the working man.
Originally presented in an upper room of City Hall, it moved to the Merchant's Exchange when that proved to be too small.
When Tammany started to lose its political influence, and its all-important access to graft, it could no longer afford to maintain the 17th Street building, and in 1943 it was purchased by a local affiliate of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union.
Tammany never recovered, but it staged a small scale come-back in the early 1950s under the leadership of Carmine DeSapio, who succeeded in engineering the elections of Robert F. Wagner, Jr., an outspoken liberal Democrat, as mayor in 1953 and W. Averell Harriman as state governor in 1954, while simultaneously blocking his enemies, especially Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Jr. in the 1954 race for state Attorney General.
Having inadvertently provoked George into running, Tammany now needed to field a strong candidate against him, which required the cooperation of the Catholic Church in New York, which was the key to getting the support of middle-class Irish-American voters.
During the 1840s, hundreds of thousands of Irish immigrants arrived in New York City to escape the Great Irish Potato Famine and Tammany saw its power grow greatly.
Hearst then moved to California.
In 1858, Tweed utilized the efforts of Republican reformers to rein in the Democratic city government to obtain a position on the County Board of Supervisors (which he then used as a springboard to other appointments) and to have his friends placed in various offices.
In 1961, Wagner won re-election by running a reformist campaign that denounced his former patron, DeSapio, as an undemocratic practitioner of Tammany machine politics.
The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission designated it in October 2013.
This space became commonly known as "Tammany Hall".
The business community appreciated its readiness, at moderate cost,  to cut through red tape and legislative mazes to facilitate rapid economic growth,  The Tammany Hall ward boss or ward heeler – "wards" were the city's smallest political units from 1786 to 1938 – served as the local vote gatherer and provider of patronage.
In 1957, Costello was released from prison after winning an appeal but officially abandoned his role as head of the Luciano family following a failed assassination attempt.
In December 1805, Dewitt Clinton reached out to supporters of Burr in order to gain enough support to resist the influence of the powerful Livingstone family.
In 1817, however, Clinton became Governor of New York and Tammany Hall was again weakened.
Full of some of the city's richest men – J.P. Morgan, Cornelius Vanderbilt, Abram Hewitt and Elihu Root, among others – the committee supported William L. Strong, a millionaire dry-goods merchant, for mayor, and forced Tammany's initial candidate, merchant Nathan Straus, co-owner of Macy's and Abraham & Straus, from the election by threatening to ostracize him from New York society.
The loss of Hines would serve as a major blow to Tammany, as he had given the political machine strong ties to the city's powerful organized crime figures since the 1920s.
Judges and other city officials were bribed and otherwise compelled to go along with the workings of these committees.
The cornerstone for the new Tammany headquarters was laid on July 14, 1867.
With the election of Fernando Wood as mayor in 1854, Tammany Hall would now dominate New York City politics until Fiorello La Guardia won the mayoral election of 1934.
A few years prior, Dewey also had powerful mobster and strong Tammany ally Lucky Luciano convicted of racketeering and handed him a 30–50 year sentence; however, Luciano was still able to maintain control of the powerful Luciano crime family from prison until his sentence was commuted to deportation to Italy in 1946.
Support for Tammany Hall regrew after they supported the War of 1812.
There was also a bar, a bazaar, a Ladies' Cafe, and an oyster saloon.
These "committees" were made up primarily of Tammany politicians and employees, and their duties consisted of filling out paperwork, providing witnesses, and lending immigrants money for the fees required to become citizens.
The society was originally developed as a club for "pure Americans".
In 1961, the group helped remove DeSapio from power.
After 1829, Tammany Hall became the city affiliate of the Democratic Party, controlling most of the New York City elections afterwards.
New Yorkers now saw DeSapio as an old-time Tammany Hall boss, and Hogan would lose the Senate election to Republican Kenneth Keating; Republican Nelson Rockefeller would also be elected Governor the same year as well.
Not only was Hewitt the leader of the Swallowtails, but he was noted philanthropist Peter Cooper's son-in-law, and had an impeccable reputation.
With his proteges elected governor of the state and mayor of the city, Tweed was able to expand the corruption and kickbacks of his "Ring" into practically every aspect of city and state governance.
It was therefore Tammany's demonstrated ''inability'' to control Irish laborers in the Orange riot of 1871 that began Tweed's downfall.
Throughout the 1830s and 1840s, the Society expanded its political control even further by earning the loyalty of the city's ever-expanding immigrant community, which functioned as a base of political capital.
Charles Murphy was the highly effective but quiet boss of Tammany Hall from 1902–1924.
Although Tweed was elected to the State Senate, his true sources of power were his appointed positions to various branches of the city government.
By 1854, the support which Tammany Hall received from immigrants would firmly establish the organization as the leader of New York City's political scene.
Hewitt turned out to be a terrible mayor, due to his personality defects and his nativist views, and in 1888 Tammany ran Croker's hand-picked choice, Hugh J.
Eleanor Roosevelt organized a counterattack with Herbert H. Lehman and Thomas K. Finletter to form the New York Committee for Democratic Voters, a group dedicated to fighting Tammany.
Republican local organizations were much weaker, but they played key roles in forming reform coalitions.
He also developed a new stream of income from the business community, which was provided with "one stop shopping": instead of bribing individual office-holders, businesses, especially the utilities, could go directly to Tammany to make their payments, which were then directed downward as necessary; such was the control Tammany had come to have over the governmental apparatus of the city.
Because Tammany's ward-heelers controlled the saloons, the new party had used "neighborhood meetings,  streetcorner rallies, campaign clubs, Assembly District organizations, and trade legions – an entire political counterculture" to run their campaign.
The basement – in the French mode – offered the Café Ausant, where one could see tableux vivant, gymnastic exhibitions, pantomimes, and Punch and Judy shows.
All this – with the exception of Bryant's – was open from seven till midnight for a combination price of fifty cents.
Tammany Hall afterwards became a locally organized machine dedicated to stopping Clinton and Federalists from rising to power in New York; in 1806, however, local Democrat-Republicans began to turn against Tammany Hall.
Kelly was not implicated in the Tweed scandals, and was a religious Catholic related by marriage to Archbishop John McCloskey.
During the 1828 U.S. presidential election, Tammany Hall leaders met with Democratic candidate Andrew Jackson and agreed to endorse him after he promised to give them control over the allocation of some federal jobs.
The structure was topped off by a large-than-life statue of Saint Tammany.
"Big Tim" Sullivan was the Tammany leader in the Bowery, and machine's spokesman in the state legislature.
The Democratic-Republican Committee, a new committee which consisted of the most influential local Democratic Republicans, would now name the new Sachems as well.
The Tammany Hall Sachems agreed to meet with him on February 20, 1806.
In exchange for all these benefits, immigrants assured Tammany Hall they would vote for their candidates.
According to Tweed biographer Kenneth D. Ackerman:It's hard not to admire the skill behind Tweed's system ...
Seth Low, the president of Columbia University, was elected the reform mayor in 1901.
The measure won on a referendum in 1936.
Richard Croker, Kelly's right-hand man, had succeeded Kelly as Grand Sachem of Tammany, and he understood that he would also need to make peace with the non-Tammany "Swallowtail" faction of the Democratic Party to avoid the threat that George and the ULP posed, which was the potential re-structuring of the city's politics along class lines and away from the ethnic-based politics which has been Tammany's underpinning all along.
They typically had strong local organizations, known as "political clubs", as well as one prominent leader often called "the boss".
After becoming mayor, LaGuardia reorganized the city cabinet with non-partisan officials and sought to develop a clean and honest city government.
He lacked the common touch, and lost much of his working class support when he listened to dry Protestants eager to crack down on the liquor business.
The building had an auditorium of sufficient size to hold public meetings, and a smaller one that became Tony Pastor's Music Hall, where vaudeville had its beginnings.
Plans to add a glass dome to the building were nixed by the Landmarks Commission in 2014; however, the interior is still slated to be completely rebuilt, including the demolition of the theater.
In 1937, LaGuardia became the first anti-Tammany "reform" Mayor to ever be re-elected in the city's history and was again re-elected in 1941 before retiring in 1945.
Tammany did not take long to rebound from Tweed's fall.
It typically controlled Democratic Party nominations and political patronage in Manhattan from the mayoral victory of Fernando Wood in 1854 and used its patronage resources to build a loyal, well-rewarded core of district and precinct leaders; after 1850 the great majority were Irish Catholics.
With such resources of money and manpower – the entire city workforce of 1,200 was essentially available to him when needed – Croker was able to neutralize the Swallowtails permanently.
During this time, Tammany Hall began to accept Irish immigrants as members and soon became dependent on them to maintain viability as a political force.
Most of the time they looked to Albany and Washington for their sphere of influence.
Charles Parkhurst when he explored the city's ''demi monde'' undercover, a Committee of Seventy was organized by Council of Good Government Clubs to break the stranglehold that Tammany had on the city.
In times of crisis however, especially in the severe depressions of the 1890s and the 1930s, the reformers took control of key offices, notably the mayor's office.
'''Tammany Hall''', also known as the '''Society of St. Tammany''', the '''Sons of St. Tammany''', or the '''Columbian Order''', was a New York City political organization founded in 1786 and incorporated on May 12, 1789, as the '''Tammany Society'''.
Under DeSapio's leadership, the nationality of Tammany Hall's leaders diversified.
After he was elected President, Jackson fulfilled his promise.
Between the years 1809 and 1815, Tammany Hall slowly revived itself by accepting immigrants and by secretly building a new wigwam to hold meetings whenever new Sachems were named.
La Guardia's appointees filled the board of magistrates and virtually every other long-term appointive office, and the power of Tammany Hall had now been reduced to a shadow of what it once was.
Hearst did manage to dominate Tammany mayor John F. Hylan (1917–25), but he lost control when Smith and Wagner denied Hylan renomination in 1925.
One example was the naturalization process organized by William M. Tweed.
In 1791, the society opened a museum designed to collect together artifacts relating to the events and history of the United States.
The Society was to remain there for 55 years.
Instead Democratic machines flourished in each of the boroughs, with Tammany Hall in Manhattan the most prominent.
Its frauds had a grandeur of scale and an elegance of structure: money-laundering, profit sharing and organization.
In 1809, the local Common Council cracked down on Tammany Hall and found that a number of its Sachems secretly received huge funds.
By 1872 Tammany had an Irish Catholic "boss," and in 1928 a Tammany hero, New York Governor Al Smith, won the Democratic presidential nomination.
Tammany left, with the leaders relocating to the National Democratic Club on Madison Avenue at East 33rd Street, and the Society's collection of memorabilia going into a warehouse in the Bronx.
The election was a Republican sweep statewide: Levi Morton, a millionaire banker from Manhattan, won the governorship, and the party also ended up in control of the legislature.
These positions gave him access to city funds and contractors, thereby controlling public works programs.
This benefitted his pocketbook and those of his friends, but also provided jobs for the immigrants, especially Irish laborers, who were the electoral base of Tammany's power.
Second, Tammany served as a powerful intermediary between immigrants and the unfamiliar state.
High ranking Democrat-Republican Aaron Burr saw Tammany Hall as an opportunity to counter Alexander Hamilton's Society of the Cincinnati and developed it into a political machine.
All of this activity, of course, also brought great wealth to Tweed and his friends.
"Big Tim" Sullivan was the Tammany leader in the Bowery, and machines spokesman in the state legislature.
Tammany Hall’s electoral base lay predominantly with New York’s burgeoning immigrant constituency, which often exchanged political support for Tammany Hall’s patronage.
The Tammany Hall Sachems then agreed to discipline the organization by passing laws that established an organization that oversaw Tammany Hall's finances and limiting contributions to the organization.
Tammany then put up Hugh Grant again, despite his being publicly dirtied by the police scandals.
After 1854, the Society expanded its political control even further by earning the loyalty of the city's rapidly expanding immigrant community, which functioned as its base of political capital.
By the 1880s, Tammany was building local clubs that appealed to social activists from the ethnic middle-class.
The building housed the New York Film Academy and the Union Square Theatre, as well as retail stores at street level, until a complete renovation of the building commenced in January 2016.
Union activists had founded the United Labor Party (ULP), which nominated political economist Henry George, the author of ''Progress and Poverty'', as its standard-bearer.
Under leaders such as Charles Francis Murphy and Timothy Sullivan, it maintained control of Democratic politics in the city and the state.
It was the Democratic Party political machine that played a major role in controlling New York City and New York State politics and helping immigrants, most notably the Irish, rise up in American politics from the 1790s to the 1960s.
Then, in 1798, the Society moved to more permanent and spacious quarters, the "Long Room" of "Brom" Martling's Tavern, located at Nassau and Spruce Streets, near where City Hall stands today.
The once mighty Tammany political machine, now deprived of its leadership, quickly faded from political importance, and by the mid-1960s it ceased to exist, its demise as the controlling group of the New York Democratic Party was sealed when the Village Independent Democrats under Ed Koch wrested away control of the Manhattan party.
First, Tammany provided the means of physical existence in times of emergency: food, coal, rent money or a job.
Manhattan District Attorney Thomas E. Dewey also got longtime Tammany Hall boss Jimmy Hines convicted of bribery in 1939 and handed him a 4–8 year sentence.
When the leaders of the Society found that they had not raised sufficient funds, and needed $25,000 more, a meeting was held at which $175,000 was immediately pledged.
The new Tammany Hall had a large room that could accommodate up to 2,000 people for political and social events, while the rest of the building was run as a hotel.
Despite occasional defeats, Tammany was consistently able to survive and prosper.
In 1958, DeSapio's "reform" image was severely damaged after he ran his own candidate for Senate, Manhattan District Attorney Frank Hogan.
In 1932, the machine suffered a dual setback when Mayor James Walker was forced from office by scandal and reform-minded Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected president of the United States.
In quiet times the machine had the advantage of a core of solid supporters and usually exercised control of politics and policymaking in Manhattan; it also played a major role in the state legislature in Albany.
Van Wyck easily outpolled Seth Low, the reform candidate backed by the Citizens Union, and Tammany was back in control.
Congressman Christopher "Christy" Sullivan was one of the last "bosses" of Tammany Hall before its collapse.
The last element weakened after 1940 with the decline of relief programs like WPA and CCC that Tammany used to gain and hold supporters.
Under "Boss" Tweed's dominance, the city expanded into the Upper East and Upper West Sides of Manhattan, the Brooklyn Bridge was begun, land was set aside for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, orphanages and almshouses were constructed, and social services – both directly provided by the state and indirectly funded by state appropriations to private charities – expanded to unprecedented levels.
It also brought them into contact and alliance with the rich elite of the city, who either fell in with the graft and corruption, or else tolerated it because of Tammany's ability to control the immigrant population, of whom the "uppertens" of the city were wary.
From 1902 until his death in 1924, Charles Francis Murphy was Tammany's boss.
Reforms demanded a general housecleaning, and former county sheriff "Honest John" Kelly was selected as the new leader.
As mayor, LaGuardia successfully led the effort to have a new city charter adopted which would mandate a proportional representation method of electing members of the City Council.
Tammany continued to support him for a time, but eventually pressure from the public persuaded the organization to no longer affiliate themselves with Burr.
In the 1830s the Loco-Focos, an anti-monopoly and pro-labor faction of the Democratic Party, became Tammany's main opposition by appealing to workingmen.
Tammany controlled the space, which it dubbed "The Wigwam", and allowed other responsible political organizations it approved of to use the room for meetings.
By 1956, however, Costello, who was convicted of tax evasion in 1954 and now controlled the Luciano family from prison, was engaged in a major power struggle with fellow associate Vito Genovese and his grip on power greatly weakened.
Tammany for example from the 1880s onward built a strong network of local clubs that attracted ambitious middle-class ethnics.
Tammany had once again succeeded and survived.
With the greater affluence, and influence, of Tammany under Tweed, a new headquarters was deemed desirable, so the building at Nassau and Frankfort was sold to Charles Dana and his friends, who would buy a newspaper, ''The Sun'', and move it there.
Tammany's candidate, Robert A.
