But in my heart of hearts I believed there was something much more sincere and genuine to get out of the story, so we set it aside and went back to the roots of the original fairy tale."
This version features some of the lyrics that were re-written and sung by Potter herself.
In response to that demand, Glen Keane held a seminar called "''The Best of Both Worlds''", where he, with 50 Disney CGI artists and traditional artists, focused on the pros and cons of each style.
The Latin American Spanish version of the song, titled "''Algo quiero querer''", was recorded by Colombian pop-singer, Fanny Lú.
Music in the film received mixed reviews.
As Eugene is being led to execution, he is rescued by the Snuggly Duckling regulars and carried back to Gothel's tower by Maximus.
Floyd Norman, a former Disney and Pixar animator and story artist, said, "The idea of changing the title of a classic like ''Rapunzel'' to ''Tangled'' is beyond stupid.
Eugene enters the tower by climbing Rapunzel's hair, only to find Rapunzel bound with chains and gagged with a handkerchief.
The film was nominated for a number of awards, including Best Original Song at the 83rd Academy Awards.
Realizing that she is the long-lost princess, she confronts Gothel.
''Time'' film critic Richard Corliss wrote that ''Tangled'' "wades into the DreamWorks style of sitcom gags and anachronistic sass," while praising the film for achieving "the complex mix of romance, comedy, adventure and heart that defines the best Disney features."
Rapunzel starts to reveal that her hair glows when she sings – but then realizes that this is their key to escape, as her hair provides enough light to find a way out of the cave.
Kyle helped us get that Fragonard look of that girl on the swing... We are using subsurface scattering and global illumination and all of the latest techniques to pull off convincing human characters and rich environments."
On November 24, 2010, the day of the film's release, directors Nathan Greno and Byron Howard disputed reports that the title change was a marketing decision.
The film also received two nominations for the Broadcast Film Critics Association in the same categories, though lost to ''Toy Story 3'' and ''127 Hours'', as well as nominations for two Annie Awards, for Best Animated Feature Film and for Writing in a Feature Production.
Moore thought that this was "a good exercise in employing your imagination".
On its opening weekend, it earned $17.4 million in eight territories and ranked second for the weekend behind ''Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows&nbsp;– Part 1'' ($117.3 million).
In its first weekend of release, it earned $48.8 million (the highest opening for Walt Disney Animation Studios, surpassing ''The Lion King'' ($40.9 million), and later surpassed by both ''Wreck-It Ralph'' ($49 million) and ''Frozen'' ($67.4 million)), placing second for the period behind ''Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows&nbsp;– Part 1'', which earned $49.1 million.
The two return to the kingdom, where Rapunzel is re-united with her parents.
A video game based on the film was released on November 23, 2010 for Nintendo DS, Wii, and PC platforms by Disney Interactive Studios.
Scott of ''The New York Times'' positively reviewed the music, saying that it "takes you back to a charmed world of swoony longing and sprightly mischief," with a slick and efficient atmosphere and grace notes of self-conscious classicism.
James Berardinelli, on the other hand, negatively commented the songs as "neither catchy nor memorable."
An abridged stage adaptation entitled ''Tangled: The Musical'' premiered on board the ''Disney Magic'' of the Disney Cruise Line in November 2015, featuring three new songs wrote by Alan Menken and Glenn Slater.
Best Original Song ("I See the Light")
Over the traditional Wednesday-Sunday Thanksgiving holiday period, it tallied $68.7 million, again finishing in second place.
''Tangled'' had the sixth highest opening weekend for a film that did not debut at #1.
Sandie Angulo Chen of Common Sense Media gave the film five out of five stars, writing, "Fantastic princess adventure is fun, with great messages."
When sandwiched together later in production, the result was something that would be visually impossible in the real world, but which created an appealing look to the film.
To do this, they used a new technique called multi-rigging, which is made up of multiple pairs of virtual cameras.
Another review aggregator Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score from 0–100 out of reviews from mainstream film critics, calculated a score of 71 based on 34 reviews.
Unadjusted for inflation, it is the sixth highest-grossing film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios, behind ''The Lion King'' ($422.8 million), ''Frozen'' ($400.7 million), ''Big Hero 6'' ($221.3 million), ''Beauty and the Beast'' ($219 million), and ''Aladdin'' ($217.4 million).
Roth Cornet from ''ScreenRant'' was positive towards them, saying that "Alan Menken’s music is as catchy, uplifting and effecting as one would expect."
It marked the seventh highest-grossing 2010 film and the third highest-grossing 2010 animated film.
Robert Newman, the film’s stereoscopic supervisor said that "We’re using depth more artistically than ever before, and we’re not as concerned with the literal transcription of depth between camera and projector as we are the interpretation of it."
Thus, Moore felt that the recording process was challenging because at that time she had no animation to look at except for a few sketches.
Due to limitations in computer technology, especially regarding attempts to capture the complexity of a human form, many basic principles of animation used in traditionally animated movies had been absent from earlier CGI films; but technological advancements have made it easier to blend the two, combining the strengths of each style.
Each pair is used individually on each separate element that adds depth to a scene, like background, foreground and characters, without adjusting for the relation with the other pairs.
Writing for the San Francisco Chronicle's blog, Margot Magowan accused Disney of sexism, writing, "Can you imagine if Disney...switched a movie title so it wouldn't risk highlighting a male star?
A two-disc Blu-ray/DVD combo pack and single DVD are also available.
When first put into production, the film was promoted as having the title ''Rapunzel Unbraided'', which was later changed to ''Rapunzel''.
They use the flower to heal their ailing queen, who soon afterwards gives birth to Princess Rapunzel.
The film sold a record 2,970,052 units (the equivalent of $44,521,079) in its first week in North America, the largest opening for a 2011 DVD.
''Tangled'' was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment as a four-disc combo pack on March 29, 2011.
Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards
These problems were finally solved in March: An improved version of a hair simulation program named Dynamic Wires, originally developed for ''Bolt'', was eventually used.
The soldiers give chase, led by Maximus, one of the lead horses in the royal army, and locate them at a dam.
When he sees the Stabbingtons on the shore, Eugene leaves Rapunzel and intends to let them have the crown.
Tim Robey from ''The Daily Telegraph'' gave a negative review, saying that they were only "OK&nbsp;– there’s nothing you want to whistle on the way home."
With over 3,800 tickets sold on its opening day, it set a new record for films showing in a single theater.
During their excursion, Flynn takes Rapunzel to the Snuggly Duckling, a pub filled with the frightening people Gothel warned Rapunzel about, but who instead are charmed by Rapunzel's innocence.
Writing in a Feature Production (Dan Fogelman)
After the meeting, it was decided that the film would be made in 3D CG animation, but in a way as to become an extension of the traditional 2D Disney "aesthetic", a term which referred to the naturalistic animation that conforms to the fundamental principles of animation as documented by Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston in the book ''The Illusion of Life: Disney Animation''.
Mandy Moore approached the project through auditioning, when she heard that a film about the story of ''Rapunzel'' was being made.
Corliss from ''Time'' was also positive to the songs, noting that though "don't sound on first hearing like top-drawer Menken," the songs still "smoothly fill their functions."
They said they changed the title from ''Rapunzel'' to ''Tangled'', because Rapunzel is not the only main character in the film.
Keane stated repeatedly he was trying to make the computer "bend its knee to the artist" instead of having the computer dictate the artistic style and look of the film.
Eugene and Rapunzel take refuge in a forest where Gothel, now in league with the Stabbingtons, gives the crown to Rapunzel and suggests using it to challenge Eugene's interest in her.
She described herself as a "girly fan" of Disney classics like ''The Little Mermaid'', ''Beauty and the Beast'', ''Aladdin'' and ''The Lion King'', and that it was an honor for her to be part of this "legacy" – the lineage of such Disney icons.
After the film's release, Keane revealed that he had "stepped back" from the role of director because of a heart attack in 2008.
They went on to say that you cannot call ''Toy Story'' "''Buzz Lightyear''," and they really needed a title that represented what the film is, and that it's a duo, and it stars Rapunzel and Flynn Rider.
Moore later expressed that she had dreamed to be a Disney princess since she was young and said that with the role of Rapunzel, she had fulfilled her "ultimate childhood dream".
As late as January 2010, the directors were still not sure if the Rapunzel character's length of hair was going to work.
Back at the tower, Rapunzel recognizes the symbol of the kingdom, which she had subconsciously incorporated into her paintings over the years.
When recording action scenes, the voice actors had to jog a little in place in order to make their voices sound realistic.
He also stated Rapunzel is "not as memorable as Snow White, Ariel, or Belle" as well as stating "the songs are neither catchy nor memorable."
Rapunzel plans to show Flynn to Gothel in order to prove she can take care of herself, but when Gothel becomes enraged at Rapunzel's insistent desire to leave, she asks for a special paint that will take Gothel three days' round trip to obtain and return.
In November 2005, ''Unbraided'' was pushed back to a summer 2009 release in order to give Keane "more time to work on the story."
Best Song Written For Visual Media ("I See the Light")
"He took the house from ''Snow White'' and built it and painted it so it looked like a flat painting that suddenly started to move, and it had dimension and kept all of the soft, round curves of the brushstrokes of watercolor.
'''''Tangled''''' is a 2010 American 3D computer-animated musical fantasy-comedy film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures.
Long ago, a drop of sunlight became a golden flower capable of healing illness, decay and injury.
Fearing this is the end, Flynn reveals his real name is Eugene Fitzherbert.
Bill Graham from Collider.com praised them for their variations to the tempo and tone, memorable lyrics, and "blending old with new," However, he also stated that "the film’s constant mixture of tones can feel a bit off-putting for some."
A television series will premiere in 2017.
The film was well received by critics and audiences alike.
Rather than focusing on realism, the 3D team used an aesthetic approach.
''Tangled'' earned $200,821,936 in North America, and $390,973,000 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $591,794,936.
We did marketing that made the people who would not normally show up say, 'Hey, this looks pretty good.'"
At a meeting one day, animator John Ripa floated an idea which turned out to be the solution they had been looking for: the mysterious floating lanterns.
As a counterpart to the appealing and cute design of Rapunzel, the directors wanted to make Flynn Rider "the most handsome, most attractive male lead Disney has ever had."
Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards 2010
A. O. Scott of ''The New York Times'' positively reviewed the film as "the 50th animated feature from Disney, and its look and spirit convey a modified, updated but nonetheless sincere and unmistakable quality of old-fashioned Disneyness."
As Eugene dies, a heartbroken Rapunzel's tear, which still contains a bit of the sun's power, lands on his cheek and restores his life.
The group reaches the kingdom and enjoys the festivities, culminating in an evening cruise as the lanterns are released.
Kenneth Turan from ''The Los Angeles Times'' awarded the film four stars out of five; he described the film as a "gorgeous computer-animated look that features rich landscapes and characters that look fuller and more lifelike than they have in the past."
Todd McCarthy, film reviewer for ''The Hollywood Reporter'' opened his review with, "It would have been nice if Disney's self-touted 50th animated feature were one of its best, a film that could stand with the studio's classics, but the world will have to make do with ''Tangled'', a passably entertaining hodgepodge of old and new animation techniques, mixed sensibilities and hedged commercial calculations."
James Berardinelli commented on his review website ''ReelViews'' that the film is "entertaining and enjoyable, but not groundbreaking."
Menken reported that that opening number went through five or six different versions.
For hundreds of years the flower is used by Mother Gothel to retain her youth until it is discovered by soldiers of a nearby kingdom, Corona.
Moore revealed that she had to attend several audition sessions and described the experiences as "pretty fun" but didn't put much hope in getting the part because she believed there would be much competition for this role; she just performed her best without any anxiety.
He described the opener, "When Will My Life Begin?," as the "heroine's 'I wanna' song," a Disney tradition that stretches back to Snow White's "Some Day My Prince Will Come."
The film was made using computer-generated imagery (CGI), although ''Tangled'' was modeled on the traditional look of oil paintings on canvas.
''Tangled'' was also nominated for favorite film in the British Academy Children Awards for Favorite Film, competing against films like ''Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows&nbsp;– Parts 1'' & ''2'', ''Transformers: Dark of the Moon'', ''Cars 2'', and ''Kung Fu Panda 2''.
As of 2016, it was the fifth highest-grossing film worldwide produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios, behind ''Frozen'', ''Zootopia'', ''The Lion King'', and ''Big Hero 6''.
Moore also stated that she herself had little influences on Rapunzel: "The character was developed way before I had anything to do with it."
When the royal soldiers appear searching for Flynn, the pub regulars help the pair escape.
Instead, the brothers tie Eugene onto a boat and confront Rapunzel, claiming Eugene is escaping with the crown.
I want luscious hair, and we are inventing new ways of doing that.
British Academy Children's Awards (BAFTA)
It was the third Disney film appearing in the Top 10 films of 2010.
Keane said, "There’s no photoreal hair.
Corliss included ''Tangled'' at 19 in a list of top 25 All-time Best Animated films.
As of January 20, 2016, the film has earned a total of $215 million in home video sales in the United States and Canada ($155 from DVD sales and $60 million from Blu-Ray sales).
Mandy Moore later recalled that during recording, she had never met Donna Murphy and only met Zachary Levi once when they recorded "I See the Light".
After watching the finished film, Moore was disappointed because she felt that her voice sounded "shrill", while Levi thought that his performance sounded "incredibly nasally".
It had originally been announced in April 2007 that Annie-nominated animator and story artist Dean Wellins would be co-directing the film alongside Glen Keane.
Conli explained that at Disney Animation under Lasseter, it is always the filmmakers who decide whether they are ready to make a sequel (not marketing or merchandising).
2011 Teen Choice Awards
In January 2015, Conli again provided a similar explanation when pressed on this point, and also mentioned that directors Greno and Howard ultimately "weren't really interested" in following up on the story.
For the songs, Moore and Levi recorded on a soundstage with a 65-piece orchestra under the supervision of composer Alan Menken.
I was with some friends and my husband&nbsp;– and I screamed as soon as I found out the news."
However, Disney executives David Stainton and Dick Cook announced that they would only approve the film for production if it were created using the 3D computer graphics.
To create the impression of a painting, non-photorealistic rendering was used.
Many of the techniques and tools that were required to give the film the quality Keane demanded did not exist when the project was started, and Walt Disney Animation Studios had to create them on their own.
Senior software engineer Kelly Ward spent six years writing programs to make it move the way they wanted.
The soundtrack peaked at number 44 on the ''Billboard'' 200, number 7 on the Soundtrack chart, and number 3 on the Kid Albums chart.
In December 2014, ''Tangled's'' producer, Roy Conli, revealed that the production team had been "heavily pushed" for a feature-length sequel to the film, but when the writers and directors got together to develop one, they realized, "she ''sic'' cut her hair.
I want to bring the warmth and intuitive feel of hand-drawn to CGI."
The film employed a unique artistic style by blending together features of computer-generated imagery (CGI) and traditional animation while using non-photorealistic rendering to create the impression of a painting.
Disney was criticized for altering the classic title as a marketing strategy.
To make hair float believably in water, and to surmount other similar challenges, discrete differential geometry was used to produce the desired effects, freeing the animators from executing these specific tasks directly, which would have taken days instead of minutes.
''Tangled'' won best 3D scene of the year at the second annual International 3D Society Creative Arts Awards.
Disney animated films are usually animated to synchronize with recorded dialogue rather than asking the vocal talent to synchronize their delivery to animation after it is rendered.
Glen Keane, the film's original director, first began working on the story for what became ''Tangled'' about 14 years prior to its release, then directed the film's development from 2002 to 2008.
Existing technology continued to present difficulties: in particular, animating hair turned out to be a challenge.
Best Original Song ("I've Got a Dream")
In ''Tangled'', as with most animated films, all voice actors had to record their dialogue separately from one another to avoid bleeding into each other's tracks.
''Tangled'' earned $11.9 million on its opening Wednesday, breaking the record for the largest pre-Thanksgiving Wednesday opening, a record previously held by Disney·Pixar's ''Toy Story 2''.
A television series, ''Tangled: Before Ever After'', will premiere on Disney Channel in 2017.
The film was shut down about a week before Catmull and John Lasseter were placed in charge of the studio in January 2006, and one of their first decisions was to restart the project and ask Keane to keep going with the film.
The combo pack includes a Blu-ray 3D, standard Blu-ray, DVD, and digital copy.
Due to scheduling conflicts with other projects (Moore had to travel to different places like London or New York, and Levi could only record on weekends for five hours once every six weeks), they did not necessarily record dialogue in the same order as in the final film.
Hollywood Foreign Press Association nominated ''Tangled'' for two Golden Globe Awards, for Best Animated Feature Film and Best Original Song for "I See the Light", but lost to ''Toy Story 3'' and ''Burlesque'' respectively.
By making the computer become as "pliable as the pencil", Keane's vision of a "three dimensional drawing" seemed within reach, with the artist controlling the technology.
In March 2014, executive producer John Lasseter explained that Disney had changed the name to improve the film's appeal to the four quadrants: "There was an audience perception that these movies were just for little girls, but when boys, men, whatever actually see these movies, they like them.
Keane said of the original plot, "It was a fun, wonderful, witty version and we had a couple of great writers.
The film reportedly cost more than $260 million to produce.
Best Animated Feature Film
On October 9, 2008, it was reported that Keane and Wellins had stepped down as directors due to other commitments, and were replaced by the team of Byron Howard and Nathan Greno, director and storyboard director, respectively, of Disney's 2008 animated feature ''Bolt''.
Peter Bradshaw from ''The Guardian'', who gave the movie two out of five star, described the songs as "sporting a laboured selection of Broadway-style showtunes," and hence are actually added for profit.
Its highest-grossing markets outside North America was Germany ($44.2 million), where it is the highest-grossing 2010 animated film, followed by France and the Maghreb region ($39.4 million) and the UK, Ireland and Malta ($32.9 million).
So on ''Rapunzel'' ... we changed the name and we called it ''Tangled''.
Other non-speaking roles include Rapunzel's parents (the King and Queen of Corona), the other Stabbington brother, and Ulf the Mime Thug.
Rapunzel captures Flynn and discovers the crown, but is unaware of its significance.
In order to aid animators in animating the characters, the filmmakers did interviews with the voice actors and filmed their facial expressions throughout the recording sessions.
On September 10, 2009, it was announced that actress and singer-songwriter Mandy Moore had been cast as the voice of Rapunzel, and actor Zachary Levi would provide the voice of Flynn Rider.
In order to market the film to both sexes and additional age groups, Disney changed the film's name from ''Rapunzel'' to ''Tangled'' while also emphasizing Flynn Rider, the film's prominent male character, showing that his story is just as important as Rapunzel's.
The Rococo paintings of French artist Jean-Honoré Fragonard, particularly ''The Swing'', were used as references for the film's artistic style, a style described by Keane as "romantic and lush."
The dam is inadvertently breached, and the resulting deluge traps Flynn and Rapunzel in a flooding cave.
For this singing section, Moore chose "Help Me" by Joni Mitchell, a song that she herself had covered on her fourth studio album, ''Coverage'' (2003).
They brought in hundreds of images of their favourite male actors and celebrities, which were torn and pasted back again.
In Russia and the CIS, it set an opening-weekend record among non-sequel animated films (first surpassed by ''Rio'') and among Walt Disney Animation Studios films (surpassed by ''Frozen'').
The film was released on Blu-ray and DVD on March 29, 2011; a short film, ''Tangled Ever After'', was released later in 2012.
Keane credited Disney 3D animator Kyle Strawitz with helping to combine CGI with the traditional hand-drawn style.
The song "Something That I Want" performed by Grace Potter from Grace Potter and the Nocturnals is featured in the closing credits.
After much deliberation, his look was eventually narrowed down to one concept drawing.
Elsewhere, Menken reported that there was originally a love song called "You Are My Forever" that Mother Gothel sang to Rapunzel in a motherly way, but was reprised later in the film by Flynn Rider in a romantic way.
Since the film was going to be a musical, it was required that all auditionees had to read several scenes and perform a song of their choice, to ensure that the voice actors could both act and sing.
She's just really sort of motivated to find out what else is out there beyond this crazy tower she's lived in for 18 years," and that "she's very independent, she can take care of herself, and she's definitely come up with really entertaining ways to keep herself busy.".
Rapunzel agrees to lifelong captivity if she is allowed to heal Eugene, but before she has the chance to save him, Eugene slices off her hair, turning it from golden blonde to brown and destroying its magic.
During its second weekend (post-Thanksgiving), ''Tangled'' declined 56% to $21.6 million, although it jumped to first place at the box office.
It dominated for two weeks on the DVD sales chart and sold 6,657,331 units ($102,154,692) as of July 18, 2012.
Best Song ("I See the Light")
One of the main goals of the animators was to create movement that mimicked the soft fluidity of the hand-drawn art found in older Disney animated films.
They sang live with the orchestra for several times in order to help everyone "get a vibe" and a feel for the music and the singing, then were asked to go in isolation booths to record the actual tracks.
The site's consensus is: "While far from Disney's greatest film, ''Tangled'' is a visually stunning, thoroughly entertaining addition to the studio's classic animated canon."
Catmull would later admit in writing that Disney Animation's faith that the ''The Princess and the Frog''s excellent quality would bring in all audiences notwithstanding the word "princess" in the title was their version of "a stupid pill."
According to CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend, the average grade cinemagoers gave ''Tangled'' was an "A+" on an A+ to F scale.
Best Song ("I See the Light")
83rd Academy Awards
Several songs were written, but eventually cut from the final film; "When Will My Life Begin?"
However, attempting to take just the hair by cutting a piece from it destroys its power, and so she kidnaps Rapunzel and raises her as her own daughter in an isolated tower.
There, Rapunzel gives Eugene the crown.
According to Ed Catmull, at one point Michael Eisner himself had proposed using modern-day San Francisco as the initial setting at the start of the film and then somehow transporting the heroine into a fairy tale world, but Keane could not make that idea work.
''Tangled'' premiered in Paris on November 17, exclusively screening at the Grand Rex theatre two weeks in advance of its French wide release.
Once a year, the King and Queen release sky lanterns on Rapunzel's birthday, hoping for their daughter's return.
Sales of ''Tangled'' in the US and Canada exceeded $95 million in DVD and Blu-ray sales, the highest grossing DVD of the year 2011; its home video sales exceeded the film's earnings in its first week in theaters.
We'd end up doing the same scene five times, depending," Levi said.
Nearing her eighteenth birthday, Rapunzel asks Gothel for permission to leave the tower and discover the source of the lanterns, but Gothel refuses, telling her that the outside world is a dangerous place.
The film  earned $591 million in worldwide box office revenue, $200 million of which was earned in the United States and Canada.
Choice Animated Movie Voice (Zachary Levi)
Against her mother's wishes, she accepts the aid of a handsome intruder to take her out into the world which she has never seen.
replaced an earlier version called "What More Could I Ever Need?".
Justin Chang of ''Variety'' compared it to changing the title of ''The Little Mermaid'' to ''Beached''.
Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media
Before the film's release, its title was changed from ''Rapunzel'' to ''Tangled'', reportedly to market the film as gender-neutral.
They held a large "Hot Man Meeting" where they gathered about 30 women from the studio and asked them what they considered attractive in a man.
Disney released a short film in 2012 titled ''Tangled Ever After''.
Las Vegas Film Critics Society
Rapunzel convinces Flynn to escort her to see the lanterns in exchange for the crown.
Best Animated Feature Film
Gothel then stabs him with a knife and attempts to leave with a struggling Rapunzel.
Gothel's age rapidly catches up to her, and she falls from the tower, disintegrating into dust.
The next morning, Maximus finds the pair and tries to capture Eugene, but Rapunzel arranges a truce in honor of her birthday.
It has also been nominated for 37th Saturn Award for Best Animated Film.
Gael Cooper of NBC News expressed that ''Tangled'' may be the best Disney film of all time.
Featuring the voices of Mandy Moore and Zachary Levi, the film tells the story of a lost, young princess with long magical hair who yearns to leave her secluded tower.
This idea was apparently replaced with the two songs "Mother Knows Best" and "I See the Light".
''Tangled'' spent six years in production at a cost that has been estimated at $260 million, which if accurate, would make it the most expensive animated film ever made and the fifth most-expensive film of all time.
"I See the Light" has been nominated for Best Original Song at the 83rd Academy Awards, but lost to "We Belong Together" from ''Toy Story 3''.
