The early Tang government established both the grain tax and cloth tax at a relatively low rate for each household under the empire.
During Emperor Taizong's reign alone, large campaigns were launched against not only the Göktürks, but also separate campaigns against the Tuyuhun, the Xiyu states, and the Xueyantuo.
Taizong set out to solve internal problems within the government which had constantly plagued past dynasties.
Although these natural calamities and rebellions stained the reputation and hampered the effectiveness of the central government, the early 9th century is nonetheless viewed as a period of recovery for the Tang dynasty.
Concepts of women's social rights and social status during the Tang era were notably liberal-minded for the period.
Their high-class courtesans, who likely influenced the Japanese geishas, were well respected.
Even Abbasid Arabs assisted the Tang in putting down An Lushan's rebellion.
According to the ''Old Book of Tang'', Pirooz was made the head of a Governorate of Persia in what is now Zaranj, Afghanistan.
In the capital city of Chang'an there was always lively celebration, especially for the Lantern Festival since the city's nighttime curfew was lifted by the government for three days straight.
After Silla and Japan reopened renewed hostilities in the late 7th century, most Japanese maritime merchants chose to set sail from Nagasaki towards the mouth of the Huai River, the Yangzi River, and even as far south as the Hangzhou Bay in order to avoid Korean ships in the Yellow Sea.
This family was known as the Longxi Li lineage (隴西李氏), which includes the Tang poet Li Bai.
During the Tang era, the nobility's power was largely eclipsed by scholar-officials.
Students of Confucian studies were potential candidates for the imperial examinations, the graduates of which could be appointed as state bureaucrats in the local, provincial, and central government.
He was the son of Wang Chulian, who in turn was the son of Wang Zhou.
By the year 742 the total number of enlisted troops in the Tang armies had risen to about 500,000 men.
In the interior of China, trade was facilitated by the Grand Canal and the Tang government's rationalization of the greater canal system that reduced costs of transporting grain and other commodities.
One of the surviving sources of the ''Old Book of Tang'', primarily covering up to 756, is the ''Tongdian'', which Du You presented to the emperor in 801.
In the census of 609, the population was tallied by efforts of the government at a size of 9 million households, or about 50&nbsp;million people.
Like the previous Sui dynasty, the Tang dynasty maintained a civil service system by recruiting scholar-officials through standardized examinations and recommendations to office.
These included a waterproof and dust-repelling cream or varnish for clothes and weapons, fireproof cement for glass and porcelain wares, a waterproof cream applied to silk clothes of underwater divers, a cream designated for polishing bronze mirrors, and many other useful formulas.
The Japanese Emperor Temmu (r. 672–686) even established his conscripted army on that of the Chinese model, his state ceremonies on the Chinese model, and constructed his palace at Fujiwara on the Chinese model of architecture.
The center of the political power of the Tang was the capital city of Chang'an (modern Xi'an), where the emperor maintained his large palace quarters and entertained political emissaries with music, sports, acrobatic stunts, poetry, paintings, and dramatic theater performances.
In 781, the Nestorian Stele was created in order to honor the achievements of their community in China.
The foreign horse-riding sport of polo from Persia became a wildly popular trend amongst the Chinese elite, and women often played the sport (as glazed earthenware figurines from the time period portray).
603) and Crown prince Li Jiancheng (b.
Technology during the Tang period was built also upon the precedents of the past.
Despite this, the earliest extant terrain maps of China come from the ancient State of Qin; maps from the 4th century BC that were excavated in 1986.
Their status of belonging to one of the 'Seven Great surnames' materialized during Gaozong's rule.
With widely open access to China that the Silk Road to the west facilitated, many foreign settlers were able to move east to China, while the city of Chang'an itself had about 25,000 foreigners living within.
The ''Shitong'' written by Liu Zhiji in 710 was a meta-history, as it covered the history of Chinese historiography in past centuries until his time.
The first classic work about the Tang is the ''Old Book of Tang'' by Liu Xu (887–946) et al.
From Tang times until the end of the Qing dynasty in 1912, scholar-officials functioned often as intermediaries between the grassroots level and the government.
The Tang period was again placed into the enormous universal history text of the ''Zizhi Tongjian'', edited, compiled, and completed in 1084 by a team of scholars under the Song dynasty Chancellor Sima Guang (1019–1086).
Tang poems remained popular and great emulation of Tang era poetry began in the Song dynasty; in that period, Yan Yu (嚴羽; active 1194–1245) was the first to confer the poetry of the High Tang (c. 713–766) era with "canonical status within the classical poetic tradition."
The government's withdrawal from its role in managing the economy had the unintended effect of stimulating trade, as more markets with less bureaucratic restrictions were opened up.
Sogdian merchants and their families living in cities such as Chang'an, Luoyang, and Xiangyang usually built a Zoroastrian temple once their local communities grew larger than 100 households.
Some of the kingdoms paying tribute to the Tang dynasty included Kashmir, Nepal, Khotan, Kucha, Kashgar, Korea, Champa, and kingdoms located in Amu Darya and Syr Darya valley.
There were also large groups of bandits, in the size of small armies, that ravaged the countryside in the last years of the Tang, who smuggled illicit salt, ambushed merchants and convoys, and even besieged several walled cities.
Much like the seaport of Guangzhou in the south, Yangzhou boasted thousands of foreign traders from all across Asia.
Wong states that this scheme lacks the undying vows and total self-commitment to love found in Western romances such as ''Romeo and Juliet'', but that underlying traditional Chinese values of inseparableness of self from one's environment (including human society) served to create the necessary fictional device of romantic tension.
He also provided a description of Guangzhou's mosque, its granaries, its local government administration, some of its written records, the treatment of travelers, along with the use of ceramics, rice-wine, and tea.
While religion played a role in politics, politics also played a role in religion.
Other Sogdians continued to live in China as merchants following the defeat of An Lushan's rebellion, but many of them were compelled to hide their ethnic identity as Li Baoyu had done.
Although the central and local governments kept an enormous number of records about land property in order to assess taxes, it became common practice in the Tang for literate and affluent people to create their own private documents and signed contracts.
Poetry styles that were popular in the Tang included ''gushi'' and ''jintishi'', with the renowned poet Li Bai (701–762) famous for the former style, and poets like Wang Wei (701–761) and Cui Hao (704–754) famous for their use of the latter.
As time passed, these military governors slowly phased out the prominence of civil officials drafted by exams, and became more autonomous from central authority.
from Tibet in 722, lost it to the Tibetans in 737, and regained it under the command of the Goguryeo-Korean General Gao Xianzhi.
Officials were granted 30 days off every three years to visit their parents if they lived  away, or 15 days off if the parents lived more than  away (travel time not included).
Li Yuan, known as Emperor Gaozu of Tang, ruled until 626, when he was forcefully deposed by his son Li Shimin, the Prince of Qin.
With the blanket ban on foreign religions two years later, Manichaeism was driven underground and never flourished in China again.
The Tang dynasty government attempted to create an accurate census of the size of their empire's population, mostly for effective taxation and matters of military conscription for each region.
Of these 108 wards in Chang'an, two of them (each the size of two regular city wards) were designated as government-supervised markets, and other space reserved for temples, gardens, ponds, etc.
In the realm of cartography, there were further advances beyond the map-makers of the Han dynasty.
These included the ''Book of Liang'', ''Book of Chen'', ''Book of Northern Qi'', ''Book of Zhou'', ''Book of Sui'', ''Book of Jin'', ''History of Northern Dynasties'' and the ''History of Southern Dynasties''.
Drinking wine and alcoholic beverages was heavily ingrained into Chinese culture, as people drank for nearly every social event.
However, incidentally it was not the economic hub during the Tang dynasty.
Songs, dances, and musical instruments from foreign regions became popular in China during the Tang dynasty.
The Uyghurs built the first Manichaean monastery in China in 768, yet in 843 the Tang government ordered that the property of all Manichaean monasteries be confiscated in response to the outbreak of war with the Uyghurs.
Several laws enforcing segregation of foreigners from Chinese were passed during the Tang dynasty.
In fact, it was during this rebellion that the Tang withdrew its western garrisons stationed in what is now Gansu and Qinghai, which the Tibetans then occupied along with the territory of what is now Xinjiang.
Arguably the most important part of her legacy was diminishing the power of the northwest aristocracy, allowing people from other clans and regions of China to become more represented in Chinese politics and government.
He had prestige and military experience, and was a first cousin of Emperor Yang of Sui (their mothers were sisters).
The supposed standard of 100 ''mu'' of land allotted to each family was in fact decreasing in size in places where population expanded and the wealthy bought up most of the land.
She then ruled as China's only empress.
The commercial success and profitability of woodblock printing was attested to by one British observer at the end of the nineteenth century, who noted that even before the arrival of western printing methods, the price of books and printed materials in China had already reached an astoundingly low price, primarily owing to the immense sales books enjoyed in China.
Building upon the Sui legal code, he issued a new legal code that subsequent Chinese dynasties would model theirs upon, as well as neighboring polities in Vietnam, Korea, and Japan.
However, the Tang did manage to restore at least indirect control over former Tang territories as far west as the Hexi Corridor and Dunhuang in Gansu.
The Tang Imperial family was watched over by the Zongcheng si 宗正寺.
These had their own signature and that of a witness and scribe in order to prove in court (if necessary) that their claim to property was legitimate.
In order to promote widespread Confucian education, the Tang government established state-run schools and issued standard versions of the Five Classics with selected commentaries.
This monastery collected vast amounts of money, silk, and treasures through multitudes of anonymous people's repentances, leaving the donations on the monastery's premise.
The rule of these powerful military governors lasted until 960, when a new civil order under the Song dynasty was established.
The royal palace, the Taiji Palace, stood north of the city's central axis.
The historian Joseph Needham labeled the work of the Daoist alchemists as "proto-science rather than pseudo-science."
However, Buddhism would later be persecuted by the state, subsequently declining in influence.
There was also the secondary capital city of Luoyang, which was the favored capital of the two by Empress Wu.
This new prose style broke away from the poetry tradition of the 'piantiwen' style begun in the Han dynasty.
On the news of Emperor Yang's murder by General Yuwen Huaji on June 18, 618, Li Yuan declared himself the emperor of a new dynasty, the Tang.
There were some prominent court women after the era of Empress Wu, such as Yang Guifei (719–756), who had Emperor Xuanzong appoint many of her relatives and cronies to important ministerial and martial positions.
To legitimize her rule, she circulated a document known as the ''Great Cloud Sutra'', which predicted that a reincarnation of the Maitreya Buddha would be a female monarch who would dispel illness, worry, and disaster from the world.
Li Shimin had commanded troops since the age of 18, had prowess with bow and arrow, sword and lance and was known for his effective cavalry charges.
Han Yu (786–824)—who Arthur F. Wright stated was a "brilliant polemicist and ardent xenophobe"—was one of the first men of the Tang to denounce Buddhism.
The Northern Zhou (6th century) fubing system of divisional militia was continued by the Tang, along with farmer-soldiers serving in rotation from the capital or frontier in order to receive appropriated farmland.
The Uyghurs helped recapture the Tang capital from the rebels, but they refused to leave until the Tang paid them an enormous sum of tribute in silk.
A Tibetan tradition mentions that Chinese troops captured Lhasa after Songtsän Gampo's death, but no such invasion is mentioned in either Chinese annals or the Tibetan manuscripts of Dunhuang.
Chinese population size would not dramatically increase until the Song dynasty period, when the population doubled to 100 million people because of extensive rice cultivation in central and southern China, coupled with rural farmers holding more abundant yields of food that they could easily provide to the growing market.
Cui Qun was part of the Cui clan of Qinghe.
The commission began the practice of selling merchants the rights to buy monopoly salt, which they would then transport and sell in local markets.
of the Song dynasty (between the years 1044 and 1060).
An artificial lake used as a transshipment pool was dredged east of Chang'an in 743, where curious northerners could finally see the array of boats found in southern China, delivering tax and tribute items to the imperial court.
In the year 714, Emperor Xuanzong forbade shops and vendors in the city of Chang'an to sell copied Buddhist sutras, instead giving the Buddhist clergy of the monasteries the sole right to distribute sutras to the laity.
The Chinese of the Tang era were also very interested in the benefits of officially classifying all of the medicines used in pharmacology.
Both of them also rank among the ''Twenty-Four Histories'' of China.
The governmental system was supported by a large class of Confucian intellectuals selected through either civil service examinations or recommendations.
The popularization of woodblock printing during the Tang dynasty made the written word available to greater audiences.
In the 3rd century Ma Jun had an entire mechanical puppet theater operated by the rotation of a waterwheel.
The branch founded by Li Dan 李丹 became prominent during the Song dynasty.
This was edited into another history (labelled the ''New Book of Tang'') in order to distinguish it, which was a work by the Song historians Ouyang Xiu (1007–1072), Song Qi (998–1061), et al.
8th century), an ethnic Indian astronomer, astrologer, and scholar born in the capital Chang'an.
Although killing two brothers and deposing his father contradicted the Confucian value of filial piety, Taizong showed himself to be a capable leader who listened to the advice of the wisest members of his council.
The use of the dental amalgam, manufactured from tin and silver, was first introduced in the medical text ''Xinxiu Bencao'' written by Su Gong in 659.
After capturing Luoyang, he named himself emperor of a new, but short-lived, Yan state.
As historian Patricia Ebrey states of the Song period scholar-officials:
The last great ambitious ruler of the Tang dynasty was Emperor Xianzong (r. 805–820), whose reign was aided by the fiscal reforms of the 780s, including a government monopoly on the salt industry.
Besides political hegemony, the Tang also exerted a powerful cultural influence over neighboring states such as those in Korea, Japan, and Vietnam.
This 3rd century mechanically driven directional-compass vehicle (employing a differential gear) was again reproduced in several models for Tenji in 666, as recorded in the ''Nihon Shoki'' of 720.
Chang'an); the basic geography of China including its previous political division around the Yangzi River; the name of China's ruler ''Taisson'' meaning "Son of God", but possibly derived from the name of the contemporaneous ruler Emperor Taizong.
In 657, Emperor Gaozong of Tang (r. 649–683) commissioned the literary project of publishing an official ''materia medica'', complete with text and illustrated drawings for 833 different medicinal substances taken from different stones, minerals, metals, plants, herbs, animals, vegetables, fruits, and cereal crops.
She even introduced numerous revised written characters to the written language, which reverted to the originals after her death.
In ancient times, the Chinese had outlined the five most basic foodstuffs known as the five grains: sesamum, legumes, wheat, panicled millet, and glutinous millet.
The Tang Empire was at its height of power up until the middle of the 8th century, when the An Lushan Rebellion (December 16, 755 – February 17, 763) destroyed the prosperity of the empire.
These were essentially the first gas cylinders; Robert Temple assumes some sort of tap was used for this device.
Advancements in clockworks and timekeeping included the mechanical gear systems of Zhang Heng (78–139) and Ma Jun (fl.
Its design was improved ''c''.
The Classical Prose Movement was spurred in large part by the writings of Tang authors Liu Zongyuan (773–819) and Han Yu (768–824).
This was proven by the discovery of the Belitung shipwreck, a silt-preserved shipwrecked Arabian dhow in the Gaspar Strait near Belitung, which had 63,000 pieces of Tang ceramics, silver, and gold (including a Changsha bowl inscribed with a date: "16th day of the seventh month of the second year of the Baoli reign", or 826, roughly confirmed by radiocarbon dating of star anise at the wreck).
From the outset, religion played a role in Tang politics.
The prohibition on marriage between the clans issued in 659 by the Gaozong Emperor was flouted by the seven families since a woman of the Boling Cui married a member of the Taiyuan Wang, giving birth to the poet Wang Wei.
With its large population base, the dynasty was able to raise professional and conscripted armies of hundreds of thousands of troops to contend with nomadic powers in dominating Inner Asia and the lucrative trade routes along the Silk Road.
Cities in the Jiangnan region to the south, such as Yangzhou, Suzhou, and Hangzhou prospered the most economically during the late Tang period.
It was closed after the Tibetans captured it in 678, but in 699, during Empress Wu's period, the Silk Road reopened when the Tang reconquered the Four Garrisons of Anxi originally installed in 640, once again connecting China directly to the West for land-based trade.
He then installed his father Emperor Ruizong (r. 710–712) on the throne.
He also had an effective well trained imperial army stationed at the capital led by his court eunuchs; this was the Army of Divine Strategy, numbering 240,000 in strength as recorded in 798.
In order to sail back to Japan in 838, the Japanese embassy to China procured nine ships and sixty Korean sailors from the Korean wards of Chuzhou and Lianshui cities along the Huai River.
Both of them were based upon earlier annals, yet those are now lost.
Therefore, Emperor Taizong ordered the government agencies in charge of municipal construction to build every visiting official his own private mansion in the capital.
In the earlier period of the Tang, the central government was able to meet crises in the harvest, as it was recorded from 714–719 that the Tang government responded effectively to natural disasters by extending the price-regulation granary system throughout the country.
In the east, the Chinese military campaigns were less successful than elsewhere.
However, the only type of map that has survived from the Tang period are star charts.
A palace coup on February 20, 705, forced her to yield her position on February 22.
However, the most common type of public and palace timekeeping device was the inflow clepsydra.
As it turned out, these scholar-officials acquired status in their local communities and in family ties, while they also shared values that connected them to the imperial court.
In addition to natural calamities and jiedushi amassing autonomous control, the Huang Chao Rebellion (874–884) resulted in the sacking of both Chang'an and Luoyang, and took an entire decade to suppress.
The Chinese also gradually adopted the foreign concept of stools and chairs as seating, whereas the Chinese beforehand always sat on mats placed on the floor.
While the Turks were settled in the Ordos region (former territory of the Xiongnu), the Tang government took on the military policy of dominating the central steppe.
Despite early victories scored by Tang General Guo Ziyi (697–781), the newly recruited troops of the army at the capital were no match for An Lushan's die-hard frontier veterans, so the court fled Chang'an.
Tea was viewed then as a beverage of tasteful pleasure and with pharmacological purpose as well.
Buddhism, originating in India around the time of Confucius, continued its influence during the Tang period and was accepted by some members of imperial family, becoming thoroughly sinicized and a permanent part of Chinese traditional culture.
Fighting a numerically superior army, he defeated Dou Jiande (573–621) at Luoyang in the Battle of Hulao on May 28, 621.
The capital was also filled with incredible amounts of riches and resources to spare.
Government officials were granted vacations during their tenure in office.
Officials also received a total of three days off for their son's capping initiation rite into manhood, and one day off for the ceremony of initiation rite of a close relative's son.
Following the Sui dynasty's example, the Tang abandoned the nine-rank system in favor of a service system.
The Tang dynasty Chinese diplomat Wang Xuance traveled to Magadha (modern northeastern India) during the 7th century.
In the Tang census of the year 754, there were 1,859 cities, 321 prefectures, and 1,538 counties throughout the empire.
Patricia Ebrey writes that even if a rather significant number of people had avoided the registration process of the tax census, the population size during the Tang had not grown significantly since the earlier Han dynasty (the census of the year 2 recording a population of roughly 58 million people in China).
610 by the Sui-dynasty engineers Geng Xun and Yuwen Kai.
Authors of medicine in the Tang include Zhen Chuan (d. 643) and Sun Simiao (581–682), the former who first identified in writing that patients with diabetes had an excess of sugar in their urine, and the latter who was the first to recognize that diabetic patients should avoid consuming alcohol and starchy foods.
Despite the many western travelers coming into China to live and trade, many travelers, mainly religious monks, recorded the strict border laws that the Chinese enforced.
In 706 the wife of Emperor Zhongzong of Tang, Empress Wei (d. 710), persuaded her husband to staff government offices with his sister and her daughters, and in 709 requested that he grant women the right to bequeath hereditary privileges to their sons (which before was a male right only).
While the heir apparent raised troops in Shanxi and Xuanzong fled to Sichuan province, they called upon the help of the Uyghur Khaganate in 756.
By helping to defeat Huang, he was granted a series of rapid military promotions.
Two of China's most famous poets, Li Bai and Du Fu, belonged to this age, as did many famous painters such as Han Gan, Zhang Xuan, and Zhou Fang.
In the previous year of 713, Emperor Xuanzong had liquidated the highly lucrative Inexhaustible Treasury, which was run by a prominent Buddhist monastery in Chang'an.
For example, the severity of punishment was different when a servant or nephew killed a master or an uncle than when a master or uncle killed a servant or nephew.
Also, the abandonment of the equal-field system meant that people could buy and sell land freely.
When the Tang chancellor Pei Ju (547–627) was working for the Sui dynasty as a Commercial Commissioner in 605, he created a well-known gridded map with a graduated scale in the tradition of Pei Xiu (224–271).
Other important literary offerings included Duan Chengshi's (d. 863) ''Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang'', an entertaining collection of foreign legends and hearsay, reports on natural phenomena, short anecdotes, mythical and mundane tales, as well as notes on various subjects.
The Longmen Wang were a cadet line of the Zhou dynasty descended from Taiyuan Wang, and Wang Yan and his grandson Wang Tong hailed from his cadet line.
Hostilities between the Tang and Tibet continued until they signed a formal peace treaty in 821.
The bigger Longxi Li lineage outside of the Tang Imperial family had prominent members like Li Jiongxiu, Li Yiyan, Li Kui (chancellor), Li Wei (Tang dynasty), Li Fengji, Li Zhongyan, Li Jing (general), Li Zhaode, and Li Bai.
Joseph Needham writes that a tributary embassy came to the court of Emperor Taizong in 643 from the Patriarch of Antioch.
The state also managed roughly  of postal service routes by horse or boat.
During the Heian period, the city of Heian kyō (present-day Kyoto) of Japan like many cities was arranged in the checkerboard street grid pattern of the Tang capital and in accordance with traditional geomancy following the model of Chang'an.
The ''jinshi'' tested a student's literary abilities in writing essay-style responses to questions on matters of governance and politics, as well as their skills in composing poetry.
Buddhist monasteries were also engaged in the economy, since their land property and serfs gave them enough revenues to set up mills, oil presses, and other enterprises.
This provoked a group of Tang princes to rebel in 684; Wu's armies suppressed them within two months.
The prominent status of Buddhism in Chinese culture began to decline as the dynasty and central government declined as well during the late 8th century to 9th century.
From this time period, the Arab merchant Shulama once wrote of his admiration for Chinese seafaring junks, but noted that their draft was too deep for them to enter the Euphrates River, which forced them to ferry passengers and cargo in small boats.
As the monk Xuanzang and many other monk travelers attested to, there were many Chinese government checkpoints along the Silk Road that examined travel permits into the Tang Empire.
During the An Lushan Rebellion Arab and Persian pirates burned and looted Guangzhou in 758, and foreigners were massacred at Yangzhou in 760.
The prototype of this actually existed since the ancient Han dynasty, while contractual language became even more common and embedded into Chinese literary culture in later dynasties.
Since ancient times, the Chinese believed in a folk religion and Taoism that incorporated many deities.
The Tang capital was very cosmopolitan, with ethnicities of Persia, Central Asia, Japan, Korea, Vietnam, Tibet, India, and many other places living within.
The sect of Pure Land Buddhism initiated by the Chinese monk Huiyuan (334–416) was also just as popular as Chan Buddhism during the Tang.
There were two types of exams that were given, ''mingjing'' ('illuminating the classics examination') and ''jinshi'' ('presented scholar examination').
There was a rich variety of historical literature compiled by scholars, as well as encyclopedias and geographical works.
The Tang period was a golden age of Chinese literature and art.
The official and geographer Jia Dan (730–805) wrote of two common sea trade routes in his day: one from the coast of the Bohai Sea towards Korea and another from Guangzhou through Malacca towards the Nicobar Islands, Sri Lanka and India, the eastern and northern shores of the Arabian Sea to the Euphrates River.
Shulama also noted that Chinese ships were often very large, with capacities up to 600–700 passengers.
After the An Lushan Rebellion, the autonomous power and authority accumulated by the jiedushi in Hebei went beyond the central government's control.
Although there were many large and prominent cities during the Tang, the rural and agrarian areas comprised the majority of China's population at some 80 to 90%.
S. A. M. Adshead writes that this salt tax represents "the first time that an indirect tax, rather than tribute, levies on land or people, or profit from state enterprises such as mines, had been the primary resource of a major state."
Hard-pressed peasants and vagrants were then induced into military service with benefits of exemption from both taxation and corvée labor service, as well as provisions for farmland and dwellings for dependents who accompanied soldiers on the frontier.
The noble Liang family of Anding produced Liang Su, a renowned Confucian scholar of the period.
He is conventionally known by his temple name Taizong.
In his bid for power, Li Yuan had attracted a following by claiming descent from the Daoist sage Laozi (&nbsp;6th century&nbsp;).
The Chinese belief in the Mandate of Heaven granted to the ailing Tang was also challenged when natural calamities occurred, forcing many to believe the Heavens were displeased and that the Tang had lost their right to rule.
By 676, the Tang army was driven out of Korea by Unified Silla.
Horses became a significant symbol of prosperity and power as well as an instrument of military and diplomatic policy.
Both Buddhist monks and scholars hailed from the Wang family of Taiyuan such as the monk Tanqian.
The Chinese engaged in large-scale production for overseas export by at least the time of the Tang.
This was during the campaign against Eastern Tujue, a Göktürk khanate that was destroyed after the capture of its ruler, Illig Qaghan, by the famed Tang military officer Li Jing (571–649), who later became a Chancellor of the Tang dynasty.
Yan Yu reserved the position of highest esteem among all Tang poets for Du Fu (712–770), who was not viewed as such in his own era, and was branded by his peers as an anti-traditional rebel.
Intersecting this were fourteen main streets running east to west, while eleven main streets ran north to south.
The Tang Chinese enjoyed feasting, drinking, holidays, sports, and all sorts of entertainment, while Chinese literature blossomed and was more widely accessible with new printing methods.
Men enjoyed the presence of assertive, active women.
These Three Departments and Six Ministries included the personnel administration, finance, rites, military, justice, and public works—an administrative model which would last until the fall of the Qing dynasty (1644–1912).
In 748, the Buddhist monk Jian Zhen described Guangzhou as a bustling mercantile center where many large and impressive foreign ships came to dock.
589), in the Xuanwu Gate Incident on July 2, 626.
