The British formed the all-arms Experimental Mechanized Force to test the use of tanks with supporting forces.
These weapons are often modified variants of those used by infantry, and so utilise the same kinds of ammunition.
Liddell Hart held a more moderate view that all arms - cavalry, infantry and artillery - should be mechanized and work together.
The name "tank" was adopted by the British during the early stages of their development, as a security measure to conceal their purpose (see etymology).
The tank power plant has evolved from predominantly petrol and adapted large-displacement aeronautical or automotive engines during World Wars I and II, through diesel engines to advanced multi-fuel diesel engines, and powerful (per unit weight) but fuel-hungry gas turbines in the T-80 and M1 Abrams.
The defeat of a major military power within weeks shocked the rest of the world, spurring tank and anti-tank weapon development.
To improve tank protection, one field of research involves making the tank invisible to radar by adapting stealth technologies originally designed for aircraft.
Despite early successes against the Soviets, the Germans were forced to up-gun their Panzer IVs, and to design and build both the larger and more expensive Tiger heavy tank in 1942, and the Panther medium tank the following year.
A breakthrough in this area was achieved during World War II when improved suspension systems were developed that allowed better cross-country performance and limited firing on the move.
The Director of Naval Construction for the Royal Navy, Eustace Tennyson d'Eyncourt, was appointed to head the Committee in view of his experience with the engineering methods it was felt might be required; the two other members were naval officers, and a number of industrialists were engaged as consultants.
During the Second Intifada further modifications were made, designated as "Merkava Mk.
The most mature future gun technology is the electrothermal-chemical gun.
World War II had shown that the speed of a light tank was no substitute for armour and firepower and medium tanks were vulnerable to newer weapon technology, rendering them obsolete.
Such features are the rear door and rear corridor, enabling the tank to carry infantry and embark safely; the IMI APAM-MP-T multi-purpose ammunition round, advanced C4IS systems and recently: TROPHY active protection system which protects the tank from shoulder-launched anti-tank weapons.
Two sightings of a target with the range-finder enable calculation of the target movement vector.
A lack of preparations for the Axis surprise attack, mechanical problems, poor training of the crews and incompetent leadership caused the Soviet machines to be surrounded and destroyed in large numbers.
The A7V, the only type made, was introduced in March 1918. with just 20 being produced during the war.
The United States Tank Corps used tanks supplied by France and Great Britain during World War I.
The machines described in Wells' 1903 short story ''The Land Ironclads'' are a step closer, insofar as they are armour-plated, have an internal power plant, and are able to cross trenches.
The obstacles that must be traversed affect the vehicles front and rear profiles.
At close range the tank can be detected even when powered down and fully concealed due to the column of warmer air above the tank and the smell of diesel.
Many sources imply that Leonardo da Vinci and H.G.
In the interwar period tanks underwent further mechanical development.
The more advanced approach involves the Hard-kill measures.
Reactive armour consists of small explosive-filled metal boxes that detonate when hit by the metallic jet projected by an exploding HEAT warhead, causing their metal plates to disrupt it.
Blitzkrieg used innovative combined arms tactics and radios in all of the tanks to provide a level of tactical flexibility and power that surpassed that of the Allied armour.
Consequently, wheeled tank transporters and rail infrastructure is used wherever possible for long-distance tank transport.
In saying that the word ''tank'' was adopted worldwide, Stern was wrong.
Well designed crew stations, giving proper considerations to comfort and ergonomics, are an important factor in the combat effectiveness of a tank, as it limits fatigue and speeds up individual actions.
During the Cold War, tension between the Warsaw Pact countries and North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) countries created an arms race that ensured that tank development proceeded largely as it had during World War II.
The tank's power plant supplies kinetic energy to move the tank, and electric power via a generator to components such as the turret rotation motors and the tank's electronic systems.
The widespread introduction of high-explosive anti-tank warheads during the second half of World War II led to lightweight infantry-carried anti-tank weapons such as the Panzerfaust, which could destroy some types of tanks.
The gunner would track the movement of the tracer round in flight, and upon impact with a hard surface, it would give off a flash and a puff of smoke, after which the main gun was immediately fired.
Working against efforts to avoid detection is the fact that a tank is a large metallic object with a distinctive, angular silhouette that emits copious heat and noise.
Advanced battle tanks, including the K-2 Black Panther, have taken up the first major step forward in adopting a fully radar integrated Fire Control System which allows it to detect tanks from a further distance and identify it as a friend-or-foe as well as increasing the tank's accuracy as well as its capability to lock onto tanks.
After General Georgy Zhukov inflicted a defeat on the Japanese 6th Army with his massed combined tank and air attack, the Soviets learned a lesson on the use of gasoline engines, and quickly incorporated those newly found experiences into their new T-34 medium tank during World War II.
British tank researchers took the next step with the development of Chobham armour, or more generally composite armour, incorporating ceramics and plastics in a resin matrix between steel plates, which provided good protection against HEAT weapons.
Tank hulls were modified to produce flame tanks, mobile rocket artillery, and combat engineering vehicles for tasks including mine-clearing and bridging.
Amongst their suggestions was the use of caterpillar tractors, but although the Army used many such vehicles for towing heavy guns, it could not be persuaded that they could be adapted as armoured vehicles.
Modern tanks seldom operate alone, as they are organized into combined arms units which involve the support of infantry, who may accompany the tanks in infantry fighting vehicles.
The XM291 electrothermal-chemical tank gun has gone through successful multiple firing sequences on a modified M8 Armored Gun System chassis.
However leading roles were played by Major Walter Gordon Wilson who designed the gearbox and developed practical tracks and by William Tritton whose agricultural machinery company, William Foster & Co., built the prototypes;.
This was accomplished from within the tank through telescopic periscopes; occasionally, however, tank commanders would open up the hatch to view the outside surroundings, which improved situational awareness but incurred the penalty of vulnerability to sniper fire, especially in jungle and urban conditions.
Lamborghini Murciélago 6.5&nbsp;L
These tracked motors were built by the Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company in Birmingham, tested in Switzerland and Norway, and can be seen in action in Herbert Ponting's 1911 documentary film of Scott's  Antarctic Terra Nova Expedition (at minute 50, here).
In a trend started in World War II, economies of scale led to serial production of progressively upgraded models of all major tanks during the Cold War.
Scott died during the expedition in 1912, but expedition member and biographer Apsley Cherry-Garrard credited Scott's "motors" with the inspiration for the British World War I tanks, writing: ''Scott never knew their true possibilities; for they were the direct ancestors of the 'tanks' in France''.
Tank agility is a function of the weight of the tank due to its inertia while manoeuvring and its ground pressure, the power output of the installed power plant and the tank transmission and track design.
Leopard 2, M1 Abrams
However, this battlefield also showed the importance of logistics, especially in an armoured force, as the principal warring armies, the German Afrika Korps and the British Eighth Army, often outpaced their supply trains in repeated attacks and counter-attacks on each other, resulting in complete stalemate.
Radios were not then portable or robust enough to be mounted in a tank, although Morse code transmitters were installed in some Mark IVs at Cambrai as messaging vehicles.
The consequence was that early tank development in Great Britain was carried out by the Royal Navy.
According to Nii Stali, the designers of Nakidka, Nakidka would reduce the probabilities of detection via "visual and near-IR bands by 30%, the thermal band by 2-3 fold, radar band by 6 fold, and radar-thermal band to near-background levels.
Attaching a field telephone to the rear would become a practice only during the next war.
Donohue, of the British Army's Mechanical Transport Committee, suggested fixing a gun and armoured shield on a British type of track-driven vehicle.
Large turrets, capable suspension systems, greatly improved engines, sloped armour and large-calibre (90&nbsp;mm and larger) guns were standard.
"armed wagon"), without reference to its armour.
Soviet developments following the invasion included upgunning the T-34, development of self-propelled anti-tank guns such as the SU-152, and deployment of the IS-2 in the closing stages of the war, with the T-34 being the most produced tank of World War II, totalling up to some 65,000 examples by May 1945.
A tank can travel at approximately  across flat terrain and up to  on roads, but due to the mechanical strain this places on the vehicle and the logistical strain on fuel delivery and tank maintenance, these must be considered "burst" speeds that invite mechanical failure of engine and transmission systems.
Given that a tank crew will spend most of its time occupied with maintenance of the vehicle, engineering simplicity has become the primary constraint on tank design since the Second World War despite advances in mechanical, electrical and electronics technologies.
In addition, they lacked radios in many of their tanks and headquarters, which limited their ability to respond to German attacks.
This information is combined with the known movement of the tank and the principles of ballistics to calculate the elevation and aim point that maximises the probability of hitting the target.
In Italian, a tank is a "''carro armato''" (lit.
Later, tanks became referred to as "Panzer" (lit.
In the 15th century, Jan Žižka built armoured wagons containing cannons and used them effectively in several battles.
This is known as Network-centric warfare by the US, Network Enabled Capability (UK) or Digital Army Battle Management System צי"ד (Israel).
By mid-war, Western Allied tanks adopted full use of radios, although Russian use of radios remained relatively limited.
The five-month-long war between the Soviet Union and the Japanese 6th Army at ''Khalkhin Gol'' (Nomonhan) in 1939 brought home some lessons.
Tanks in World War I were developed separately and simultaneously by Great Britain and France as a means to break the deadlock of trench warfare on the Western Front.
They combine this with heavy vehicle armour which provides protection for the crew, the vehicle's weapons, and its propulsion systems, and operational mobility, due to its use of tracks rather than wheels, which allows the tank to move over rugged terrain and be positioned on the battlefield in advantageous locations.
Tank design is a compromise between its technological and budgetary constraints and its tactical capability requirements.
On 24 December 1915, a meeting took place of the Inter-Departmental Conference (including representatives of the Director of Naval Construction's Committee, the Admiralty, the Ministry of Munitions, and the War Office).
The tanks were labelled "With Care to Petrograd," but the belief was encouraged that they were a type of snowplough.
Guderian's armored warfare ideas, combined with Germany's existing doctrines of ''Bewegungskrieg'' ("maneuver warfare") and infiltration tactics from World War I, became the basis of blitzkrieg in the opening stages of World War II.
These three vehicles formed the bulk of the armoured forces of NATO and the Warsaw Pact throughout much of the Cold War.
Tanks are highly mobile and able to travel over most types of terrain due to their continuous tracks and advanced suspension.
The result was two largely unsatisfactory types of tank, 400 each of the Schneider and Saint-Chamond, both based on the Holt Tractor.
Furthermore, advances in gas turbine technology, including the use of advanced recuperators, have allowed for reduction in engine volume and mass to less than 1 m3 and 1 metric ton, respectively, while maintaining fuel efficiency similar to that of a diesel engine.
Hard kill systems intercept incoming threats with a projectile of its own, destroying the threat.
"That night, in the draft report of the conference, the word 'tank' was employed in its new sense for the first time."
Armour technology progressed in an ongoing race against improvements in anti-tank weapons, especially antitank guided missiles like the TOW.
In a memorandum of 1908, Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott presented his view that man-hauling to the South Pole was impossible and that motor traction was needed.
The Russian Nakidka camouflage kit was designed to reduce the Optical, Thermal, Infrared, and Radar signatures of a tank, so that acquisition of the tank would be difficult.
The first armoured car was produced in Austria in 1904.
Tanks work in concert with infantry in urban warfare by deploying them ahead of the platoon.
The FT was the most numerous tank of the war; over 3,000 were made by late 1918.
The accuracy of modern tank guns is pushed to the mechanical limit by computerised fire-control systems.
The tracks disperse the weight of the vehicle over a large area, resulting in less ground pressure.
Leonardo's late 15th century drawings of what some describe as a "tank" show a man-powered, wheeled vehicle with cannons all around it.
The committee's first design, Little Willie, ran for the first time in September 1915 and served to develop the form of the track but an improved design, better able to cross trenches, swiftly followed and in January 1916 the prototype, nicknamed "Mother", was adopted as the design for future tanks.
This pattern, with the gun located in a mounted turret and the engine at the back, has become the standard for most succeeding tanks across the world even to this day.
The terrain that is expected to be traversed determines the track ground pressure that may be allowed to be exerted for that particular terrain.
Estienne, rejected in favour of ''char d'assaut'' ("assault vehicle") or simply ''char'' ("vehicle").
Tanks were used to spearhead the initial US invasion of Iraq in 2003.
The first tank to engage in battle was designated ''D1'', a British Mark I Male, during the Battle of Flers-Courcelette (part of the wider Somme offensive) on 15 September 1916.
Tandem warheads defeat reactive armour by causing the armour to detonate prematurely.
Once detected, soft-kill measures will be deployed which involves deploying smoke screens or smoke grenades which interfere with the incoming missile's infra-red tracking system.
Great Britain produced about 2,600 tanks of various types during the war.
Much like the Soviets, when entering World War II six months later (December 1941), the United States' mass production capacity enabled it to rapidly construct thousands of relatively cheap M4 Sherman medium tanks.
Fuller's doctrine of spearhead attacks with massed tank formations was the basis for work by Heinz Guderian in Germany, Percy Hobart in Britain, Adna R. Chaffee, Jr., in the U.S., Charles de Gaulle in France, and Mikhail Tukhachevsky in the USSR.
All of these ideas were rejected and, by 1914, forgotten (although it was officially acknowledged after the war that de Mole's design was at least the equal to the initial British tanks).
Since the Second World War, tank development has incorporated experimenting with significant mechanical changes to the tank design while focusing on technological advances in the tank's many subsystems to improve its performance.
In the case of the Abrams MBT which has good firepower, speed and armour, these advantages are counterbalanced by its engine's notably high fuel consumption, which ultimately reduces its range, and in a larger sense its mobility.
As of 2005, there were 1,100 M1 Abrams used by the United States Army in the course of the Iraq War, and they have proven to have an unexpectedly high level of vulnerability to roadside bombs.
Firepower is the ability of a tank's crew to identify, engage, and destroy enemy tanks and other targets using its large-calibre cannon.
Experiments can be traced back as far as the 17th century, and by the late nineteenth they existed in various recognizable and practical forms in several countries.
D'Eyncourt's account differs from Swinton's and Tritton's:
The Germans pioneered the use of face hardened steel during World War II and the Soviets also achieved improved protection with sloped armour technology.
For information regarding tank development in this period, see tank development between the wars.
It was the development of a practical caterpillar track that provided the necessary independent, all-terrain mobility.
The "caterpillar" track arose from attempts to improve the mobility of wheeled vehicles by spreading their weight, reducing ground pressure, and increasing their adhesive friction.
In accordance with blitzkrieg methods, German tanks bypassed enemy strongpoints and could radio for close air support to destroy them, or leave them to the infantry.
However, all were restricted to rails or reasonably passable terrain.
However, with upgrades to their armour in the rear, M1s have proven invaluable in fighting insurgents in urban combat, particularly at the Battle of Fallujah, where the US Marines brought in two extra brigades.
During the Invasion of Poland, tanks performed in a more traditional role in close cooperation with infantry units, but in the Battle of France deep independent armoured penetrations were executed by the Germans, a technique later called blitzkrieg.
Tank design during the Cold War built on this foundation and included improvements to fire control, gyroscopic gun stabilisation, communications (primarily radio) and crew comfort and saw the introduction of laser rangefinders and infrared night vision equipment.
In Hungarian the tank is called ''harckocsi'' (combat wagon), albeit ''tank'' is also common.
So many played a part in its long and complicated development that it is not possible to name any individual as the sole inventor of the tank.
The French Army, with tanks equal or superior to the German tanks in both quality and quantity, employed a linear defensive strategy in which the armoured cavalry units were made subservient to the needs of the infantry armies to cover their entrenchment in Belgium.
+Tank power output and torque in context:
However, Wells' vehicles were driven by steam and moved on pedrail wheel, technologies that were already outdated at the time of writing.
These involve directly destroying the incoming enemy missile or projectile by deploying the tank's own anti missile projectile.
The role of tank vs. tank combat is becoming diminished.
It is true that in 1770 he patented a "machine, that should carry and lay down its own road", but this was Edgeworth's choice of words.
That is how these weapons came to be called Tanks," and incorrectly added, "and the name has now been adopted by all countries in the world."
These features enable the tank to perform well in a tactical situation: the combination of powerful weapons fire from their tank gun, and their ability to survive enemy fire means the tank can engage the enemy  even under fire.
Tanks and anti-tank weapons of the Cold War era saw action in a number of proxy wars like the Korean War, Vietnam War, Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Soviet war in Afghanistan and Arab-Israeli conflicts, culminating with the Yom Kippur War.
Research is also ongoing in electromagnetic armour systems to disperse or deflect incoming shaped charge jets, as well as various forms of active protection systems to prevent incoming projectiles from striking the tank at all.
High explosive squash head warheads led to anti-spall armour linings, and kinetic energy penetrators led to the inclusion of exotic materials like a matrix of depleted uranium into a composite armour configuration.
In terms of tactics, J.F.C.
In terms of firepower, the focus of current R&D is on increased detection capability such as thermal imagers, automated fire control systems and increased muzzle energy from the gun to improve range, accuracy and armour penetration.
In August 1939, Soviet General Georgy Zhukov used the combined force of tanks and airpower at Nomonhan against the Japanese 6th Army; Heinz Guderian, a tactical theoretician who was heavily involved in the formation of the first independent German tank force, said "Where tanks are, the front is", and this concept became a reality in World War II.
The description bears no similarity to a caterpillar track.
Finland uses ''panssarivaunu'' (armoured wagon), although ''tankki'' is also used colloquially.
In Japanese, the term  is taken from Chinese and used, and this term is likewise borrowed into Korean as ''jeoncha'' (전차/戰車); more recent Chinese literature uses the English derived 坦克 ''tǎnkè'' (tank) as opposed to 戰車 ''zhànchē'' (battle vehicle) used in earlier days.
Production of American-built tanks had just begun when the War came to an end.
In addition to the traversible turret, another innovative feature of the FT was its engine located at the rear.
Although tank tactics developed rapidly during the war, piecemeal deployments, mechanical problems, and poor mobility limited the military significance of the tank in World War I, and the tank did not fulfil its promise of rendering trench warfare obsolete.
Advances such as the EFA mobile bridge and MT-55 scissors bridge have also reduced the impediment to tank advance that rivers posed in World War II.
Plans to expand the tank programme were under way when the War ended.
Less than two weeks later, Germany began their large-scale armoured campaigns that would become known as blitzkrieg ("lightning war") – massed concentrations of tanks supported by motorised and mechanized infantry, artillery and air power designed to break through the enemy front and collapse enemy resistance.
During World War I, German sources tended to refer to British tanks as ''Tanks'' and to their own as ''Kampfwagen''.
Aspects of gun technology changed significantly as well, with advances in shell design and aiming technology.
Upgunned versions with the 76 mm gun M1 and the 17 pounder were introduced to improve the M4's firepower, but concerns about protection remained — despite the apparent armor deficiencies, a total of some 42,000 Shermans were built and delivered to the Allied nations using it during the war years, a total second only to the T-34.
Modern tank guns are also commonly fitted with insulating thermal jackets to reduce gun-barrel warping caused by uneven thermal expansion, bore evacuators to minimise fumes entering the crew compartment and sometimes muzzle brakes to minimise the effect of recoil on accuracy and rate of fire.
Both these active protection systems can be found on several main battle tanks including the K-2 Black Panther, the Merkerva, the Leopard 2a7.
The word ''tank'' was first applied to the British "landships" in 1915, before they entered service, to keep their nature secret.
This situation would not be resolved until 1942, when during the Second Battle of El Alamein, the Afrika Korps, crippled by disruptions in their supply lines, had 95% of its tanks destroyed and was forced to retreat by a massively reinforced Eighth Army, the first in a series of defeats that would eventually lead to the surrender of the remaining Axis forces in Tunisia.
Mobility includes how well the tank can be transported by rail, sea, or air to the operational staging area; from the staging area by road or over terrain towards the enemy; and tactical movement by the tank over the battlefield during combat, including traversing of obstacles and rough terrain.
I took up an idea, manipulated it slightly, and handed it on."
The modern tank was the result of a century of development from the first primitive armoured vehicles, due to improvements in technology such as the internal combustion engine, which allowed the rapid movement of heavy armoured vehicles.
Improved engines, transmissions and suspensions allowed tanks of this period to grow larger.
The ''affordability of the design'' therefore takes precedence over the combat capability requirements.
In doing so, the ''Wehrmacht'' denied the infantry and other support arms the production priorities that they needed to remain equal partners with the increasingly sophisticated tanks, in turn violating the principle of combined arms they had pioneered.
He later discussed it with a Lt-Col W. Dally Jones, and they chose the word "tank".
Usually, tanks carry smaller calibre armament for short-range defence where fire from the main weapon would be ineffective, for example when engaging infantry, light vehicles or close air support aircraft.
World War II developments led to the obsolescence of homogeneous steel armour with the development of shaped-charge warheads, exemplified by the Panzerfaust and bazooka infantry weapons which were effective, despite some early success with spaced armour.
In the Second World War only Germany would initially put the theory into practice on a large scale, and it was their superior tactics and French blunders, not superior weapons, that made blitzkrieg so successful in May 1940.
The main weapon of modern tanks is a single, large-calibre cannon mounted in a fully traversing gun turret.
Historically, crews have varied from just two members to a dozen.
The primary lesson learned from this war was that machine gun armed tanks had to be equipped with cannon, with the associated armor inherent to modern tanks.
Nonetheless, it was clear to military thinkers on both sides that tanks in some way could have a significant role in future conflicts.
Italy also manufactured two Fiat 2000s towards the end of the war, too late to see service.
Consequently, it is difficult to effectively camouflage a tank in the absence of some form of cover or concealment (e.g., woods) it can hide its hull behind.
The firepower and low cost of these vehicles made them attractive but as manufacturing techniques improved and larger turret rings made larger tank guns feasible, the gun turret was recognised as the most effective mounting for the main gun to allow movement in a different direction from firing, enhancing tactical flexibility.
The first combinations of the three principal components of the tank appeared in the decade before World War One.
Estienne, who directly approached the Commander-in-Chief with detailed plans for a tank on caterpillar tracks, in late 1915.
From late 1914 a small number of middle-ranking British Army officers tried to persuade the War Office and the Government to consider the creation of armoured vehicles.
Britain deployed its Challenger 2 tanks to support its operations in southern Iraq.
Some tanks also have a hull-mounted machine gun.
Norway uses the term ''stridsvogn'' and Sweden the similar ''stridsvagn'' (lit.
In the absence of combat engineers, most tanks are limited to fording rivers.
Among the tanks of the 1950s were the British Centurion and Soviet T-54/55 in service from 1946, and the US M48 from 1951.
Steel armour plate was the earliest type of armour.
(* The initials W.C. are a British abbreviation for a water closet; in other words, a toilet.
Nowhere was this principle illustrated better than during the Second World War when two Allied designs, the T-34 and the M4 Sherman, although both simple designs which accepted engineering compromises, were used successfully against more sophisticated designs by Germany that were more complex and expensive to produce, and more demanding on overstretched logistics of the Wehrmacht.
In 1911, a Lieutenant Engineer in the Austrian Army, Günther Burstyn, presented to the Austrian and Prussian War Ministries plans for a light, three-man tank with a gun in a revolving turret.
The following year, the French pioneered the use of a full 360° rotation turret in a tank for the first time, with the creation of the Renault FT light tank, with the turret containing the tank's main armament.
They are also usually supported by reconnaissance or ground-attack aircraft.
In line with the new doctrine of network-centric warfare, the modern battle tank shows increasing sophistication in its electronics and communication systems.
Conversely, tanks can spearhead attacks when infantry are deployed in personnel carriers.
The tank becomes easier to detect when moving (typically, whenever it is in use) due to the large, distinctive auditory, vibration and thermal signature of its power plant.
It is frequently claimed that Richard Lovell Edgeworth created a caterpillar track.
Colonel Ernest Swinton, who was secretary to the meeting, says that he was instructed to find a non-committal word when writing his report of the proceedings.
Whilst several experimental machines were investigated in France, it was a colonel of artillery, J.B.E.
The Soviet Drozd, the Russian Arena, the Israeli Trophy and Iron Fist, Polish ERAWA, and the American Quick Kill systems show the potential to dramatically improve protection for tanks against missiles, RPGs and potentially kinetic energy penetrator attacks, but concerns regarding a danger zone for nearby troops remain.
Its purpose was to discuss the progress of the plans for what were described as "Caterpillar Machine Gun Destroyers or Land Cruisers."
Armoured bulkheads, engine noise, intervening terrain, dust and smoke, and the need to operate "buttoned up" are severe detriments to communication and lead to a sense of isolation for small tank units, individual vehicles, and tank crewmen.
In 1903, a Captain Levavasseur of the French Artillery proposed mounting a field gun in an armoured box on tracks.
Modern tanks are versatile mobile land weapon system platforms, mounting a large-calibre cannon in a rotating gun turret, supplemented by mounted machine guns or other weapons.
In those tanks with a fifth crew member, usually three were located in the turret (as described above) while the fifth was most often seated in the hull next to the driver, and operated the hull machine gun in addition to acting as a co-driver or radio operator.
Numerical and logistical superiority and the successful use of combined arms allowed the Allies to overrun the German forces during the Battle of Normandy.
However, a number of novel designs have appeared throughout this period with mixed success, including the Soviet IT-1 and T-64 in firepower, and the Israeli Merkava and Swedish S-tank in protection, while for decades the USA's M551 remained the only light tank deployable by parachute.
Their first use in combat was by the British Army in September 1916 during the Battle of the Somme.
Tanks of the interwar period evolved into the much larger and more powerful designs of World War II.
During the Cold War, the main battle tank concept arose and became a key component of modern armies.
For this reason I, as Secretary, considered the proposed title totally unsuitable.
The Polish name ''czołg'', derived from verb ''czołgać się'' ("to crawl"), is used, depicting the way of machine's movement and its speed.
Commanding and coordinating tanks in the field has always been subject to particular problems, particularly in the area of communications, but in modern armies these problems have been partially alleviated by networked, integrated systems that enable communications and contribute to enhanced situational awareness.
Swinton's ''Notes on the Employment of Tanks'', in which he uses the word throughout, was published in January 1916.
