Approximately 70% of the population is rural, although this percentage has been declining since at least 1967.
Tanzania ranks 159 out of 187 countries in poverty according to the United Nation’s Human Development Index (2014).
Children in rural areas suffer substantially higher rates of malnutrition and chronic hunger, although urban-rural disparities have narrowed as regards both stunting and underweight.
Claiming the coastal strip, Omani Sultan Seyyid Said moved his capital to Zanzibar City in 1840.
The non-urban units have an autonomous district council but are subdivided into village councils or township authorities (first level) and then into ''vitongoji''.
Tanzania's written literary tradition is relatively undeveloped.
These reforms have been backed by a significant increase of the budget starting in 2006, when the water sector was included among the priority sectors of the National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty MKUKUTA.
Among the languages spoken in Tanzania are all four of Africa's language families: Bantu, Cushitic, Nilotic, and Khoisan.
Tanzania is one of the poorest countries in the world.
They brought with them the west African planting tradition and the primary staple of yams.
At , Tanzania is the 13th largest country in Africa and the 31st largest in the world, ranked between the larger Egypt and smaller Nigeria.
Young children increasingly speak Swahili as a first language, particularly in urban areas.
In 2007–08, malaria prevalence among children aged 6 months to 5 years was highest in the Kagera Region (41.1%) on the western shore of Lake Victoria and lowest in the Arusha Region (0.1%).
From its formation until 1992, it was the only legally permitted party in the country.
In Zanzibar, the lowest level courts are the Kadhi's Courts for Islamic family matters and the Primary Courts for all other cases.
This changed on 1 July 1992, when amendments to the Constitution and a number of laws permitting and regulating the formation and operations of more than one political party were enacted by the National Assembly.
The Tanzanian military is participating along with South African and Malawian militaries in the United Nations Force Intervention Brigade (MONUSCO) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).
The mayor of the city council is elected by that council.
In 1954, Julius Nyerere transformed an organisation into the politically oriented Tanganyika African National Union (TANU).
Travel and tourism contributed 12.7% of Tanzania's gross domestic product and employed 11.0% of the country's labour force (1,189,300 jobs) in 2013.
The Christian population is mostly composed of Roman Catholics and Protestants.
The electrical supply varies, particularly when droughts disrupt hydropower electric generation; rolling blackouts are implemented as necessary.
The climate is cool in high mountainous regions.
Since the recession ended, the Tanzanian economy has expanded rapidly thanks to strong tourism, telecommunications, and banking sectors.
Many utilities are barely able to cover their operation and maintenance costs through revenues due to low tariffs and poor efficiency.
It is bordered by Kenya and Uganda to the north; Rwanda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the west; Zambia, Malawi, and Mozambique to the south; and by the Indian Ocean to the east.
The armed forces consists of the army, navy and air force.
The tension was renewed in May 2014 when, in a speech to the Tanzanian National Assembly, Foreign Affairs Minister Bernard Membe renewed his claim that Rwandans were causing instability in the DRC.
The union of the two hitherto separate regions was controversial among many Zanzibaris (even those sympathetic to the revolution) but was accepted by both the Nyerere government and the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar owing to shared political values and goals.
Tanzania is highly biodiverse and contains a wide variety of animal habitats.
Tanganyikans fought in units of the King's African Rifles during the East African Campaign in Somalia and Abyssinia against the Italians, in Madagascar against the Vichy French during the Madagascar Campaign, and in Burma against the Japanese during the Burma Campaign.
Approximately 99% of Tanzanians are of African descent, with small numbers of Arab, European, and Asian descent.
It also exports sizeable quantities of gemstones, including diamonds and tanzanite.
A large majority of the Muslim population is Sunni.
Attacks are often to hack off the limbs of albinos in the perverse superstitious belief that possessing the bones of albinos will bring wealth.
Tanzania's relations with other donor countries, including Japan and members of the European Union, are generally good, though donors are concerned about Tanzania's commitment to reducing government corruption.
Over 35 billion cubic feet of gas was produced from this field in 2013, with proven, probable, and possible reserves totalling 1.1 trillion cubic feet.
Tanzania is also a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Tanzania is a one party dominant state with the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) party in power.
The eastern shore is hot and humid, with the Zanzibar Archipelago just offshore.
According to estimates from 2014, 61.4% is Christian, 35.2% of the population is Muslim, 1.8% practice Traditional African religion, 1.4 are unaffiliated with any religion, and 0.2 consisting of other religions.
Mixtures of cassava and millet flours are locally used for ugali.
The President is Zanzibar's head of government and the chairman of the Revolutionary Council, in which the executive authority of Zanzibar is invested.
Approximately 68 percent of Tanzania's 44.9 million citizens live below the poverty line of $1.25 a day and 16 percent of children under 5 are malnourished.
At the end of 2013, the total assets of the Tanzanian banking industry were 19.5 trillion Tanzanian shillings, a 15% increase over 2012.
The country has banned witch doctors to try to prevent the practice, but it has continued and albinos remain targets.
Other popular sports include netball, boxing, volleyball, athletics, and rugby.
The second is from the party in power and is the leader of government business in the House.
As of 31 October 2014, Tanzania was contributing 2,253 soldiers and other personnel to various United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The EAC, the SADC, and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa agreed in June 2011 to negotiate the creation of a Tripartite Free Trade Area spanning 26 African countries, with a goal to complete the first phase of negotiations within 36 months.
Tanzania is located on the eastern coast of Africa and has an Indian Ocean coastline approximately  long.
The president appoints a prime minister, subject to confirmation by the assembly, to serve as the government's leader in the assembly.
The under-five mortality rate in 2012 was 54 per 1,000 live births.
The city of Dar es Salaam is unique because it has a city council whose areal jurisdiction overlaps three municipal councils.
The most popular professional football clubs in Dar es Salaam are the Young Africans F.C.
According to the ''Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 2010'', 15% of Tanzanian women have undergone female genital mutilation (FGM) and 72% of Tanzanian men have been circumcised.
'''Tanzania''' ,This approximates the Kiswahili pronunciation .
Approximately 12% of Tanzanians used the internet , though this number is rapidly growing.
Malaria in Tanzania causes death and disease and has a "huge economic impact".
Only 15% of Tanzanians had access to electric power in 2011.
In 1972, local government on the mainland was abolished and replaced with direct rule from the central government.
Education is compulsory until children reach age 15.
Tanzania's largest trading partners in 2012 for its US $5.5 billion in exports were South Africa, Switzerland, and China.
Airlines in Tanzania include Air Tanzania, Precision Air, Fastjet, Coastal Aviation, and ZanAir.
Sugar was the largest cash crop on the mainland in 2013 (296,679 tonnes), followed by cotton (241,198 tonnes), cashew nuts (126,000 tonnes), tobacco (86,877 tonnes), coffee (48,000 tonnes), sisal (37,368 tonnes), and tea (32,422 tonnes).
Dar es Salaam (population 4,364,541) is the largest city and commercial capital.
The vast majority of tourists visit Zanzibar or a "northern circuit" of Serengeti National Park, the Ngorongoro Conservation Area (NCA), Tarangire National Park, Lake Manyara National Park, and Mount Kilimanjaro.
Tanzania is also home to about 130 amphibian and over 275 reptile species, many of them strictly endemic and included in the International Union for Conservation of Nature's Red Lists of different countries.
Tanzania is also involved in the following United Nations peacekeeping missions: UNAMID (Sudan), UNIFIL (Lebanon) and Force Intervention Brigade (part of MONUSCO in DR Congo).
According to a 2013 published report, around 600,000 people visit the NCA annually, earning 56 billion Tanzanian shillings in 2012.
For all women aged 45–49, 37.3% had given birth to eight or more children, and for currently married women in that age group, 45.0% had given birth to that many children.
According to a 2013 report published by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS that compares 2012 with 2001 data, AIDS deaths have decreased 33%, new HIV infections have decreased 36%, and new HIV infections among children have decreased 67%.
They subsequently migrated out of these regions across the rest of Tanzania between 2,300 and 1,700 years ago.
Since then, Tanzania's gross domestic product per capita has grown and poverty has been reduced, according to a report by the World Bank.
The Bank of Tanzania is the central bank of Tanzania and is primarily responsible for maintaining price stability, with a subsidiary responsibility for issuing Tanzanian shilling notes and coins.
From there, appeal is to the High Court of Mainland Tanzania or Zanzibar.
The name of Zanzibar comes from "zengi", the name for a local people (said to mean "black"), and the Arabic word "barr", which means coast or shore.
, Tanzania's gross domestic product (GDP) was an estimated $43.8 billion, or $86.4 billion on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis.
Commercial production of gas from the Songo Songo Island field in the Indian Ocean commenced in 2004, thirty years after it was discovered there.
An unsuccessful mediation regarding this issue took place in March 2014.
Tanzania weathered the Great Recession, which began in late 2008 or early 2009, relatively well.
During this time, Zanzibar became the centre for the Arab slave trade.
Maize was the largest food crop on the Tanzania mainland in 2013 (5.17 million tonnes), followed by cassava (1.94 million tonnes), sweet potatoes (1.88 million tonnes), beans (1.64 million tonnes), bananas (1.31 million tonnes), rice (1.31 million tonnes), and millet (1.04 million tonnes).
The Sukuma, Nyamwezi, Chagga, and Haya peoples have more than 1 million members each.
It is usually composed of corn and is similar in consistency to a stiff paste or porridge, giving it its second name of corn meal porridge.
The population consists of about 125 ethnic groups.
Freddie Mercury, of the band Queen, was born in Tanzania.
Travellers and merchants from the Persian Gulf and India have visited the east African coast since early in the first millennium A.D. Islam was practised by some on the Swahili Coast as early as the eighth or ninth century A.D.
Neither the president nor the vice-president may be a member of the National Assembly.
Of the 169 districts, 34 are urban units, which are further classified as three city councils (Arusha, Mbeya, and Mwanza), nineteen municipal councils, and twelve town councils.
Most Tanzanians thus speak both Swahili and a local language; many educated Tanzanians are trilingual, also speaking English.
In the highlands, temperatures range between  during cold and hot seasons respectively.
Tanzania has 16 national parks, plus a variety of game and forest reserves, including the Ngorongoro Conservation Area.
Generation increased by 63% between 2005 and 2012; Almost 18% of the electricity generated in 2012 was lost because of theft and transmission and distribution problems.
Swahili is used in parliamentary debate, in the lower courts, and as a medium of instruction in primary school; English is used in foreign trade, in diplomacy, in higher courts, and as a medium of instruction in secondary and higher education, although the Tanzanian government plans to discontinue English as a language of instruction altogether.
The unreliability of the electrical supply has hindered the development of Tanzanian industry.
On 29 October of the same year, the country was renamed the United Republic of Tanzania ("Tan" comes from Tanganyika and "Zan" from Zanzibar).
After Tingatinga's death in 1972, other artists adopted and developed his style, with the genre now being the most important tourist-oriented style in East Africa.
Bringing the total reserves to over 43 trillion cubic feet by the end of 2013,.
Mainland and union judges are appointed by the Chief Justice of Tanzania, except for those of the Court of Appeal and the High Court, who are appointed by the president of Tanzania.
The post–World War I accords and the League of Nations charter designated the area a British Mandate, except for the Kionga Triangle, a small area in the southeast that was incorporated into Portuguese East Africa (later Mozambique).
All legislative power relating to mainland Tanzania and union matters is vested in the National Assembly, which is unicameral and has a maximum of 357 members.
The value of natural gas actually produced in 2013 was US $52.2 million, a 42.7% increase over 2012.
Tanzania is divided into thirty regions (mkoa), twenty-five on the mainland and five in Zanzibar (three on Unguja, two on Pemba).
Results have been mixed.
An ambitious National Water Sector Development Strategy that promotes integrated water resources management and the development of urban and rural water supply was adopted in 2006.
The Government of Tanzania has embarked on a major sector reform process since 2002.
officially the '''United Republic of Tanzania''' (), is a large country in Eastern Africa within the African Great Lakes region.
Density varies from   in the Katavi Region to  in the Dar es Salaam Region.
Three of Africa's Great Lakes are partly within Tanzania.
The United Nations Security Council authorised the force on 28 March 2013 to conduct targeted offensive operations to neutralise groups that threaten peace in the DRC.
Low rural sector productivity arises mainly from inadequate infrastructure investment; limited access to farm inputs, extension services and credit; limited technology as well as trade and marketing support; and heavy dependence on rain-fed agriculture and natural resources.
Strong gold prices, bolstering the country's mining industry, and Tanzania's poor integration into global markets helped to insulate the country from the downturn.
Local government, however, was reintroduced in the beginning of the 1980s, when the rural councils and rural authorities were re-established.
According to the East African Common Market Protocol of 2010, the free trade and free movement of people is guaranteed, including the right to reside in another member country for purposes of employment.
The government-owned Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO) dominates the electric supply industry in Tanzania.
Later, in 1506, the Portuguese succeeded in controlling most of the Southeast African littoral.
Tanzania has four international airports, along with over 100 small airports or landing strips; airport infrastructure tends to be in poor condition.
The Pare people were the main producers of highly demanded iron for peoples who occupied the mountain regions of northeastern Tanzania.
The Legislative Council has two parts: the President of Zanzibar and the House of Representatives.
, Tanzania had 56 mobile telephone subscribers per 100 inhabitants, a rate slightly above the sub-Saharan average.
The former is experienced in southern, central, and western parts of the country, and the latter is found in the north from Lake Victoria extending east to the coast.
Eastern Nilotic peoples, including the Maasai, represent a more recent migration from present day South Sudan within the past 1,500 to 500 years.
The two countries agreed in 2013 to ask the International Court of Justice (ICJ) to resolve the dispute should mediation be unsuccessful.
To the southwest lies Lake Nyasa.
It also incorporates several offshore islands, including Unguja (Zanzibar), Pemba, and Mafia.
169 districts (wilaya), also known as local government authorities, have been created.
The sector is growing rapidly, with overall receipts rising from US $1.74 billion in 2004 to US $4.48 billion in 2013, and receipts from international tourists rising from US $1.255 billion in 2010 to US $1.880 billion in 2013.
Industry and construction is a major and growing component of the Tanzanian economy, contributing 22.2% of GDP in 2013.
Ethnic community languages (ECL, other than Kiswahili) are not allowed as language of instruction, neither are they taught as subject, though they might be used unofficially (illegally) in some cases in initial education.
In 2013, the most visited national park was Serengeti (452,485 tourists), followed by Manyara (187,773) and Tarangire (165,949).
The 2010 Global Hunger Index ranks the situation as “alarming”.
A campaign to register new members was launched, and within a year TANU had become the leading political organisation in the country.
In 1992, the Constitution of Tanzania was amended to allow multiple political parties.
Tanzania has developed a Biodiversity Action Plan to address species conservation.
The Tanzania Football Federation is the governing body for football in the country.
In 1967, Nyerere's first presidency took a turn to the left after the Arusha Declaration, which codified a commitment to socialism as well-as Pan-Africanism.
In connection with his Ujamaa social policies, President Nyerere encouraged the use of Swahili as a means of unifying the country's many ethnic groups.
The 86,500-kilometer road system is in generally poor condition.
The House of Representatives is composed of elected members, ten members appointed by the president, all the regional commissioners of Zanzibar, the attorney general, and appointed female members whose number must be equal to 30% of the elected members.
In 2010, 74.1% of children age 5 to 14 years were attending school.
The widespread use and promotion of Swahili is contributing to the decline of smaller languages in the country.
Otherwise, the final appeal is to the Court of Appeal of Tanzania.
After the declaration, banks and many large industries were nationalised.
Tanzania is a presidential constitutional republic, and since 1996, its official capital city has been Dodoma, where the President's Office, the National Assembly, and some government ministries are located.
Based on 2012 data, the literacy rate in Tanzania for persons aged 15 and over is estimated to be 67.8%.
The music of Tanzania includes traditional African music, string-based taarab, and a distinctive hip hop known as bongo flava.
One of the most infamous slave traders on the East African coast was Tippu Tip, who was himself the grandson of an enslaved African.
The Sandawe people speak a language that may be related to the Khoe languages of Botswana and Namibia, while the language of the Hadzabe people, although it has similar click consonants, is arguably a language isolate.
Famous taarab singers include Abbasi Mzee, Culture Musical Club, Shakila of Black Star Musical Group.
Tanzania is a middle-power country, with a per capita GDP of $1,813 (PPP), which was 32% below the average of $2,673 for the 45 sub-Saharan African countries and ranked 23rd among those countries.
Each municipal council also has a mayor.
The Menai Bay Conservation Area is Zanzibar's largest marine protected area.
Makonde is both a tribe in Tanzania and Mozambique and a sculptural style.
The people of Tanzania have been associated with the production of iron and steel.
Tanzania's population of 51.82 million (2014) is diverse, composed of several ethnic, linguistic and religious groups.
Internationally known traditional artists include Bi Kidude, Hukwe Zawose, Diamond Platnumz, Ally Kiba and Tatu Nane.
In western Tanzania, Gombe Stream National Park is the site of Jane Goodall's ongoing study of chimpanzee behaviour, which started in 1960.
On the mainland, Muslim communities are concentrated in coastal areas; there are also some large Muslim majorities in inland urban areas and along the former caravan routes.
Kilimanjaro, Africa's highest mountain, is in northeastern Tanzania.
The High Court of mainland Tanzania has three divisions – commercial, labour, and land – and 15 geographic zones.
Tanganyika was an important source of food during this war, and its export income increased greatly compared to the pre-war years of the Great Depression Wartime demand, however, caused increased commodity prices and massive inflation within the colony.
The President selects ministers from members of the House of Representatives, with the ministers allocated according to the number of House seats won by political parties.
Many also identify as Shirazis.
The greatest part of Tanzania's recorded oral literature is in Swahili, even though each of the country's languages has its own oral tradition.
Tanzania is a member of the East African Community (EAC), along with Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda, and Burundi.
Most Tanzanian literature is in Swahili or English.
According to 2010 Tanzanian government statistics, the total fertility rate in Tanzania was 5.4 children born per woman, with 3.7 in urban mainland areas, 6.1 in rural mainland areas, and 5.1 in Zanzibar.
Following their respective independence in 1961 and 1963, the two entities merged in April 1964 to form the United Republic of Tanzania.
Its imports totalled US $11.7 billion, with Switzerland, China, and the United Arab Emirates being the biggest partners.
The armed forces was engaged in the Uganda–Tanzania War, the Mozambican Civil War and most recently the 2008 invasion of Anjouan.
Annual temperature is .
The country is the site of Africa's highest and lowest points: Mount Kilimanjaro, at  above sea level, and the floor of Lake Tanganyika, at  below sea level, respectively.
Tanzania's literary culture is primarily oral.
Tanzania was also participating in peacekeeping missions in the Darfur Region of Sudan (UNAMID); Abyei, control of which is contested between South Sudan and Sudan (UNISFA); the Central African Republic (MINUSCA); Lebanon (UNIFIL); and South Sudan (UNMISS).
The Nyamwezi slave traders operated under the leadership of Msiri and Mirambo.
Tanzania is a party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
However,  is also heard in English.
The most prominent challenges Tanzania faces in poverty reduction are unsustainable harvesting of its natural resources, unchecked cultivation, climate change and water- source encroachment, according to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The World Health Organization estimated in 2012 that the prevalence of HIV was 3.1%, although the ''Tanzania HIV/AIDS and Malaria Indicator Survey 2011–12'' found that, on average, 5.1% of those tested in the 15 to 49 age group were HIV-positive.
Rail travel in Tanzania often entails slow journeys with frequent cancellations or delays; the railways also have a deficient safety record.
The population distribution in Tanzania is extremely uneven.
Tanzania has a four-level judiciary.
The country has a fibre-optic cable network that recently replaced unreliable satellite service, but internet bandwidth remains very low.
Nyerere became Minister of British-administered Tanganyika in 1960 and continued as prime minister when Tanganyika became independent in 1961.
The bi-modal regime is caused by the seasonal migration of the Intertropical Convergence Zone.
The Tanzania Electoral Commission demarcates the mainland into constituencies in the number determined by the commission with the consent of the president.
The rest of the country has temperatures rarely falling lower than .
The hottest period extends between November and February () while the coldest period occurs between May and August ().
All of Tanzania's coal production, which totalled 106,000 short tons in 2012, is used domestically.
The other leading causes of death for these children were, in decreasing order, malaria, diarrhoea, HIV, and measles.
In 1699, the Portuguese were ousted from Zanzibar by Omani Arabs.
According to the United Nations Development Program, however, recent growth in the national economy has benefited only the "very few", leaving out the majority of the population.
Tanzania also has its own distinct African rumba music, termed muziki wa dansi ("dance music"); important artists include Simba Wanyika, Remmy Ongala, and Orchestra Makassy.
Some albinos in Tanzania have been the victims of violence in recent years.
This protocol, however, has not been implemented because of work permit and other bureaucratic, legal, and financial obstacles.
Very few Tanzanians have fixed-line telephones.
According to Timothy Insoll, "Figures record the exporting of 718,000 slaves from the Swahili coast during the 19th century, and the retention of 769,000 on the coast."
"The City Council performs a coordinating role and attends to issues cutting across the three municipalities", including security and emergency services.
Elections for president and all National Assembly seats were last held in October 2010.
