Tartan was incorporated in an assortment of common household objects, such as snuffboxes, jewellery cases, tableware, sewing accessories, and desk items.
Twenty years after her uncle's visit to Scotland, Queen Victoria and her husband Prince Albert made their first trip to the Scottish Highlands.
The method of identifying friend from foe was not through tartans but by the colour of ribbon worn upon the bonnet.
''Muted'' refers to tartan which is shade between ''modern'' and ''ancient''.
The sett is made up of a series of woven threads which cross at right angles.
According to the Scottish Tartans Authority—which is closely associated with the Scottish tartan industry—the ''Balmoral'' tartan should not be worn by anyone who is not part of the British Royal Family.
Many books on Scottish clans list such rules and guidelines.
Hunting tartans are also a Victorian conception.
Martin Martin, in ''A Description of the Western Islands of Scotland'', published in 1703, wrote that Scottish tartans could be used to distinguish the inhabitants of different regions.
The unorthodox use of tartan, which had long been associated with authority and gentility, was then seen as the expression of discontent against modern society.
″It was probably their use of it which gave birth to the idea of differentiating tartan by clans; for as the Highland regiments were multiplied&nbsp;... so their tartan uniforms were differentiated."
He utilised the red ''Royal Stewart'' and the green ''Hunting Stewart'' tartans for carpets, while using the ''Dress Stewart'' for curtains and upholstery.
The total number of colours, including mixtures, increases quadratically with the number of base colours so a sett of six base colours produces fifteen mixtures and a total of twenty-one different colours.
This means that children who bear their father's surname belong to the father's clan (if any), and that children who bear their mother's surname (her maiden name) belong to their mother's clan (if any).
Ironically, as the craze swept over Scotland the Highland population suffered grievously from the Highland Clearances, when thousands of Gaelic-speaking Scots from the Highlands and Isles were evicted by landlords (in many cases the very men who would have been their own clan chiefs) to make way for sheep.
Today tartan may be mostly associated with Scotland; however, the earliest evidence of tartan is found far afield from the British Isles.
The "Burberry Check", first designed in early 1920s, is an instantly recognisable tartan that is very well known around the world and is an example of a tartan that is protected.
Today "tartan" usually refers to coloured patterns, though originally a tartan did not have to be made up of any pattern at all.
It is only certain recently created tartans, such as Canadian provincial and territorial tartans and American state tartans, that are designed with certain symbolic meaning for the colours used.
Scott and the Celtic Society urged Scots to attend festivities "all plaided and plumed in their tartan array".
The idea that the various colours used in tartan have a specific meaning is purely a modern one.
The romantic enthusiasm that Logan and the Sobieski Stuarts generated with their publications led the way for other tartan books in the 19th century.
Tartan has also been used by corporations in advertising campaigns.
Following the Royal visit several books which documented tartans added to the craze.
The first publication showing plates of clan tartans was the ''Vestiarium Scoticum'', published in 1842.
At this time many setts were simply numbered, or given fanciful names such as the "Robin Hood" tartan, not associated with any specific clan.
The diagrams left illustrate the construction of a "symmetrical" tartan.
Note that some modern tartans are protected by trademark law, and the trademark proprietor can, in certain circumstances, prevent others from selling that tartan.
This is the personal tartan of Queen Elizabeth II.
The naming and registration of official clan tartans began on 8 April 1815, when the Highland Society of London (founded 1778) resolved that all the clan chiefs each "be respectfully solicited to furnish the Society with as Much of the Tartan of his Lordship's Clan as will serve to Show the Pattern and to Authenticate the Same by Attaching Thereunto a Card bearing the Impression of his Lordship's Arms."
For example, the sett of a tartan (about 6&nbsp;inches) may be too large to fit upon the face of a necktie.
This tartan was used and is still used by several military units throughout the Commonwealth.
Each thread in the warp crosses each thread in the weft at right angles.
The earliest documented tartan in Britain, known as the "Falkirk" tartan, dates from the 3rd century AD.
In the 1960s, a Scottish society called the Scottish Tartans Society (now defunct) was created to record and preserve all known tartan designs.
They are commonly used today in Highland dancing.
In Scotland at least two local government councils have official tartans.
Tartan-like leggings were found on the "Cherchen Man", a 3,000-year-old mummy found in the Taklamakan Desert.
The resulting blocks of colour repeat vertically and horizontally in a distinctive pattern of squares and lines known as a ''sett''.
The Victorians' penchant for ordered taxonomy and the new chemical dyes then available meant that the idea of specific patterns of bright colours, or "dress" tartans, could be created and applied to a faux-nostalgic view of Scottish history.
The Queen and prince bought Balmoral Castle in 1848 and hired a local architect to re-model the estate in "Scots Baronial" style.
Efforts to pacify the Highlands led to the Dress Act of 1746, banning tartans, except for the Highland regiments of the British army.
James Logan's romanticised work ''The Scottish Gael'', published in 1831, was one such publication which led the Scottish tartan industry to invent clan tartans.
One criticism of the SRT and NAS's management of it is that its exclusivity, in both cost and criteria, necessarily means that it cannot actually achieve its goals of definiteness, preservation and open access.
Some of them were discovered in 2004, remarkably preserved, in the Hallstatt salt mines near Salzburg, Austria.
Also, some tartans (very few) do not have exactly the same sett for the warp and weft.
Tartans originated in woven wool, but now they are made in many other materials.
Contemporary portraits show that although tartan is of an early date, the pattern worn depended not on the wearer's clan, but upon his or her location, or personal taste.
Once approved by the Lord Lyon, after recommendation by the Advisory Committee on Tartan, the clan tartan is then recorded in the Lyon Court Books.
For instance, tartan made a resurgence in its use in punk fashion.
Where a thread in the warp crosses a thread of the same colour in the weft they produce a solid colour on the tartan, while a thread crossing another of a different colour produces an equal mixture of the two colours.
In some cases, following such recognition from the clan chief, the clan tartan is recorded and registered by the Lord Lyon King of Arms.
As he does not mention the use of a special pattern by each family, it would appear that such a distinction is a modern one.
The fragment was stuffed into the mouth of an earthenware pot containing almost 2,000 Roman coins.
This means the warp and weft will have alternate ''thread counts''.
By the 19th century the Highland romantic revival, inspired by James Macpherson's Ossian poems and the writings of Sir Walter Scott, led to wider interest, with clubs like the Celtic Society of Edinburgh welcoming Lowlanders.
The idea of groups of men wearing the same tartan is thought to originate from the military units in the 18th century.
The weft is woven in a simple twill, two over—two under the warp, advancing one thread at each pass.
Dress tartans are based on the ''earasaid'' tartans worn by Highland women in the 17th and 18th centuries.
William Wilson & Sons of Bannockburn became the foremost weaving manufacturer around 1770 as suppliers of tartan to the military.
Depending upon how "different tartan" is defined, it has been estimated that there are about 3,500 to 7,000 different tartans, with around 150 new designs being created every year.
Clever Victorian entrepreneurs not only created new tartans, but new tartan objects called ''tartanware''.
Both organisations are registered Scottish charities and record new tartans (free in the case of STS and for a fee in the case of STWR) on request.
The society's register, the ''Register of All Publicly Known Tartans'' (''RAPKT''), contains about 2,700 different designs of tartan.
In the late 1970s, punk music was a way for youth in the British Isles to voice their discontent with the ruling class.
These tartans tend to be made up of subdued colours, such as dark blues and greens.
By then, tartan had shifted from being mainly a component of men's clothing to become an important part of women's fashion.
Tartan is recorded by counting the threads of each colour that appear in the sett.
'''Tartan''' is a pattern consisting of criss-crossed horizontal and vertical bands in multiple colours.
This means that the more stripes and colours used, the more blurred and subdued the tartan's pattern becomes.
Today tartanware is widely collected in England and Scotland.
It was not until the mid-nineteenth century that many patterns were created and artificially associated with Scottish clans, families, or institutions who were (or wished to be seen as) associated in some way with a Scottish heritage.
Patterned cloth from the Gaelic-speaking Scottish Highlands was called ''breacan'', meaning many colours.
Today tartan and "clan tartan" is an important part of a Scottish clan.
In Canada, most provinces and territories have an official tartan.
Chemical dyes tended to produce a very strong, dark colour compared to the natural dyes.
When the law was repealed in 1782, it was no longer ordinary Highland dress, but was adopted instead as the symbolic national dress of Scotland.
In ''diagram A'', the sett reverses at the first pivot, then repeats, then reverses at the next pivot, and will carry on in this manner horizontally.
The setts painted all differ from one another and very few of the those painted show any resemblance to today's clan tartans.
Many of the states of the United States of America also have official tartans.
Victoria and Albert spent a considerable amount of time at their estate, and in doing so hosted many "Highland" activities.
Prince Albert himself loved watching the Highland games.
Tourists visiting the Scottish Highlands went home with it, and Scottish-based businesses sent tartanware out as gifts to customers.
The Queen designed the ''Victoria'' tartan, and Prince Albert the ''Balmoral'', still used as a royal tartan today.
The ''Vestiarium'' was the work of two brothers: John Sobieski and Charles Allen Hay.
On the Register's website users can register new tartans (for a fee), search for and request the threadcounts of existing tartans and receive notifications of newly registered tartans.
The current version of the STA's ITI, for example, already contains a large number of tartans that do not appear in the SRT, and the gulf will only widen under current policy.
The Scottish Register of Tartans (SRT) is Scotland's official tartan register.
In the same line of opinion, some tartan attributed to the British Royal Family are claimed by some to be "off limits" to non-royals.
Victoria was attended by pipers and her children were attired in Highland dress.
Tartan is sometimes differentiated from another with the same name by the label ''dress'' or ''hunting''.
The sett was first published in 1831 in the  book 'The Scottish Gael' by James Logan.
The Dress Act of 1746 attempted to bring the warrior clans under government control by banning the tartan and other aspects of Gaelic culture.
In the mid-19th century natural dyes began to be replaced by chemical dyes which were easier to use and were more economic for the booming tartan industry.
One contemporary writer sarcastically described the pomp that surrounded the celebrations as "Sir Walter's Celtified Pagentry".
As late as the 1830s tartan was sometimes described as "plain coloured&nbsp;... without pattern".
By the late 16th century there are numerous references to striped or checkered plaids.
''Ancient'' refers to a lighter shade of tartan.
The STA's ITI is larger, in part, because it has absorbed the entries recorded in the ''TartanArt'' database formerly maintained by the merged International Association of Tartan Studies and Tartan Educational and Cultural Association (IATS/TECA), based in the United States, and with whom the STA is directly affiliated.
Tartan is often called ''plaid'' in North America, but in Scotland, a plaid is a tartan cloth slung over the shoulder as a kilt accessory, or a  plain ordinary blanket such as one would  have on a bed.
Tartans or tartan-like plaid patterns are also commonly worn as skirts or jumpers/pinafores in Catholic school uniform and other private school uniform codes in North America.
Until the late 20th century, instead of a central, official tartan registry, several independent organisations located in Scotland, Canada, and the United States documented and recorded tartans.
This concept of the entitlement to certain tartans has led to the term of ''universal tartan'', or ''free tartan'', which describes tartan which can be worn by anyone.
Scottish kilts almost always have tartan patterns.
Similar finds have been made in central Europe and Scandinavia.
Though thread counts are indeed quite specific, they can be modified in certain circumstances, depending on the desired size of the tartan.
With four ways of presenting the hues in the tartan—"modern", "ancient", "weathered", and "muted" colours—there are thus about 14,000 recognised tartan variations from which to choose.
The Falkirk tartan has a simple check design, of natural light and dark wool.
It is generally stated that one of the most popular tartans today is the ''Royal Stewart tartan''.
Early forms of tartan like this are thought to have been invented in pre-Roman times, and would have been popular among the inhabitants of the northern Roman provinces as well as in other parts of Northern Europe such as Jutland, where the same pattern was prevalent.
A witness of the 1689 Battle of Killiecrankie describes "McDonnell's men in their triple stripes".
In ''modern'' colours, setts made up of blue, black and green tend to be obscured.
Almost all Scottish clans have several tartans attributed to their name.
One such myth is that red tartans were "battle tartans", designed so they would not show blood.
Evidence suggests that in 1725 the Independent Highland Companies may have worn a uniform tartan.
Tartan has had a long history with the military and today many military units—particularly those within the Commonwealth—have tartan dress uniforms.
For many centuries the patterns were loosely associated with the weavers of a particular area, though it was common for highlanders to wear a number of different tartans at the same time.
The Cockburn Collection of named samples made by William Wilson & Sons was put together between 1810 and 1820 and is now in the Mitchell Library in Glasgow.
The festivities surrounding the event were originated by Sir Walter Scott who founded the Celtic Society of Edinburgh in 1820.
The popularity of tartan was greatly increased by the Royal Visit of George IV to Edinburgh in 1822.
Generally, a more liberal attitude is taken by those in the business of selling tartan, stressing that anyone may wear any tartan they like.
A 1587 charter granted to Hector Maclean of Duart requires feu duty on land paid as 60 ells of cloth of white, black and green colours.
Even so, there are no rules on who can, or cannot, wear a particular tartan.
Tartan is particularly associated with Scotland.
The STWR's self-titled Scottish Tartans World Register database is made up of about 3,000 different designs as of 2004.
Today tartan is no longer limited to textiles, but is used on non-woven mediums, such as paper, plastics, packaging, and wall coverings.
The patterns were simply different regional checked-cloth patterns, chosen by the wearer's preference—in the same way as people nowadays choose what colours and patterns they like in their clothing, without particular reference to propriety.
David Morier's well-known painting of the Highland charge at the Battle of Culloden shows the clansman wearing various tartans.
In time, ''plaid'' was used to describe blankets themselves.
The word ''plaid'', derived from the Scottish Gaelic ''plaide'', meaning "blanket", was first used of any rectangular garment, sometimes made up of tartan, particularly that which preceded the modern kilt (see: belted plaid).
Canada has an official national tartan that was originally designed to commemorate the introduction of its new maple leaf flag, and was made an official national emblem in 2011.
Many regional tartans are officially recognised by government bodies.
The Act was repealed in 1782 due to the efforts of the Highland Society of London.
The tartan as we know it today is not thought to have existed in Scotland before the 16th century.
Another popular tartan is the ''Black Watch'' (also known as ''Old Campbell'', ''Grant Hunting'', ''Universal'', ''Government'').
In ''diagram B'', the sett reverses and repeats in the same way as the warp, and also carries on in the same manner vertically.
These "rules" are mere conventions; there are no laws regarding the wearing of any tartan.
The register itself is made up of the existing registers of the STA and the STWR as they were at the time of the SRT's launch, and new registrations from 5 February 2009 onward.
Also, the Lord Lyon states that a clan tartan should only be worn by those who profess allegiance to that clan's chief.
This opinion is enforced by the fact that in the Scottish clan system, the Lord Lyon states that membership to a clan technically passes through the surname.
Several clans have "official" tartans.
The pageantry invented for the 1822 visit of King George IV to Scotland brought a sudden demand for tartan cloth and made it the national dress of the whole of Scotland, rather than just the Highlands and Islands, with the invention of many new clan-specific tartans to suit.
In America the term ''plaid'' is commonly used to describe ''tartan''.
They have also been created for various events and certain ethnic groups.
The STA's database, the International Tartan Index (ITI) consists of about 3,500 different tartans (with over 7,000, counting variants), as of 2004.
Wilson corresponded with his agents in the Highlands to get information and samples of cloth from the clan districts to enable him to reproduce "perfectly genuine patterns" and recorded over 200 setts by 1822, many of which were tentatively named.
It also aims to be the definitive source for the registration of new tartans (that pass NAS criteria for inclusion).
Until the middle of the nineteenth century, the highland tartans were only associated with either regions or districts, rather than any specific Scottish clan.
Although it is possible for anyone to create a tartan and name it any name they wish, the only person with the authority to make a clan's tartan "official" is the chief.
The shades of colour in tartan can be altered to produce variations of the same tartan.
Today ''tartan'' is generally used to describe the pattern, not limited to textiles.
He expressly wrote that the inhabitants of various islands and the mainland of the Highlands were not all dressed alike, but that the setts and colours of the various tartans varied from isle to isle.
This design, ''Benyhone'' (from Scottish Gaelic: "Mountain of the birds") was one of the most widely used designs, being applied to 27 aircraft of the BA fleet.
It is maintained by many that clan tartans were not in use at the time of the Battle of Culloden in 1746.
Some of the more popular tartans were the ''Stewart'', ''McDonald'', ''McGregor'', ''McDuff'', ''MacBeth'', and ''Prince Charlie''.
Tartan is made with alternating bands of coloured (pre-dyed) threads woven as both warp and weft at right angles to each other.
The society also claims that non-royals who wear this tartan are treated with "great disdain" by the Scottish tartan industry.
These terms refer to colour only.
Mourning tartans, though quite rare, are associated with death and funerals.
It is not until the late 17th or early 18th century that any kind of uniformity in tartan is thought to have occurred.
The ''thread count'' not only describes the width of the stripes on a sett, but also the colours used.
The ''Vestiarium'' was followed by the equally dubious ''The Costume of the Clans'' two years later.
However, on an "asymmetrical" tartan, the sett does not reverse at the pivots, it just repeats at the pivots.
George IV was the first reigning monarch to visit Scotland in 171 years.
Several Canadian counties and municipalities also have official tartans.
The most effective fighters for Jacobitism were the supporting Scottish clans, leading to an association of tartans with the Jacobite cause.
Since the Victorian era, authorities on tartan have stated that there is an etiquette to wearing tartan, specifically tartan attributed to clans or families.
It is generally regarded that "clan tartans" date no earlier than the beginning of the 19th century, and are an example of an invented tradition.
The first and last threads of the thread count are the pivot points.
Even so, some weavers outside of the United Kingdom ignore the "longstanding convention" of the British Royal Family's "right" to this tartan.
The pattern of a tartan is called a ''sett''.
The aim of the Register is to provide a definitive and accessible resource to promote and preserve tartans.
In at least one instance a clan tartan appears in the heraldry of a clan chief and is considered by the Lord Lyon as the "proper" tartan of the clan.
In this way tartan, worn unconventionally, became an anti-establishment symbol.
Former members of the society then formed two new Scottish-based organisations—the Scottish Tartans Authority (STA) and the Scottish Tartans World Register (STWR).
From 1725 the government force of the ''Highland Independent Companies'' introduced a standardised tartan chosen to avoid association with any particular clan, and this was formalised when they became the Black Watch regiment in 1739.
The ''SRT'' is maintained and administrated by the National Archives of Scotland (NAS), a statutory body based in Edinburgh.
It was uncovered at Falkirk in Stirlingshire, Scotland, about 400 metres north-west of the Antonine Wall.
The two claimed to be grandsons of Prince Charles Edward Stuart and his wife Princess Louise of Stolberg, and consequently later became known as the "Sobieski Stuarts".
For example, the colour ''green'' sometimes symbolises prairies or forests, ''blue'' can symbolise lakes and rivers, and the colour ''yellow'' is sometimes used to symbolise various crops.
The brothers, who called themselves ''John Sobieski Stolberg Stuart'' and ''Charles Edward Stuart'', first appeared in Scotland in 1822.
Because of this, tartan has made reappearances in the world of fashion several times.
Prince Albert personally took care of the interior design, where he made great use of tartan.
Dress tartans tend to be made by replacing a prominent colour with the colour white.
According to the textile historian E.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;W. Barber, the Hallstatt culture of Central Europe, which is linked with ancient Celtic populations and flourished between the 8th and 6th centuries BC, produced tartan-like textiles.
In the Victorian and Edwardian eras, tartan-clad garments featured in fashion catalogues.
Many had no idea of what their tartan might be, but were keen to comply and to provide authentic signed and sealed samples.
''Modern'' represents a tartan that is coloured using chemical dye, as opposed to natural dye.
It has also been suggested that "tartan" may be derived from modern Scottish Gaelic ''tarsainn'', meaning "across".
The English word "tartan" is most likely derived from the French ''tartarin'' meaning "Tartar cloth".
In this case the thread count has to be reduced ''in proportion'' (about 3&nbsp;inches).
These shades are meant to represent the colours that would result from fabric aging over time.
The society, however, ran into financial troubles in about the year 2000, and folded.
The resulting variations are termed: ''modern'', ''ancient'', and ''muted''.
Thus, a sett of two base colours produces three different colours including one mixture.
In addition to clan tartans, many tartan patterns have been developed for individuals, families, districts, institutions, and corporations.
The 7,000 figure above includes many of these variations counted as though they were different tartans.
This was because like other materials, tartan designs were produced by local weavers for local tastes and would usually only use the natural dyes available in that area, as chemical dye production was non-existent and transportation of other dye materials across long distances was prohibitively expensive.
Some clan societies even claim that certain tartans are the personal property of a chief or chieftain, and in some cases they allow their clansfolk "permission" to wear a tartan.
Both of these societies initially based their databases on the RAPKT.
