Though an island state, due to a mapping error the state shares a land border with Victoria at its northernmost terrestrial point, Boundary Islet, a nature reserve in Bass Strait.
About 1.7% of the Tasmanian population are employed by local governments.
The Greens won four seats, with over 18% of the popular vote, the highest proportion of any Green party in any parliament in the world at that time.
During the 15 years until 2010, new agricultural products such as wine, saffron, pyrethrum and cherries have been fostered by the Tasmanian Institute of Agricultural Research.
Notable titles include ''For the Term of His Natural Life'' by Marcus Clarke, ''The Sound of One Hand Clapping'', ''Gould's Book of Fish '' by Richard Flanagan, ''The Alphabet of Light and Dark'' by Danielle Wood, ''The Roving Party'' by Rohan Wilson, ''The Butterfly Man'' by Heather Rose and ''The Year of Living Dangerously'' by Christopher Koch and children's books such as ''The Museum of Thieves'' by Lian Tanner and ''Tiger Tale'' by Marion and Steve Isham.
The state also has a large number of food exporting sectors, including but not limited to seafood (such as Atlantic salmon, abalone and crayfish).
Settlement in the island's northwest corner was monopolised by the Van Diemen's Land Company, which sent its first surveyors to the district in 1826.
File:Hellyer Gorge, Tasmania.jpg|Ferns in Hellyer Gorge, to the northeast of Savage River National Park.
The Tasmanian community has for some time been divided over the issue of the proposed Bell Bay Pulp Mill to be built in the Tamar Valley.
Tasmanians voted in favour of federation with the largest majority of all the Australian colonies.
Since 1901, Tasmania has been a state of the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Australian Constitution regulates its relationship with the Commonwealth and prescribes which powers each level of government enjoys.
Hostilities increased further with the arrival of 600 colonists from Norfolk Island between 1807 and 1813.
He concluded: "The colonial government from 1832 to 1838 ethnically cleansed the western half of Van Diemen's Land and then callously left the exiled people to their fate."
Tasmania's major population centres are mainly situated around estuaries (some of which are named rivers).
Tasmania is the only Australian state that is not located on the Australian mainland.
It is widely considered to be one of the most difficult yacht races in the world.
Tasmania hosts the Moorilla International tennis tournament as part of the lead up to the Australian Open and is played at the Hobart International Tennis Centre, Hobart.
Tasmania is a State in the Australian federation.
Many quickly succumbed to infectious diseases to which they had no immunity, reducing the population further.
Rural or regional events include Agfest, a three-day agricultural show held at Carrick (just west of Launceston) in early May and the Royal Hobart Show and Royal Launceston Show, both held in October annually.
On the western side, rainfall increases from around  at Strahan on the coast up to  at Cradle Valley in the highlands.
It has stretched its front legs out in front of its face.
The best known of these is the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race, starting on Boxing Day in Sydney and usually arriving at Constitution Dock in Hobart around three to four days later, during the Taste of Tasmania, an annual food and wine festival.
Thirty-four percent of Tasmanians are reliant on welfare payments as their primary source of income.
On 28 April 1996, in the incident now known as the Port Arthur massacre, lone gunman Martin Bryant shot and killed 35 people (including tourists and residents) and injured 21 others.
Plomley and Rhys Jones, settled on a figure of 3,000 to 4,000.
File:Russell Falls, Mount Field National Park.jpg|Russell Falls
In the 1970s, the state government announced plans to flood environmentally significant Lake Pedder.
Tasmania's House of Assembly use a system of multi-seat proportional representation known as Hare-Clark.
Of those removed from Tasmania, the last to die was Truganini, in 1876.
In the 1960s and 1970s there was a rapid decline in traditional crops such as apples and pears, with other crops and industries eventually rising in their place.
Tasman named the island "Anthony van Diemen's Land" after his sponsor Anthony van Diemen, the Governor of the Dutch East Indies.
Hobart is also the home port of the French ship ''l'Astrolabe'', which makes regular supply runs to the French Southern Territories near and in Antarctica.
The port of Hobart is the second deepest natural port in the world, second to only Rio de Janeiro in Brazil.
The state was initially a territory of New South Wales and was independently established as a self-governing colony under the name Van Diemen's Land (named after Anthony van Diemen) in 1825.
The Midlands and the Lower Derwent present a different story from the rest of the state.
Winter maximums are  on average along coastal areas and  on the central plateau, as a result of a series of cold fronts from the Southern Ocean.
In April 2006, the Beaconsfield Mine collapse was triggered by a small earthquake.
This has in part been attributed to increased levels of interstate and overseas immigration.
Tasmania's lowest recorded minimum temperature was  on 30 June 1983, at Butlers Gorge, Shannon, and Tarraleah.
Inland areas receive regular freezes throughout the winter months.
With few external threats and strong trade links with the Empire, Tasmania enjoyed many fruitful periods in the late 19th century, becoming a world-centre of shipbuilding.
The domestic sea route between Tasmanian and the mainland is serviced by Bass Strait passenger/vehicle ferries operated by the Tasmanian government-owned TT-Line (Tasmania).
It was officially renamed Tasmania in honour of its first European discoverer on 1 January 1856.
The mountain lies in the heart of the world-famous Cradle Mountain-Lake St Clair National Park.
Tasmania has the world's largest areas of dolerite, with many distinctive mountains and cliffs formed from this rock type.
Tasmania is also colloquially shortened to "Tas", especially when used in business names and website addresses.
In the late 1990s, many national companies based their call centres in the state after obtaining cheap access to broad-band fibre optic connections.
Australian Rules Football is also popularly followed, with occasional discussion of a proposed Tasmanian team in the Australian Football League (AFL).
The homogeneity makes it an attractive location to study population genetics.
With its rugged topography, Tasmania has a great number of rivers.
Tasmania has numerous relatively unspoiled, ecologically valuable regions.
National and international attention surrounded the campaign against the Franklin Dam in the early 1980s.
As with the House of Assembly, Tasmania's local government elections use a system of multi-seat proportional representation known as Hare–Clark.
The state government tried using them on the Bass Strait run but eventually decided to discontinue the run because of concerns over viability and the suitability of the vessels for the extreme weather conditions sometimes experienced in the strait.
For example, in basketball Tasmania has not been represented in the National Basketball League since the demise of the Hobart Devils in 1996.
Since 2001, however, the Tasmanian economy has experienced a significant improvement.
The first reported sighting of Tasmania by a European was on 24 November 1642 by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman, who landed at today's Blackmans Bay.
King Island off the northwestern coast of Tasmania has a reputation for boutique cheeses and dairy products.
In his last months he opened a vigorous anti-smoking campaign which included many restrictions of where individuals could smoke, such as pubs.
Council revenue comes mostly from property taxes and government grants.
These airlines fly direct routes to Brisbane, the Gold Coast, Melbourne and Sydney.
It is thought Tasmanian Aboriginals were separated from the mainland Aboriginal groups about 10,000 years ago when the sea rose to form Bass Strait.
Tasmania is the most mountainous state in Australia.
Major population centres include Hobart, Launceston, Devonport, Burnie, and Ulverstone.
The Museum of Old and New Art (MONA) opened in January 2011 at the Moorilla Estate in Berriedale, and is the largest privately owned museum complex in Australia.
Several sections of inland Tasmania, together with Flinders Island, were declared drought-affected areas by the state government in 2007.
Ten Clubs take part in the statewide Tasmanian Rugby Competition.
Van Diemen's Land had an enormous gender imbalance, with male colonists outnumbering females six to one in 1822—and 16 to one among the convict population.
Scarring from fighting is visible next to this devil's left eye.|alt=A devil lying belly down on dry scrub grass and dead leaves.
More than a century later, in 1772, a French expedition led by Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne also landed at Blackmans Bay, and the following year Tobias Furneaux became the first Englishman to land in Tasmania when he arrived at Adventure Bay.
The most mountainous region is the Central Highlands area, which covers most of the central western parts of the state.
Geographically and genetically isolated, Tasmania is known for its unique flora and fauna.
Many flora species are unique to Tasmania, and some are related to species in South America and New Zealand through ancestors which grew on the super continent of Gondwana, 50&nbsp;million years ago.
Tasmania, Hobart in particular, serves as Australia's chief sea link to Antarctica, with the Australian Antarctic Division located in Kingston.
To foster tourism, the state government encourages or supports several annual events in and around the island.
Tasmania has a cool temperate climate with four distinct seasons.
Scattered across Tasmania are many vineyards, and Tasmanian beer brands such as Boags and Cascade are known and sold in Mainland Australia.
On 23 February 2004, the Premier Jim Bacon announced his retirement, after being diagnosed with lung cancer.
The most successful team is the Hobart Tigers winning the title three times.
Films set in Tasmania include ''Young Einstein'', ''The Tale of Ruby Rose'', ''The Hunter'', ''The Last Confession of Alexander Pearce'', ''Arctic Blast'', ''Manganinnie'' and ''Van Diemen's Land''.
Much of the island is composed of Jurassic dolerite intrusions (upwellings of magma) through other rock types, sometimes forming large columnar joints.
In November 1830 Arthur organised the so-called "Black Line", ordering every able-bodied male colonist to assemble at one of seven designated places in the Settled Districts to join a massive drive to sweep Aboriginals out of the region and on to the Tasman Peninsula.
Sport is an important pastime in Tasmania, and the state has produced several famous sportsmen and women and also hosted several major sporting events.
In March 2014, Will Hodgman's Liberal Party won government, ending sixteen years of Labor governance, and ending an eight-year period for Hodgman himself as Leader of the Opposition.
The more densely populated northern coast is much drier than the western side, with annual rainfall ranging from  in Launceston to  in Burnie in the north west and  in Scottsdale located further to the east.
Major airports include Hobart International Airport (which has not had a regular scheduled international passenger service since the 1990s) and Launceston Airport; the smaller airports, Burnie (Wynyard) and King Island, serviced by Regional Express; and Devonport, serviced by QantasLink; have services to Melbourne.
The conflict, which peaked between 1825 and 1831 and led to more than three years of martial law, cost the lives of almost 1100 Aboriginals and settlers.
After hostilities between settlers and Aboriginals ceased in 1832, almost all of the remnants of the indigenous population were persuaded or forced by government agent George Augustus Robinson to relocate to Flinders Island.
''The Last Confession of Alexander Pearce'' and ''Van Diemen's Land'' are both set during an episode of Tasmania's convict history.
He died four months later.
In the 1940s and 1950s, a hydro-industrialisation initiative was embodied in the state by Hydro Tasmania.
Summer lasts from December to February when the average maximum sea temperature is  and inland areas around Launceston reach .
There is an ongoing proposal to reinstate commuter trains to Hobart.
The biennial ''Tasmanian Living Artists' Week'' is a ten-day statewide festival for Tasmania's visual artists.
The eastern part of Tasmania has more evenly distributed rainfall than in the west, and most months receive very similar averages.
The fourth festival in 2007 involved more than 1000 artists.
The state was created in 1803 as a penal settlement of the British Empire to prevent claims to the land by the First French Empire during the Napoleonic Wars; around 75,000 convicts were sent to Van Diemen's Land before transportation ceased in 1853.
It was the only bridge in the city, and made crossing the Derwent River by road at Hobart impossible.
In the alluvial areas of southeastern Tasmania, rich alluvial soils permit apples to be grown.
Crown land held in Tasmania  is managed under the  Crown Lands Act 1976.
Some grain crops are also grown in the driest areas.
Here the rainfall is evenly distributed over the year, but can be very erratic as heavy rainfalls from the warm Tasman Sea are quite frequent.
Tasmania is promoted as a natural state; almost 45% of Tasmania lies in reserves, national parks, and World Heritage Sites and the state was the founding place of the first environmental party in the world.
Captain James Cook landed at Adventure Bay in 1777.
Boyce has claimed that the April 1828 "Proclamation Separating the Aborigines from the White Inhabitants" sanctioned force against Aboriginals "for no other reason than that they were Aboriginal" and described the decision to remove all Tasmanian Aborigines after 1832—by which time they had given up their fight against white colonists—as an extreme policy position.
Cradle Mountain, another dolerite peak, for example, was a nunatak.
The Midlands located in the central east, is fairly flat, and is predominantly used for agriculture, although farming activity is scattered throughout the state.
In the southwest, Precambrian quartzites were formed from very ancient sea sediments and form strikingly sharp ridges and ranges, such as Federation Peak or Frenchmans Cap.
Much of Tasmania is still densely forested, with the Southwest National Park and neighbouring areas holding some of the last temperate rain forests in the Southern Hemisphere.
Tasmania's tallest mountain is Mount Ossa at 1,617&nbsp;metres (5,305&nbsp;feet).
, more than 80% of Tasmanians were born in the state and almost 90% were born in Australia, New Zealand, Great Britain, or Ireland.
Tasmania's population is more homogeneous than that of other states of Australia, with most of British descent.
Although most of the water is dammed at Lake Trevallyn, some flows on into the Cataract Gorge, where it becomes a tributary to the Tamar Estuary, and the outflow from the power station also joins the Tamar River downstream of Launceston.
Apparently the state's housing market was undervalued in the early part of 2000, and a large boom in the national housing market finally made Tasmanian housing prices rise dramatically.
The near-destruction of Tasmania's Aboriginal population has been described as an act of genocide by historians including Robert Hughes, James Boyce, Lyndall Ryan and Tom Lawson.
Further east in the Lake Country, annual rainfall declines to around , whilst in the Midlands, annual rainfall is as low as  at Ross and generally below .
In 1901, it became a state through the process of the Federation of Australia.
File:Tasmanian Devil resting.jpg|Although Tasmanian devils are nocturnal, they like to rest in the sun.
Most rain falls in winter, and in summer the average can be as low as  per month in Launceston.
Left on their own without further supplies, the Sullivans Cove settlement suffered severe food shortages and by 1806 its inhabitants were starving, with many resorting to scraping seaweed off rocks and scavenging washed-up whale blubber from the shore to survive.
Tasmania receives less immigration than other states.
During colonial times the cuisines of the British Isles were the standard in most areas of Tasmania.
As a result of the eventual flooding of Lake Pedder, the world's first greens party was established; the United Tasmania Group.
Small business is a large part of the community life, including such success stories as Incat, Moorilla Estate and Tassal.
Owing to persecution by farmers, government-funded bounty hunters and, in the final years, collectors for overseas museums, it appears to have been exterminated in Tasmania.
It starts in the mountains at Fingal and flows through Avoca, Evandale, Longford, Hadspen and finally Launceston.
Mount Wellington above Hobart is a good example, showing distinct columns known as the Organ Pipes.
The highest recorded maximum temperature in Tasmania was  at Scamander on 30 January 2009, during the 2009 southeastern Australia heat wave.
The reconstructed Palawa kani language name for Tasmania is lutriwita.
Composition of the Parliament of Tasmania
Tasmania (the state) also includes Macquarie Island halfway between New Zealand and the Antarctic mainland, along with neighboring island groups Judge and Clerk Islets 11&nbsp;km north and Bishop and Clerk Islets about 37&nbsp;km south of Macquarie Island.
While some of the other sports played and barracked for have grown in popularity, others have declined.
Whereas a three-day fall of  occurs only once every 50 years on the north coast, it occurs on average once every four or five years around Swansea and Bicheno, and on 7–8 June 1954, there were many falls as large as  in two days in that area.
Wealthy middle-class free settlers began arriving in large numbers from 1820, lured by the promise of land grants and free convict labour.
Almost 300 British troops were sent into the Settled Districts, where Aboriginal attacks were taking place almost every second day, gripping settlers with paralysing fear, and in November 1828 Arthur declared martial law, giving soldiers the right to shoot on sight any Aboriginal in the Settled Districts.
The Tarkine, containing Savage River National Park located in the island's far north west, is the largest temperate rainforest area in Australia covering about .
They established farms along the River Derwent and east and west of Launceston, occupying 10 percent of Van Diemen's Land.
Music events held in Tasmania include the Falls Festival at Marion Bay (a Victorian event now held in both Victoria and Tasmania on New Year's Eve), MS Fest is a charity music event held in Launceston, to raise money for those with multiple sclerosis, the Cygnet Folk Festival is one Australia's most iconic folk music festivals and is held every year in January, the Tasmanian Lute Festival is an early music event held in different locations in Tasmania every two years and directed by Susan King.
Tasmania has extremely diverse vegetation, from the heavily grazed grassland of the dry Midlands to the tall evergreen eucalypt forest, alpine heathlands and large areas of cool temperate rainforests and moorlands in the rest of the state.
The Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race is an annual event starting in Sydney, NSW, on Boxing Day and finishing in Hobart, Tasmania.
Lennon resigned in 2008 and was succeeded by David Bartlett, who formed a coalition government with the Greens after the 2010 state election resulted in a hung parliament.
Within 12 months, MONA became Tasmania's top tourism attraction.
Their higher nutrient levels, however, allow them to support productive pasture, and large numbers of sheep are grazed in these regions.
English-born painter John Glover (1767–1849) is known for his paintings of Tasmanian landscapes.
Violence began to spiral rapidly from the mid-1820s in what became known as the "Black War".
Services are operated by TasRail.
Tasmania is home to two winners of the prestigious Archibald Prize—Jack Carington Smith in 1963 for a portrait of Professor James McAuley, and Geoffrey Dyer in 2003 for his portrait of Richard Flanagan.
By 2012 the birth rate had slipped to 2.1 children per woman, bringing the state to the replacement threshold, but it continues to have the second-highest birth rate of any state or territory (behind the Northern Territory).
Despite the presence of some Quaternary glaciation, Tasmania's soils are not more fertile than those of mainland Australia, largely because most are severely leached and the areas with driest climates (least leaching) were unaffected by glaciation or alluvia derived therefrom.
Rail transport in Tasmania consists of narrow-gauge lines to all four major population centres and to mining and forestry operations on the west coast and in the northwest.
Also present in the south and northwest is limestone with caves.
Tasmanian film production goes as far back as the silent era, with the epic ''For The Term of His Natural Life'' in 1927 being the most expensive feature film made on Australian shores.
In the early 1980s the state was again plunged into often bitter debate over the proposed Franklin River Dam.
Proposals for local economic development have therefore been faced with strong requirements for environmental sensitivity, or outright opposition.
The colony suffered from economic fluctuations, but for the most part was prosperous, experiencing steady growth.
Kingston is often defined as a separate city but is generally regarded as part of the Greater Hobart Area.
Common within Australian cinema, the Tasmanian landscape is a focal point in most of their feature film productions.
In addition, Bellerive Oval regularly hosts international cricket matches.
The nearest bridge was approximately 20&nbsp;km to the north, at Bridgewater.
Several AFL games have been played at Aurora Stadium, Launceston, including the Hawthorn Football Club and , at the Bellerive Oval with the North Melbourne Football Club playing 3 home games there.
A shortage of rental accommodation has caused problems for many of Tasmania's low income earners.
In 1854 the present Constitution of Tasmania was passed and the following year the state received permission to change its name to Tasmania.
Tasmania has been volcanically inactive in recent geological times but has many jagged peaks resulting from recent glaciation.
Tasmanians are also consumers of seafood, such as crayfish, orange roughy, salmon and oysters, both farmed and wild.
Burnie and Devonport on the northwest coast host ports and several other coastal towns host either small fishing ports or substantial marinas.
By 1824 the colonial population had swelled to 12,600, while the island's sheep population had reached 200,000.
Tasmania became known as the "Apple Isle" because for many years it was one of the world's major apple producers.
Tasmania's area is , of which the main island covers .
The state encompasses the main island of Tasmania, the 26th-largest island in the world, and the surrounding 334 islands.
In the southern midlands as far south as Hobart, the dolerite is underlaid by sandstone and similar sedimentary stones.
Tasmania's landmass of  is located directly in the pathway of the notorious "Roaring Forties" wind that encircles the globe.
Most of these lands are thus not used for agriculture, but there is much productive forestry—which remains one of the state's major industries.
The Tasmanian devil became the largest carnivorous marsupial in the world following the extinction of the thylacine in 1936, and is now found in the wild only in Tasmania.
Local councils are responsible for functions delegated by the Tasmanian parliament, such as urban planning, road infrastructure and waste management.
Recent additions to the state arts events calendar include the 10 Days on the Island arts festival, and MONA FOMA, run by David Walsh and curated by Brian Ritchie.
Owing to a relatively dry climate and alkaline (mostly dolerite) parent material, these soils are relatively unleached and contain lime in the deeper subsoil.
By 1830 one-third of Australia's non-Indigenous population lived in Van Diemen's Land and the island accounted for about half of all land under cultivation and exports.
They engaged in fire-stick farming, hunted game including kangaroo and wallabies, caught seals, mutton-birds, shellfish and fish and lived as nine separate "nations" on the island, which they knew as "Trouwunna".
The state is named after Dutch explorer Abel Tasman, who made the first reported European sighting of the island on 24 November 1642.
In 1975, the Tasman Bridge collapsed when the bridge was struck by the bulk ore carrier ''MV Lake Illawarra''.
The central plateau and the southeast portions of the island are mostly dolerite.
In particular, proposals for hydroelectric power generation proved controversial in the late 20th century.
Historian Nicholas Clements has suggested the "voracious appetite" for native women was the most important trigger for the explosion of violence from the late 1820s.
While black inhabitants were driven to desperation by dwindling food supplies as well as anger at the prevalence of abductions of women and girls, whites carried out attacks as a means of exacting revenge and suppressing the native threat.
Other major employers include Nyrstar, Norske Skog, Grange Resources, Rio Tinto, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Hobart, and Federal Group.
Public transport is provided by Metro Tasmania bus services within urban areas, with Redline Coaches, Tassielink Transit and Callows Coaches providing bus service between population centres.
They are mostly classified as "prairie soils" or "brown earths" and bear some resemblance to the chernozems of Russia and North America, although they are much lower in available phosphorus and somewhat acidic in the surface levels.
In 1901, the Colony of Tasmania united with the five other Australian colonies to form the Commonwealth of Australia.
Historian Lyndall Ryan's analysis of population studies led her to conclude that there were about 7,000 spread throughout the island's nine nations; Nicholas Clements, citing research by N.J.B.
These all have had varying fortunes over the last century and more, involved in ebbs and flows of population moving in and away dependent upon the specific requirements of the dominant industries of the time.
Many rivers begin in the Central Highlands and flow out to the coast.
Most soils on the Bass Strait Islands, the east coast and western Tasmania are very infertile spodosols or psamments, with some even less fertile "lateritic podzolic soils" in the latter region.
Matthew Flinders and George Bass sailed through Bass Strait in 1798–99, determining for the first time that Tasmania was an island.
After another eight months the  death toll had risen to 43 colonists and probably 350 Aboriginals.
On the north coast, apart from some relatively fertile alluvial soils used for fruit-growing, there are also deep red, easily workable soils known as "krasnozems" ("red land").
Since the 1980s the environmental focus has shifted to old growth logging and mining in the Tarkine region, which have both proved highly divisive.
These soils are highly acidic and fix phosphate very effectively, but their extremely favourable physical properties make them extensively used for dairying, beef cattle and fodder crops.
Autumn lasts between March and May and experiences changeable weather, when summer weather patterns gradually take on the shape of winter patterns.
The anti-dam sentiment was shared by many Australians outside Tasmania and proved a factor in the election of the Hawke Labor government in 1983, which halted construction of the dam.
