Hearing is its dominant sense, and it also has an excellent sense of smell, which has a range of .
It is a common belief that devils will eat humans.
The trial ran for 18 months and the trial area had two-thirds less deaths than the control.
San Diego Zoo Global and Albuquerque Biopark were selected to participate in the program, and Wellington Zoo and Auckland Zoo soon followed.
According to this research, mixing the devils may increase the chance of disease.
The Hobart Devils were once part of the National Basketball League.
The Save the Tasmanian Devil Appeal is the official fundraising entity for the Save the Tasmanian Devil Program.
"Beelzebub's pup" was an early vernacular name given to it by the explorers of Tasmania, in reference to a religious figure who is a prince of hell and an assistant of Satan; the explorers first encountered the animal by hearing its far-reaching vocalisations at night.
It is believed that ancient marsupials migrated from what is now South America to Australia tens of millions of years ago during the time of Gondwana, and that they evolved as Australia became more arid.
Another report of overpopulation and livestock damage was reported in 1987.
By 5 October, 4 had been hit by cars, prompting Samantha Fox, leader of Save the Tasmanian Devil, to describe roadkill as being the biggest threat to the Tasmanian devil after DFTD.
These help the devil locate prey when foraging in the dark, and aid in detecting when other devils are close during feeding.
In summer, the first two categories account for 61% and 37% respectively.
Most of these devils are living in Australian zoos and wildlife reserves.
Males often keep their mates in custody in the den, or take them along if they need to drink, lest they engage in infidelity.
Although they are not found at the highest altitudes of Tasmania, and their population density is low in the button grass plains in the south-west of the state, their population is high in dry or mixed sclerophyll forests and coastal heaths.
The genus ''Sarcophilus'' contains two other species, known only from Pleistocene fossils: ''S.
Periods of low population density may also have created moderate population bottlenecks, reducing genetic diversity.
Throughout the year, adult devils derive 16.2% of their biomass intake from arboreal species, almost all of which is possum meat, just 1.0% being large birds.
This means they can become very heavy and lethargic after a large meal; in this state they tend to waddle away slowly and lie down, becoming easy to approach.
Despite its rotund appearance, the devil is capable of surprising speed and endurance, and can climb trees and swim across rivers.
The devil is an iconic symbol of Tasmania and many organisations, groups and products associated with the state use the animal in their logos.
So far, it has been established that the short-term effects of the disease in an area can be severe.
The third population was from southwest Western Australia.
It has screened on television in Australia and in the United States on the National Geographic Channel.
In the eastern half, Epping Forest had only two different types, 75% being type O.
At least two major population declines, possibly due to disease epidemics, have occurred in recorded history: in 1909 and 1950.
At the start of the 20th century, Hobart zoo operator Mary Roberts, who was not a trained scientist, was credited for changing people's attitudes and encouraging scientific interest in native animals such as the devil that were seen as fearsome and abhorrent, and the human perception of the animal changed.
Localised populations of devils have also been severely reduced by collisions with motor vehicles, particularly when they are eating roadkill.
Jones believed that the quoll has evolved into its current state in just 100–200 generations of around two years as determined by the equal spacing effect on the devil, the largest species, the spotted-tail quoll, and the smallest species, the eastern quoll.
It is hoped that the removal of diseased devils from wild populations should decrease disease prevalence and allow more devils to survive beyond their juvenile years and breed.
During this transitional phase out of the pouch, the young devils are relatively safe from predation as they are generally accompanied.
According to Pemberton, the possible ancestors of the devil may have needed to climb trees to acquire food, leading to a growth in size and the hopping gait of many marsupials.
Low genetic diversity is thought to have been a feature in the Tasmanian devil population since the mid-Holocene.
The devil is directly linked to the ''Dasyurotaenia robusta'', a tapeworm which is classified as Rare under the Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995.
Captive devils are usually forced to stay awake during the day to cater to visitors, rather than following their natural nocturnal style.
The devils eat in accordance with a system.
They can also stand on their hind legs and push each other's shoulders with their front legs and heads, similar to sumo wrestling.
In 2015, the Tasmanian devil was chosen as Tasmania's state emblem.
Like all dasyurids, the devil has prominent canines and cheek teeth.
In 2009, the Save the Tasmanian Devil group launched the "Roadkill Project", which allowed members of the public to report sightings of devils which had been killed on the road.
As it was believed devils would hunt and kill livestock, possibly due to strong imagery of packs of devils eating weak sheep, a bounty scheme to remove the devil from rural properties was introduced as early as 1830.
For every  of insects consumed,  of energy are produced, while a corresponding amount of wallaby meat generated .
According to a study by Menna Jones, "gene flow appears extensive up to ", meaning a high assignment rate to source or close neighbour populations "in agreement with movement data.
It is believed that the communal defecation may be a means of communication that is not well understood.
This disappearance is usually blamed on dingoes, which are absent from Tasmania.
For low beam, the devils are the seventh worst in terms of detection distance, 16% below the median.
In earlier times, hunting possums and wallabies for fur was a big business—more than 900,000 animals were hunted in 1923—and this resulted in a continuation of bounty hunting of devils as they were thought to be a major threat to the fur industry, even though quolls were more adept at hunting the animals in question.
Dens formerly owned by wombats are especially prized as maternity dens because of their security.
The teeth and claw strength allow the devil to attack wombats up to  in weight.
Near human habitation, they can also steal shoes and chew on them, and eat the legs of otherwise robust sheep when they have slipped in wooden shearing sheds, leaving their legs dangling below.
During the 1990s there were internet sites in the US that were advertising devil sales, and rumours that some US Navy personnel had tried to buy them illegally during a visit to Tasmania.
Short of a cure, scientists are removing the sick animals and quarantining healthy devils in case the wild population dies out.
Tasmanian devils can take prey up to the size of a small kangaroo, but in practice they are opportunistic and eat carrion more often than they hunt live prey.
The specific lineage of the Tasmanian devil is theorised to have emerged during the Miocene, molecular evidence suggesting a split from the ancestors of quolls between 10 and 15 million years ago, when severe climate change came to bear in Australia, transforming the climate from warm and moist to an arid, dry ice age, resulting in mass extinctions.
It has a "highly carnivorous dentition and trophic adaptations for bone consumption".
The IUCN classified the Tasmanian devil in the lower risk/least concern category in 1996, but in 2009 they reclassified it as endangered.
A scientific report in 1910 claimed that Aborigines preferred the meat of herbivores rather than carnivores.
The standard metabolic rate of a Tasmanian devil is 141 kJ/kg (15.3 kcal/lb) per day, many times lower than smaller marsupials.
Like all dasyurids, the devil has 14 chromosomes.
The north-western population is located west of the Forth River and as far south as Macquarie Heads.
In 1997, a devil turned up in Western Australia; it had not escaped from any licensed keeper.
As soil degradation took hold, it is believed that the marsupials adapted to the more basic flora of Australia.
The Tasmanian devil has an exceptionally strong bite for its size, generating a force of over .
Torn flesh around the mouth and teeth, as well as punctures in the rump, can sometimes be observed, although these can also be inflicted during breeding fights.
Males fight over females in the breeding season, and female devils will mate with the dominant male.
Subsequently, the infraorbital, interramal, supraorbital and submental vibrissae form.
In 1941, the devils, which were originally seen as implacably vicious, became officially protected.
However, a field study published in 2009 shed some light on this.
Zoologist Eric Guiler recorded its size at this time as follows: a crown-snout length of , tail length of , pes length , manus , shank , forearm  and crown-rump length is .
A model has been tested to find out whether culling devils infected with DFTD would assist in the survival of the species, and it has found that culling would not be a suitable strategy to employ.
Hence, all devils in a region are part of a single social network.
Eyelids are apparent at 16 days, whiskers at 17 days, and the lips at 20 days.
Little is known about the composition of the devil's milk compared to other marsupials.
They choose to travel through lowlands, saddles and along the banks of creeks, particularly preferring carved-out tracks and livestock paths and eschewing steep slopes and rocky terrain.
In 1838 a specimen was named ''Dasyurus laniarius'' by Richard Owen, but by 1877 he had relegated it to ''Sarcophilus''.
It is characterised by its stocky and muscular build, black fur, pungent odour, extremely loud and disturbing screech, keen sense of smell, and ferocity when feeding.
Devils are known to return to the same places to defecate, and to do so at a communal location, called a ''devil latrine''.
The first doctorate awarded for research into the devil came in 1991.
Devils can dig to forage corpses, in one case digging down to eat the corpse of a buried horse that had died due to illness.
Roberts wrote an article on keeping and breeding the devils for the London Zoological Society.
Fossils of species similar to modern devils have been found, but it is not known whether they were ancestors of the contemporary species, or whether the current devils co-existed with these species.
Embryonic diapause does not occur.
Middens that contain devil bones are rare—two notable examples are Devil's Lair in the south-western part of Western Australia and Tower Hill in Victoria.
It is believed that, as a secure den is highly prized, some may have been used for several centuries by generations of animals.
Related names that were used in the 19th century were ''Sarcophilus satanicus'' ("Satanic meatlover") and ''Diabolus ursinus'' ("bear devil"), all due to early misconceptions of the devil as implacably vicious.
In the second week, the rhinarium becomes distinctive and heavily pigmented.
This may have helped to hasten the extinction of the thylacine, which also ate devils.
As with many native animals, ancient devils were larger than their contemporary descendants.
The teeth and jaws of Tasmanian devils resemble those of hyenas, an example of convergent evolution.
Since 1999, all devils caught in the field have had ear biopsies taken, providing samples of DNA.
The state's west coast area and far north-west are the only places where devils are tumour free.
While the thylacine was extant, apart from hunting devils, it may also have put pressure on the devil for survival, by competing for scarce food and dens; both animals sought caves and burrows.
They usually establish dominance by sound and physical posturing, although fighting does occur.
Since the late 1990s, devil facial tumour disease has drastically reduced the devil population and now threatens the survival of the species, which in 2008 was declared to be endangered.
As with most other marsupials, the forelimb is longer () than the rear limb (), the eyes are spots, and the body is pink.
Young pups remain in one den with their mother, and other devils are mobile, changing dens every 1–3 days and travelling a mean distance of  every night.
The devil and quoll are especially vulnerable as they often try to retrieve roadkill for food and travel along the road.
Field workers are also testing the effectiveness of disease suppression by trapping and removing diseased devils.
As juveniles are more crepuscular than adults, their appearance in the open during summer gives the impression to humans of a population boom.
They are known to hunt water rats by the sea and forage on dead fish that have been washed ashore.
Unlike most other dasyurids, the devil thermoregulates effectively and is active during the middle of the day without overheating.
Much of the noise attributed to the animal is a result of raucous communal eating, at which up to 12 individuals can gather, although groups of two to five are common; it can often be heard several kilometres away.
The devil is a keystone species in the ecosystem of Tasmania.
He speculated that these adaptations may have caused the contemporary devil's peculiar gait.
Occurring in March, mating takes places in sheltered locations during both day and night.
At high beam, devils had the lowest detection distance, 40% closer than the median.
The Tasmanian devil is the largest surviving carnivorous marsupial.
A study of feeding devils identified twenty physical postures, including their characteristic vicious yawn, and eleven different vocal sounds that devils use to communicate as they feed.
Devils are not monogamous, and their reproductive process is very robust and competitive.
The field metabolic rate is 407 kJ/kg (44.1 kcal/lb).
Although they hunt alone, there have been unsubstantiated claims of communal hunting, where one devil drives prey out of its habitat and an accomplice attacks.
Dense vegetation near creeks, thick grass tussocks, and caves are also used as dens.
A later revision of the devil's taxonomy, published in 1987, attempted to change the species name to ''Sarcophilus laniarius'' based on mainland fossil records of only a few animals.
This combination of a solitary animal that eats communally makes the devil unique among carnivores.
As prey is most abundant in spring and early summer, the devil's reproductive cycle starts in March or April so that the end of the weaning period coincides with the maximisation of food supplies in the wild for the newly roaming young devils.
Starting in 2013, Tasmanian devils are again being sent to zoos around the world as part of the Australian government's Save the Tasmanian Devil Program.
As there are only four nipples in the pouch, competition is fierce and few newborns survive.
Female devils are occupied with raising their young for all but approximately six weeks of the year.
Owen and Pemberton feel this may have contributed to the devil's survival prior to European settlement.
Those devils in the east of the state have less MHC diversity; 30% are of the same type as the tumour (type 1), and 24% are of type A.
The cause of their disappearance from the mainland is unclear, but their decline seems to coincide with the expansion across the mainland of indigenous Australians and dingoes.
The amount of noise is correlated to the size of the carcass.
This population had contracted from northern Victoria and New South Wales.
In contrast, in the west, Cape Sorell yielded three types, and Togari North-Christmas Hills yielded six, but the other seven sites all had at least eight MHC types, and West Pencil Pine had 15 types.
This revealed that all devils were part of a single huge contact network, characterised by male-female interactions during mating season, while female–female interactions were the most common at other times, although frequency and patterns of contact did not vary markedly between seasons.
It was also conjectured that the animals were harder to see against the dark bitumen instead of the light gravel.
According to Fritz Noetling, the Secretary of the Royal Society of Tasmania in 1910, there was no evidence that Tasmanian Aborigines ate any carnivorous animals.
When quolls are eating a carcass, devils will tend to chase them away.
Despite the large litter at birth, the female has only four nipples, so there are never more than four babies nursing in the pouch, and the older a female devil gets, the smaller her litters will become.
In winter, large and medium mammals account for 25% and 58% each, with 7% small mammals and 10% birds.
Pemberton has reported that they can average 10&nbsp;km/h for "extended periods" on several nights per week, and that they run for long distances before sitting still for up to half an hour, something that has been interpreted as evidence of ambush predation.
In dingo-free Tasmania, carnivorous marsupials were still active when Europeans arrived.
Devils began to be used in tourism from the 1970s, when studies showed that the animals were often the only things known about Tasmania overseas and suggested that they should therefore be the centrepiece of marketing efforts, resulting in some devils being taken on promotional tours.
Since devils hunt at night, their vision seems to be strongest in black and white.
Devils are not monogamous, and females will mate with several males if not guarded after mating; males also reproduce with several females during a season.
Devils can also swim and have been observed crossing rivers that are  in width, including icy cold waterways, apparently enthusiastically.
The devil has long claws that allow it to dig burrows and seek subterranean food easily and grip prey or mates strongly.
Brown has also proposed that the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) grew stronger during the Holocene, and that the devil, as a scavenger with a short life span, was highly sensitive to this.
Born in January 1997 at the Cincinnati Zoo, Coolah died in May 2004 at the Fort Wayne Children's Zoo.
Devils prefer open forest to tall forest, and dry rather than wet forests.
Females have an average head and body length of , a  tail and an average weight of , although devils in western Tasmania tend to be smaller.
The first litter was presumed eaten by Billy, but a second litter in 1914 survived after Billy was removed.
Work by scientist Menna Jones and a group of conservation volunteers to remove dead animals from the road resulted in a significant reduction in devil traffic deaths.
Disputes are less common as the food source increases as the motive appears to be getting sufficient food rather than oppressing other devils.
Devils have five long toes on their forefeet, four pointing to the front and one coming out from the side, which gives the devil the ability to hold food.
To alleviate the problem, traffic slowing measures, man-made pathways that offer alternative routes for devils, education campaigns, and the installation of light reflectors to indicate oncoming vehicles have been implemented.
As the devil is the thylacine's closest relative, there has been speculation that the thylacine could be revived by combining DNA from museum samples of thylacines with ova of the devil.
Both the Tasmanian devil and the quolls appears to have evolved up to 50 times faster than the average evolutionary rate amongst mammals.
Of the 25 MHC types, 40% are exclusive to the western devils.
While the thylacine was extant it preyed on the devil, which targeted young and unattended thylacine cubs in their dens.
Seven of every ten devils in the east are of type A, D, G or 1, which are linked to DFTD; whereas only 55% of the western devils fall into these MHC categories.
s and spears for hunting around 10,000 years ago, a critical fall in numbers due to systematic hunting is unlikely.
This allows a higher total mass of devils to occupy a given area than territorial animals, without conflict.
A catamaran, called the ''Devil Cat'', was named for, and based on, the Tasmanian devil.
The Tasmanian devil's genome was sequenced in 2010 by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute.
Unusually, the gender can be determined at birth, with an external scrotum present.
The amount of movement is believed to be similar throughout the year, except for mothers who have given birth recently.
Research by Professor Greg Woods from the University of Tasmania's Menzies Institute for Medical Research has shown encouraging evidence for the potential development of a vaccine using dead devil facial tumour disease cells to trigger an immune response in healthy devils.
During this period, the devils lengthen at a roughly linear rate.
Theodore Thomson Flynn was the first professor of biology in Tasmania and carried out some research during the period around World War I.
The vast majority of deaths occurred in the sealed portion of the road, believed to be due to an increase in speeds.
When the mother is hunting they can stay inside a shelter or come along, often riding on their mother's back.
In 2006, Warner Bros. permitted the Government of Tasmania to sell stuffed toys of Taz with profits funnelled into research on DFTD.
As most of their prey died of the cold, only a few carnivores survived, including the ancestors of the quoll and thylacine.
Although the north-west population is less genetically diverse overall, it has higher MHC gene diversity, which allows them to mount an immune response to DFTD.
Devils use three or four dens regularly.
Phylogenetic analysis shows that the devil is most closely related to quolls.
Snarl, a character in the Transformers ''Beast Wars'' storyline, had the alternate form of a Tasmanian devil.
Juveniles have also been observed climbing into nests and capturing birds.
Studies have suggested that food security is less important than den security, as habitat destruction that impacts the latter has had more effect on mortality rates.
For more information www.tassiedevil.com.au
The Tasmanian devil's population has been calculated in 2008 by Tasmania's Department of Primary Industries and Water as being in the range of 10,000 to 100,000 individuals, with 20,000 to 50,000 mature individuals being likely.
Cascade Brewery in Tasmania sells a ginger beer with a Tasmanian devil on the label.
It has three pairs of lower incisors and four pairs of upper incisors.
During this time, the devil drank water and showed no visible signs of discomfort, leading scientists to believe that sweating and evaporative cooling is its primary means of heat dissipation.
Approximately 10,000 devils were killed per year in the mid-1990s.
The Tasmanian devil is probably best known internationally as the inspiration for the ''Looney Tunes'' cartoon character the Tasmanian Devil, or "Taz" in 1954.
The following year, ''Trichinella spiralis'', a parasite which kills animals and can infect humans, was found in devils and minor panic broke out before scientists assured the public that 30% of devils had it but that they could not transmit it to other species.
The first Tasmanian settlers ate Tasmanian devil, which they described as tasting like veal.
This wildlife contraceptive program is aimed to help the devils continue with their wild behaviour by mating freely, but without certain females contributing too much to the next generation, which "can have long-term genetic consequences for the insurance population".
This differs from placental carnivores, which have comparatively high basal metabolic rates.
In this respect, devils have earned the gratitude of Tasmanian farmers, as the speed at which they clean a carcass helps prevent the spread of insects that might otherwise harm livestock.
A study of nine species, mostly marsupials of a similar size, showed that devils were more difficult for drivers to detect and thus avoid.
Long-term monitoring at replicated sites will be essential to assess whether these effects remain, or whether populations can recover.
There is no evidence of torpor.
In the United States, four additional zoos have since been selected as part of the Australian government's Save the Tasmanian Devil program, the zoos selected were: the Fort Wayne Children's Zoo, the Los Angeles Zoo, the Saint Louis Zoo, and the Toledo Zoo.
Unusually for a marsupial, its forelegs are slightly longer than its hind legs, and devils can run up to  for short distances.
Quolls and devils are also seen as being in direct competition in Tasmania.
It is proposed that devils would have fewer impacts on both livestock and native fauna than dingoes, and that the mainland population could act as an additional insurance population.
The devil is an iconic animal within Australia, particularly Tasmania; it is the symbol of the Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service, and the former Tasmanian Australian rules football team which played in the Victorian Football League was known as the Devils.
In the mid-1960s Professor Guiler assembled a team of researchers and started a decade of systematic fieldwork on the devil.
The species was listed as vulnerable under the Tasmanian ''Threatened Species Protection Act 1995'' in 2005 and the Australian ''Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999'' in 2006, which means that it is at risk of extinction in the "medium term".
The newborn are pink, lack fur, have indistinct facial features and weigh around  at birth.
Along with quolls, Tasmanian devils have a metabolic rate comparable to non-carnivorous marsupials of a similar size.
The location and geometry of these areas depend on the distribution of food, particularly wallabies and pademelons nearby.
Males are usually larger than females, having an average head and body length of , a  tail and an average weight of .
This is equivalent to an increase in food consumption from .
Early attempts to breed Tasmanian devils in captivity had limited success.
The similarity in travel distances for males and females is unusual for sexually dimorphic, solitary carnivores.
