The tax proposal is named FairTax.
Sales tax, for instance, can be replaced with a value added tax which disregards intermediate transactions.
Some scholars refer to certain economic effects as taxes, though they are not levies imposed by governments.
Early taxation is also described in the Bible.
One example is the United States under the ''American Jobs Creation Act'', where any individual who has a net worth of $2 million or an average income-tax liability of $127,000 who renounces his or her citizenship and leaves the country is automatically assumed to have done so for tax avoidance reasons and is subject to a higher tax rate.
For example, a loss on the stock market may be deducted against taxes paid on wages.
Most taxes—including income tax and sales tax—can have significant deadweight costs.
Any otherwise non-exempt object can lose its exemption if regularly kept outside the household.
luxury) items pay the tax.
Historically, in many countries, a contract needs to have a stamp affixed to make it valid.
buildings) and personal property (movable things).
30:11–16) was a form of poll tax.
Excise duties were first introduced into England in the year 1643, as part of a scheme of revenue and taxation devised by parliamentarian John Pym and approved by the Long Parliament.
The view that democracy legitimizes taxation is rejected by those who argue that all forms of government, including laws chosen by democratic means, are fundamentally oppressive.
The two most common type of event driven property taxes are stamp duty, charged upon change of ownership, and inheritance tax, which is imposed in many countries on the estates of the deceased.
If there is a negative externality associated with a good, meaning that it has negative effects not felt by the consumer, then a free market will trade too much of that good.
Records from the time document that the Pharaoh would conduct a biennial tour of the kingdom, collecting tithes from the people.
* The opposite of a progressive tax is a regressive tax, where the effective tax rate decreases as the amount to which the rate is applied increases.
For this reason, geoists generally believe that such payment cannot be regarded as a true 'tax', but rather a compensation or fee.
The Ramsey problem deals with minimizing deadweight costs.
The tax is often imposed based on a deemed disposition of all the individual's property.
Geoists state that the Lockean proviso is violated wherever land value is greater than zero.
Poll taxes are administratively cheap because they are easy to compute and collect and difficult to cheat.
Household goods are often exempt when kept or used within the household.
* In between is a proportional tax, where the effective tax rate is fixed, while the amount to which the rate is applied increases.
Some of these include expenditures on economic infrastructure (roads, public transportation, sanitation, legal systems, public safety, education, health care systems), military, scientific research, culture and the arts, public works, distribution, data collection and dissemination, public insurance, and the operation of government itself.
If an artwork had to be sent to another state for some touch-ups, it may have become subject to personal property tax in ''that'' state as well.
Tax collection is performed by a government agency such as the Canada Revenue Agency, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the United States, or Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC) in the United Kingdom.
Many countries provide publicly funded retirement or health care systems.
In fact, that's what a thief does; he redistributes income.
A similar tax on hearths existed in France and elsewhere, with similar results.
The purpose of taxes is to raise revenue to fund government.
Examples include tuition at public universities and fees for utilities provided by local governments.
An excise duty is an indirect tax imposed upon goods during the process of their manufacture, production or distribution, and is usually proportionate to their quantity or value.
Energy, water and waste management systems are also common public utilities.
So, for instance, a tax on wages in a town will (at least in the long run) affect property-owners in that area.
The most extreme anti-tax view is anarcho-capitalism, in which the provision of all social services should be voluntarily bought by the person(s) using them.
* Ruling fees charged by governmental agencies to make determinations in particular situations.
Arguably a windfall profits tax which is entirely unanticipated can also fall into this category.
Income taxation has the worst effect on division of labor in the form of barter.
To give an example, sheet steel is imported by a machine manufacturer.
The difference between government and thievery is mostly a matter of legality."
During the war-filled years of the eighteenth and early nineteenth century, tax rates in Europe increased dramatically as war became more expensive and governments became more centralized and adept at gathering taxes.
Economists have considered poll taxes economically efficient because people are presumed to be in fixed supply and poll taxes therefore do not lead to economic distortions.
But taxation levels are hard to compare to the size and flow of the economy since production numbers are not as readily available.
Stamp duty has the effect of discouraging speculative purchases of assets by decreasing liquidity.
If the elasticity of demand is low, more will be paid by the customer; and, contrariwise for the cases where those elasticities are high.
John Locke stated that whenever labour is mixed with natural resources, such as is the case with improved land, private property is justified under the proviso that there must be enough other natural resources of the same quality available to others.
The wholesale distributor will then continue the process, charging the retail distributor the VAT on the entire price to the retailer, but remitting only the amount related to the distribution mark-up to the government.
According to George, this would end real estate bubbles, business cycles, unemployment and distribute wealth much more evenly.
These not only result in lost revenue, but involve additional costs: for instance, payments made for tax advice are essentially deadweight costs because they add no wealth to the economy.
One potential result of the Laffer curve is that increasing tax rates beyond a certain point will become counterproductive for raising further tax revenue.
For example, suppose jobs A and B are both valued at $1 on the market.
The legal definition and the economic definition of taxes differ in that economists do not regard many transfers to governments as taxes.
The terms progressive, regressive, and proportional are used to describe the way the rate progresses from low to high, from high to low, or proportionally.
As early as 1920, Arthur Pigou suggested a tax to deal with externalities (see also the section on Increased economic welfare below).
Tariffs discourage trade, and they may be used by governments to protect domestic industries.
A value added tax (VAT), also known as Goods and Services Tax (G.S.T), Single Business Tax, or Turnover Tax in some countries, applies the equivalent of a sales tax to every operation that creates value.
It is clear that a 0% tax rate raises no revenue, but the Laffer curve hypothesis is that a 100% tax rate will also generate no revenue because at such a rate there is no longer any incentive for a rational taxpayer to earn any income, thus the revenue raised will be 100% of nothing.
Some low-income countries have relatively high tax-to- GDP ratios due to resource tax revenues (e.g.
According to most political philosophies, taxes are justified as they fund activities that are necessary and beneficial to society.
The government's ability to raise taxes is known as fiscal capacity.
The toll is likely to be a fixed charge, possibly graduated for vehicle type, or for distance on long routes.
Conservatives advocate the "fundamental conservative premise that no one should be excused from paying for government, lest they come to believe that government is costless to them with the certain consequence that they will demand more government 'services'."
Another study confirmed this number, finding that per capita tax revenues had grown almost sixfold over the eighteenth century, but that steady economic growth had made the real burden on each individual only double over this period before the industrial revolution.
In summary, depending on the situation a 50% tax rate can cause the division of labor to fail even where productivity gains of up to 300% would have resulted.
The last VAT amount is paid by the eventual retail customer who cannot recover any of the previously paid VAT.
In this example, the buyer has paid $0.20 of the $0.50 tax (in the form of a post-tax price) and the seller has paid the remaining $0.30 (in the form of a lower pre-tax price).
Generally the tax is imposed on net profits from business, net gains, and other income.
* Financial repression: Government policies such as interest rate caps on government debt, financial regulations such as reserve requirements and capital controls, and barriers to entry in markets where the government owns or controls businesses.
Additional information can be obtained at the  Federation of Tax Administrators website.
People with higher incomes spend a lower proportion of them, so a flat-rate sales tax will tend to be regressive.
The provinces of British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Prince Edward Island also have a provincial sales tax PST.
For example, the seller might drop the price of the product to $0.70 so that, after adding in the tax, the buyer pays a total of $1.20, or $0.20 more than he did before the $0.50 tax was imposed.
Compulsory taxation of individuals, such as income tax, is often justified on grounds including territorial sovereignty, and the social contract.
Economic theory suggests that the economic effect of tax does not necessarily fall at the point where it is legally levied.
In the United States, transfer tax is often charged by the state or local government and (in the case of real property transfers) can be tied to the recording of the deed or other transfer documents.
Taxation as a percentage of GDP in 2003 was 56.1% in Denmark, 54.5% in France, 49.0% in the Euro area, 42.6% in the United Kingdom, 35.7% in the United States, 35.2% in Ireland, and among all OECD members an average of 40.7%.
Because payment of tax is compulsory and enforced by the legal system, some political philosophies view taxation as theft, extortion, (or as slavery, or as a violation of property rights), or tyranny, accusing the government of levying taxes via force and coercive means.
A hypothetical Laffer curve for any given economy can only be estimated and such estimates are sometimes controversial.
Corporate tax refers to income, capital, net worth, or other taxes imposed on corporations.
Under perfect division of labor, you would do job A and somebody else would do job B.
Optimal taxation theory is the branch of economics that considers how taxes can be structured to give the least deadweight costs, or to give the best outcomes in terms of social welfare.
The tax is often designed with blanket coverage and large exceptions for things like food and clothing.
Many low-income countries have a tax-to-GDP ratio of less than 15% which could be due to low tax potential, such as a limited taxable economic activity, or low tax effort due to policy choice, non-compliance, or administrative constraints.
In this way, the state is able to reduce the tax burden on its citizens.
You're left with one unit of job B, but only if you were 400% as productive doing job A!
Your unique abilities would always be rewarded.
Even a mere 30% tax rate can negate the advantage of a 100% productivity gain.
On average, high-income countries have tax revenue as a percentage of GDP of around 22%, compared to 18% in middle-income countries and 14% in low-income countries.
The classic ways of cheating a tariff are smuggling or declaring a false value of goods.
The 'easiest' countries in which to pay taxes are located in the Middle East with the UAE ranking first, followed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia, most likely reflecting low tax regimes in those countries.
An economic definition, by Atkinson, states that "...direct taxes may be adjusted to the individual characteristics of the taxpayer, whereas indirect taxes are levied on transactions irrespective of the circumstances of buyer or seller."
Because tax rates are often much lower for capital gains than for ordinary income, there is widespread controversy and dispute about the proper definition of capital.
Its modern derivatives, stamp duty reserve tax and stamp duty land tax, are respectively charged on transactions involving securities and land.
A property tax (or millage tax) is an ''ad valorem'' tax levy on the value of property that the owner of the property is required to pay to a government in which the property is situated.
Angola) or relatively efficient tax administration (e.g.
Demand for specific land is dependent on nature, but even more so on the presence of communities, trade, and government infrastructure, particularly in urban environments.
In the United States, there is a growing movement for the replacement of all federal payroll and income taxes (both corporate and personal) with a national retail sales tax and monthly tax rebate to households of citizens and legal resident aliens.
Consumption tax refers to any tax on non-investment spending, and can be implemented by means of a sales tax, consumer value added tax, or by modifying an income tax to allow for unlimited deductions for investment or savings.
All large businesses incur administrative costs in the process of delivering revenue collected from customers to the suppliers of the goods or services being purchased.
Numerous records of government tax collection in Europe since at least the 17th century are still available today.
Most jurisdictions imposing an income tax treat capital gains as part of income subject to tax.
The side-effects of taxation (such as economic distortions) and theories about how best to tax are an important subject in microeconomics.
Mirrlees optimal income tax is a detailed theoretical model of the optimum progressive income tax along these lines.
Indirect taxes are imposed on events, rights, privileges, and activities.
A nation's tax system is often a reflection of its communal values and the values of those in current political power.
Government expenditures and revenue in France during the 17th century went from about 24.30 million ''livres'' in 1600–10 to about 126.86 million ''livres'' in 1650–59 to about 117.99 million ''livres'' in 1700–10 when government debt had reached 1.6 billion ''livres''.
While overall tax revenues have remained broadly constant, the global trend shows trade taxes have been declining as a proportion of total revenues(IMF, 2011), with the share of revenue shifting away from border trade taxes towards domestically levied sales taxes on goods and services.
The curve is constructed by thought experiment.
The existence of a tax can ''increase'' economic efficiency in some cases.
Some economic theorists consider the concept to be intellectually dishonest since, in reality, money is fungible.
* Tolls: a fee charged to travel via a road, bridge, tunnel, canal, waterway or other transportation facilities.
Inheritance tax, estate tax, and death tax or duty are the names given to various taxes which arise on the death of an individual.
The provision of public goods such as roads and other infrastructure, schools, a social safety net, health care, national defense, law enforcement, and a courts system increases the economic welfare of society if the benefit outweighs the costs involved.
The basic principle of excise duties was that they were taxes on the production, manufacture or distribution of articles which could not be taxed through the customs house, and revenue derived from that source is called excise revenue proper.
According to Ludwig von Mises, "society as a whole" should not make such decisions, due to methodological individualism.
:The "marginal rate" would be 15%.
Excises (or exemptions from them) are also used to modify consumption patterns of a certain area (social engineering).
Taxation is almost never a simple transfer of wealth.
A customs union has a common external tariff, and the participating countries share the revenues from tariffs on goods entering the customs union.
When expenditures exceed tax revenue, a government accumulates debt.
Because deadweight costs are related to the elasticity of supply and demand for a good, it follows that putting the highest tax rates on the goods for which there is most inelastic supply and demand will result in the least overall deadweight costs.
::18,750/175,000 = 0.107
This effect is commonly produced where means testing is used to withdraw tax allowances or state benefits.
Many libertarians recommend a minimal level of taxation in order to maximize the protection of liberty.
This causes fewer transactions to occur, which reduces economic welfare; the individuals or businesses involved are less well off than before the tax.
An expatriation tax is a tax on individuals who renounce their citizenship or residence.
The difference between output tax and input tax is payable to the Local Tax Authority.
It is an example of the concept of fixed tax.
The first known system of taxation was in Ancient Egypt around 3000–2800 BC in the first dynasty of the Old Kingdom.
Recurrent property taxes may be imposed on immovable property (real property) and some classes of movable property.
Therefore, in order to stabilize sales, the seller absorbs more of the additional tax burden.
Proponents of land value tax argue that it is economically justified, as it will not deter production, distort market mechanisms or otherwise create deadweight losses the way other taxes do.
In many countries, taxes are imposed on business (such as corporate taxes or portions of payroll taxes).
The purpose of taxation is to provide for government spending without inflation.
A small number of U.S. states rely entirely on sales taxes for state revenue, as those states do not levy a state income tax.
Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa are among the 'hardest' to pay with the Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, Guinea and Chad in the bottom 5, reflecting higher total tax rates and a greater administrative burden to comply.
A '''tax''' (from the Latin ''taxo'') is a financial charge or other levy imposed upon a taxpayer (an individual or legal entity) by a state or the functional equivalent of a state to fund various public expenditures.
George stated there should be one single tax: the Land Value Tax, which is considered both efficient and moral.
The collection of a tax in order to spend it on a specified purpose, for example collecting a tax on alcohol to pay directly for alcoholism rehabilitation centres, is called hypothecation.
Modern geoists note that land in the classical economic meaning of the word referred to all natural resources, and thus also includes resources such as mineral deposits, water bodies and the electromagnetic spectrum, to which privileged access also generates economic rent that must be compensated.
Egypt was known for the wealth of its crops; it was to be the granary of the Persian Empire (and, later, of the Roman Empire) and was required to provide 120,000 measures of grain in addition to 700 talents of silver.
On average, resource-rich countries have made the most progress, rising from 10% in the mid-1990s to around 17% in 2008.
India, a province fabled for its gold, was to supply gold dust equal in value to the very large amount of 4,680 silver talents.
This is because goods with elastic demand cause a large decline in quantity demanded for a small increase in price.
Capital assets include personal assets in many jurisdictions.
These are generally not considered taxes, as long as they are levied as payment for a direct benefit to the individual paying.
Economists describe  environmental impacts as negative externalities.
For example, a taxpayer who allocated more of his taxes on public education would have less to allocate on public healthcare.
Other records are granary receipts on limestone flakes and papyrus.
If the seller is a competitive firm, the tax burden is distributed over the factors of production depending on the elasticities thereof; this includes workers (in the form of lower wages), capital investors (in the form of loss to shareholders), landowners (in the form of lower rents), entrepreneurs (in the form of lower wages of superintendence) and customers (in the form of higher prices).
Geoists (Georgists and geolibertarians) state that taxation should primarily collect economic rent, in particular the value of land, for both reasons of economic efficiency as well as morality.
The question of whether they are generally progressive or regressive is a subject of much current debate.
The introduction of a poll tax in medieval England was the primary cause of the 1381 Peasants' Revolt.
Libertarian opponents of taxation claim that governmental protection, such as police and defense forces might be replaced by market alternatives such as private defense agencies, arbitration agencies or voluntary contributions.
The other four-fifths you may keep as seed for the fields and as food for yourselves and your households and your children".
It is therefore common to exempt food, utilities and other necessities from sales taxes, since poor people spend a higher proportion of their incomes on these commodities, so such exemptions make the tax more progressive.
In United States tax law, there is a distinction between an estate tax and an inheritance tax: the former taxes the personal representatives of the deceased, while the latter taxes the beneficiaries of the estate.
One of the earliest taxes mentioned in the Bible of a half-shekel per annum from each adult Jew (Ex.
When real estate is held by a higher government unit or some other entity not subject to taxation by the local government, the taxing authority may receive a payment in lieu of taxes to compensate it for some or all of the foregone tax revenues.
In 1780–89, it reached 421.50 million ''livres''.
The proper implementation of environmental taxes has been the subject of a long lasting debate.
A common presentation of this view, paraphrasing various statements by Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. is "Taxes are the price of civilization".
Joseph Stiglitz's Henry George Theorem predicts its sufficiency for financing public goods because those raise land value.
Over the last years the validity of the theory of optimal taxation was discussed by many political economists.
These are collectively called costs of compliance.
For example, some transfers to the public sector are comparable to prices.
In some societies, tariffs also could be imposed by local authorities on the movement of goods between regions (or via specific internal gateways).
:The "effective rate" would be 10.7%:
Kenya, Brazil) whereas some middle-income countries have lower tax-to-GDP ratios (e.g.
That manufacturer will pay the VAT on the purchase price, remitting that amount to the government.
Economist and social reformer Henry George opposed sales taxes and protective tariffs for their negative impact on trade.
Occupational taxes or license fees may be imposed on businesses or individuals engaged in certain businesses.
In modern taxation systems, governments levy taxes in money; but in-kind and ''corvée'' taxation are characteristic of traditional or pre-capitalist states and their functional equivalents.
This type of tax is called a Pigovian tax, after economist Arthur Pigou.
In connection with these systems, the country typically requires employers and/or employees to make compulsory payments.
Rates of tax and the taxable base for corporations may differ from those for individuals or other taxable persons.
The more details of tax policy there are, the more opportunities for legal tax avoidance and illegal tax evasion.
In the United Kingdom, vehicle excise duty is an annual tax on vehicle ownership.
In many jurisdictions (including many American states), there is a general tax levied periodically on residents who own personal property (personalty) within the jurisdiction.
However, poll taxes are very unpopular because poorer people pay a higher proportion of their income than richer people.
They advocate a high tax (the "Single Tax") on land and other natural resources to return this unearned income to the state, but no other taxes.
In a competitive market the price of a particular economic good adjusts to ensure that all trades which benefit both the buyer and the seller of a good occur.
These payments are often computed by reference to wages or earnings from self-employment.
Some systems provide an upper limit on earnings subject to the tax.
In democratic nations where the public elects those in charge of establishing the tax system, these choices reflect the type of community that the public wishes to create.
Some have argued that such taxes on wages are a form of "forced savings" and not really a tax, while others point to redistribution through such systems between generations (from newer cohorts to older cohorts) and across income levels (from higher income levels to lower income levels) which suggest that such programs are really tax and spending programs.
Supporters argue that allowing taxpayers to demonstrate their preferences would help ensure that the government succeeds at efficiently producing the public goods that taxpayers truly value.
This increase was greatest in England, Peter Mathias and Patrick O'Brien found that the tax burden increased by 85% over this period.
Vehicle and boat registration fees are subsets of this kind of tax.
If both a 0% rate and 100% rate of taxation generate no revenue, it follows from the extreme value theorem that there must exist at least one rate in between where tax revenue would be a maximum.
For instance, a tax on employment paid by employers will impact on the employee, at least in the long run.
For a VAT and sales tax of identical rates, the total tax paid is the same, but it is paid at differing points in the process.
Historically, the nobility were supported by taxes on the poor; modern social security systems are intended to support the poor, the disabled, or the retired by taxes on those who are still working.
Property taxes are usually charged on a recurrent basis (e.g., yearly).
Long-term average performance of tax revenue as a share of GDP in low-income countries has been largely stagnant, although most have shown some improvement in more recent years.
Therefore, income from labour and 'proper' capital should remain untaxed.
Joseph was telling the people of Egypt how to divide their crop, providing a portion to the Pharaoh.
In most countries, the stamp has been abolished but stamp duty remains.
