Unlike other forms of electronic dance music that tend to be produced with synthesizer keyboards, techno does not always strictly adhere to the harmonic practice of Western music and such strictures are often ignored in favor of timbral manipulation alone.
In Germany, fans started to refer to the harder techno sound emerging in the early 1990s as ''Tekkno'' (or ''Bretter'').
Certain electro-disco and European synthpop productions share with techno a dependence on machine-generated dance rhythms, but such comparisons are not without contention.
It was "the pioneers of Detroit techno who were making the 909 the rhythmic basis of their sound, and setting the stage for the rise of Roland's vintage Rhythm Composer."
'''Techno'''  is a form of electronic dance music that emerged in Detroit, Michigan, in the United States during the mid-to-late 1980s.
Rushton was later quoted as saying he, Atkins, May, and Saunderson came up with the compilation's final name together, and that the Belleville Three voted down calling the music some kind of regional brand of house; they instead favored a term they were already using, ''techno''.
Only what is essential to make people move".
This first wave of Detroit expatriates was soon joined by a number of up-and-coming artists, the so-called "second wave", including Carl Craig, Octave One, Jay Denham, Kenny Larkin, and Stacey Pullen, with UR's Jeff Mills, Mike Banks, and Robert Hood pushing their own unique sound.
Drum machines from the 1980s such as Roland's TR-808 and TR-909 are highly prized, and software emulations of such retro technology are popular among techno producers.
At the same time, in Frankfurt, a supposed alternative was a music characterised by Simon Reynolds as "moribund, middlebrow Electro-Trance music, as represented by Frankfurt's own Sven Väth and his Harthouse label."
Atkins has also claimed he was unaware of Kraftwerk's music prior to his collaboration with Richard "3070" Davis as Cybotron, which was two years after he had first started experimenting with electronic instruments.
With an increasing diversification (and commercialization) of dance music, the collectivist sentiment prominent in the early rave scene diminished, each new faction having its own particular attitude and vision of how dance music (or in certain cases, non-dance music) should evolve.
Despite the success of ReBirth RB-338, it was officially taken out of production in September 2005.
With this release Propellerhead were credited with "creating a buzz that only happens when a product has really tapped into the zeitgeist, and may just be the one that many were waiting for."
It feels like you're in some sort of hi-tech village."
In exploring techno's origins writer Kodwo Eshun maintains that "Kraftwerk are to Techno what Muddy Waters is to the Rolling Stones: the authentic, the origin, the real."
It was like something you can't imagine, the kind of power and energy people got off that record when it was first heard.
Manchester (UK)-based techno act 808 State helped fuel this development with tracks such as "Pacific State" and "Cobra Bora" in 1989.
Developments in American-produced techno between 1990 and 1992 fueled the expansion and eventual divergence of techno in Europe, particularly in Germany.
In the latter half of the 1990s the demand for vintage drum machines and synthesizers motivated a number of software companies to produce computer-based emulators.
The New Dance Sound of Detroit'', an album compiled by ex-Northern Soul DJ and Kool Kat Records boss Neil Rushton (at the time an A&R scout for Virgin's "10 Records" imprint) and Derrick May, was an important milestone and marked the introduction of the word ''techno'' in reference to a specific genre of music.
In this manner: "techno dance music defeats what Adorno saw as the alienating effect of mechanisation on the modern consciousness".
By 1988, house music had exploded in the UK, and acid house was increasingly popular.
There were also a number of joint ventures, the most commercially successful of which was Kevin Sanderson's group Inner City, which saw collaborations with Atkins, May, vocalist Paris Grey, and fellow DJs James Pennington and Arthur Forest.
Elliott's 2001 album ''Miss E...
The tempo tends to vary between approximately 120 bpm (quarter note equals 120 pulses per minute) and 150 bpm, depending on the style of techno.
By 1994 there were a number of techno producers in the UK and Europe building on the Detroit sound, but a number of other underground dance music styles were by then vying for attention.
By Spring 1990, Tanith, along with Wolle XDP, an East-Berlin party organizer responsible for the X-tasy Dance Project, were organizing the first large scale rave events in Germany.
The creative use of music production technology, such as drum machines, synthesizers, and digital audio workstations, is viewed as an important aspect of the music's aesthetic.
Of this time, Atkins has said:
Just drums, basslines and funky grooves and only what's essential.
It was largely based around an alliance between warehouse party goers from various urban squat scenes and politically inspired new age travellers.
One of the most notable was the ''ReBirth RB-338'', produced by the Swedish company Propellerhead and originally released in May 1997.
Other influences on the development of this style were European Electronic Body Music (EBM) groups of the mid-1980s such as DAF, Front 242, and Nitzer Ebb.
But, when the group were on the verge of finalising their contract, May allegedly refused to agree to Top of the Pops appearances and negotiations collapsed.
Some drew upon the Detroit techno aesthetic, while others fused components of preceding dance music forms.
Stylistically, techno is generally repetitive instrumental music, oftentimes produced for use in a continuous DJ set.
The Detroit sound exerted an influence on widely differing styles of electronic music, yet it also maintained an identity as a genre in its own right, one now commonly referred to as "Detroit techno."
In its simplest form, time is marked with kicks (bass drum beats) on each quarter-note pulse, a snare or clap on the second and fourth pulse of the bar, with an open hi-hat sound every second eighth note.
Subsequently, Atkins taught May how to mix records, and in 1981, "Magic Juan", Derrick "Mayday", in conjunction with three other DJ's, one of whom was Eddie "Flashin" Fowlkes, launched themselves as a party crew called Deep Space Soundworks (also referred to as Deep Space).
Despite this, weekly night at clubs such as Final Frontier (London), House of God (Birmingham), Pure (Edinburgh, whose resident DJ Twitch later founded the more eclectic Optimo), and Bugged Out (Manchester) were still popular.
Pioneering producer Juan Atkins cites Toffler's phrase "techno rebels" as inspiring him to use the word ''techno'' to describe the musical style he helped to create.
After the Berlin Wall fell on 9 November 1989, free underground techno parties mushroomed in East Berlin, and a rave scene comparable to that in the UK was established.
Despite the short-lived disco boom in Detroit, it had the effect of inspiring many individuals to take up mixing, Juan Atkins among them.
They initially played a mix of different styles including Belgian new beat, Deep House, Chicago House, and synthpop such as Kraftwerk and Yello and it was out of this blend of styles that the Frankfurt trance scene is believed to have emerged.
There was also a long-established warehouse party subculture based around the sound system scene.
Detroit producer Mike Banks was heavily influenced by jazz, as demonstrated on the influential Underground Resistance release ''Nation 2 Nation'' (1991).
Some of the more popular software tools for achieving such ends are commercial releases such as Max/Msp and Reaktor and freeware packages such as Pure Data, SuperCollider, and ChucK.
Other important UK clubs at this time included Back to Basics in Leeds, Sheffield's Leadmill and Music Factory, and in Manchester The Haçienda, where Mike Pickering and Graeme Park's Friday night spot, Nude, was an important proving ground for American underground   dance music.
Techno musicians, or ''producers'', rather than employing traditional compositional techniques, may work in an improvisatory fashion, often treating the electronic music studio as one large instrument.
Other producers achieve similar results by using the automation features of computer-based digital audio workstations.
It was European Teknival free parties, such as the annual Czechtek event in the Czech Republic that gave rise to several French, German and Dutch sound systems.
In 1988, after the Omen opened, the Frankfurt dance music scene was allegedly dominated by the club's management and they made it difficult for other promoters to get a start.
Germany's engagement with American underground dance music during the 1980s paralleled that in the UK.
Reason has since achieved popular appeal and is as of 2016 at version 9.
It is thought that Robert Hood, a Detroit-based producer and one time member of UR, is largely responsible for ushering in the minimal strain of techno.
In some sense, as a result of technological innovation, the DIY mentality that was once a core part of dance music culture is seeing a resurgence.
DJ Tanith commented at the time that "Berlin was always hardcore, hardcore hippie, hardcore punk, and now we have a very hardcore house sound."
Amongst others they include: Black Dog Productions (1989), Carl Craig's Planet E (1991), Kirk Degiorgio's Applied Rhythmic Technology (1991), Eevo Lute Muzique (1991), General Production Recordings (1991), New Electronica (1993), Mille Plateaux (1993), 100% Pure (1993), and Ferox Records (1993).
Other notable underground parties were those run by Force Inc. Music Works and Ata & Heiko from Playhouse records (Ongaku Musik).
Despite this fascination with retro music technology, according to Derrick May   "there is no recipe, there is no keyboard or drum machine which makes the best techno, or whatever you want to call it.
Derrick May identified the influence of Kraftwerk and other European synthesizer music in commenting that "it was just classy and clean, and to us it was beautiful, like outer space.
In 1993, the German techno label Tresor Records released the compilation album ''Tresor II: Berlin & Detroit – A Techno Alliance'', a testament to the influence of the Detroit sound upon the German techno scene and a celebration of a "mutual admiration pact" between the two cities.
Devices that once existed exclusively in the hardware domain can easily have virtual counterparts.
Acid house party fever escalated in London and Manchester, and it quickly became a cultural phenomenon.
According to Wolle it was an "out and out rejection of disco values," instead they created a "sound storm" and encouraged a form of "dance floor socialism," where the DJ was not placed in the middle and you "lose yourself in light and sound."
Many producers use retro electronic musical devices to create what they consider to be an authentic techno sound.
In the same period, German DJs began intensifying the speed and abrasiveness of the sound, as an acid infused techno began transmuting into hardcore.
By 1987 a German party scene based around the Chicago sound was well established.
Simon Reynolds suggests that this progression "involved a full-scale retreat from the most radically posthuman and hedonistically functional aspects of rave music toward more traditional ideas about creativity, namely the auteur theory of the solitary genius who humanizes technology."
In the same period (1992–93) other names were also bandied about such as armchair techno, ambient techno, and electronica, but all were used to describe an emerging form of ''post-rave'' dance music for the "sedentary and stay at home".
In November 1995 the UK music technology magazine ''Sound on Sound'' noted:
In America ''Keyboard Magazine'' asserted that ReBirth had "opened up a whole new paradigm: modeled analog synthesizer tones, percussion synthesis, pattern-based sequencing, all integrated in one piece of software".
A typical approach to using this type of technology compositionally is to overdub successive layers of material while continuously looping a single measure or sequence of measures.
Though short-lived, MI was known internationally for its all-night sets, its sparse white rooms, and its juice bar stocked with "smart drinks" (the Institute never served liquor).
This led to increased sophistication in the use of both rhythm and harmony in a number of techno productions.
Yet another example is Yellow Magic Orchestra's work which has been described as "proto-techno" YMO had also used the prefix "techno" in a number of titles including the song "Technopolis" (1979), the album ''Technodelic'' (1981), and a rare flexi disc EP, "The Spirit of Techno" (1983).
In attempting to sum up the changes since the heyday of Detroit techno, Derrick May has since revised his famous quote in stating that "Kraftwerk got off on the third floor and now George Clinton's got Napalm Death in there with him.
In the same period, close to Detroit (Windsor, Ontario), Richie Hawtin, with business partner John Acquaviva, launched the influential imprint Plus 8 Records.
The growth of techno's popularity in Europe between 1988 and 1992 was largely due to the emergence of the rave scene and a thriving club culture.
The original techno music was very hi-tech with a very percussive feel... it was extremely, extremely Tribal.
By 1993, as interest in techno in the UK club scene started to wane, Berlin was considered the unofficial ''techno capital'' of Europe.
During the late 1970s-early 1980s high school clubs such as Brats, Charivari, Ciabattino, Comrades, Gables, Hardwear, Rafael, Rumours, Snobs, and Weekends created the incubator in which techno was grown.
The popularity of Euro disco and Italo disco—referred to as ''progressive'' in Detroit—and new romantic synthpop in the Detroit high school party scene from which techno emerged has prompted a number of commentators to try to redefine the origins of techno by incorporating musical precursors to the Detroit sound as part of a wider historical survey of the genre's development.
This process will usually continue until a suitable multi-track arrangement has been produced.
The resulting Detroit sound was interpreted by Derrick May and one journalist in 1988 as a "post-soul" sound with no debt to Motown, but by another journalist a decade later as "soulful grooves" melding the beat-centric styles of Motown with the music technology of the time.
The move away from EBM had started in Berlin when acid house became popular, thanks to Monika Dietl's radio show on SFB 4.
DJ Tanith has expressed that Techno as a term already existed in Germany but was to a large extent undefined.
The site also features extensive information about the software's history and development.
Technoclub was "more or less an underground thing for suburban kids," it was, according to Laarmann, "never really hip to go there."
The MI, notes Dan Sicko, along with Detroit's early techno pioneers, "helped give life to one of the city's important musical subcultures&nbsp;– one that was slowly growing into an international scene."
Commercially, the release did not fare as well as expected, and it failed to recoup, however Inner City's production "Big Fun" (1988), a track that was almost not included on the compilation, became a massive crossover hit in fall 1988.
Added to this is the influence of futuristic and fictional themes relevant to life in American late capitalist society, with Alvin Toffler's book ''The Third Wave'' being a notable point of reference.
In 1991 a number of party venues closed, including ''Ufo'', and the Berlin Techno scene centered itself around three locations close to the foundations of the Berlin Wall: ''Planet'' (later renamed ''E-Werk'' by Paul van Dyk), ''Der Bunker'', and the relatively long-lived ''Tresor''.
A ''Sound on Sound'' review of the RB-338 V2 in November 1998 noted that Rebirth had been called "the ultimate techno software package" and mentions that it was "a considerable software success story of 1997".
In 1980 or 1981 they met with Mojo and proposed that they provide mixes for his show, which they did end up doing the following year.
The Berlin scene offered an alternative and many began embracing an imported sound that was being referred to as ''Techno-House.''
''Sound on Sound'' reported that the 909 was selling for between £900 and £1100 and noted that the 808 was still collectible, but maximum prices had peaked at about £700 to £800.
To escape the attention of the press and the authorities, this after-hours activity quickly went underground.
At this time the German popular music charts were riddled with Low Spirit "pop-Tekno" German folk music reinterpretations of tunes such as "Somewhere Over The Rainbow" and "Tears Don't Lie", many of which became hits.
In Detroit, techno resulted from the melding of African American music including Chicago house, funk, electro, and electric jazz with electronic music by artists such as Kraftwerk, Giorgio Moroder, and Yellow Magic Orchestra.
Such prices have held in the 12 years since the article was published, this can be evidenced by a quick search on eBay.
The use of motivic development (though relatively limited) and the employment of conventional musical frameworks is more widely found in commercial techno styles, for example euro-trance, where the template is often an AABA song structure.
Dimitri Hegemann has stated that the Frankfurt definition of techno associated with Talla's Technoclub differed from that used in Berlin.
This is essentially a disco (or even polka) drum pattern and is common throughout house and trance music as well.
By the close of the 1980s, the pioneers had recorded and released material under various guises: Atkins as Model 500, Flintstones, and Magic Juan; Fowlkes simply as Eddie "Flashin" Fowlkes; Saunderson as Reeses, Keynotes, and Kaos; with May as Mayday, R-Tyme, and Rhythim Is Rhythim.
In the early 1990s a post-rave, DIY, free party scene had established itself in the UK.
Juan Atkins has acknowledged that he had an early enthusiasm for Kraftwerk and Giorgio Moroder, particularly Moroder's work with Donna Summer and the producer's own album ''E=MC2.''
The R&B artist, Missy Elliott, inadvertently exposed the popular music audience to the Detroit techno sound when she featured material from Cybotron's ''Clear'' on her 2006 release "Lose Control"; this resulted in Juan Atkins' receiving a Grammy Award nomination for his writing credit.
The venue was for a time the standard bearer for techno and played host to many of the leading Detroit producers, some of whom relocated to Berlin.
There are many ways to create techno, but the majority will depend upon the use of loop-based step sequencing as a compositional method.
By the late 1980s and early 1990s, the original techno sound had garnered a large underground following in the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium.
Muzik described the sound of UK techno at this time as "dutiful grovelling at the altar of American techno with a total unwillingness to compromise."
Producers from Detroit, frustrated by the lack of opportunity in their home country, looked to Europe for their future livelihood.
In 1984 Talla started an event called Technoclub on Sunday afternoons at Frankfurts Disco No name, which then moved to the Dorian Gray club in 1987.
They also found musical inspiration via the ''Midnight Funk Association,'' an eclectic five-hour late-night radio program hosted on various Detroit radio stations, including WCHB, WGPR, and WJLB-FM from 1977 through the mid-1980s by DJ Charles "The Electrifying Mojo" Johnson.
In 1991 UK music journalist Matthew Collin wrote that "Europe may have the scene and the energy, but it's America which supplies the ideological direction...if Belgian techno gives us riffs, German techno the noise, British techno the breakbeats, then Detroit supplies the sheer cerebral depth."
He also identified Japanese synthpop act Yellow Magic Orchestra, particularly member Ryuichi Sakamoto, and British band Ultravox, as influences, along with Kraftwerk.
With a marketing campaign targeting under-35s, Ford used "Detroit Techno" as a print ad slogan and chose Model 500's "No UFO's" to underpin its November 2000 MTV television advertisement for the Ford Focus.
According to Muzik magazine, by 1995 the UK techno scene was in decline and dedicated club nights were dwindling.
Derrick May views this as one of his busiest times and recalls that it was a period where he
The TR-808 and TR-909 drum machines have since achieved legendary status, a fact that is now reflected in the prices sought for used devices.
Within a year, however, up to 10,000 people at a time were attending the first commercially organized mass parties, called ''raves'', and a media storm ensued.
The initial blueprint for techno developed during the mid-1980s in Belleville, Michigan, a suburb of Detroit by Juan Atkins, Kevin Saunderson and Derrick May (the so-called Belleville Three), all of whom attended school together at Belleville High, with the addition of Eddie Fowlkes, Blake Baxter and Jams Pennington.
Although eclipsed by Germany, Belgium was another focus of second-wave techno in this time period.
Locations like local church activity centers, vacant warehouses, offices, and YMCA auditoriums were the early locations where underage crowds gathered and the musical form was nurtured and defined.
The Birmingham-based label Network Records label was instrumental in introducing Detroit techno to British audiences.
Mike Dunn says he has no idea how people can accept a record that doesn't have a bassline."
The DJs thought to be responsible for house's early UK success include Mike Pickering, Mark Moore, Colin Faver, and Graeme Park.
Following this many of the traveller artists moved away from Britain to Europe, the US, Goa in India, Koh Phangan in Thailand and Australia's East Coast.
In the rest of Europe, due in some part to the inspiration of traveling sound systems from the UK, rave enjoyed a prolonged existence as it continued to expand across the continent.
In recent years, the publication of relatively accurate histories by authors Simon Reynolds (''Generation Ecstasy'' aka ''Energy Flash'') and Dan Sicko (''Techno Rebels''), plus mainstream press coverage of the Detroit Electronic Music Festival, have helped to diffuse the genre's more dubious mythology.
The term ''intelligent techno'' was used to differentiate more sophisticated versions of underground techno  from rave-oriented styles such as breakbeat hardcore, Schranz, Dutch Gabber.
May has commented that he considered his music a direct continuation of the European synthesizer tradition.
This one event was largely responsible for the introduction in 1994 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act; effectively leaving the British free party scene for dead.
Derrick May's experimentation on works such as ''Beyond the Dance'' (1989) and ''The Beginning'' (1990) were credited with taking techno "in dozens of new directions at once and having the kind of expansive impact John Coltrane had on Jazz".
The elevator's stalled between the pharmacy and the athletic wear store."
Version one of the software featured two TB-303s and a TR-808 only, but the release of version two saw the inclusion of a TR-909.
There never has been.
Mojo refused to follow pre-established radio formats or playlists, and he promoted social and cultural awareness of the African American community.
Bolland, releasing "tough, metallic tracks...with harsh, discordant synth lines that sounded like distressed Hoovers," according to one music journalist.
Talla, in the early to mid-1980s, worked in City Music at Frankfurt Station and began to categorize artists such as New Order, Depeche Mode, Kraftwerk, Heaven 17 and Front 242 under the heading ''techno'', to sum up all technologically created dance  music.
Juan Atkins has stated that it is "music that sounds like technology, and not technology that sounds like music, meaning that most of the music you listen to is made with technology, whether you know it or not.
Less well-known styles related to techno or its subgenres include the primarily Sheffield (UK)-based bleep techno, a regional variant that had some success between 1989 and 1991, and a scene that was responsible for putting Warp Records on the map (largely as a result of its fifth release, LFO's self-titled 12″).
It was in Tresor at this time that a trend in paramilitary clothing was established (amongst the techno fraternity) by a DJ called Tanith; possibly as an expression of a commitment to the underground aesthetic of the music, or perhaps influenced by UR's paramilitary posturing.
Both night spots quickly became synonymous with acid house, and it was during this period that the use of MDMA, as a party drug, started to gain prominence.
This ranged from relatively pop oriented acts such as Moby to the distinctly anti-commercial sentiments of Underground Resistance.
This alternative spelling, with varying numbers of ''k''s, began as a tongue-in-cheek attempt to emphasize the music's hardness, but by the mid-1990s it came to be associated with a controversial point of view that the music was and perhaps always had been wholly separate from Detroit's ''techno'', deriving instead from a 1980s EBM-oriented club scene cultivated in part by DJ/musician Talla 2XLC in Frankfurt.
The collection of devices found in a typical studio will include units that are capable of producing many different sounds and effects.
This emerging sound is thought to have been influenced by Dutch gabber and Belgian hardcore; styles that were in their own perverse way paying homage to Underground Resistance and Richie Hawtin's Plus 8 Records.
Even the dance sounds of Chicago also had a German connection, as it was in Munich that Giorgio Moroder and Pete Bellotte first produced the 1970s Eurodisco synthpop sound.
This development would lead to a permanent move away from the sound associated with Techno-House and toward a hard edged mix of music that came to define Tanith and Wolle's Tekknozid parties.
Many of these groups found audiences easily and were often centered around squats in cities such as Amsterdam and Berlin.
For instance jungle (drum and bass) demonstrated influences ranging from hip-hop, soul, and reggae to techno and house.
In 2008 a tape from the mid-to-late 1960s by the original composer of the Doctor Who theme Delia Derbyshire was found to contain music that sounded remarkably like contemporary electronic dance music.
Living around Detroit, there was so little beauty... everything is an ugly mess in Detroit, and so we were attracted to this music.
This unique blend of influences aligns techno with the aesthetic referred to as afrofuturism.
Artists can now also individuate their sound by creating personalized software synthesizers, effects modules, and various composition environments.
Detroit techno had maintained its integrity throughout the rave era and was pushing a new generation of so-called ''intelligent techno'' producers forward.
Once a single loop-based arrangement has been generated, a producer may then focus on developing how the summing of the overdubbed parts will unfold in time, and what the final structure of the piece will be.
To producers such as Derrick May, the transference of spirit from the body to the machine is often a central preoccupation; essentially an expression of technological spirituality.
In 1989 German DJs Westbam and Dr. Motte established the ''Ufo club'', an illegal party venue, and co-founded the Love Parade.
Changes were also taking place in Frankfurt during the same period but it did not share the egalitarian approach found in the Berlin party scene.
It was down to the preferences of a few guys.
The music had become "too hard, too fast, too male, too drug-oriented, too anally retentive."
Although it is primarily Warp that has been credited with ushering the commercial growth of IDM and electronica, in the early 1990s there were many notable labels associated with the initial ''intelligence'' trend that received little, if any, wider attention.
This syncopated-feel (funkiness) distinguishes the Detroit strain of techno from other variants.
Prior to achieving notoriety, Atkins, Saunderson, May, and Fowlkes shared common interests as budding musicians, "mix" tape traders, and aspiring DJs.
Some producers achieve this by adding or removing layers of material at appropriate points in the mix.
Spiral Tribe, Bedlam and other English sound systems took their cooperative techno ideas to Europe, particularly Eastern Europe where it was cheaper to live, and audiences were quick to appropriate the free party ideology.
By 1993, Detroit acts such as Model 500 and UR had made explicit references to the genre, with the tracks "Jazz Is The Teacher" (1993) and "Hi-Tech Jazz" (1993), the latter being part of a larger body of work and group called Galaxy 2 Galaxy, a self-described jazz project based on Kraftwerk's "man machine" doctrine.
With techno reaching a state of "creative palsy," and with a disproportionate number of underground dance music enthusiasts more interested in the sounds of rave and jungle, in 1995 the future of the UK techno scene looked uncertain as the market for "pure techno" waned.
In a sense, popular electronic music had come full circle, returning to Germany, home of a primary influence on the electronic dance music of the 1980s: Düsseldorf's Kraftwerk.
By the end of the 1990s, a number of post-techno  underground styles had emerged, including ghettotech (a style that combines some of the aesthetics of techno with hip-hop and house music), nortec, glitch, digital hardcore, the so-called ''no-beat techno'', and electroclash.
The following year (1988) saw acid house making as significant an impact on popular consciousness in Germany as it had in England.
By May 1996, ''Sound on Sound'' was reporting that the popularity of the 808 had started to decline, with the rarer TR-909 taking its place as "the dance floor drum machine to use."
YMO's song "Technopolis" (1979), a tribute to Tokyo as an electronic mecca, is considered an "interesting contribution" to the development of Detroit techno, foreshadowing concepts that Atkins and Davis would later explore with Cybotron.
Kevin Saunderson has also acknowledged the influence of Europe but he claims to have been more inspired by the idea of making music with electronic equipment: "I was more infatuated with the idea that I can do this all myself."
At some point tension over "who defines techno" arose between scenes in Frankfurt and Berlin.
This lead was followed by a number of techno producers in the UK who were influenced by both jazz and UR, Dave Angel's "Seas of Tranquility" EP (1994) being a case in point, Other notable artists who set about expanding upon the structure of "classic techno" include Dan Curtin, Morgan Geist, Titonton Duvante and Ian O'Brien.
This led to the appearance (in the UK initially) of inventive new music that sounded far-removed from techno.
One of the few real alternatives then was The Bruckenkopf in Mainz, underneath a Rhine bridge, a venue that offered a non-commercial alternative to Frankfurt's discothèque-based clubs.
We were using Yamaha drum machines, different percussion machines, whatever."
Derrick May has summed up the sound as 'Hi-tech Tribalism': something "very spiritual, very bass oriented, and very drum oriented, very percussive.
In America, apart from regional scenes in Detroit, New York City, and Chicago, interest was limited.
These young promoters developed and nurtured the local dance music scene by both catering to the tastes of the local audience of young people and by marketing parties with new DJs and their music.
Regarding his initial impression of Kraftwerk, Atkins notes that they were "clean and precise" relative to the "weird UFO sounds" featured in his seemingly "psychedelic" music.
Eventually, Atkins started producing his own music under the pseudonym Model 500, and in 1985 he established the record label Metroplex.
In March 2001, with the release of Reason V1, Propellerhead upped the ante in providing a £300 software-based electronic music studio, comprising a 14-input automated digital mixer, 99-note polyphonic 'analogue' synth, classic Roland-style drum machine, sample-playback unit, analogue-style step sequencer, loop player, multitrack sequencer, eight effects processors, and over 500&nbsp;MB of synthesizer patches and samples.
It became natural for us to incorporate Detroit techno into our commercials after we discovered that young people are embracing techno."
Atkins also suggests that the Chicago house sound developed as a result of Frankie Knuckles' using a drum machine he bought from Derrick May.
In response, Hood and others sought to emphasize a single element of the Detroit aesthetic, interpreting techno with "a basic stripped down, raw sound.
The first recorded use of the word ''techno'' in reference to a specific genre of music was in 1988.
The record was also responsible for bringing industry attention to May, Atkins and Saunderson, which led to discussions with ZTT records about forming a techno supergroup called ''Intellex.''
In the same period, with the assistance of Tresor, Underground Resistance released their X-101/X-102/X103 album series, Juan Atkins collaborated with 3MB's Thomas Fehlmann and Moritz Von Oswald and Tresor-affiliated label Basic Channel had its releases mastered by Detroit's National Sound Corporation, the main mastering house for the entire Detroit dance music scene.
Such advances democratized music creation, and lead to a massive increase in the amount of home-produced music available to the general public via the internet.
Mojo's show featured electronic music by artists such as Giorgio Moroder, Kraftwerk, Yellow Magic Orchestra and Tangerine Dream, alongside the funk sounds of acts such as Parliament Funkadelic and dance oriented new wave music by bands like Devo and the B-52's.
These software-based music production tools offer viable and cost-effective alternatives to typical hardware-based production studios, and thanks to advances in microprocessor technology, can create high quality music using little more than a single laptop computer.
May famously described the sound of techno as something that is "...like Detroit...a complete mistake.
The 808 was our preference.
