Williams placed second in MVP voting; DiMaggio won, 291 votes to 254, on the strength of his record-breaking 56-game hitting streak and league-leading 125 RBI.
Often, parents of sick children would learn at check-out time that "Mr. Williams has taken care of your bill."
One writer (whom Williams thought was Mel Webb, who Williams called a "grouchy old guy", although the identity of the writer remains unknown) completely left Williams off his ballot, who would have tied DiMaggio or won if one writer who had voted Williams as second had voted him first.
Despite the cheers and adulation of most of his fans, the occasional boos directed at him in Fenway Park led Williams to stop tipping his cap in acknowledgement after a home run.
Williams married Dolores Wettach, a former Miss Vermont and ''Vogue'' model, in 1968.
On December 7, 1941, the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, bringing the United States into World War II.
On May 21, Williams also hit his 100th career home run.
In the season, Williams won the Triple Crown, with a .356 batting average, 36 home runs, and 137 RBIs.
Williams used his celebrity to virtually launch the fund, which raised more that $750 million between 1948 and 2010.
The Red Sox played three more games, but they were on the road in New York City and Williams did not appear in any of them, as it became clear that Williams' final home at-bat would be the last one of his career.
Some seemingly were.
Ignoring the shift, Williams walked twice and grounded out to second base.
With the National League (NL) leading 5-2 in the eighth inning, Williams struck out in the middle of an American League (AL) rally.
Williams was much more successful in fishing.
In , Williams batted .388 to lead the Major Leagues, and remarkably at the age of 40 in 1958, he led the American League with a .328 batting average.
Williams' paternal ancestors were a mix of Welsh and Irish.
They divorced in 1954.
In the main lodge one can still see memorabilia from Williams' playing days.
Joining the Red Sox in 1939, he immediately emerged as one of the sport's best hitters.
During the mission, a piece of flak knocked out his hydraulics and electrical systems, causing Williams to have to "limp" his plane back to K-13, a U.S. Air Force airfield close to the front lines.
Williams joined the  Navy Reserve on May 22, 1942, went on active duty in 1943, and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the United States Marine Corps as a Naval Aviator on May 2, 1944.
He was selected for the Major League Baseball All-Time Team in 1997 and the Major League Baseball All-Century Team in 1999.
Williams also caused a controversy in mid-August when he called his salary "peanuts", along with saying he hated the city of Boston and reporters, leading reporters to lash back at him, saying that he should be traded.
During an exhibition game in Fenway Park against an All-Star team during early October, Williams was hit on the elbow by a curveball by the Washington Senators' pitcher Mickey Haefner.
Meanwhile, Collins kept in touch with Padres general manager Bill Lane, calling him two times throughout the season.
Williams lacked foot speed, as attested by his 19-year career total of only one inside-the-park home run, one occasion of hitting for the cycle, and just 24 stolen bases.
Pitchers, though, were not afraid to walk him to get to the 33-year-old Foxx, and after that the 34-year-old Joe Cronin, the player-manager.
In January , Williams was drafted into the military, being put into Class 1-A.
Pesky again described Williams' acumen in the advance training, for which Pesky personally did not qualify: "I heard Ted literally tore the sleeve target to shreds with his angle dives.
Williams went 6-for-8 on the day, finishing the season at .406.
Williams ran away as the winner in the MVP voting.
The maternal, Mexican side of Williams' family was quite diverse, having Spanish (Basque), Russian, and American Indian roots.
One of Ted Williams' final, and most memorable, public appearances was at the 1999 All-Star Game in Boston.
After the season, manager Steve O'Neill was fired, with Lou Boudreau replacing him.
He famously used a lighter bat than most sluggers, because it generated a faster swing.
In the 11th inning, Williams' prediction came true, as he hit a big blast to help the Red Sox win.
Their daughter, Barbara Joyce ("Bobbi Jo"), was born on January 28, 1948, while Williams was fishing in Florida.
Ted went to Jacksonville for a course in aerial gunnery, the combat pilot's payoff test, and broke all the records in reflexes, coordination, and visual-reaction time.
In 1991 on Ted Williams Day at Fenway Park, Williams pulled a Red Sox cap from out of his jacket and tipped it to the crowd.
He became just the second player to hit 200 home runs in a Red Sox uniform, joining his former teammate Jimmie Foxx.
Williams later signed a $70,000 contract in 1947.
He followed this up by winning his first Triple Crown in 1942.
In 1947, he won his second Triple Crown.
In a graphic from 1968 that accompanied an article in ''Sports Illustrated'' magazine, Williams divided the strike zone into 77 baseballs, with each baseball containing his projected batting average for pitches thrown in that location.
In the Red Sox final two games against the Yankees to force a one-game playoff against the Cleveland Indians, Williams got on base eight times out of ten plate appearances.
Williams led the league with 135 runs scored and 37 home runs, and he finished third with 335 total bases, the most home runs, runs scored, and total bases by a Red Sox player since Jimmie Foxx's in 1938.
This led ''Boston Globe'' sports journalist Gerry Moore to quip, "Not since Joe DiMaggio broke in with the Yankees by "five for five" in St. Petersburg in 1936 has any baseball rookie received the nationwide publicity that has been accorded this spring to Theodore Francis  Williams".
In the off-season between the 1946 and  season, Williams was offered a three-year, $300,000 dollar contract to play for the Mexican League, which Williams declined.
When Pumpsie Green became the first black player on the Boston Red Sox in 1959 — the last major league team to integrate its team — Williams openly welcomed Green.
However, despite being ahead of the Yankees by one game right before the series, the Red Sox lost both games they had to play against the Yankees.
Williams was fined $5,000 for the incident.
In 2016, the major league San Diego Padres inducted Williams into their hall of fame for his contributions to baseball in San Diego.
("If I had known hitting .400 was going to be such a big deal", he quipped in 1991, "I would have done it again.")
In the first inning, Williams caught a  line drive by Ralph Kiner, slamming into the Comiskey Park scoreboard and breaking his left arm.
The Tampa Bay Rays home field, Tropicana Field, installed the Ted Williams Museum (formerly in Hernando, Florida, 1994–2006) behind the left field fence.
When Williams returned, he signed a $98,000 contract on May 13.
When his classification was changed to 1-A following the American entry into World War II, Williams appealed to his local draft board.
He often touted Rogers Hornsby as being the greatest right-handed hitter of all time.
The Padres ended up winning the PCL title, while Williams ended up hitting .291 with 23 home runs.
Williams was then switched from right field to left field, as there would be less sun in his eyes, and it would give Dom DiMaggio a chance to play.
Because he was so popular, GIs and airmen from all around the base came to see him and his plane.
After retirement from play, Williams helped Boston's new left fielder, Carl Yastrzemski, in hitting.
In the ninth inning the AL still trailed 5-3; Ken Keltner and Joe Gordon singled, and Cecil Travis walked to load the bases.
On April 28, Williams hit his 223rd career home run, breaking the record for most home runs in a Red Sox uniform, passing Jimmie Foxx.
Ted's two 24-hour private caregivers who were with him the entire period the note was said to have been created also stated in affidavits that John-Henry and Claudia were never present at any time for the note to be produced.
In , under their new manager Joe McCarthy (manager), Williams hit a league-leading .369 with 25 home runs and 127 RBIs, and was third in MVP voting.
Williams' son, John-Henry, and brother, Danny, both died of leukemia.
The Service World Series with the Army versus the Navy attracted crowds of 40,000 for each game.
Williams was also known as an accomplished hunter; he was fond of pigeon-shooting for sport in Fenway Park during his career, on one occasion drawing the ire of the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
The .553 OBP stood as a major league record until it was broken by Barry Bonds in 2002 and his .735 slugging percentage  was highest mark in the major leagues between 1932 and 1994.
Williams was also almost traded for Joe DiMaggio in 1947.
Williams was first sent to the Navy's Preliminary Ground School at Amherst College for six months of academic instruction in various subjects including math and navigation, where he achieved a 3.85 grade point average.
On August 18, 1945, following the atomic bomb drops on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Lt. Williams was sent to Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
While the Millers ended up sixth place in an eight-team race, Williams ended up hitting .366 with 46 home runs and 142 RBIs.
He was also second to Ruth in career walks, but has since dropped to fourth place behind Barry Bonds and Rickey Henderson.
On September 6, Williams hit his 332nd career home run, passing Hank Greenberg for seventh all-time.
On August 25, Williams passed Johnny Mize for sixth place, and on September 3, Williams passed Joe DiMaggio for fifth all-time in career home runs with his 362nd career home run.
Williams demanded loyalty from those around him.
Unlike many other major league players, he did not spend all of his war-time playing on service teams.
from the crowd by making an appearance from the dugout.
Williams resented his mother's long hours working in the Salvation Army, and Williams and his brother cringed when she took them to the Army's street-corner revivals.
In May, Williams was hitting .337.
Gibson and others followed, starting in 1972 and continuing off and on into the 21st Century.
He collected his first hit on the Millers' first game of the season, as well as his first and second home runs during his third game.
In 1991 President George H. W. Bush presented Williams with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award bestowed by the United States government.
Williams could not swing a bat again until four days later, one day before the World Series, when he reported the arm as "sore".
Of his Mexican ancestry he said that "If I had my mother's name, there is no doubt I would have run into problems in those days, considering the prejudices people had in Southern California".
On his first game back, Williams hit a home run, and he batted .356 in 320 at bats on the season, lacking enough at bats to win the batting title over Al Kaline, who batted .340 in 1955, while hitting 28 home runs and driving in 83 runs, while being named the "Comeback Player of the Year".
This assertion actually led to a split in the relationship between Ty Cobb and Ted Williams.
From 1955 to 1960, Williams maintained an average OPS of 1.092, as compared with .950 for Aaron.
Despite his lower-than-usual production at bat, Williams made the All-Star team.
Saul was one of his mother's four brothers, as well as a former semi-professional baseball player who had pitched against Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, and Joe Gordon in an exhibition game.
Williams also had an uneasy relationship with the Boston fans, though he could be very cordial one-on-one.
Even though there was not a Rookie of the Year award yet in 1939, Babe Ruth declared Williams to be the Rookie of the Year, to which Williams later said was "good enough for me".
In 1938, the nineteen-year-old Williams was ten days late to spring training camp in Sarasota, Florida, because of a flood in California blocking the railroads.
Williams remained in major league spring training for about a week.
Angry, the attorney took the case to the Presidential Board.
While the incident was an accident and Williams apologized to the woman personally, to all appearances it seemed at the time that Williams had hurled the bat in a fit of temper.
At the pitcher's mound he was surrounded by players from both teams, including fellow Red Sox player Nomar Garciaparra.
Ted choked and was only able to say,"...ok kid..." The Red Sox went on to win the game 5-3 thanks to a two-run home run by Williams in the seventh inning.
Williams married the socialite model Lee Howard on September 10, 1961 and they were divorced in 1967.
Williams gave generously to those in need.
Williams inherited Chapman's number 9 on his uniform as opposed to Williams' number 5 in the previous spring training.
Ted Williams was born in San Diego, California, as '''Teddy Samuel Williams''', named after his father, Samuel Stuart Williams, and former president, Teddy Roosevelt.
(Interestingly, despite his slowness on the basepaths, he is one of only four players in history – along with the noted speedsters Tim Raines, Rickey Henderson, and Omar Vizquel – to have stolen a base in four different decades.)
This resulted in the discovery of an inner ear infection that disqualified him from flight status.
When he came to bat he spit in the direction of fans near the dugout.
Gibson died early in 1947 and thus never played in the majors; and Paige's brief major league stint came long past his prime as a player.
In the fourth inning Williams doubled to drive in a run.
In the 1941 All-Star Game, Williams batted fourth behind Joe DiMaggio, who was in the midst of his record-breaking hitting streak, having hit safely in 48 consecutive games.
Red Sox manager Joe Cronin offered him the chance to sit out the final day, but he declined.
Williams lived in San Diego's North Park neighborhood (4121 Utah Street).
Williams came to spring training three days late in , thanks to Williams driving from California to Florida and respiratory problems, the latter of which would plague Williams for the rest of his career.
Philadelphia fans ran out on the field to surround Williams after the game, forcing him to protect his hat from being stolen; he was helped into the clubhouse by his teammates.
Williams later had a twenty-two game hitting streak that lasted from Memorial Day through mid-June.
The Yankees won the first of what would be five straight World Series titles in 1949.
He once had a friendship with Ty Cobb, with whom he often had discussions about baseball.
In the playoff, Williams went 1-for-4, with the Red Sox losing 8–3 due to McCarthy's decision to start Denny Galehouse over southpaw Mel Parnell.
It was not uncommon to find Williams fishing in the pond at the camp.
Williams felt that he should have gotten a "little more consideration" because of winning the Triple Crown, and he thought that "the reason I didn't get more consideration was because of the trouble I had with the draft boards".
For Williams' 40th birthday, MacArthur sent him an oil painting of himself with the inscription "To Ted Williams&nbsp;— not only America's greatest baseball player, but a great American who served his country.
His devotion allowed him to hit for power and average while maintaining extraordinary plate discipline.
He made a public statement that once he had built up his mother's trust fund, he intended to enlist.
Williams occasionally expressed regret that he had not worked harder on his defense.
He often spent time in left field practicing "shadow swings" for his next at-bat.
Williams' best season as a manager was 1969 when he led the expansion Senators to an 86–76 record in the team's only winning season in Washington.
Williams served as a Naval Aviator during World War II and the Korean War.
Williams rejected this; when he liked a western actor like Hoot Gibson, he liked him in every picture, and would not think of booing him.
Collins later explained, "It wasn't hard to find Ted Williams.
Fans responded with a standing ovation that lasted several minutes.
Throughout his career, Williams stated his goal was to have people point to him and remark, "There goes Ted Williams, the greatest hitter who ever lived."
Although Aaron (age 21-26) recorded only one of his five best seasons, their averages are not too far from the career averages of the two baseball players.
The home run is still considered to be the longest home run ever hit in the old Comiskey Park, some saying that it went 600 feet (183 meters).
Through 2011, Williams was one of seven major league players to have had at least four 30-home run and 100-RBI seasons in their first five years, along with Chuck Klein, Joe DiMaggio, Ralph Kiner, Mark Teixeira, Albert Pujols, and Ryan Braun.
However, he did show great respect for Red Sox pitcher Bill "Spaceman" Lee, crediting him with that kind of mindset.
Williams would also go into a partnership with friend Al Cassidy to form the Ted Williams Baseball Camp in Lakeville, Massachusetts.
His father was a soldier, sheriff, and photographer from New York, while his mother, May Venzor, a Mexican-American from El Paso, Texas, was an evangelist and lifelong soldier in the Salvation Army.
(Sacrifice flies were counted as at-bats in 1941; under today's rules, Williams would have hit between .411 and .419, based on contemporaneous game accounts.)
Hornsby told Williams useful advice, including to "get a good pitch to hit".
Williams was in Pearl Harbor awaiting orders to join the Fleet in the Western Pacific when the War in the Pacific ended.
The players said it was even better than the actual World Series being played between the Detroit Tigers and Chicago Cubs that year.
He also led the AL in walks, with 107, a rookie record.
Throughout his career, Williams made countless bedside visits to children being treated for cancer, which Williams insisted on going unreported.
He was chosen "Manager of the Year" after that season.
Williams was talented as a pilot, and so enjoyed it that he had to be ordered by the Navy to leave training to personally accept his American League 1942 Major League Baseball Triple Crown.
John-Henry's lawyer then produced an informal "family pact" signed by Ted, Claudia, and John-Henry, in which they agreed "to be put into biostasis after we die" to "be able to be together in the future, even if it is only a chance."
On November 18, 1991, President George H. W. Bush presented Williams with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the US.
Tom Yawkey, the Red Sox owner, then sent Jack Fadden to Williams' Florida home to talk to Williams.
For the 1946 baseball season, Williams hit .342 with 38 home runs and 123 RBIs, helping the Red Sox win the pennant on September 13, hitting the only inside-the-park home run in his Major League career in a 1-0 win against Cleveland.
He finished his playing career with a .344 batting average, 521 home runs, and a .482 on-base percentage, the highest of all time.
The incident caused an avalanche of negative media reaction, and inspired sportswriter Austen Lake's famous comment that when Williams name was announced the sound was like "autumn wind moaning through an apple orchard."
Williams had to borrow $200 from a bank to make the trip from San Diego to Sarasota.
On July 14, after Williams hit three home runs and eight RBIs in the first game of a doubleheader, Lou Boudreau, inspired by Williams' consistent pull hitting to right field, created what would later be known as the Boudreau shift (also Williams shift) against Williams, having only one player on the left side of second base (the left fielder).
In late August, Williams was hitting .402.
Able to walk only a short distance, Williams was brought to the pitcher's mound in a golf cart.
On the first day of spring training in , Williams broke his collarbone running after a line drive.
Your friend, Douglas MacArthur.
Williams' baseball season of 1941 is often considered favorably with the greatest seasons of Ruth and Bonds in terms of various offensive statistical measures such as slugging, on-base and "offensive winning percentage."
On May 15, 1951, Williams became the 11th player in major league history to hit 300 career home runs.
On May 1, 1952, 14 months after his promotion to Captain in the Marine Corps Reserve, Williams was recalled to active duty for service in the Korean War.
The younger Williams provided structure to his father's business affairs, exposed forgeries that were flooding the memorabilia market, and rationed his father's public appearances and memorabilia signings to maximize their earnings.
Though the family pact upset some friends, family and fans, a public plea for financial support of the lawsuit by Ferrell produced little result.
He was occasionally criticized for refusing to swing at a borderline pitch to put a ball in play when it might have helped advance a runner or score a run (a recurring theme among sportswriter critics was that "Ted plays for himself.").
Paige was the first inducted in 1971.
You remind me a lot of myself.
Inquiries to cryonics organizations increased after the publicity from the case.
Also in that eight-team league were Joe DiMaggio, Joe Gordon, and Stan Musial.
Williams also won the Triple Crown in 1947, but lost the MVP award to Joe DiMaggio, with 201 votes compared to DiMaggio's 202 votes.
This was the first time that he had done so since his earliest days as a player.
In the second week of spring training in , Williams broke a bone in his right ankle, limiting him to pinch hitting for the first two weeks of the season.
He had not flown any aircraft for about eight years but he turned down all offers to sit out the war in comfort as a member of a service baseball team.
On September 26, Williams "retired" after the Red Sox's final game of the season.
For his actions of this day, he was awarded the Air Medal.
In the 1937 season, after graduating from Hoover High in the winter, Williams finally broke into the line-up on June 22, when he hit an inside-the-park home run to help the Padres win 3-2.
In December 1937, during the winter meetings, the deal was made between Lane and Collins, sending Williams to the Boston Red Sox and giving Lane $35,000 and two major leaguers, Dom D'Allessandro and Al Niemiec, and two other minor leaguers.
"If I'm going to be a .400 hitter", he said at the time, "I want more than my toenails on the line."
The Fund recently stated that, "Williams would travel everywhere and anywhere, no strings or paychecks attached, to support the cause&nbsp;... His name is synonymous with our battle against all forms of cancer."
Cobb apparently had strong feelings about Hornsby and he threw a fit, expelling Williams from his hotel room.
Whatever gave me the idea he could act?"
Born and raised in San Diego, Williams played baseball throughout his youth.
While on the baseball team, Williams was sent back to Fenway Park on July 12, 1943 to play on an All-Star team managed by Babe Ruth.
Williams said he would buy Orlando a Cadillac if this all came true.
By today's standards (plate appearances) he would have been the champion.
John-Henry said that his father was a believer in science and was willing to try cryonics if it held the possibility of reuniting the family.
He was the third Red Sox player to hit 100 home runs with the team, following his teammates Jimmie Foxx and Joe Cronin.
Williams was sometimes considered to be an indifferent outfielder with a good throwing arm.
While in the Pacific Coast League in 1936, Williams met future teammates and friends Dom DiMaggio and Bobby Doerr, who were on the Pacific Coast League's San Francisco Seals.
However, Williams did become an expert at playing the rebounds of batted balls off of the left-field wall and fences in Fenway Park.
Although Williams' career did not overlap with that of Ruth or Bonds, a direct comparison with another great hitter, Hank Aaron, is possible.
On July 17, , Williams became the fifth player to hit 400 home runs, following Mel Ott in 1941, Jimmie Foxx in 1938, Lou Gehrig in 1936, and Babe Ruth in 1927.
Williams was discharged by the Marine Corps on January 28, 1946, in time to begin preparations for the upcoming pro baseball season.
During the off-season of 1954, Williams was offered the chance to be manager of the Red Sox.
Although Williams hit .344, his power and runs batted in were down from the previous season, with 23 home runs and 113 RBIs.
He then served as manager of the Washington Senators, from 1969–1971, then continued with the team when they became the Texas Rangers after the 1971 season.
Williams was a seventeen-time All-Star, a two-time recipient of the American League (AL) Most Valuable Player Award, a six-time AL batting champion, and a two-time Triple Crown winner.
Williams said that the "only real fun" he had in 1940 was being able to pitch once on August 24, when he pitched the last two innings in a 12 – 1 loss to the Detroit Tigers, allowing one earned run on three hits, while striking out one batter, Rudy York.
This powerful and unprecedented statement from the Hall of Fame podium was "a first crack in the door that ultimately would open and include Paige and Gibson and other Negro League stars in the shrine."
They were divorced in 1972.
Nevertheless, Williams was somewhat resentful of being called up, which he admitted years later, particularly regarding the Navy's policy of calling up Inactive Reservists rather than members of the Active Reserve.
Ted's elder daughter, Bobby-Jo Ferrell, brought suit to have her father's wishes recognized.
