Like much of central Honduras, the city has a tropical climate, though tempered by the altitude—meaning less humid than the lower valleys and the coastal regions—with even temperatures averaging between  and  degrees.
*'''3''' - '''South Comayagüela''' is by far the better-off region of Comayagüela.
This area prevails north of Lepaterique Road and westward of ''Boulevard de la Comunidad Europea'' (European Community Blvd).
Tegucigalpa-Danlí highway) rather the number itself since road signage is scarce.
File:Tegus1.jpg|Downtown Tegucigalpa
La Tigra National Park lies several kilometers north of the city and covers an area of .
Most of the popular museums are located around the historic center of the city.
The metropolitan area of both Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela covers a total area of  while the entire Municipality of the Central District covers a total area of .
Comayagüela is found on the west bank of the Choluteca River, and most of its urbanization is made up of lower income neighborhoods.
There is an average of 107 rainy days in the year, June and September usually the wettest months.
Tegucigalpa's infrastructure has not kept up with its population growth.
Heavily congested roadways where current road infrastructure is unable to efficiently handle over 400,000 vehicles create havoc on a daily basis.
It still remained relatively small and provincial until the 1970s, when migration from the rural areas began in earnest.
Popular retail, restaurant, and hospitality American-branded franchises prevail throughout the Honduran capital; such as Walmart, McDonalds, and Marriott, among others.
While the city administration divides the capital into barrios and colonias, the fact that there are hundreds of them makes it difficult to define the city's different regions, especially for those not familiar with the Central District.
The wettest months of the rainy season are May—June and September—October, averaging 16.2 rainy days during each of those periods.
Manufacturing assembly plants (''maquiladoras'') were introduced in Honduras in 1976.
Honduras has the world's highest murder rate.
Most of their students study abroad.
Inter-city school sports championships take place in Tegucigalpa as well.
Bus routes are named based on the neighborhood they cover.
Total K-12 tuition of The American School of Tegucigalpa costs a total of L.1.366 million (US$72,248) for all years (amount based on 10-11 academic year).
The average sunshine hours during the dry season is 228 per month while  is the average monthly precipitation during the wet season.
Intense webs of electrical and telephone lines above the streets are a common sight in the capital, and in virtually all Honduran cities, since implementation of underground utility lines has only been adopted in recent years.
Tegucigalpa is located in the southern-central highland region known as the department of Francisco Morazán of which it is also the departmental capital.
Top victim age group (15-39)
There are 32,665 business establishments throughout the capital, the most of any city in the country.
Many of these neighborhoods came to be through improvised urbanization and lack proper infrastructure.
*'''2''' - '''North Comayagüela''' is formed by relatively recent post-Hurricane Mitch middle class residential developments that stretch onto the northern hills of Comayagüela, such as Colonia Cerro Grande, a continuously growing middle-class neighborhood on the northern outskirts.
They are not the cheapest form of public transportation for the locals, however.
Large commercial jets are required to execute a tight hairpin left turn at very low altitude to land on the short runway.
The industrial production taking place in the region includes textiles, clothing, sugar, cigarettes, lumber, plywood, paper, ceramics, cement, glass, metalwork, plastics, chemicals, tires, electrical appliances, and farm machinery.
However, nearly all governmental institutions are on the Tegucigalpa side, so for all practical purposes Tegucigalpa is the capital.
During the dry season, a dense cloud of smog lingers in the basin until the first rains fall.
Firearm involvement
The city's major economic sources are commerce, construction, services, textiles, sugar, and tobacco.
There are an estimated 650,000 residents in Comayagüela contributing 58.3 percent of the 120 million lempiras (US$6.349 million) generated every day by commerce in the Central District.
The literacy rate, , is at 80%.
It later enters the municipality of Guaimaca and then junctions with highway 43 which connects to Yoro department.
In 2001, the infant mortality rate was 29 per 1000 live births (Both maternal and infant mortality rates are based on local and out-of-district residents who arrive to receive medical attention).
Voz el Soberano'' and ''Revistazo'' are political watchdog online publishers.
International financial institutions in Tegucigalpa include  Banco de América Central-BAC Honduras (former Banco Mercantil-BAMER),  Banco Lafise (Latin American Financial Services), Citibank, Davivienda, the Inter-American Development Bank (IAB), the World Bank, and the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (BCIE), with its headquarters located in Colonia Miramontes on Boulevard Suyapa.
Prior to 1991, the central government held great jurisdiction over the execution of city management across the country, leading to uneven representation and improper distribution of resources and governance.
The Natural History Museum (Museo de la Historia Natural) is located within the National Autonomous University of Honduras.
Cable Color, based in Tegucigalpa, is one of the major cable TV providers in the country.
Several of the main boulevards have been equipped with interchanges, overpasses and underpasses, allowing for sections of controlled-access highways, but considering that even the city's beltway does not entirely circle the city, the roads are generally limited-access.
91 percent of the victims were men and 81.2 were ages 15 to 39.
It is also the seat of government of the Francisco Morazán department.
However, the most transited roads suffer from heavy traffic congestion due to the region's geography and disorganized urbanization.
María Pediatric Hospital and the Basílica of Suyapa lie on the side of Anillo Períferico's eastern stretch.
Boulevard Morazán and Avenida Los Próceres/Avenida La Paz are busy commercial corridors (running parallel to each other) and run through several neighborhoods home to foreign embassies, a hotel district, business establishments and corporate buildings, including Los Próceres Comercial Park (''Parque Comercial'').
According to the  National Chamber of Tourism of Honduras (CANATURH), the city is visited by at least 250,000 tourists every summer.
Tegucigalpa is also served by the rest of country's newspapers, including ''La Prensa'' and ''El Tiempo'' from San Pedro Sula and the sports newspaper and fashion magazine, ''Diez'' and '' Estilo'', respectively; divisions of ''La Prensa''.  ''
These include the National Identity Museum ( Museo para la Identidad Nacional), founded in 2006; the National Anthropology and History Museum or Villa Roy National Museum (Museo Nacional de Antropología e Historia-Museo Nacional Villa Roy), founded in 1976 on the former residence of President Julio Lozano Díaz (1954–1956) and reopened after a complete restoration in 1997; the National Art Gallery (Galería de Arte Nacional), founded in 1996; the Republic History Museum (Museo Histórico de la República), founded in 1993; the Museum of Man (Museo del Hombre), founded in 1989, the Telecommuncations Museum (Museo de las Comunicaciones), founded in 1985; the Military History Museum (Museo Histórico Militar), founded in 1983; and the Archaeological Museum (Museo Arqueológico).
For years, this area remained neglected and run down, but in recent times attempts have been made to revive the zone and bring back its colonial heritage.
Taxis are the quickest way to move around the city after personal auto transportation.
There is currently a project under construction to give the public transportation system an upgrade with the addition of a bus rapid transit fleet.
Some of the parks in the city include Parque La Leona, Parque Herrera, Parque Del Soldado, Parque Juan A. Lainez, Plaza España, Plaza del Libertador, and Central Park, the latter located in the heart of the historic center which leads to Paseo Liquidambar, a pedestrian zone street.
Both the city mayor and aldermen are elected to 4-year terms by voters of the Central District.
It is also bordered on the west by two municipalities of the Comayagua Department, Villa de San Antonio and Lamaní, with the latter exactly at the quadripoint where the Central District, Lepaterique, Villa de San Antonio and Lamaní all meet.
The dam clogged the waters of the river and many of the low-lying areas of Comayagüela were submerged; historic buildings located along Calle Real were either completely destroyed or so badly damaged that repair was futile.
Toncontín International, Metro Mall and City Mall are located in this area.
The first mayor of Tegucigalpa was ''Juan de la Cueva'', who took office in 1579.
Like most of the interior highlands of Honduras, the majority of Tegucigalpa's current area was occupied by open woodland.
The Central District is the largest of the 28 municipalities in the Francisco Morazán department.
The Tiburcio Carias Andino National Stadium is the multi-purpose venue hosting the national and international soccer games taking place in the capital.
For 2011, the fair was scheduled to run from September 26 until October 13.
The airport is frequently criticized as being dangerous; due to its location next to a sierra, short runway, and difficult approach.
This comes three years after former President Manuel Zelaya had announced that all commercial flights would be transferred to Soto Cano Air Base; however, work on the new terminal at Soto Cano was then cancelled after Zelaya was removed from office on 28 June 2009 in the 2009 Honduran coup d'état.
Each has its own distinct character and sense of history and all of them make easy day-trips out of the city.
A popular myth claims that the society of Comayagua, the long-time colonial capital of Honduras, publicly disliked the wife of President Soto, who took revenge by moving the capital to Tegucigalpa.
Traditionally, they are regarded as twin or sister cities in part because they were originally founded as two distinct cities.
The heavy rain caused flash floods of Choluteca's tributaries, and the swollen river overflowed its banks, tearing down entire neighborhoods and bridges across the ravaged city.
There are an additional of 41 villages and 293 hamlets through the Central District Municipality.
Also a post-Hurricane Mitch area, it has grown in the last decade and includes some of Comayagüela's upper income communities that have erupted in the area and continues to spread out as newer suburban middle class developments are built.
The city is also highly disorganized, particularly around its oldest districts.
The Municipal Department of Justice (''Departamento Municipal de Justicia'') through its Municipal Police Court (''Juzgado de Policía Municipal'') enforces and prosecutes local law offenses.
There is currently an overflow of public transportation vehicles on the roads.
Several festivities occur during this time including book fairs, art expositions, concerts and a parade.
Fuerzas Armadas'' within the Government Civic Center complex, which also houses the Foreign Affairs Ministry and the Supreme Court of Justice.
*Data based on crimes reported to authorities.
The following radio stations are based in Tegucigalpa: 88.7 Radio Globo Honduras, 91.1 Radio Kairos,  91.7 Estereo La Buenisima,  93.5 Radio Cadena Voces, 94.7 Radio America,  95.9 Radio Panamericana,  97.1 La 97 FM Radio,  97.7 Stereo Azul,  100.1 Super 100 Estereo,  101.3 Radio Nacional de Honduras,  103.1 Tu Alternativa,  103.7 Stereo Luz,  104.3 Momentos FM Estereo, 104.9 Estereo Amor,  106.7 Radio CHN-Cadena Hondureña de Noticias, and  107.3 W-107 Radio del Flow.
It operates seven police districts throughout the metropolitan area.
These five private schools are highly recognized by American institutions such as the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS-CASI) and the American School of Tegucigalpa is the only one that has the International Baccalaureate (IB Program).
* Paseo Los Próceres
There is a children's museum, ( Centro Interactivo de Enseñanza CHIMINIKE), founded in 2003, located on ''Blvd.
It is currently managed by InterAirports, the company hired by the government of Honduras to manage the four airports in the country.
The  Honduran Institute of Anthropology and History, founded in 1952, promotes cultural heritage and manages several museums throughout Honduras.
Crimes against property
In late May 2011, the National Congress approved the project under a new law as part of the financing deal with the Inter-American Development Bank (IAB).
Tegucigalpa is home to Club Deportivo Olimpia and Club Deportivo Motagua, members of the Honduran National Soccer League.
*'''3''' - '''North Tegucigalpa''' is formed by both middle class and impoverished neighborhoods that lie above the surrounding hill immediately north of the historic downtown.
Crimes against person
There are 14 museums in Tegucigalpa.
These may be assigned deputy mayors (''alcalde auxiliar'') to serve as local representatives.
Both current national and local governments have taken steps to improve and expand infrastructure as well as to reduce poverty in the city.
The first Presbyterian congregation was planted 50 years ago, by the National Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Guatemala.
Taxis are popular for short-distance trips or trips that require a sense of urgency.
The main obstacle to establishing factories in Tegucigalpa has been facilitating infrastructure to provide efficient access between the capital and country's economic hubs: San Pedro Sula and Puerto Cortez.
The Christian Love Brigade Association arrived in Tegucigalpa in 1971, the Abundant Life Christian Church was founded in 1972, the Cenacle Christian Center of Charismatic Renewal began in 1978 and the Living Love Groups started in 1978.
Being a for-profit business, it encourages competition between the fleet owners where revenue is the priority while badly ignoring the quality and efficiency of the service.
It has seen a rapid growth in the last 30 years, and only until recently has the government passed certain laws to establish city planning and zoning rules.
A grid of surface streets and a network of major avenues and boulevards cross through the major areas of the capital.
Public transportation regulation is very flawed.
There are several bus lines connecting the capital with the rest of Honduras.
Today, Tegucigalpa continues to sprawl far beyond its former colonial core: towards the east, south and west, creating a large but disorganized metropolis.
Upon completion four years later, it linked Tegucigalpa with her neighbor city of Comayagüela.
The American School of Tegucigalpa (K-12),  Discovery School (K-12),  DelCampo International School(K-12),  Los Pinares Academy (K-12, Christian) and  International School of Tegucigalpa (K-12, Christian) are considered the most expensive private schools of the city.
The Comayagüela side of the capital can be divided into four sections: '''1''') Zona Centro (Downtown Comayagüela); '''2''') North Comayagüela; '''3''') South Comayagüela; and '''4''') West Comayagüela:
Locals and visitors alike can enjoy several restaurants serving traditional Honduran dishes as well, from a typical streetside vendor, a family restaurant, or an upscale food establishment.
The center of shopping in Tegucigalpa is Multiplaza, the most exclusive,  multi-level indoor shopping mall that includes design name stores, a major grocery store, a movie theater complex, restaurants, and banking.
These two entities remain separated by the Choluteca River basin that runs between them.
Buses leave for Guatemala, El Salvador,  Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and Mexico every day.
The oldest districts were not built with the advent of the automobile in mind and therefore lack efficient roadways to accommodate the overwhelming number of vehicles.
1, Colonia el Carrizal No.
It is formed by more than 40 neighborhoods, many of them wealthy middle class residential areas such as Colonia Palmira to the east of the historic center, on Boulevard Morazán which hosts several foreign embassies as well as upscale restaurants.
Honduran philologist , in his book ''Indigenous Toponymies of Central America'', states that Tegucigalpa is a Nahuatl word meaning "in the homes of the sharp stones" and rules out the traditional meaning "hills of silver" arguing that Taguzgalpa was the name of the ancient eastern zone of Honduras.
This lack of proper urbanization as the population has grown is evident on the surrounding slopes of the several hills in the city where some of the city's most impoverished neighborhoods have prevailed.
There are three other daily papers printed in the city: '' El Libertador'', '' El Patriota'', and '' Tiempos del Mundo''.  ''
While their contribution to the economy remained small, they boomed at the beginning of the 1990s, mostly concentrating in northern Honduras, but after the mid-1990s they were expanded to the central region, including Tegucigalpa.
File:Tegus7.png|Torres Metrópolis and Las Lomas del Guijarro Hill
The public transportation system in Tegucigalpa is, however, highly disorganized.
There are over 12,000 taxis in the Central District.
City government takes the form of a mayor-council system and is regulated under the Law of Municipalities which came into effect on January 1, 1991.
Historically, Comayagüela has remained less developed than the other side of the capital, some citing insufficient contribution from public officials.
Vehicle-related deaths
Beyond the Park, stretching north and northwest of the city, upper income suburban neighborhoods such as El Hatillo sit on the sides of the hills, surrounded by heavy vegetation.
For 2011, the Secretary of Security designated L.2.162 billion (US$114.283 million) to law enforcement and criminal investigation in the Central District.
It is situated in a valley, surrounded by mountains.
These landslides destroyed most of the Soto neighborhood, and debris flowed into the river, forming a dam.
is the Honduran government's official newspaper, printed and published in the capital.
Taxis are relatively cheap for the international tourist.
To have a better understanding of the city's regions, the metro area of the Central District can essentially be divided, first, into two sections: Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela.
Honduras has been experiencing record-high violence in recent years.
Today, they are many religious groups in Tegucigalpa including a Jewish community, Jehovah's Witnesses and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints that is currently building a new temple in the city.
However, lacking the enforcement of city planning and zoning laws, it led to highly disorganized urbanization.
Since the Municipality of Tela is not considered the entire city of Tela, it is not bigger than La Ceiba.
About 30 other provincial roads connect to the towns and villages outside the urban area of the Central District.
In 1821, Tegucigalpa legally became a city.
Surface roads can be narrow with the most important avenues carrying no more than two or three lanes running in each direction, adding to the problem of heavy traffic congestion.
Their history in Tegucigalpa began around 1548 with the Spanish setting up Mercedarian missionaries as part of their conversion efforts of the native communities.
Top suicide age group (15-39)
The Metropolitan Police Headquarters No.
In 2009, the city government reported a revenue of 1.955 billion lempiras (US$103,512,220), more than any other capital city in Central America except Panama City.
An estimate of 400,000 vehicles take on the city streets and roads every day.
It is the home base of several state-owned entities such as ENEE and Hondutel, the national energy and telecommunications companies, respectively.
Public transportation in Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela is based on buses and taxis and they currently cover 71 percent of the capital's road migration.
All three branches of the national government as well as their immediate divisions—including the 16 departments of the Executive Branch, the National Congress, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Armed Forces and National Police headquarters—are located in the city.
In 2008, the city operated on an approved budget of 1.555 billion lempiras (US$82,189,029).
Highway 33 travels southwest and connects to the municipality of Lepaterique.
The Municipal Corporation also consults with a Municipal Development Council (''Consejo de Desarrollo Municipal'') which serves as an advising cabinet on all the areas of issues of the city such as human development, public safety, utilities, etc.
After October 1838, following Honduras' independence as a single republic, the capital continued to switch back and forth between Tegucigalpa and Comayagua until October 30, 1880, when Tegucigalpa was declared the permanent capital of Honduras by then-president Marco Aurelio Soto.
The District's active labor force is 367,844 people of which 56,035 are employed in the public sector.
International routes are given a "CA-"  designation followed by a highway number (i.e.
As a result, in late 1990 under Decree 134-90, the National Congress of Honduras enacted the Law of Municipalities (''Ley de Municipalidades''), defining the country's department and municipal institutions, representatives and their functions to give city government autonomy and decentralize it from the national government.
Furthermore, Chapter 11, Article 295, states (translated)  "The Central District consists of a single municipality made up of the former municipalities of Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela"; however, municipalities in Honduras are defined as political entities similar to counties, and they may contain one or more cities.
The city consists of gentle hills, and the ring of mountains surrounding the city tends to trap pollution.
The United Nations National Park on El Picacho Hill just north above the city offers a great view of the city and hosts the Picacho Metropolitan Zoo.
Ten aldermen (''regidores'') are also members of the Municipal Corporation who along with the mayor execute the duties as described in the Law of Municipalities, including management, budgeting, and local law and ordinance legislation.
After the hurricane, infrastructure in Tegucigalpa was severely damaged.
Some of the popular landmarks include the Metropolitan Cathedral, the former Presidential Palace (now a museum), the National University, the Basilica of the Virgin of Suyapa, La Merced Church, and the Manuel Bonilla Theater.
The months of December and January are coolest, with an average min/ low temperature of ; whereas March and April—popularly associated with Holy Week's holidays—are hottest and temperatures can reach up to  degrees on the hottest day.
International airline pilots flying into Toncontín receive additional, specific training for the Toncontín approach.
These include: the Marriott Hotel, Clarion Hotel, Hotel El Centenario, Intercontinental, Honduras Maya, Plaza Del Libertador, Plaza San Martín, Hotel Alameda, and Excelsior Hotel and Casino.
These are Police District 1-1 ''El Edén'', Police District 1-2 ''El Mandén'', Police District 1-3 ''San Miguel'', Police District 1-4 ''Kennedy'', Police District 1-5 ''El Belén'', Police District 1-6 ''La Granja'' and Police District 1-7 ''San Francisco''.
Tegucigalpa features a more moderate form of a tropical wet and dry climate.
The rainfall also triggered massive landslides around El Berrinche Hill, close to the downtown area.
During this period, both cities had a population of about 40,000 people.
Emisoras Unidas, the largest radio conglomerate in the country, is headquartered in Tegucigalpa and operates 94-SU 94.1 FM, Rock N' Pop 92.3 FM, Vox 101.9 FM, Suave 102.5 FM, Sterio Éxitos 88.1 FM, Radio Satélite 790&nbsp;AM, XY Honduras 90.5 FM, and Radio HRN 92.9 FM.
The storm remained over Honduran territory for five days, dumping heavy rainfall late in the rainy season.
In 2009, the city's revenue and expenditures budget was L.2,856,439,263 (US$151,214,182)  while in 2010 it was L.2,366,993,208 (US$125.204.606).
The capital's international airport, Toncontín, is known for its extremely short runway and the unusual maneuvers pilots must undertake upon landing or taking off to avoid the nearby mountains.
These barrios are formed in a grid street plan style.
Tegucigalpa is home to two of the nation's four most important newspapers: ''La Tribuna'', the liberal and leading newspaper in the city and ''El Heraldo'', the more conservative.
The dry season lasts from November through April and the rainy season from May through October.
The other four networks are Channel 11 owned by Grupo Continental & R. Media;  Televisión Educativa National-TEN (Channel 10), a public broadcasting network featuring the ''Telenoticiero Abriendo Brecha'' newscast; Maya TV (Channel 66), and  Telered 21 which has its principal offices in San Pedro Sula.
In 1946, missionaries of the Southern Baptist Convention first arrived in Tegucigalpa and in the 1950s, the National Convention of Baptist Churches and the Eastern Mennonite Board of Missions followed.
These are assigned numbers; however, they are more often identified using their physical destinations (e.g.
Law enforcement in the city is the responsibility of the National Police of Honduras, the nationwide police force.
*'''2''' - '''Centro Contemporáneo''' is the contemporary, vibrant and modern downtown of Tegucigalpa.
There is an art and history museum, ''Santa María de los Ángeles'', in Valle de Ángeles,  northwest of Tegucigalpa.
However, in a September 25, 2011 update, President Lobo stated officials were still "evaluating the pros and cons" of constructing the new airport.
Companies from other countries such as Mexico, have also made their presence with arrivals like Cinépolis movie theaters, which opened in 2010 in Cascadas Mall.
* Paseo Los Castaños
Several government offices, including the National Congress and City Hall as well as museums, parks, a cathedral and churches are located here.
The Choluteca River, which crosses the city from south to north, physically separates Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela.
The city is also home to the country's most important public university, the National Autonomous University of Honduras, as well as the national soccer team.
Tegucigalpa is host to 25 foreign embassies and 16 consulates.
Upon realization of the Palmerola airport, international flights to and from Toncontín would continue to operate but would be limited to small aircraft.
There are 24 FM radio stations and 28&nbsp;AM stations transmitting into or from Tegucigalpa.
Tegucigalpa is connected with the rest of Central America and Mexico through its international bus lines.
During the 1970s, the  Catholic Charismatic Renewal Movement began to grow among the upper classes in Tegucigalpa.
The area surrounding the city continues to be open woodland supporting pine forest interspersed with some oak, scrub, and grassy clearings as well as needle leaf evergreen and broadleaf deciduous forest.
While autonomous, the Central District is still influenced by the national government given the territory remains seat of government of the republic.
A general manager, appointed by the mayor, serves as chief comptroller to manage city funds and their allocation.
Two universities, UTH and UNITEC, are located just off the beltway in southern outskirt neighborhoods.
1'') is the police department in charge of law and order in the city.
Silver, lead and zinc are still mined in the outskirts of the city.
The neighborhoods reporting the highest incidence of violent death are Barrio Concepción, Colonia Nueva Capital, Colonia Villa Nueva Norte, Colonia Cerro Grande, Colonia El Carrizal No.
The Municipal Corporation is formed by a mayor serving as chief executive, general administrator and legal representative of the municipality and a vice mayor to serve as acting mayor when required and to oversee functions within AMDC as instructed by the mayor.
