Most of the remainder of workers are factory workers, shopkeepers, laborers and transport workers.
Within the one week successive snowfall roads were made impassable in some areas in north of Tehran along with a temperature variety of -8&nbsp;°C to -16&nbsp;°C
It is also the world's nearest ski resort to a capital city.
He was aware of the loyalties of the inhabitants of the previous capitals Isfahan and Shiraz to the Safavid and Zand dynasties respectively, and was wary of the power of the local notables in these cities.
On February 3, 2014, Tehran reached a heavy snowfall, specifically in the northern parts of the city, with a height of 2 meters.
Pizzerias, sandwich shops and kebab shops make up the majority of food outlets in the city.
During the war, Tehran also received a great number of migrants from the west and the southwest of the country bordering Iraq.
2008 museum garden cafe Tehran 2789830499.jpg|Shemroon Cafe
Persepolis and Esteghlal, which are the city's biggest clubs and two of the biggest clubs in Asia, compete in the Tehran derby.
Iranian Foreign Affaire Ministry.jpg|Police House,The National Garden
One of them was held in October 2014, organized by the Tehran University of Art.
According to a 2010 census conducted by the Sociology Department of Tehran University, in many districts of Tehran across various socio-economic classes in proportion to population sizes of each district and socio-economic class, 63% of people in Tehran were born in Tehran, 98% know Persian, 75% identify themselves as ethnic Persian, and 13% have some degree of proficiency in a European language.
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Tehran was rapidly developing under the reign of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.
It is also a leading center for the sale of carpets and furniture.
They were systematically demolished, and modern buildings in the pre-Islamic Iranian style, such as the National Bank, the Police Headquarters, the Telegraph Office and the Military Academy were built in their place.
The record high temperature is  and the record low is .
There are four parks in Tehran established exclusively for women, totaling about 80 hectares in area, in which the female mandatory dress codes are not required.
Tabiat Bridge, which was completed in 2014, is considered the third contemporary symbol of the city.
02 aazadi tower.jpg|Azadi Square
It also includes other items collected by the Shahs of Iran.
It is ranked 29th in the world by the population of its metropolitan area.
The city was the seat of the Qajars and Pahlavis, the two last imperial dynasties of Iran.
With the start of the Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988) following the Iraqi invasion, a second wave of inhabitants fled the city, especially during Iraqi air offensives on the capital.
Large scale demolition and rebuilding began in the 1920s, and Tehran has been a destination for the mass migrations from all over Iran since the 20th century.
Iran Pro League (IPL)
It appears in the epics as the birthplace of Manuchehr, the residence of Keyumars, the place where Freydun binds the dragon fiend Aži Dahāka and the place where Arash the Archer shot his arrow from.
A newspaper said it had been the worst weather for 34 years.
, BRT had a network of , transporting 1.8 million passengers on a daily basis.
Despite the regular occurrence of earthquakes during the Qajar period and after, some historic buildings have remained from that era.
Dushan Tappe Airbase is closed and the former Qale Morqi Airbase has been converted into an amusement park named ''Velayat Park''.
Derived into Modern Persian as ''Rey'', it remains now as a city located towards the southern end of the modern-day city of Tehran, which has been absorbed into the Greater Tehran metropolitan area.
Association football
The first development plan of Tehran in 1855 emphasized the traditional spatial structure.
There have also been plans to raise people's awareness about the hazards of the pollution.
80% of the city's pollution is due to cars.
The Azadi Tower, a memorial built during the late Pahlavi era, has long been the most famous symbol of the city of Tehran.
Tehran Mayor Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf driving a Taxi.jpg|Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, Tehran's Mayor, driving a taxi
Ab va Atash park at night by Tasnimnews 06.jpg|People standing on the Tabiat Bridge.
The medieval writer Najm od Din Razi declared the population of Rey about 500,000 before the Mongol Invasion.
Association football
Tehran's most famous landmark, the Azadi Tower, was built by the order of the Shah in 1971.
Tehran City Theater 1.jpg|A view of the City Theater of Tehran
The map of 1878 included new city walls, in the form of a perfect octagon with an area of 19 square kilometers, which mimicked the Renaissance cities of Europe.
After the political, social and economic consequences of the 1979 Revolution and the years that followed, some Iranian citizens, mostly Tehranis, left Iran due to the pressures.
Tehran Bus Rapid Transit was officially inaugurated in 2008 by Tehran's mayor of the time, Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf.
Tochal is equipped with a  gondola lift that covers a huge vertical distance.
Masoodieh.jpg|Masoudie Palace, Baharestan.
Tehran is served by the Mehrabad and Khomeini international airports, a central railway station, the rapid transit rail system of the Tehran Metro, as well as a trolleybus and a BRT system, and has a large network of highways.
Because of this resistance, when the Arabs captured Rey, they ordered the town to be destroyed and ordered Farrukhzad to rebuild the town anew.
Tehran Old Bazaar.jpg|The Old Grand Bazaar
As an attempt to create a network for the easy movement of goods and vehicles in Tehran, the city walls and gates were demolished in 1937 and replaced by wide streets cutting through the urban fabric.
A 2016 survey of 230 cities by consultant Mercer ranked Tehran 203rd for quality of living.
Reza Shah believed that ancient buildings such as large parts of the Golestan Palace, Tekye Dowlat, the Toopkhane Square, the city fortifications and the old citadel among others, should not be part of a modern city.
The dramatic temperature drop was accompanied by wind gusts reaching nearly 118&nbsp;km/h.
The remaining 20% is due to industrial pollution.
BRT in Tehran, Vali Asr.jpg|An urban bus
The unstable situation and the war in neighboring Afghanistan and Iraq prompted a rush of refugees into the country who arrived in their millions, with Tehran being a magnet for many seeking work, who subsequently helped the city to recover from war wounds, working for far less pay than local construction workers.
Most of the international branded stores and upper class shops are located in the northern and western parts of the city, while the rest of the shopping centers are located across the city.
But before the 1979 Revolution, many foreign companies were active in this region.
Some of these institutions have played crucial roles in the unfolding of Iranian political events.
The imperial crown jewels are on display at the Central Bank of Iran.
This is most likely because of the afforestation projects, which also include expanding parks and lakes.
Association football
After 50 years of Qajar rule, the city still barely had more than 80,000 inhabitants.
The native language of the city is the Tehrani accent of the Persian language, and the majority of people in Tehran identify themselves as Persians.
Tehran's retail business is growing with several newly built malls and shopping centers.
From the 1920s to 1930s, the city was essentially rebuilt from scratch, under the rule of Reza Shah Pahlavi.
Mehrabad Airport, an old airport in Western Tehran that doubles as a military base, is mainly used for domestic and charter flights.
For instance, the  Valiasr Street runs from Tehran's railway station at  elevation above sea level in the south of the city to the Tajrish Square, and at  elevation above sea level in the north.
It has, for instance, encouraged taxis and buses to convert from petrol engines to engines that run on compressed natural gas.
The weather of Tehran can sometimes be unpredictably harsh.
In 2005, trolleybuses were operating on five routes, all starting at Imam Hossein Square near Imam Hossein Station on the Tehran Metro Line 2.
In Old Persian inscriptions, Rhaga appears as a province (Behistun 2, 10–18).
Summer is long, hot and dry with little rain, but relative humidity is generally low.
The majority of Iranian emigrations have left for the United States, France, Germany, Sweden, and Canada.
The feasibility study and conceptual planning of the construction of Tehran's subway system were started in the 1970s.
The hall was inaugurated by Emperor Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and Empress Farah Diba on October 26, 1967, and now continues to operate with ''Vahdat Hall'' as its official name.
The capital has been moved several times throughout the history, and Tehran is the 32nd national capital of Iran.
Association football
Thus, he probably viewed Tehran's lack of a substantial urban structure as a blessing, because it minimized the chances of resistance to his rule by the notables and by the general public.
Mount Damavand, the highest peak of Iran, which is located near Tehran, is an important location in Ferdowsi's ''Shahname'', the long Iranian epic poem that is based on the ancient epics of Iran.
Smaller clubs of the city include:
Tehran was the site of the Tehran Conference in 1943, attended by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin, and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill.
In the 13th century, the Mongols invaded Rey, laid the city to ruin and massacred many of its inhabitants.
National Museum of Iran Darafsh (839).JPG|The National Museum of Iran
Tochal Ski Resort is the world's fifth highest ski resort at over  above sea level at its highest point.
02 hasan abad Sq..jpg|Hasan Abad Square
Tehran is also home to the Iranian Imperial Crown Jewels, claimed to be the largest jewel collection in the world.
Today, many modern industries in the city include the manufacturing of automobiles, electronics and electrical equipment, weaponry, textiles, sugar, cement and chemical products.
It is home to many historical collections, such as the royal complexes of Golestan, Sa'dabad, and Niavaran, as well as the country's most important governmental buildings of the modern period.
The resort was completed in 1976, shortly before the 1979 Revolution.
Golestan palace Tehran.jpg|Golestan Palace
Tehran BRT bus transport system.jpg|Rapid Transit Bus at the Azadi Terminal
In the 9th century, Tehran was a well known village, but less known than the city of Rey, which was flourishing nearby.
Few foreign companies operate in Tehran because of the government's complex international relations.
The City Theater of Tehran was opened in 1972, with its main building designed by architect Ali Sardar Afkhami, and contains several performance halls.
The first football club of Tehran was founded in 1920 and named the Iran Club, which was dissolved in 1923.
Tehran is also home to Ararat F.C., a popular Armenian-Iranian football team based at the Ararat Stadium.
Many Persian gardens also fell victim to new construction projects.
Niavaran palace.jpg|Niavaran House
On January 5 and 6, 2008, after years of relatively little snow, a wave of heavy snow and low temperatures covered the city in a thick layer of snow and ice, forcing the Council of Ministers to officially declare a state of emergency and close down the capital on January 6 and 7.
Other ethnic minority groups include Kurds, Armenians, Georgians, Bakhtiaris, Talysh people, Baloch people, Assyrians, Arabs, Jews and Circassians.
Tehran only had a small population until the late 18th century, but began to take a more considerable role in Iranian society after it was chosen as the capital city.
In the Classical era, part of the present-day city of Tehran was occupied by a Median city that in the Avesta occurs as ''Rhaga''.
Tehran subway.jpg|Tehran Metro
Tehran saw a drastic change in its ethno-social composition in the early 1980s.
In recent years, Tehran Municipality has been using graffiti in order to beautify the city.
MajIes1956.JPG|A former Parliament Building, built in the 1920s
There are two parallel chair ski lifts in Tochal that reach  high near Tochal's peak (at ), rising higher than the gondola's 7th Station.
Association football
A 3.2-km extension from Shoosh Square to Rah Ahan Square and the railway station there opened in March 2010.
10,000 bulldozers and 13,000 municipal workers deployed to keep the main roads open.
Association football
In some Middle Persian texts, Rhaga is given as the birthplace of Zoroaster, although modern historians generally place the birth of Zoroaster in Khorasan.
Formerly known as the ''Shahyad Tower'', it was built in commemoration of the 2,500 year celebration of the Persian Empire.
Ports Park in Tehran.jpg|Ab-o-Atash Park
Tehran Conference, 1943.jpg|The Tehran Conference, 1943
The new city map of Tehran in 1937 was heavily influenced by the modernist planning patterns of zoning and gridiron networks.
Buses have served the city since the 1920s.
The establishment of the planning organization of Iran in 1948 resulted in the first socio-economic development plan to cover 1949 to 1955.
Tehran is also the site of Iran's national football stadium at the Azadi Complex, which has a capacity of 100,000.
Until early 1930s, there were 15 theaters in Tehran Province and 11 in other provinces.
The stadium is named after Mount Ararat, and is dedicated to the Armenian community of the city.
Snow depth was  in south part of the city and  in the north of city.
Tehran is Iran's primate city, and is considered to have the most modernized infrastructure in the country; however, the gentrification of old neighborhoods and the demolition of buildings of cultural significance has caused concerns.
The officials are engaged in a battle to reduce air pollution.
Although, considering the area of Greater Tehran, monuments dating back to the Seljuk era remain as well; notably the Toqrol Tower.
Furthermore, the government has set up a "Traffic Zone" covering the city center during peak traffic hours.
From Rhaga, Darius the Great sent reinforcements to his father Hystaspes, who was putting down the rebellion in Parthia (Behistun 3, 1–10).
Five people were killed and more than 57 injured.
Average high temperatures are between , and at nights it rarely drops below .
These plans not only failed to slow the unbalanced growth of Tehran, but with the 1962 land reforms that Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi called the ''White Revolution'', Tehran's chaotic growth was further accentuated.
Architecture, however, found an eclectic expression to reflect the new lifestyle.
Tehran is served by the international airports of Mehrabad and Khomeini.
Tehran's International Tower is the tallest residential building in Iran.
Association football
Ferdowsi and Milad Tower.JPG|The Milad Tower
To bring back order to the city and resolve the problem of social exclusion, the first comprehensive plan of Tehran was approved in 1968.
Iran Pro League (IPL)
Tehran Province League
The city has also a very small number of third generation Indian Sikhs that have a local gurudwara that was visited by the Indian Prime Minister in 2012.
Shopping districts such as Valiasr, Shariati, and Mirdamad have a wide range of different shops.
Mehrabad International Airport and Imam Khomeini International Airport are the remaining active ones.
Association football
From the Tochal peak, one has a spectacular view of the Alborz range, including the  Mount Damavand, a dormant volcano.
The Milad Tower, which is the sixth tallest tower and the 17th tallest freestanding structure in the world, is the city's second landmark tower.
Previously a low-rise city due to seismic activity in the region, modern high rise developments in Tehran have been built in recent decades in order to service its growing population.
Tehran relies heavily on private cars, buses, motorcycles and taxis, and is one of the most car-dependent cities in the world.
Vicolo Cafe & Grill, Tehran.jpg|Vicolo Cafe & Grill
With most major powers backing Iraq at the time, economic isolation gave yet more reason for many inhabitants to leave the city (and the country).
Tehran has seen an increase in relative humidity and annual precipitation since the beginning of the 21st century.
Most of the light annual precipitation occurs from late autumn to mid-spring, but no one month is particularly wet.
Tehran's transport system includes conventional buses, trolleybuses and the Bus Rapid Transit (BRT).
Two routes running northeastwards operate almost entirely in a segregated busway located in the middle of the wide carriageway (along Damavand Street), stopping only at purpose built stops located about every 500 metres along the routes, effectively making these routes trolleybus-BRT (but they are not called such).
Tehran's climate is largely defined by its geographic location, with the towering Alborz Mountains to its north and the central desert to the south.
The changes in the urban fabric started with the street-widening act of 1933, which served as a framework for changes in all other cities.
Having left all they had and having struggled to adapt to a new country and build a life, most of them never came back when the war was over.
There is an oil refinery near Rey, south of the metropolitan Greater Tehran.
Tehran has many modern and traditional restaurants and cafes, serving both traditional Iranian and cosmopolitan cuisine.
Tehran is also home to Iran's largest military academy, and several religious schools and seminaries.
Moreover, he had to remain within close reach of Azerbaijan and Iran's integral Caucasian territories in the North and South Caucasus, at that time not yet irrevocably lost per the treaties of Golestan and Turkmenchay to the neighboring Imperial Russia, which would follow in the course of the 19th century.
Toopkhooneh ghadeem.jpg|Toopkhaneh Square in 1911
Allameh Tabatabaei University, Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), K.N.Toosi University of Technology, Shahid Beheshti University (Melli University), Kharazmi University, Iran University of Science and Technology, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, International Institute of Earthquake Engineering and Seismology, Iran Polymer and Petrochemical Institute, Shahed University and Tarbiat Modarres University are among the other universities of Iran located in Tehran.
Tehran is the economic center of Iran.
BRT has three lines with 60 stations in different areas of the city.
In 2005, FIFA ordered Iran to limit spectators allowed into the Azadi Stadium because of a fatal crush due to inadequate safety procedures.
In the Avesta's ''Videvdat'' (i, 15), Rhaga is mentioned as the twelfth sacred place created by the Ohrmazd.
One method that is currently being employed is the installation of Pollution Indicator Boards all around the city to monitor the current level of particulate matter (PM10), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and carbon monoxide (CO).
Because the city is large with significant differences in elevation among various districts, the weather is often cooler in the hilly north than in the flat southern part of Tehran.
In February 2005, heavy snow covered all of the parts of the city.
Azadegan League (IPL)
The trolleybus system opened in 1992, using a fleet of 65 articulated trolleybuses built by Škoda.
One of the most popular dishes of the city is chelow kabab.
Agha Mohammad Khan's choice of his capital was based on a similar concern for the control of both the northern and the southern regions of Iran.
The majority of these projects, such as the Milad Tower, were continued after the 1979 Revolution when Tehran's urbanization had reached its peak, and the new government started many other new projects.
Imam Khomeini Airport, located  south of the city, handles the main international flights.
Both route sections are served by limited-stop services and local (making all stops) services.
During the Second World War, Soviet and British troops entered the city.
The first movie theater of Tehran was established and opened by Mirza Ebrahim Khan in 1904.
In the 10th century, Rey was described in detail by Muslim geographers.
It was a major area for the Iranian tribes of Medes and Achaemenids.
'''Tehran''' ( – ''Tehrān'', ) is the capital of Iran and Tehran Province.
Meydan Mashgh Tehran.jpg|Cossack House,The National Garden
Clavijo later described Tehran as an unwalled region under the Timurid Empire.
The 270-meter pedestrian overpass of Tabiat Bridge is another landmark of the city, which was designed by the award winning Leila Araghian and was completed in 2014.
The Iranian Parliament named Shahroud, Esfahan and Semnan as three of the main candidates to replace Tehran as the capital.
It struck between 5 and 6 PM, plummteing temperatures from 33&nbsp;°C to 19&nbsp;°C in just an hour.
About 30% of Iran's public-sector workforce and 45% of its large industrial firms are located in the city and almost half of these workers are employed by the government.
Samuel M. Jordan, whom Jordan Avenue in Tehran was named after, was also one of the founding pioneers of the American College of Tehran.
Iran Pro League (IPL)
The hottest month is July, with a mean minimum temperature of  and a mean maximum temperature of , and the coldest is January, with a mean minimum temperature of  and a mean maximum temperature of .
This was the first trolleybus system in Iran and remains the country's only such system.
It is a 54-story building located in the northern district of Youssef Abad.
It can be generally described as mild in the spring and autumn, hot and dry in the summer, and cold and wet in the winter.
On June 3, 2014, a severe thunderstorm with powerful microbursts created a haboob that engulfed the city in sand and dust.
The complexes of Mellat Cinema and Gallery, Azadi Cinema, and Cinema Farhang are among the well known cinema complexes in Tehran.
The Tehran Stock Exchange, which is a full member of the Federation Internationale des Bourses de Valeurs (FIBV) and a founding member of the Federation of Euro-Asian Stock Exchanges, has been one of the world's best performing stock exchanges in recent years.
The Oghuz Turks invaded Rey discretely in 1035 and 1042, but the city was recovered during the Seljuk and Khwarazmian eras.
A few of the well known malls across the city include Tiraje and Hyperstar, and smaller shopping centers such as Tandis, Golestan, Palladium Mall, 7center and Safavie.
Pizza Capri, Tehran.jpg|Pizza Capri, Kamyab Street
