In 2007, the Sadan Report recommended the introduction of a congestion charge similar to that of London in Tel Aviv as well as other Israeli cities.
In February 2009, the municipality launched a water saving campaign, including competition granting free parking for a year to the household that is found to have consumed the least amount of water per person.
The city receives over a million international visitors annually.
Before legislation to preserve this landmark architecture, many of the old buildings were demolished.
Studios of the international news channel i24news is located at Jaffa Port Customs House.
Habima Theatre, Israel's national theatre, was closed down for renovations in early 2008, and reopened in November 2011 after major remodeling.
Tel Aviv's White City, designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2003, comprises the world's largest concentration of International Style buildings (Bauhaus and other related modernist architectural styles).
For the same reason, both the town and the harbor were destroyed in 1345.
It also houses the Olympic Committee of Israel and the National Athletics Stadium with the Israeli Athletic Association.
Many new Jewish immigrants to Palestine disembarked in Jaffa, and remained in Tel Aviv, turning the city into a center of urban life.
The Second Aliyah led to further expansion.
In the future all services to Sde Dov will be transferred to Ben Gurion Airport.
As a result, 20&nbsp;additional kindergarten classes were opened in 2008–09 in the city.
The urban planning for the new city was influenced by the Garden city movement.
The main airport serving Greater Tel Aviv is Ben Gurion Airport.
These include the History section of the official Tel Aviv-Yafo Centennial Year website; the Ahuzat Bayit collection, which focuses on the founding families of Tel Aviv, and includes photographs and biographies;
As Tel Aviv is a multicultural city, many languages are spoken in addition to Hebrew.
In 2005–2009, the station was restored and converted into an entertainment and leisure venue marketed as "HaTachana", Hebrew for "the station" (see homepage here:).
Sokolow had adopted the name of a Mesopotamian site near the city of Babylon mentioned in Ezekiel: "Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel Abib, that lived by the river Chebar, and to where they lived; and I sat there overwhelmed among them seven days."
However, hotel towers along almost the entire beachfront will be allowed to rise up to 25 stories.
The name of the unified city was Tel Aviv until 19 August 1950, when it was renamed Tel Aviv-Yafo in order to preserve the historical name Jaffa.
Hayarkon Park is the most visited urban park in Israel, with 16 million visitors annually.
In recent years, Tel Aviv has received many non-Jewish migrants, students, foreign workers (documented and undocumented) and refugees.
The municipality is responsible for social services, community programs, public infrastructure, urban planning, tourism and other local affairs.
During the colder days of winter, temperatures may reach a low of .
Jews of all backgrounds form 91.8 percent of the population, Muslims and Arab Christians make up 4.2 percent, and the remainder belong to other groups (including various Christian and Asian communities).
Some believe that the name derives from ''yafah'' or ''yofi'', Hebrew for "beautiful" or "beauty".
Tensions between religious and secular Jews before the gay pride parade ended in vandalism of a synagogue.
In 2009, Tel Aviv celebrated its official centennial.
This gathering is considered the official date of the establishment of Tel Aviv.
In 1949, a memorial to the 60&nbsp;founders of Tel Aviv was constructed.
Other notable schools in Tel Aviv include Shevah Mofet, the second Hebrew school in the city, Ironi Alef High School for Arts and Alliance.
Enav Cultural Center is one of the newer additions to the cultural scene.
Instead, it developed as a hub of business and scientific research.
Tel Aviv was ranked as a beta+ world city.
The first line of a light rail system is under construction and scheduled to open in 2020.
The Tel Aviv Central Bus Station is located in the southern part of the city.
Tel Aviv has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: Csa), characterised by hot, humid yet rainless summers and mild, wet winters with most of the annual precipitation falling between October and May.
In December 2008, Tel Aviv began putting together a team of gay athletes for the 2009 World Outgames in Copenhagen.
The Tel Aviv City Hall is located at Rabin Square.
Tel Aviv was granted municipal status in 1934.
The Kiryat Atidim high tech zone opened in 1972 and the city has become a major world high tech hub.
The population over age 65 stands at 14.6 percent compared with 19% in 1983.
Private taxis are white with a yellow sign on top.
''Tel Aviv'' is the Hebrew title of Theodor Herzl's ''Altneuland'' ("Old New Land"), translated from German by Nahum Sokolow.
A long period of steady decline followed, however, and by the late 1980s the city had an aging population of 317,000.
Tel Aviv and other Israeli cities continued to be hit by Scuds throughout the war, and every city in the Tel Aviv area except for Bnei Brak was hit.
The Tel Aviv Stock exchange has also gained attention for its resilience and ability to recover from war and disasters.
Industries in Tel Aviv include chemical processing, textile plants and food manufacturers.
Due to an Israel Border Police roadblock at the entrance and immediate response of the Border Police team during the subsequent stabbings, a much larger and fatal mass-casualty incident was avoided.
Neighboring cities and towns include Herzliya to the north, Ramat HaSharon to the northeast, Petah Tikva, Bnei Brak, Ramat Gan and Giv'atayim to the east, Holon to the southeast, and Bat Yam to the south.
Crusader domination ended in 1268, when the Mamluk Sultan Baibars captured the town, destroyed its harbor and razed its fortifications.
Tel Aviv was the temporary government center of the State of Israel until the government moved to Jerusalem in December, 1949.
The modern city's first neighbourhoods had already been established in 1886, the first being Neve Tzedek.
Housed on the campus of Tel Aviv University is Beth Hatefutsoth, a museum of the international Jewish diaspora that tells the story of Jewish prosperity and persecution throughout the centuries of exile.
Since the 1980s, major restoration and gentrification projects have been implemented in southern Tel Aviv.
It decided not to allow the construction of any additional skyscrapers in the city center, while at the same time greatly increasing the construction of skyscrapers in the east.
Three women were killed by a Hamas terrorist in the Café Apropo bombing on 27 March 1997.
The airport is  southeast of Tel Aviv, on Highway 1 between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
Civil War broke out in the country and in particular between the neighbouring cities of Tel Aviv and Jaffa, which had been assigned to the Jewish and Arab states respectively.
The city was founded in 1909 by Jewish immigrants on the outskirts of the ancient port city of Jaffa ( '''').
Known as "The City that Never Sleeps" and a "party capital", it has a lively nightlife, dynamic atmosphere and a famous 24-hour culture.
Another airport in the Tel Aviv area, Sde Dov (IATA: SDV), in northwestern Tel Aviv close to Tel Aviv Port, serves mainly domestic flights and may be closed in favor of real-estate development.
Lydda Airport (later Ben Gurion Airport) and Sde Dov Airport opened between 1937 and 1938.
Construction of these buildings, later declared protected landmarks and, collectively, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, continued until the 1950s in the area around Rothschild Boulevard.
In April 2011, Tel Aviv municipality launched Tel-O-Fun, a bicycle sharing system, in which 150 stations of bicycles for rent were installed within the city limits.
The Tel Aviv municipality is currently working on building a SkyTran system across the city, under which light, two-person cars will be transported along elevated magnetic levitation tracks.
The lottery was organised by Akiva Aryeh Weiss, president of the building society.
Autumns and springs are characterized by sharp temperature changes, with heat waves that might be created due to hot and dry air masses that arrive from the nearby deserts.
Trade with Europe began to develop in the mid-19th century.
In addition, Tel Aviv hosts an annual LGBT Film Festival.
The opening ceremony of the Jaffa Electric Company powerhouse, on 10 June 1923, celebrated the lighting of the two main streets of Tel Aviv.
During heatwaves in autumn and springs, temperatures usually climb up to  and even up to , accompanied with exceptionally low humidity.
Tel Aviv is home to different architectural styles that represent influential periods in its history.
The city is economically stratified between the north and south.
In November 2012, it was announced that to encourage investment in the city's architecture, residential towers throughout Tel Aviv would be extended in height.
After crashing, the assailant went on a stabbing spree, injuring eight people.
Tel Aviv is consistently ranked as one of the top LGBT destinations in the world.
It has been called the "next hot destination" for fashion.
The city often hosts global musical acts such as Paul McCartney, Madonna and The Rolling Stones in venues such as Hayarkon Park, the Israel Trade Fairs & Convention Center, the Barby Club and the Zappa Club.
It is known as "the city that never sleeps" and a "party capital" due to its thriving nightlife, young atmosphere and famous 24-hour culture.
National Sport Center – Tel Aviv (also '''Hadar Yosef Sports Center''') is a compound of stadiums and sports facilities.
In the mid-1990s, the construction of skyscrapers began throughout the entire city, altering its skyline.
The age profile is relatively even, with 22.2 percent aged under 20, 18.5 percent aged 20–29, 24 percent aged 30–44, 16.2 percent aged between 45 and 59, and 19.1 percent older than 60.
The city has several multiplex cinemas.
+Tel Aviv mean sea temperature
Israel has the highest number of museums per capita of any country, with three of the largest located in Tel Aviv.
According to current plans, the tower is planned to have 80 floors, rise to a height of 270 meters, and will have a 50-meter spire.
(Jer 31:4) Tel Aviv was planned as an independent Hebrew city with wide streets and boulevards, running water at each house, and street lights.
This will be the pilot project of the SkyTran system, which is planning other such projects around the world.
For example, the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange was higher on the last day of both the 2006 Lebanon war and the 2009 Operation in Gaza than on the first day of fighting Many international venture-capital firms, scientific research institutes and high-tech companies are headquartered in the city.
Shimshon Tel Aviv and Beitar Tel Aviv both formerly played in the top division, but dropped into the lower leagues, and merged in 2000, the new club now playing in Liga Artzit, the third tier.
On 6 March 1996, another Hamas suicide bomber killed 13 people (12 civilians and 1 soldier) in the Dizengoff Center suicide bombing.
Buildings in Jaffa and the southern and eastern districts may have two and a half stories added, while those on Ibn Gabirol Street might be extended by seven and a half stories.
Under this plan, road users traveling into the city would pay a fixed fee.
The oldest of these is Jaffa, the ancient port city out of which Tel Aviv grew.
In the early 1980s, 13 embassies in Jerusalem moved to Tel Aviv as part of the UN's measures responding to Israel's 1980 Jerusalem Law.
Among these are the Eretz Israel Museum, known for its collection of archaeology and history exhibits dealing with the Land of Israel, and the Tel Aviv Museum of Art.
The city, Jaffa, is first mentioned in letters from 1470 BC that record its conquest by Egyptian Pharaoh Thutmose III.
Indeed, street artists, such as Dede, installation artists such as Sigalit Landau, and many others made the upbeat neighborhood their home base.
and Stanford University's  Eliasaf Robinson Tel Aviv Collection, documenting the history of the city.
On 11 April 1909, 66 Jewish families gathered on a desolate sand dune to parcel out the land by lottery using seashells.
The city's nightlife, cultural attractions and architecture attract tourists whose spending benefits the local economy.
Tel Aviv is a major transportation hub, served by a comprehensive public transport network, with many major routes of the national transportation network running through the city.
''Aviv'' is Hebrew for "spring", symbolizing renewal, and ''tel'' is a man-made mound accumulating layers of civilization built one over the other and symbolizing the ancient.
Immediately north of the ancient port of Jaffa, Tel Aviv lies on land that used to be sand dunes and as such has relatively poor soil fertility.
According to the 1947 UN Partition Plan for dividing Palestine into Jewish and Arab states, Tel Aviv, by then a city of 230,000, was included in the new Jewish state.
Tel Aviv has been ranked as the twenty-fifth most important financial center in the world.
At this time, gentrification began in the poor neighborhoods of southern Tel Aviv, and the old port in the north was renewed.
In the early 1990s, the decline in population was reversed, partly due to the large wave of immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
In the 1960s, some of the older buildings were demolished, making way for the country's first high-rises.
Tel Aviv also began to emerge as a high-tech center.
As of October 2011, there are 125 active stations, providing more than 1,000 bicycles.
Theories vary about the etymology of Jaffa or ''Yafo'' in Hebrew.
Precipitation during the summer is rare, although light drizzles may occur in some early mornings.
The northern side of Tel Aviv is home to Tel Aviv University, Hayarkon Park, and upscale residential neighborhoods such as Ramat Aviv and Afeka.
Tel Aviv is the only city with three clubs in Israeli Premier League, the country's top football league.
The main bus network in Tel Aviv metropolitan area operated by Dan Bus Company, Metropoline and Kavim.
At the point where Jabotinsky Road and Highway 4 intersect the line drops into an underground tunnel for  through Bnei Brak, Ramat Gan and Tel Aviv and emerges again to street level just before Jaffa, where it turns southwards towards Bat Yam.
According to Forbes, nine of its fifteen Israeli-born billionaires live in Israel; four live in Tel Aviv and its suburbs.
The Jewish population, which forms the majority group in Tel Aviv consists of immigrants from all parts of the world and their descendants, including Ashkenazi Jews from Europe, North America, South America, Australia and South Africa, as well as Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews from Southern Europe, North Africa, India, Central Asia, West Asia, and the Arabian Peninsula.
Tel Aviv attracts over a million international visitors annually.
Israeli designers, such as swimwear company Gottex show their collections at leading fashion shows, including New York's Bryant Park fashion show.
In the early state of the Great Revolt in Judea, Cestius Gallus, the Roman legate of Syria, assembled the Syrian legion XII ''Fulminata'' reinforced with units of III ''Gallica'', IIII ''Scythica'', and VI ''Ferrata'', plus auxiliaries and allies (a total of approximately 30,000 soldiers) in order to restore order in the neighbouring province.
At the same time, Jewish cultural life was given a boost by the establishment of the Ohel Theatre and the decision of Habima Theatre to make Tel Aviv its permanent base in 1931.
This is especially true for the city's mostly affluent central and northern neighborhoods, though not the case for its working-class southeastern neighborhoods.
The members' names were written on the white shells and the plot numbers on the grey shells.
One of the most deadly attacks occurred on 1 June 2001, during the Second Intifada, when a suicide bomber exploded at the entrance to the Dolphinarium discothèque, killing 21, mostly teenagers, and injuring 132.
American journalist David Kaufman reported in ''New York'' magazine that since Tel Aviv "was named a UNESCO World Heritage site, gorgeous historic buildings from the Ottoman and Bauhaus era have been repurposed as fabulous hotels, eateries, boutiques, and design museums."
The largest area for nightclubs is the Tel Aviv port, where the city's large, commercial clubs and bars draw big crowds of young clubbers from both Tel Aviv and neighboring cities.
The government voted on the unification of Tel Aviv and Jaffa on 4 October 1949, but the decision was not implemented until 24 April 1950 due to the opposition of Tel Aviv mayor Israel Rokach.
In 2010, ''Knight Frank'''s world city survey ranked it 34th globally.
The remaining 5 percent were not classified by religion.
The Shalom Meir Tower, which was completed in 1965. was Israel's tallest building until 1999.
The high relative humidity due to the location of the city by the Mediterranean Sea, in a combination with the high temperatures, creates a thermal discomfort during the summer.
Tel Aviv's population reached a peak in the early 1960s at around 390,000, falling to 317,000 in the late 1980s as high property prices forced families out and deterred young couples from moving in.
In 1926, the country's first shopping arcade, Passage Pensak, was built there.
Ben Gurion House was built in 1930–31, part of a new workers' housing development.
While most of the northern area of Tel Aviv was built according to this plan, the influx of European refugees in the 1930s necessitated the construction of taller apartment buildings on a larger footprint in the city.
The first was Neve Tzedek, built on lands owned by Aharon Chelouche.
Together with Bar-Ilan University in neighboring Ramat Gan, the student population numbers over 50,000, including a sizeable international community.
Batey Haosef Museum specializes in Israel Defense Forces military history.
It served as the terminus for the Jaffa–Jerusalem railway.
The sea wall,  high, remained intact until the 1930s, when it was built over during a renovation of the port by the British Mandatory authorities.
A maintenance depot, connected via a branch line and tunnel to the main section of the line, will be constructed in Kiryat Arye, across from the existing Kiryat Arye suburban railway station.
Historically, there was a demographic split between the Ashkenazi northern side of the city, including the district of Ramat Aviv, and the southern, more Sephardi and Mizrahi neighborhoods including Neve Tzedek and Florentin.
In 1099, the Catholic armies of the First Crusade, led by Godfrey of Bouillon, occupied Jaffa, which had been abandoned by the Muslims, fortified the town and improved its harbor.
Ramat Aviv, a district in the northern part of the city that is largely made up of luxury apartments and includes Tel Aviv University, is currently undergoing extensive expansion and is set to absorb the beachfront property of Sde Dov Airport after its decommissioning.
The outdoor plaza where this occurred, formerly known as Kikar Malchei Yisrael, was renamed Rabin Square.
Sixty-four percent of students in the city are entitled to matriculation, more than 5 percent higher than the national average.
The South of Tel Aviv is known for the popular Haoman 17 club, as well as for being the city's main hub of alternative clubbing, with underground venues including established clubs like the Block Club, Comfort 13 and Paradise Garage, as well as various warehouse and loft party venues.
Further south, skyscrapers rising up to 40 stories will be built along the old Ottoman railway between Neve Tzedek and Florentine, with the first such tower there being the Neve Tzedek Tower.
The Tel Aviv Central railway station is the main railway station of the city, and the busiest station in Israel.
Right next to Charles Clore Park is a museum of the Etzel.
Jaffa was captured by Saladin in 1187 but swiftly re-taken by Richard the Lionheart in 1191, who added to its defenses.
Another Hamas suicide bomber killed six civilians and injured 70 in the Allenby Street bus bombing.
Tel Aviv's White City emerged in the 1930s, and became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2003.
In 2013, Tel Aviv had more than 700 startup companies and research and development centers, and was ranked the second-most innovative city in the world, behind Medellín and ahead of New York City.
Remnants of buildings from the Persian and Hellenistic periods were also discovered.
The second line is scheduled to open in 2021.
Its basketball team, Maccabi Tel Aviv, is a world-known professional team, that holds 50 Israeli titles, has won 39&nbsp;editions of the Israel cup, and has six&nbsp;European Championships, and its football team has won 21 Israeli league titles and has won 23 State Cups, four Toto Cups and two Asian Club Championships.
In 1906, a group of Jews, among them residents of Jaffa, followed the initiative of Akiva Aryeh Weiss and banded together to form the ''Ahuzat Bayit'' (lit.
Compared with Westernised cities, crime in Tel Aviv is relatively low.
Tel Aviv is also ranked to be 10th best to-skateboarding city by Transworld Skateboarding.
A new elementary school is planned north of Sde Dov as well as a new high school in northern Tel Aviv.
Tel Aviv is a global city, and is the twenty-fifth most important financial center in the world.
On 9 September 1940, 137 were killed in the bombing of Tel Aviv.
The society's goal was to form a "Hebrew urban centre in a healthy environment, planned according to the rules of aesthetics and modern hygiene."
Tel Aviv and Jaffa were merged into a single municipality in 1950, two years after the establishment of the State of Israel.
The number of churches has grown to accommodate the religious needs of diplomats and foreign workers.
The city's education standards are above the national average: of its 12th-grade students, 64.4 percent are eligible for matriculation certificates.
The first water well was later dug at this site (today Rothschild Boulevard, across from Dizengoff House).
An Islamic Jihad bomber killed five and wounded over 50 in the 25 February 2005 Stage Club bombing.
All of the rockets either missed populated areas or were shot down by an Iron Dome rocket defense battery stationed near the city.
The line is being built instead by NTA – The Tel Aviv region's mass transit development authority.
The city is the focal point of the larger Tel Aviv Metropolitan Area, which contains over 3.7 million residents, over 42% of the country's population.
They also exposed sections of a packed-sandstone glacis and a massive brick wall, dating from the Late Bronze Age, as well as a temple attributed to the Sea Peoples and dwellings from the Iron Age.
In 1923, Tel Aviv was the first town to be wired to electricity in Palestine, followed by Jaffa later in the same year.
The boundaries of Tel Aviv and Jaffa became a matter of contention between the Tel Aviv municipality and the Israeli government in 1948.
Meanwhile, the beaches of Tel Aviv provide a vibrant Matkot (beach paddleball) scene.
The city averages  of precipitation annually.
Bauhaus architecture was introduced in the 1920s and 1930s by German Jewish architects who settled in Palestine after the rise of the Nazis.
The Tel Aviv Cinematheque screens art movies, premieres of short and full-length Israeli films, and hosts a variety of film festivals, among them the Festival of Animation, Comics and Caricatures, "Icon" Science Fiction and Fantasy Festival, the Student Film Festival, the Jazz, Film and Videotape Festival and Salute to Israeli Cinema.
Unlike other forms of public transport, these taxis also operate on Fridays and Saturdays (the Jewish sabbath "Shabbat").
Gallus later reached Acre in Western Galilee, and then marched on Caesarea and Jaffa, where he massacred some 8,400 people, raising the city to the ground.
Other districts, such as Sarona, have been developed with office towers.
Any new buildings there will usually not be allowed to rise above six and a half stories.
One final proposed skyscraper project was approved, while dozens of others had to be scrapped.
In 2008, a center for secular Jewish Studies and a secular yeshiva opened in the city.
In 2010, the Tel Aviv Municipality's Planning and Construction Committee launched a new master plan for the city for 2025.
Tel Aviv is governed by the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality, headed by Ron Huldai, and is home to many foreign embassies.
During the operation, a bomb blast on a bus wounded at least 28 civilians, three seriously.
About 19% of the city land are green spaces.
Apart from bus tours, architectural tours, Segway tours, and walking tours are also popular.
When the first Iraqi missiles hit Israel, some people injected themselves with an antidote for nerve gas.
In November 2009, ''Haaretz'' reported that Tel Aviv had 59 skyscrapers more than 100 meters tall.
The Allenby/Rothschild area is another popular nightlife hub, featuring such clubs as the Pasaz, Radio EPGB and the Penguin.
The Palmach Museum near Tel Aviv University offers a multimedia experience of the history of the Palmach.
Some 3,000 buildings were created in this style between 1931 and 1939 alone.
The city is located  northwest of Jerusalem and  south of the city of Haifa.
