In 1966, Greenwood et al.
In fish where the swim bladder is closed, the gas content is controlled through the rete mirabilis, a network of blood vessels serving as a countercurrent gas exchanger between the swim bladder and the blood.
Like many fish, teleosts continue to grow throughout their lives.
Clupeiformes consist of 350 living species of herring and herring-like fishes.
Since endocrine disruption also affects humans, teleosts are used to indicate the presence of such chemicals in water.
Metabolic heat generated in the muscles or gut is quickly dissipated through the gills, with blood being diverted away from the gills during exposure to cold.
The spine ends at the caudal peduncle, distinguishing this group from other fish in which the spine extends into the upper lobe of the tail fin.
There are many exceptions to this method of locomotion, especially where speed is not the main objective; among rocks and on coral reefs, slow swimming with great manoeuvrability may be a desirable attribute.
Oophagy is practised by a few species, such as ''Nomorhamphus ebrardtii''; the mother lays unfertilised eggs on which the developing larvae feed in the uterus, and intrauterine cannibalism has been reported in some halfbeaks.
Courtship may be done by a female to overcome a territorial male that would otherwise drive her away.
With sequential hermaphroditism, individuals may function as one sex early in their adult life and switch later in life.
The '''teleosts''' or '''Teleostei''' (Greek: ''teleios'', "complete" + ''osteon'', "bone") are by far the largest infraclass in the class Actinopterygii, the ray-finned fishes, and make up 96 percent of all fish.
In Characiformes, the adipose fin develops from an outgrowth after the reduction of the larval fin fold, while in Salmoniformes, the fin appears to be a remnant of the fold.
Most teleost species are oviparous, having external fertilisation with both eggs and sperm being released into the water for fertilisation.
Water pollution caused local extinction of teleost populations in many northern European lakes in the second half of the twentieth century.
Male territoriality "preadapts" a species to evolve male parental care.
Changing sex can occur in various contexts.
For example, increased winter precipitation (rain and snow) could harm populations of freshwater fish in Norway, whereas warmer summers could increase growth of adult fish.
The teleosts were first recognised as a distinct group by the German ichthyologist Johannes Peter Müller in 1844.
Longevity depends on the species with some gamefish like European perch and largemouth bass  living up to 25 years.
The larvae are at first bilaterally symmetrical but they undergo metamorphosis during the course of their development, with one eye migrating to the other side of the head, and they simultaneously start swimming on their side.
Substrate spawning commonly occurs in nests, rock crevices or even burrows.
The pharyngeal jaws of teleosts, a second set of jaws contained within the throat, are composed of five branchial arches, loops of bone which support the gills.
As well as torpedo-shaped fish built for speed, teleosts can be flattened vertically or horizontally, be elongated cylinders or take specialised shapes as in anglerfish and seahorses.
The transition from larvae to juvenile can be short and fairly simple, lasting minutes or hours as in some damselfish, while in other species, like salmon, squirrelfish, gobies and flatfishes, the transition is more complex and takes several weeks to complete.
File:Willem Ormea & Abraham Willaerts - Vis Stilleven met stormachtige zeeën.jpg|Dutch Golden Age painting: ''Fish Still Life with Stormy Seas'', Willem Ormea and Abraham Willaerts, 1636
Water column spawners are mostly limited to coral reefs; the fish will rush towards the surface and release their gametes.
Some teleosts exploit habitats where the oxygen availability is low, such as stagnant water or wet mud; they have developed accessory tissues and organs to support gas exchange in these habitats.
Multifactorial sex determination occurs in numerous Neotropical species and involves both XY and ZW systems.
It is uncertain how ocean acidification, caused by rising carbon dioxide levels, might affect teleosts.
Some like the electric eel and the electric catfish can give a severe electric shock.
The adults spawn here and then die, but the developing young are swept by the Gulf Stream towards Europe.
In monogamous species, males and females may form pair bonds and breed exclusively with their partners.
Sexual dimorphism exists in some species.
In some species, a pelvic sucker allows them to climb, and the Hawaiian freshwater goby climbs waterfalls while migrating.
Simultaneous hermaphroditism typically occurs in species that live in the ocean depths, where potential mates are sparsely dispersed.
Fish meal is used as a food supplement for farmed fish and for livestock.
Some like the foureye butterflyfish have eyespots to startle or deceive, while others such as lionfish have aposematic coloration to warn that they are toxic or have venomous spines.
They gain and lose heat through their skin and during respiration and are able to regulate their circulation in response to changes in water temperature by increasing or reducing the blood flow to the gills.
The base of the lower pharyngeal jaws is formed by the fifth ceratobranchials while the second, third and fourth pharyngobranchials create the base of the upper.
Both the XY sex-determination system and ZW sex-determination system exist in teleost species.
In addition to mouthbrooding, some teleost have also developed structures to carry young.
The 200 species of osteoglossomorphs are defined by a bony element in the tongue.
provided a more solid classification.
During the Mesozoic and Cenozoic they diversified, and as a result, 96 percent of all known fish species are teleosts.
Other fish, such as knifefish, generate weak varying electric fields to detect their prey; they swim with straight backs to avoid distorting their electric fields.
The two major groups of euteleosts are Protacanthopterygii, which consists of fish like salmon, pike and smelts and Neoteleosti which contain the majority of euteleosts.
Teleosts may spawn in the water column or, more commonly, on the substrate.
In some parenting species, young from a previous spawning batch may stay with their parents and help care for the new young.
Teleosts became common in Renaissance art, with still life paintings reaching a peak of popularity in the Netherlands in the 17th century.
Approximate dates are from Near et al., 2012.
In the former, both spermatozoa and eggs are present in the gonads.
In addition, the hypurals, bones that form a flattened plate at the posterior end of the vertebral column, are enlarged providing further support for the caudal fin.
Teleosts including the brown trout and the scaly osman are found in mountain lakes in Kashmir at altitudes as high as .
Lek-like breeding systems have also been recorded in several other species.
The oldest teleost fossils date back to the late Triassic, evolving from fish related to the bowfins in the clade Holostei.
Parental care is much more common among freshwater fish.
Some teleosts are migratory; certain fresh water species move within river systems on an annual basis; other species are anadromous, spending their lives at sea and moving inland to spawn, salmon and striped bass being examples.
This is known to occur in around 19 species of cichlids in Lake Tanganyika.
It is often more efficient to gather food by working as a group, and individual fish optimise their strategies by choosing to join or leave a shoal.
Experiments with mazes show that fish possess the spatial memory needed to make such a mental map.
The longest teleost is the giant oarfish, reported at   and more, but this is dwarfed by the extinct ''Leedsichthys'', one individual of which has been estimated to have a length of .
They have thin leaf-shaped larvae known as leptocephali, specialised for a marine environment.
Some species are farmed commercially, and this method of production is likely to be increasingly important in the future.
This appears to protect the eggs from some predators and allow them to disperse widely via currents.
File:Haeckel Ostraciontes.jpg|thumb|"Ostraciontes" by Ernst Haeckel, 1904.
This group is characterised by an unusual abdominal scute and a different arrangement of the hypurals.
Teleost fishes have been frequent subjects in art, reflecting their economic importance, for at least 14,000 years.
This is recorded in sculpins, sunfish, darters, damselfish and cichlids where multiple females may visit a territorial male that guards and takes care of eggs and young.
Fish oils are made either from fish liver, especially rich in vitamins A and D, or from the bodies of oily fish such as sardine and herring, and used as food supplements and to treat vitamin deficiencies.
It is often absent in fast swimming fishes such as the tuna and mackerel.
Fish orient themselves using landmarks, and may use mental maps based on multiple landmarks or symbols.
The fresh water European eel migrates across the Atlantic Ocean as an adult to breed in floating seaweed in the Sargasso Sea.
Filial cannibalism occurs in some teleost families and may have evolved to combat starvation.
Some larvae were even considered different species from the adults.
This includes colour changes, sound production and visual displays (fin erection, rapid swimming, breaching), which is often done by the male.
The zebrafish is the most commonly used laboratory vertebrate, offering the advantages of similar genetics to mammals, small size, simple environmental needs, transparent larvae permitting non-invasive imaging, plentiful offspring, rapid growth, and the ability to absorb mutagens added to their water.
Four species, surrounded by scales
Müller based this classification on certain soft tissue characteristics which would prove to be problematic as it did not take into account the distinguishing features of fossil teleosts.
These fish had elongated bodies; some were filter-feeders, while others ate larger prey.
They have reduced growth rate but gain protection from predators.
Most fish have sensitive receptors that form the lateral line system, which detects gentle currents and vibrations, and senses the motion of nearby fish and prey.
Polygyny may also involve a male guarding a harem of several females.
A fair proportion of teleosts are hermaphrodites, starting life as females and transitioning to males at some stage, with a few species reversing this process.
Isinglass is made from thread fish and drum fish.
Tuna achieve muscle temperatures  or even higher above the surroundings by having a counterflow system in which the metabolic heat produced by the muscles and present in the venous blood, pre-warms the arterial blood before it reaches the muscles.
A small number of productive species including carp, salmon, tilapia and catfish are farmed commercially, producing millions of tons of protein-rich food per year.
Self-fertilisation is rare and has only been recorded in two species, ''Kryptolebias marmoratus'' and ''Kryptolebias hermaphroditus''.
In the species ''Anthias squamipinnis'', where individuals gather into large groups and females greatly outnumber males, if a certain number of males are removed from a group, the same number of females change sex and replace them.
The body of a teleost is denser than water, so fish must compensate for the difference or they will sink.
The heaviest teleost is believed to be the ocean sunfish, with a specimen landed in 2003 having an estimated weight of , while the smallest fully mature adult is the male anglerfish ''Photocorynus spiniceps'' which can measure just , though the female at  is much larger.
Other bones further back in the mouth serve to grind and swallow food.
The spine ends at the caudal peduncle, the base of the caudal fin, distinguishing this group from those in which the spine extends into the upper lobe of the caudal fin, such as most fish from the Paleozoic (541 to 252 million years ago).
Remoras have their front dorsal fins modified into large suckers with which they cling onto a host animal such as a whale, sea turtle, shark or ray, but this is probably a commensal rather than parasitic arrangement because both remora and host benefit from the removal of ectoparasites and loose flakes of skin.
When a predator has been noticed, prey fish respond defensively, resulting in collective shoal behaviours such as synchronised movements.
One unusual example of female parental care is in mother discuses, which provide nutrients for their developing young in the form of mucus.
Because of their relative inability to control their blood temperature, most teleosts can only survive in a small range of water temperatures.
While teleost bones are well calcified, they are constructed from a scaffolding of struts, rather than the dense cancellous bones of holostean fish.
Species with this condition include parrotfish, wrasses, sea basses, flatheads, sea breams and lightfishes.
In some teleosts, both genetics and the environment play a role in determining sex.
Male nurseryfish have a bony hook on their foreheads to carry fertilised eggs; they remain on the hook until they hatch.
This is because the physiological changes that come with reproduction eventually lead to death.
Male care is far more common than female care.
They provide a large proportion of the fish caught for sport.
In species like the banded acara, young are brooded after they hatch and this may be done by both parents.
In some African cichlids, the eggs may be fertilised there.
A typical teleost fish has a streamlined body for rapid swimming, and locomotion is generally provided by a lateral undulation of the hindmost part of the trunk and the tail, propelling the fish through the water.
The FAO expects production to increase sharply so that by 2030, perhaps sixty-two percent of food fish will be farmed.
Pollution, especially in rivers and along coasts, has harmed teleosts as sewage, pesticides and herbicides have entered the water.
In most species, the swim bladder extends to the braincase and plays a role in hearing.
The phylogeny of the teleosts has been subject to long debate, without consensus on either their phylogeny or the timing of the emergence of the major groups before the application of modern DNA-based cladistic analysis.
The wolf fish has a XY multifactorial system where females are determined by X1X1X2X2 and the male by X1X2Y.
A small number of species such as herring, cod, pollock, anchovy, tuna and mackerel provide people with millions of tons of food per year, while many other species are fished in smaller amounts.
Other adaptations of tuna for speed include a streamlined, spindle-shaped body, fins designed to reduce drag, and muscles with a raised myoglobin content, which gives these a reddish colour and makes for a more efficient use of oxygen.
Reef fish live in a complex, relatively confined underwater landscape and for them, manoeuvrability is more important than speed and many of them have developed bodies which optimize their ability to dart and change direction.
Temperature is the main factor, but PH levels, growth rate, density and social environment may also play a role.
Over 26,000 species have been described.
Modern methods of preservation include freezing, freeze drying, and heat processing (as in canning).
File:Fish Magic.JPG|''Fish Magic'', Paul Klee, oil and watercolour varnished, 1925
Certain other catfish, such as the Loricariidae, are able to respire through air held in their digestive tracts.
They have also developed a muscle that allows the pharyngeal jaws to have a role in grinding food in addition to transporting it.
They calibrated (set actual values for) branching times in this tree from 36 reliable measurements of absolute time from the fossil record.
Others are kept in aquaria or used in research, especially in the fields of genetics and developmental biology.
Ten teleosts, with ''Lactoria cornuta'' in centre.
In the roach, river pollution has caused the intersex condition, in which an individual's gonads contain both cells that can make male gametes (such as spermatogonia) and cells that can make female gametes (such as oogonia).
File:Antonio tanari, pesci, 1610-30 ca..JPG|Italian Renaissance: ''Fish'', Antonio Tanari, c. 1610–1630, in the Medici Villa, Poggio a Caiano
Dimorphism can also take the form of differences in coloration.
The adipose fin, which is present in over 6,000 teleost species, is often thought to have evolved once in the lineage and to have been lost multiple times due to its limited function.
Some species are promiscuous, where both males and females breed with multiple partners and there are no obvious mate choices.
In several minnow species, males develop swollen heads and small bumps known as breeding tubercles during the breeding season.
Their skeletal structure has evolved towards greater lightness.
However, they receive no parental care.
The neural arches are elongated to form uroneurals which provide support for this upper lobe.
The cladogram shows the relationship of the teleosts to other bony fish, and to the terrestrial vertebrates (tetrapods) that evolved from a related group of fish.
The caudal fin is homocercal, meaning the upper and lower lobes are about equal in size.
Fish also aggregate in shoals to spawn.
Some fish have grown dermal (skin) appendages for camouflage; the prickly leather-jacket is almost invisible among the seaweed it resembles and the tasselled scorpionfish invisibly lurks on the seabed ready to ambush prey.
Some combtooth blennies emerge to feed on land, and freshwater eels are able to absorb oxygen through damp skin.
This involves the male inseminating the female with an intromittent organ.
This occurs in North American freshwater catfishes, many butterflyfishes, sea horses and several other species.
Multifactorial systems involve rearrangements of sex chromosomes and autosomes.
Such coloration can be very conspicuous to predators, showing that the drive to reproduce can be stronger than that to avoid predation.
In more derived teleosts, the premaxilla is enlarged and has teeth, while the maxilla is toothless.
For seahorses, the male has a brooding pouch where the female deposits the fertilised eggs and they remain there until they become free-swimming juveniles.
Swamp eels have similar well-vascularised mouth-linings, and can remain out of water for days and go into a resting state (aestivation) in mud.
The effects of climate change on teleosts could be powerful but are complex.
Their function is limited to merely transporting food and they rely mostly on lower pharyngeal jaw activity.
Mudskippers can remain out of water for considerable periods, exchanging gases through skin and mucous membranes in the mouth and pharynx.
Many pollutants, such as heavy metals, organochlorines, and carbamates interfere with teleost reproduction, often by disrupting their endocrine systems.
The male green humphead parrotfish has a more well-developed forehead with an "ossified ridge" which plays a role in ritualised headbutting.
This enhances their hearing, as sound waves make the bladder vibrate, and the bones transport the vibrations to the inner ear.
Others such as the piranha and barracuda have a powerful bite and have sometimes attacked human bathers.
Water column spawners are more likely than substrate spawners to spawn in groups.
In addition, it may also exist to an extent among anglerfish, where some females have more than one male attached to them.
(2012) explored the phylogeny and divergence times of every major lineage, analysing the DNA sequences of 9 unlinked genes in 232 species.
They have a yolk sac attached to them which provides nutrients.
Some eggs can stick to various surfaces like rocks, plants, wood or shells.
In the former, an individual breeds once after reaching maturity and then dies.
The Chondrostei such as sturgeons also have a swim bladder, but this appears to have evolved separately: other Actinopterygii such as the bowfin and the bichir do not have one, so swim bladders appear to have arisen twice, and the teleost swim bladder is not homologous with the chondrostean one.
The defining features of the teleosts are mobile premaxilla, elongated  neural arches at the end of the caudal fin and unpaired basibranchial toothplates.
Within neoteleosts, the Acanthopterygii have a spiny dorsal fin which is in front of the soft-rayed dorsal fin.
Teleosts possess highly developed sensory organs.
The major means of respiration in teleosts, as in most other fish, is the transfer of gases over the surface of the gills as water is drawn in through the mouth and pumped out through the gills.
The zoologist and artist Ernst Haeckel painted teleosts and other animals in his 1904 ''Kunstformen der Natur''.
Rockfish appear to be the longest living teleosts with some species living over 100 years.
There are two major reproductive strategies of teleosts; semelparity and iteroparity.
Teleosts dominate the seas from pole to pole and inhabit the ocean depths, estuaries, rivers, lakes and even swamps.
Responses do not consist only of attempting to hide or flee; antipredator tactics include for example scattering and reassembling.
Tuna and other fast-swimming ocean-going fish maintain their muscles at higher temperatures than their environment for efficient locomotion.
are Northern hemisphere fish, with both salt and freshwater species.
Many fish also have chemoreceptors responsible for acute senses of taste and smell.
Environment-dependent sex determination has been documented in at least 70 species of teleost.
In these, the eggs are fertilised internally and retained in the female during development.
Living among seagrasses and algae, the seahorse adopts an upright posture and moves by fluttering its pectoral fins, and the closely related pipefish moves by rippling its elongated dorsal fin.
Some teleost species are hermaphroditic, which can come in two forms: simultaneous and sequential.
Many teleosts have a swim bladder that adjusts their buoyancy through manipulation of gases to allow them to stay at the current water depth, or ascend or descend without having to waste energy in swimming.
Several early groups, now extinct, branched off from neopterygian ancestors before the teleosts appeared.
Protandry is when an individual starts out male and becomes female while the reverse condition is known as protogyny, the latter being more common.
By contrast, in rivers there is an exchange of just two percent of the body Na+ content per hour.
Mudskippers move in much the same way on terrestrial ground.
Salmon of the genus ''Oncorhynchus'' are well known for this feature; they hatch in fresh water and then migrate to the sea for up to four years before travelling back to their place of birth where they spawn and die.
Pelagic eggs rely on the ocean currents to disperse and receive no parental care.
Most use external fertilisation: the female lays a batch of eggs, the male fertilises them and the larvae develop without any further parental involvement.
Of the major groups of teleosts, the Elopomorpha, Clupeomorpha and Percomorpha (perches, tunas and many others) all have a worldwide distribution and are mainly marine; the Ostariophysi and Osteoglossomorpha are worldwide but mainly freshwater, the latter mainly in the tropics; the Atherinomorpha (guppies, etc.)
File:Mandarin Fish by Bian Shoumin.jpg|''Mandarin Fish'' by Bian Shoumin, Qing Dynasty, 18th century
These include the Pachycormiformes and Aspidorhynchiformes of the Mesozoic era.
For the Atlantic silverside, spawning in colder waters creates more females, while warmer waters create more males.
Shared traits of the euteleosts include; similarities in the embryonic development of the bony or cartilaginous structures located between the head and dorsal fin (supraneural bones), an outgrowth on the stegural bone (a bone located near the neural arches of the tail) and caudal median cartilages located between hypurals of the caudal base.
Among many recorded instances, overfishing caused the complete collapse of the Atlantic cod population off Newfoundland in 1992, leading to Canada's indefinite closure of the fishery.
Fish are consumed fresh, or may be preserved by traditional methods, which include combinations of drying, smoking, and salting, or fermentation.
The cuckoo catfish is known for laying eggs on the substrate as mouthbrooding cichclids collect theirs and the young catfish will eat the cichlid larvae.
In contrast, the Esociformes (pikes) are limited to freshwater in the Northern Hemisphere, while the Salmoniformes (salmon, trout) are found in both Northern and Southern temperate zones in freshwater, some species migrating to and from the sea.
If she is removed, the next ranking female takes her place.
As well as being able to selectively limit salt and water exchanged by diffusion, there is an active mechanism across the gills for the elimination of salt in sea water and its uptake in fresh water.
As they grow, survival rates increase and there is greater physiological tolerance and sensitivity, ecological and behavioural competence.
File:Maler der Grabkammer des Menna 003.jpg|Wall painting of fishing, Tomb of Menna the scribe, Thebes, Ancient Egypt, c. 1422–1411 BC
If the female dies, the male switches sexes and the next largest male takes his place.
Teleosts have adopted a range of reproductive strategies.
The premaxilla is unattached to the neurocranium (braincase); it plays a role in protruding the mouth and creating a circular opening.
Open water fish are usually streamlined like torpedoes to minimize turbulence as they move through the water.
