The first suggestion for using electricity as a means of communication appeared in the "Scots Magazine" in 1753.
From then on, commercial telegraphy took off in America with lines linking all the major metropolitan centres on the East Coast within the next decade.
Telex began in Germany as a research and development program in 1926 that became an operational teleprinter service in 1933.
Smoke signals, for instance, are to be considered semaphore, not telegraph.
The service was operated by the Reichspost (Reich postal service) and had a speed of 50 baud - approximately 66 words-per-minute.
Its main competitors were the ''Bélinographe'' by Édouard Belin first, then since the 1930s the ''Hellschreiber'', invented in 1929 by German inventor Rudolf Hell, a pioneer in mechanical image scanning and transmission.
Telegraphy requires that the method used for encoding the message be known to both sender and receiver.
But individual e-mail accounts were not widely available until local Internet service providers were in place, although demand grew rapidly, as e-mail was seen as the Internet's killer app.
The line was inaugurated on March 1, 1859, in a ceremony flanked by the Spanish and American flags.
Multics also pioneered instant messaging between computer users in the mid-1970s.
Radiotelegraphy proved effective for rescue work in sea disasters by enabling effective communication between ships and from ship to shore.
A ''wire picture'' or ''wire photo'' was a newspaper picture that was sent from a remote location by a facsimile telegraph.
It was used to carry dispatches for the war between France and Austria.
Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Weber built the first electromagnetic telegraph used for ''regular'' communication in 1833 in Göttingen, connecting Göttingen Observatory and the Institute of Physics, covering a distance of about 1&nbsp;km.
On 2 March 1791 at 11 am, they sent the message "si vous réussissez, vous serez bientôt couverts de gloire" (If you succeed, you will soon bask in glory) between Brulon and Parce, a distance of .
Beginning in 1956 telegrams begun to be transmitted over the Telex network using the  standard named Gentex in order to lower the costs for some European telecommunications companies by allowing the sending telegraph station to connect directly to the receiving station.
The message sent was "ARE YOU READY".
Britain's postmaster-general summed up, referring to the ''Titanic'' disaster, "Those who have been saved, have been saved through one man, Mr. Marconi...and his marvellous invention."
The line was relaid the next year and then followed by connections to Ireland and the Low Countries.
Each character was assigned a unique code based on the sequence of just five contacts.
The cables were originally installed underground in a steel conduit.
Teleprinters were invented in order to send and receive messages without the need for operators trained in the use of Morse code.
A telegraph message sent by an electrical telegraph operator or telegrapher using Morse code (or a printing telegraph operator using plain text) was known as a ''telegram''.
Offering his invention to the Admiralty in July 1816, it was rejected as "wholly unnecessary".
In 2002, the Internet was used by Kevin Warwick at the University of Reading to communicate neural signals, in purely electronic form, telegraphically between the nervous systems of two humans, potentially opening up a new form of communication combining the Internet and telegraphy.
The teleprinter system improved message speed and delivery time, making it possible for messages to be flashed across a country with little manual intervention.
After an initial exchange of greetings between Queen Victoria and President Napoleon, it was almost immediately severed by a French fishing vessel.
In 1855 an Italian abbot, Giovanni Caselli, also created an electric telegraph that could transmit images.
It was successfully demonstrated on 25 July 1837.
The era of mass personal communication had begun.
ARPANET allowed different computers to be connected to allow e-mails to be relayed from computer to computer, with the first ARPANET e-mail being sent in 1971.
He also developed an electric relay.
Since the Internet operates over any digital transmission medium, further evolution of telegraphic technology will be effectively concealed from users.
The advent of radio in the early 1900s brought about radiotelegraphy and other forms of wireless telegraphy.
This brought news reportage from the rest of the world.
From his Fraserburgh base, he transmitted the first long-distance, cross-country wireless signal to Poldhu in Cornwall.
This was set out as a formal strategic goal, which became known as the All Red Line.
Later, SONET and SDH were adapted to combine carrier channels into groups that could be sent over optic fiber.
The patent recommended a five-needle system, but any number of needles could be used depending on the number of characters it was required to code.
David Edward Hughes invented the printing telegraph in 1855; it used a keyboard of 26 keys for the alphabet and a spinning type wheel that determined the letter being transmitted by the length of time that had elapsed since the previous transmission.
Commercial electrical telegraphs were introduced from 1837.
Officials of Globe Wireless reported that "The message was 95 words, and it took six or eight minutes to copy it."
The first undersea cable was laid in 1850 and connected London with Paris.
Large telegraphy providers began to develop systems that used telephone-like rotary dialling to connect teletypewriters.
Rigging several fibres in the same structures as the first fibre is usually easy and inexpensive, and many fibre installations include unused spare "dark fibre", "dark wavelengths", and unused parts of the SONET frame, so-called "virtual channels".
Pantelegraph was successfully tested and approved for a telegraph line between Paris and Lyon.
Soon after the first successful telegraph systems were operational, the possibility of transmitting messages across the sea by way of submarine communications cables was first mooted.
Customarily, a T-1 link is sent over a balanced twisted pair, isolated with transformers to prevent current flow.
Frederick Bakewell made several improvements on Bain's design and demonstrated a telefax machine.
As the PSTN became a digital network, T-carrier "synchronous" networks became commonplace in the U.S. A T1 line has a "frame" of 193 bits that repeats 8000 times per second.
This is to be distinguished from ''semaphore'', which merely transmits messages.
That event was also used to mark the final commercial U.S. ship-to-shore telegraph message transmitted from North America by Globe Wireless, a company founded in 1911.
In May 1837 they patented the Cooke and Wheatstone system, which used a number of needles on a board that could be moved to point to letters of the alphabet.
In the 19th century, the harnessing of electricity led to the invention of electrical telegraphy.
In 1843 Scottish inventor Alexander Bain invented a device that could be considered the first facsimile machine.
Fax machines were another technology that helped displace the telegram.
A system of two teleprinters, with one operator trained to use a typewriter, replaced two trained Morse code operators.
At the end of the 19th century the average length of a German telegram was calculated as 14.2 words.
These continue to be called telegrams or cables regardless of the method used for transmission.
At the rate of 45.45 (±0.5%) baud—considered speedy at the time—up to 25 telex channels could share a single long-distance telephone channel by using ''voice frequency telegraphy multiplexing'', making telex the least expensive method of reliable long-distance communication.
This company bought out the Cooke and Wheatstone patents and solidly established the telegraph business.
As of 1895, France still operated coastal commercial semaphore telegraph stations, for ship-to-shore communication.
A ''cablegram'' was a message sent by a submarine telegraph cable, often shortened to a ''cable'' or a ''wire''.
Using one wire for each letter of the alphabet, a message could be transmitted by connecting the wire terminals in turn to an electrostatic machine, and observing the deflection of pith balls at the far end.
However, the cables soon began to fail as a result of deteriorating insulation and were replaced with uninsulated wires on poles.Beauchamp, page 35 As an interim measure, a two-needle system was used with three of the remaining working underground wires, which despite using only two needles had a greater number of codes.
The London and Blackwall Railway (another rope-hauled application) was equipped with the Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph when it opened in 1840, and many others followed.
At the end of 1894 the young Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi began working on the idea of building a commercial wireless telegraphy system based on the use of Hertzian waves (radio waves), a line of inquiry that he noted other inventors did not seem to be pursuing.
The first working telegraph was built by the English inventor Francis Ronalds in 1816 and used static electricity.
Telegraphs employing electrostatic attraction were the basis of early experiments in electrical telegraphy in Europe, but were abandoned as being impractical and were never developed into a useful communication system.
2''' ('''ITA2''') code as an international standard.
However they were highly dependent on good weather and daylight to work and even then could accommodate only about two words per minute.
An overland telegraph from Britain to India was first connected in 1866 but was unreliable so a submarine telegraph cable was connected in 1870.
Even though early telegraphic precedents, such as signalling through the lighting of pyres, have existed since ancient times, long-distance telegraphy (transmission of complex messages) started in 1792 in the form of semaphore lines, or optical telegraphs, that sent messages to a distant observer through line-of-sight signals.
By this point reception had been automated, but the speed and accuracy of the transmission was still limited to the skill of the human operator.
He would work on the system through 1895 in his lab and then in field tests making improvements to extend its range.
The message (in Morse code) was typed onto a piece of perforated tape using a keyboard-like device called the 'Stick Punch'.
A series of demonstrations for the British government followed—by March 1897, Marconi had transmitted Morse code signals over a distance of about  across Salisbury Plain.
On 13 May 1897, Marconi, assisted by George Kemp, a Cardiff Post Office engineer, transmitted the first wireless signals over water to Lavernock (near Penarth in Wales) from Flat Holm.
An electrical telegraph was independently developed and patented in the United States in 1837 by Samuel Morse.
The first commercial electrical telegraph  was co-developed by Sir William Fothergill Cooke and Charles Wheatstone.
Later, a ''Telex'' was a message sent by a Telex network, a switched network of teleprinters similar to a telephone network.
They then transmitted the message to the White House via e-mail.
The overland telegraph connected the west coast of the continent to the east coast by 24 October 1861, bringing an end to the Pony Express.
The system was very stable and accurate and became the accepted around the world.
Messages and information would now travel far and wide, and the telegraph demanded a language "stripped of the local, the regional; and colloquial", to better facilitate a worldwide media language.
This yielded only thirty-two codes, so it was over-defined into two "shifts", "letters" and "figures".
During 1790–1795, at the height of the French Revolution, France needed a swift and reliable communication system to thwart the war efforts of its enemies.
It was successfully completed on 18 July 1866 by the ship SS ''Great Eastern'', captained by Sir James Anderson after many mishaps along the way.
As an electric current was applied by the sender representing each digit of a message, it would at the recipient's end electrolyse the acid in its corresponding tube, releasing a stream of hydrogen bubbles next to its associated letter or numeral.
His star rising, he was soon sending signals across The English channel (1899), from shore to ship (1899) and finally across the Atlantic (1901).
Building on the ideas of previous scientists and inventors Marconi re-engineered their apparatus by trial and error attempting to build a radio based wireless telegraphic system that would function the same as wired telegraphy.
A ''diplomatic telegram'', also known as a diplomatic cable, is the term given to a confidential communication between a diplomatic mission and the foreign ministry of its parent country.
In 1858, Morse introduced wired communication to Latin America when he established a telegraph system in Puerto Rico, then a Spanish Colony.
By the end of the 19th century, the telegraph was becoming an increasingly common medium of communication for ordinary people.
The use of smoke signals, beacons, reflected light signals, and flag semaphore signals are early examples.
Early teleprinters used the ITA-1 Baudot code, a five-bit code.
A study of these demonstrations of radio, with scientists trying to figure out how a phenomenon predicted to have a short range could transmit "over the horizon", led to the discovery of a radio reflecting layer in the Earth's atmosphere in 1902, later called the ionosphere.
A four-needle system was installed between Euston and Camden Town in London on a rail line being constructed by Robert Stephenson between London and Birmingham.
Some of these names are retained even though more sophisticated means are now used.
According to Morse, telegraph dates only from 1832, when Pavel Schilling invented one of the earliest electrical telegraphs.
John Watkins Brett, an engineer from Bristol, sought and obtained permission from Louis-Philippe in 1847 to establish telegraphic communication between France and England.
The telegraph across the Pacific was completed in 1902, finally encircling the world.
The telegraph freed communication from the constraints of space and time and revolutionized the global economy and society.
The first practical automated system was patented by Charles Wheatstone, the original inventor of the telegraph.
In 1790, the Chappe brothers set about devising a system of communication that would allow the central government to receive intelligence and to transmit orders in the shortest possible time.
Numerous newspapers in various countries, such as ''The Daily Telegraph'' in Britain, ''The Telegraph'' in India, and ''De Telegraaf'' in the Netherlands, were given names which include the word "telegraph" due to their having received news by means of electric telegraphy.
Internet use was then largely limited to government, academia and other government contractors until the net was opened to commercial use in the 1980s.
His account of the scheme and the possibilities of rapid global communication in ''Descriptions of an Electrical Telegraph and of some other Electrical Apparatus'' was the first published work on electric telegraphy and even described the risk of signal retardation due to induction.
Notably, Marconi's apparatus was used to help rescue efforts after the sinking of ''Titanic''.
This immense growth in the business sectors influenced society to embrace the use of telegrams.
Worldwide telegraphy changed the gathering of information for news reporting.
Between 1886 and 1888 Heinrich Rudolf Hertz published the results of his experiments where he was able to transmit electromagnetic waves (radio waves) through the air, proving James Clerk Maxwell's  1873 theory of electromagnetic radiation.
Australia was first linked to the rest of the world in October 1872 by a submarine telegraph cable at Darwin.
The system allowed for automatic recording on the receiving end.
Media language had to be standardized, which led to the gradual disappearance of different forms of speech and styles of journalism and storytelling.
Around 1900, German physicist Arthur Korn invented the ''Bildtelegraph'', widespread in continental Europe especially, since a widely noticed transmission of a wanted-person photograph from Paris to London in 1908, used until the wider distribution of the radiofax.
An explicit, unshared shift code prefaced each set of letters and figures.
Cooke and Wheatstone had their first commercial success with a system installed on the Great Western Railway over the  from Paddington station to West Drayton in 1838, the first commercial telegraph in the world.
He called his invention a "recording telegraph".
The last commercial semaphore link ceased operation in Sweden in 1880.
With the growth of the Internet, e-mail began to be possible between any two computers with access to the Internet.
The lines were connected at both ends to clocks marked with the letters of the alphabet and electrical impulses sent along the wire were used to transmit messages.
One of the primary technical challenges was to insulate the submarine cable sufficiently to prevent the current from leaking out into the water.
Various private networks like UUNET (founded 1987), the Well (1985), and  GEnie (1985) had e-mail from the 1970s, but subscriptions were quite expensive for an individual, US$25 to US$50 per month, just for e-mail.
In 1842, a Scottish surgeon William Montgomerie introduced Gutta-percha, the adhesive juice of the ''Palaquium gutta'' tree, to Europe.
On Monday, 12 July 1999, a final telegram was sent from the National Liberty Ship Memorial, the SS Jeremiah O'Brien, in San Francisco Bay to President Bill Clinton in the White House.
The 1857 cable only operated intermittently for a few days or weeks before it failed.
Contrary to the extensive definition used by Chappe, Morse argued that the term ''telegraph'' can strictly be applied only to systems that transmit ''and'' record messages at a distance.
The late 1880s through the 1890s saw the discovery and then development of a newly understood phenomenon into a form of wireless telegraphy, called ''Hertzian wave'' wireless telegraphy, radiotelegraphy, or (later) simply "radio".
In 1792 Claude was appointed ''Ingénieur-Télégraphiste'' and charged with establishing a line of stations between Paris and Lille, a distance of 230 kilometres (about 143 miles).
As well as the rapid expansion of the use of the telegraphs along the railways, they soon spread into the field of mass communication with the instruments being installed in post offices across the country.
But when the line was extended to Slough in 1843, a one-needle, two-wire system was installed.
Earlier transatlantic submarine cables installations were attempted in 1857, 1858 and 1865.
By 1935, message routing was the last great barrier to full automation.
Another early system was that of Edward Davy, who demonstrated his in Regent's Park in 1837 and was granted a patent on 4 July 1838.
Several telegraph companies were combined to form the ''Eastern Telegraph Company'' in 1872.
The first telegram in the United States was sent by Morse on 11 January 1838, across two miles (3&nbsp;km) of wire at Speedwell Ironworks near Morristown, New Jersey, although it was only later, in 1844, that he sent the message "WHAT HATH GOD WROUGHT" from the Capitol in Washington to the old Mt.
As at Liverpool, the electric telegraph was in the end rejected in favour of a pneumatic system with whistles.
Telex machines first performed rotary-telephone-style pulse dialling for circuit switching, and then sent data by Baudot code.
It was tried on a wire laid across the Rhine between Deutz and Cologne.
The telegraph receiver's operator would visually observe the bubbles and could then record the transmitted message, albeit at a very low baud rate.
Such methods are designed according to the limits of the signalling medium used.
In 2006, a well-defined communication channel used for telegraphy was established by the SONET standard OC-768, which sent about 40 gigabits per second.
This "type A" Telex routing functionally automated message routing.
One very early experiment in electrical telegraphy was an ''electrochemical telegraph'' created by the German physician, anatomist, and inventor Samuel Thomas von Sömmering in 1809, based on an earlier, less robust design of 1804 by Spanish polymath and scientist Francisco Salva Campillo.
The one-needle telegraph proved highly successful on British railways, and 15,000 sets were still in use at the end of the nineteenth century.
In 1794, it brought news of a French capture of Condé-sur-l'Escaut from the Austrians less than an hour after it occurred.
Having failed to interest the Italian government, the 22-year-old inventor brought his telegraphy system to Britain in 1896 and met William Preece, a Welshman, who was a major figure in the field and Chief Engineer of the General Post Office.
The Atlantic Telegraph Company was formed in London in 1856 to undertake to construct a commercial telegraph cable across the Atlantic Ocean.
Bain's telegraph was able to transmit images by electrical wires.
Euston needed to signal to an engine house at Camden Town to start hauling the locomotive up the incline.
Automatic teleprinter exchange service was introduced into Canada by CPR Telegraphs and CN Telegraph in July 1957 and in 1958, Western Union started to build a Telex network in the United States.
For German telegrams the mean length is 11.5 words or 72.4 characters.
In 1904 Marconi began the first commercial service to transmit nightly news summaries to subscribing ships, which could incorporate them into their on-board newspapers.
Both their designs employed multiple wires (up to 35) in order to visually represent most Latin letters and numerals.
His assistant, Alfred Vail, developed the Morse code signalling alphabet with Morse.
The rest of the frame provides 8 bits for each of 24 separate voice or data channels.
Sent from its wireless station at Half Moon Bay, California, the sign-off message was a repeat of Samuel F. B. Morse's message 155 years earlier, "What hath God wrought?"
It allowed anyone to email anyone, whereas previously, different system had been walled off from each other, such that America Online subscribers could email only other America Online subscribers, Compuserve subscribers could  email only other Compuserve subscribers, etc.
The first bit, called the "sync" bit, alternates between 1 and 0 to identify the start of the frames.
E-mail was first invented for CTSS and similar time sharing systems of the era in the mid-1960s.
After many breakthroughs, including applying the wired telegraphy concept of grounding the transmitter and receiver, Marconi was able, by early 1896, to transmit radio far beyond the short ranges that had been predicted.
The broad user base created by the demand for e-mail smoothed the way for the rapid acceptance of the World Wide Web in the mid-1990s.
The Morse telegraphic apparatus was officially adopted as the standard for European telegraphy in 1851.
During World War I, Britain's telegraph communications were almost completely uninterrupted, while it was able to quickly cut Germany's cables worldwide.
Many scientists and inventors experimented with this new phenomenon but the general consensus was that these new waves (similar to light) would be just as short range as light, and therefore useless for long range communication.
Thus, messages could be conveyed electrically up to a few kilometers (in von Sömmering's design), with each of the telegraph receiver's wires immersed in a separate glass tube of acid.
The setup consisted of a coil that could be moved up and down over the end of two magnetic steel bars.
In 1881, English inventor Shelford Bidwell constructed the ''scanning phototelegraph'' that was the first telefax machine to scan any two-dimensional original, not requiring manual plotting or drawing.
This was a five-needle, six-wire system.
In 1901 Baudot's code was modified by Donald Murray and Around 1930, the CCITT introduced the '''International Telegraph Alphabet No.
The study of underwater telegraph cables accelerated interest in mathematical analysis of very long transmission lines.
Only Great Britain with its extensive overseas empire kept the needle telegraph of Cooke and Wheatstone.
Telegraphy facilitated the growth of organizations "in the railroads, consolidated financial and commodity markets, and reduced information costs within and between firms".
In 2006, no existing encoding system approached this theoretical limit, even with wavelength division multiplexing.
The transmitter automatically ran the tape through and transmitted the message at the then exceptionally high speed of 70 words per minute.
The theoretical maximum capacity of an optic fiber is more than 1012 bits (one terabit or one trillion bits) per second.
The Prussian system was put into effect in the 1830s.
The telegraph isolated the message (information) from the physical movement of objects or the process.
French engineer Émile Baudot patented a printing telegraph in which the signals were translated automatically into typographic characters.
In the Internet age, telegraphic means developed greatly in sophistication and ease of use, with natural language interfaces that hide the underlying code, allowing such technologies as electronic mail and instant messaging.
The direction of the current could be reversed by commuting the two wires in a special switch.
A regular transatlantic radio-telegraph service was finally begun on 17 October 1907.
Prior to the electrical telegraph, nearly all information was limited to traveling at the speed of a human or animal.
At first, e-mail was possible only between different accounts on the same computer (typically a mainframe).
Europeans adopted a similar system (E-1) of 32 channels (with one channel for frame synchronisation).
Therefore, Gauss and Weber chose to encode the alphabet in a binary code, using positive and negative currents as the two states.
From the 1850s until well into the 20th century, British submarine cable systems dominated the world system.
The capacity of an optic fiber is often extended with wavelength division multiplexing, rather than rerigging new fibre.
Caselli called his invention "Pantelegraph".
In 1896, there were thirty cable laying ships in the world and twenty-four of them were owned by British companies.
By the early 1990s, modems made e-mail a viable alternative to Telex systems in a business environment.
These machines were called "Telex" (TELegraph EXchange).
Clare Depot in Baltimore.
Some remained in service in the 1930s.
At the family home on Hammersmith Mall, he set up a complete subterranean system in a 175 yard long trench as well as an eight mile long overhead telegraph.
From this point the use of the electric telegraph started to grow on the new railways being built from London.
Michael Faraday and Wheatstone soon discovered the merits of gutta-percha as an insulator, and in 1845, the latter suggested that it should be employed to cover the wire which was proposed to be laid from Dover to Calais.
The resulting induction current was transmitted through two wires to the receiver, consisting of a galvanometer.
Operators had to maintain a steady rhythm, and the usual speed of operation was 30 words per minute.
