Although the concepts of "telecommuting" and "telework" are closely related, there is a difference between the two.
Teleworking provides the freedom to arrange work to avoid family conflicts.
Skill variety has the strongest relationship with internal work motivation.
For companies, telecommuting expands the talent pool, reduces the spread of illness, reduces costs including real-estate footprint, increases productivity, reduces their carbon footprint and energy usage, offers a means of complying with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and possibly earning a tax credit, if they're American, reduces turnover and absenteeism, improves employee morale, enhances continuity-of-operations strategies, improves their ability to handle business across multiple time zones, and augments their cultural adaptability.
Also, perceived social isolation can lead to less motivation.
The rise of cloud computing technology and Wi-Fi availability have enabled access to remote servers via a combination of portable hardware and software.
Skill variety is the degree that a job requires a variety of activities and skills to complete the task.
Telework centers are offices that are generally set up close to a majority of people who might otherwise drive or take public transit.
In general, telecommuting benefits society in economic, environmental, and personal ways.
Weaker relationships between job dimensions and job outcomes, such as job performance and absenteeism, may explain why the results regarding performance and telework are conflicting.
ROCs are generally located in areas near to where people live throughout population centers, so that workers do not have to commute more than a couple of miles.
Telecommuting has come to be viewed by some as more of a "complement rather than a substitute for work in the workplace".
On May 24, 2010, the Senate passed the Telework Enhancement Act (S. 707) sponsored by Sens.
Around 10,000 of these jobs will be in regional Australia.
To accomplish interpersonal exchange in telecommuting, other forms of interaction need to be used.
The telecommuter works in a real office but accesses the company network across the internet using a VPN just as in traditional telecommuting.
Feedback is particularly important so that the employees continuously learn about how they are performing.
When a worker is not in the office, there is limited information and greater ambiguity, such as in assignments and expectations.
Autonomy influences experienced responsibility such that if the job provides freedom, independence, and scheduling flexibility, the individual should feel responsible for his or her work outcomes.
According to an article from New York Times, telecommuting now takes about 2.6 percent of the American workforce not including remote works like drivers.
Telecommuting has long been promoted as a way to substantially increase employee productivity.
Task significance is the degree that the individual feels his or her work has a substantial impact on the lives or work of other people within the organization or outside of the organization.
Increasing the challenge of the job increases the individual’s experienced meaningfulness, how much the individual cares about work, and finds it worthwhile.
Of these five job characteristics, telework specifically changes autonomy and feedback compared to face-to-face work and can thus influence employees’ behaviors and attitudes.
There is an interplay between the intended use of technology and the way that people use the technology.
Telecommuting requires the use of various types of media to communicate, such as the telephone and email.
Very few companies employ large numbers of home-based full-time staff.
It has gained in popularity in the West, particularly in Europe.
Some studies have found that telework increases productivity in workers  and leads to higher supervisor ratings of performance and higher performance appraisals.
Some feature support staff, including receptionists or administrators.
Nicholas Bloom is an economics professor from Stanford University.
Work-at-home and telecommuting scams are very common; many of these job offers are scams claiming that people can "get rich quick" while working from home.
It was found that autonomy increased teleworkers' satisfaction by reducing work-family conflicts, especially when workers were allowed to work outside of traditional work hours and be more flexible for family purposes.
While teleworking, communication is not as immediate or rich as face-to-face interactions.
Feedback refers to the degree that an individual receives direct and clear information about his or her performance related to work activities.
Telecommuting is also called "remote work",  "telework", or "teleworking".
In the telework circumstance, employees and supervisors have to work harder to maintain relationships with co-workers.
Role ambiguity, when situations have unclear expectations as to what the worker is to do, may result in greater conflict, frustration, and exhaustion.
In 2009, the United States Office of Personnel Management reported that approximately 103,000 federal employees were teleworking.
Managers may view the teleworker as experiencing a drop in productivity during the first few months.
These work arrangements are more likely to become more popular with current trends towards greater customization of services and virtual organizing.
While increasing in importance, distributed work has not yet gained widespread acceptance in Asia.
Telecommuting refers more specifically to work undertaken at a location that reduces commuting time.
If five characteristics of a job are present (skill variety, task identity, task significance, autonomy, and feedback), then the employee in that job will experience more internal work motivation, satisfaction with personal growth opportunities, general job satisfaction, higher job performance, and lower absenteeism and turnover.
Employees who telework may feel pressure to produce more output in order to be seen as valuable, and reduce the idea that they are doing less work than others.
In earlier surveys, 33% considered telework the best recruiting incentive, and half considered it second best.
They substantially increase the mobility of the worker and the degree of coordination with their organization.
The number of employees reported to have worked from their home "on their primary job" in 2010 has been reported as 9.4 million (6.6% of the workforce), though, this number might include the self-employed.
The study engaged over 26,000 business managers across 90 countries, with 55% of respondents stating that the effective management of remote workers is an attainable goal.
Typical organization communication patterns are thus altered in telecommuting.
Even the sites that claim to be scam-free often feature ads that link to scams.
One of the principles of STS is minimal critical specification.
Some companies, particularly those where employees spend a great deal of time on the road and at remote locations, offer a hotdesking or hoteling arrangement where employees can reserve the use of a temporary traditional office, cubicle or meeting room at the company headquarters, a remote office center, or other shared office facility.
body language, tone of voice).
Telecommuting also reduces turnover intent, or the intention to quit one’s job.
When teleworkers are not physically present, they may be “out of sight, out of mind” to other workers in the office.
It can be efficient and useful for companies since it allows workers to communicate over long distances, saving significant amounts of travel time and cost.
Businesses often provide teleworkers access to corporate in-house applications, accessible by a remote device such as a tablet or laptop.
Reports finding that all 87 agencies participating in the Data Cell had established telework policies and 73 percent of the policies met the Telework Act Requirements.
And Intuit reports that by 2020, more than 40% of the American workforce, or 60 million people, will be freelancers,  contractors and temp workers.
Half-time telecommuting by those with compatible jobs (40%) and a desire to do so (79%) would save companies, communities, and employees over $650 billion a year; the result of increased productivity, reduced office expense, lower absenteeism and turnover, reduced travel, less road repairs, less gas consumption, and other savings.
Among the top 10 telecommuter countries, U.S is ranked number one; however, developing countries like China is also catching up to the trend.An article from money.163.com states that the number of telecommuters in the Asia pacific region exceeds region like America, Europe, Middle East and Africa.
The act required companies with over 100 employees to encourage car pools, public transportation, shortened work weeks, and telecommuting.
The importance of manager communication with teleworkers is made clear in a study that found that individuals have lower job satisfaction when their managers telework.
An isolation from daily activities arise of the company and may be less aware of other things going on to the company and a possible hatred from other employees arises from other employees who do not telecommute.
Coworkers who do not telework can feel resentful and jealous because they may consider it unfair if they are not allowed to telework as well.
Study results from the 2013 Regus Global Economic Indicator were published in September 2013 and showed that 48% of business managers worldwide work remotely for at least half their working week.
Room for mistakes and miscommunication can increase.
Liability and workers' compensation can become serious issues as well.
In January 2012, Reuters, drawing from an Ipsos/Reuters poll, predicted that telecommuting was "a trend that has grown and one which looks like it will continue with 34% of connected workers saying they would be very likely to telecommute on a full-time basis if they could."
Telework centers allow people to reduce their commute yet still work in a traditional office setting.
Coworking facilities can range from shared space in formal offices to social areas such as a coffee shop.
Telework is a shift in the way business is accomplished which can make a difference overtime.
Cisco reports that the company has generated an estimated annual savings of $277 million in productivity by allowing employees to telecommute and telework.
Additionally, the increase in autonomy from teleworking in turn increases job satisfaction.
Only high-intensity telecommuting (where employees work from home for more than 2.5 days a week) harmed employee relationships with co-workers, even though it did reduce work-family conflict.
Furthermore, a study from FlexJobs that surveyed over 3000 people found that 81 percent of respondents also said they would be more loyal to their employers if they had flexible work options.
Overall, the federal government seems to have embraced teleworking and is attempting to create more remote working opportunities for employees.
A decrease in productivity due to continual procrastination with a lack  of supervision will result to a poor performance in the quality of work of the employee.
It is favored by most workers to combine telecommuting and office work.
Telecommuting individuals, or more specifically those in "work from home" arrangements, may find that it improves work-life balance, reduces their carbon footprint and fuel usage, frees up the equivalent of 15 to 25 workdays a year (time they would have otherwise spent commuting), and saves thousands of dollars per year in travel and work-related costs.
Teleworkers do not have to stick to office routines and can shift work to different times of day.
The job characteristic dimension, feedback, increases employees' knowledge of results.
Telecommuting actually was found to positively affect employee-supervisor relations and the relationship between job satisfaction and turnover intent was in part due to supervisor relationship quality.
Although the quitting rate decreased for telecommuters, the promotion rate also decreased.
Traditional line managers are accustomed to managing by observation and not necessarily by results.
Coworking is a social gathering of a group of people who are still working independently, but who share a common working area as well as the synergy that can happen from working with people in the same space.
However, with the use of desktop virtualization, specifically remote desktop virtualization, any legacy application or operating system can be accessed from a mobile device, as this device is primary used as a display unit while the processing is performed on the company's internal server.
In the 1990s, telecommuting became the subject of pop culture attention.
Workers tend to be satisfied with face-to-face interactions, phone conversations, and in-person departmental meetings to receive communications, but email and the Internet do not add to their communication satisfaction.
This increase in responsibility for their work also increases their power, supporting the idea that teleworking is a privilege and in some companies, considered a promotion.
Adaptive structuration theory studies variations in organizations as new technologies are introduced  Adaptive structural theory proposes that structures (general rules and resources offered by the technology) can differ from structuration (how people actually use these rules and resources).
As well, teleworking may make it easier for workers to balance their work responsibilities with family roles (e.g., caring for children or elderly parents).
Of the more than three million web entries resulting from a search on the phrase "work at home," more than 95% of the results were scams, links to scams, or other dead ends.
This improvement in output arose from working 9% more hours from saved commuting time and from 3.5% improved efficiency from quieter working conditions.
Ctrip is a large China travel agency.
A living list of fully distributed companies can be found  here.
Organizations may use telecommuting to reduce costs (telecommuting employees do not require an office or cubicle, a space which has to be rented or purchased, provided with lighting and climate control, etc.).
Additionally, autonomy explained an increase in employee engagement when the amount of time spent teleworking increased.
This causes a serious obstacle in organizations attempting to adopt telecommuting.
The drop could also be due to inadequate office setup.
Some organizations adopt telecommuting to improve workers' quality of life, as teleworking typically reduces commuting time and time stuck in traffic jams.
Events in 2007 have pushed telework to the forefront as a critical measurement for the U.S. federal government.
Teleworkers were found to have higher satisfaction than office based workers.
In entrepreneurship, coworking allows creative start-up founders, researchers and knowledge workers to meet and share ideas, collaborate, share new research, and find potential partners.
As broadband Internet connections become more commonplace, more and more workers have adequate bandwidth at home to use these tools to link their home to their corporate intranet and internal phone networks.
Some organizations adopt teleworking for environmental reasons, as telework can reduce congestion and air pollution, as it can reduce the number of cars on the roads.
Some estimates suggest that full-time telework can save companies approximately $20,000 per employee.
Telecommuting offers benefits to communities, employers, and employees.
The adoption of local area networks promoted the sharing of resources, and client–server computing allowed for even greater decentralization.
Teleworking can negatively affect a person's career.
* The energy potential from the fuel savings would total more than twice what the U.S. currently produces from all renewable energy sources combined.
Jobs that allow workers to use a variety of skills increase workers’ internal work motivation.
Telework is facilitated by tools such as groupware, virtual private networks, conference calling, videoconferencing, virtual call centre and Voice over IP (VOIP) and by the decreasing cost of good quality laptop computers.
Telecommuting has been adopted by a range of businesses, governments and not-for-profit organizations.
This social context can affect individuals’ beliefs about the nature of the job, the expectations for individual behavior, and the potential consequences of behavior, especially in uncertain situations.
Emails have a time lag that does not allow for immediate feedback; telephone conversations make it harder to decipher the emotions of the person or team on the phone; and both of these forms of communication do not allow one to see the other person.
When it comes to environment, it has been estimated that if 10 per cent of Australian employees were to telework 50 percent of the time, it would save 120 million litres of fuel and 320,000 tonnes of carbon emissions.
Increased control over life demands  is one of its main attractions.
This pressure to produce output, as well as a lack of social support from limited coworker relationships and feelings of isolation, leads to lower job engagement in teleworkers.
According to Christine Durst, CEO of Staffcentrix, there is a 48-to-1 ratio of scams to legitimate offerings among work-at-home job leads on the Internet.
The bill requires each executive agency to establish a policy under which employees may be authorized to telework to the maximum extent possible without diminishing employee performance or agency operations.
By the early 1980s, branch offices and home workers were able to connect to organizational mainframes using personal computers and terminal emulation.
If all Federal employees who are eligible to telework full-time were to do so, the Federal Government could realize $13.9 billion savings in commuting costs annually and eliminate 21.5 billion pounds ( of pollutants from the environment each year.
Work at home scams earn their perpetrators more than $500 million per year, and home business scams account for another $250 million per year.
The autonomy of telework allows for lower work-family conflict.
However, another study found that professional isolation in teleworkers led to a decrease in job performance, especially for those who spent more time teleworking and engaged in fewer face-to-face interactions.
AST suggests that when technologies are used over time, the rules and resources for social interactions will change.
Co-sponsors of the bill included Reps. Connolly (D-VA), Wolf (R-VA), and Capito (R-WV).
The wide application of ICTs provides increasing benefits for employees, especially ones with physical disabilities.
Many telecommuters work from home, while others, sometimes called "nomad workers" work at coffee shops or other locations.
Telework flexibility is a desirable prerequisite for employees.
More than 144,000 federal employees had written teleworking agreements with their agencies.
On December 9, 2010 President Obama signed H.R.
Additionally, a 1999 study claimed that "70 minutes of each day in a regular office are wasted by interruptions, yakking around the photocopier, and other distractions".
International evidence and experience shows that telework can deliver a broad range of benefits to individuals, employers and society as a whole.
Employers' largest concerns about telecommuting are fear of loss of control; 75% of managers say they trust their employees, but a third say they'd like to be able to see them, "just to be sure."
According to one study, children are ranked as the number one distractions, followed by spouses, pets, neighbors, and solicitors.
Security must be addressed for teleworkers and non-teleworkers as well.
The roots of telecommuting are found in early 1970s technology that linked satellite offices to downtown mainframes through dumb terminals using telephone lines as a network bridge.
A meta-analysis of 46 studies of telecommuting involving 12,833 employees conducted by Ravi Gajendran and David A. Harrison in the ''Journal of Applied Psychology'', published by the American Psychological Association (APA), found that telecommuting has largely positive consequences for employees and employers.
Though working in an office has its distractions, it is often argued that telecommuting involves even greater distractions.
Top paid among work-from-home sectors are home-based physicians and radiologists in which it is suspected that they earn near the $1,975 median weekly income of physicians, as reported by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, making it a six-figure job.
Teleworkers may experience more responsibility to the extent that they feel in control and accountable for their work.
The lack of proper tools and facilities also serves as a major distraction, though this can be mitigated by using short-term coworking rental facilities.
Distributed work entails the conduct of organizational tasks in places that extend beyond the confines of traditional offices or workspaces.
The call center industry is one notable exception: several U.S. call centers employ thousands of home-based workers.
"Bogus business opportunities trample on Americans’ dreams of financial independence," said FTC Chairman Deborah Platt Majoras.
This type of arrangement does not share fully in the benefits of home-based telecommuting, but can address the needs of employees who are unable or unwilling to work from home.
Presumably because of the effects of autonomy, initial job satisfaction increases as the amount of telecommuting increases; however, as the individual telecommutes more, declines in feedback and task significance lead job satisfaction to level off and decrease slightly.
27 percent of teleworkers worked remotely three or more days per week.
One study found that by increasing feedback and task identity through clear communication of goals, objectives, and expectations, turnover intent decreased in teleworkers and quality of work output increased.
Additionally, telework may not always be seen positively by management due to fear of loss of managerial control.
Hygiene factors, such as work conditions, may improve when teleworking such that teleworkers have the flexibility to work in a variety of locations.
Her challenge would enable 50 percent of eligible agency employees to telework one or more days per week by 2010. , 10 percent of eligible GSA employees telework, compared to 4.2 percent for the overall Federal workforce.
Additionally, job characteristics can interact with individual differences to impact employee attitudes and behavior.
Ninety percent of executives charged with security in large organizations feel that telework is not a security concern.
The telecommuters were also more productive and happier.
These scams offer only a money pit, where no matter how much time and money is invested, consumers never achieve the riches or financial freedom that they were promised."
Less feedback when teleworking is associated with lower job engagement.
For instance, those individuals high in growth need strength will have a more positive reaction to increased autonomy and a more negative reaction to decreased feedback in telecommuting than those individuals low in growth need strength.
A remote office center provides professional grade network access, phone system, security system, mail stop and optional services for additional costs.
These devices are gaining popularity in the workforce but come with different underlying operating systems and therefore a variety compatibility issues.
The study also found that home-workers reported significantly higher job-satisfaction scores and their quit rates fell by almost 50%.
In 2006, a United States Department of Veterans Affairs employee's stolen laptop represented what was described as "potentially the largest loss of Social Security numbers to date."
This drop occurs as "the employee, his peers, and the manager adjust to the new work regimen."
Telework relates to continuity of operations (COOP) and national pandemic preparedness planning, reducing dependence on foreign oil and the burden of rising gas prices, the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission (BRAC), and a focus on recruitment and retention.
All types of technology-assisted work conducted outside of a centrally located work space (including work undertaken in the home, outside calls, etc.)
Originally developed to explain the paradox of improved technology but decreased productivity, the theory can be applied to the design of telework.
As a broader concept than telecommuting, telework has four dimensions in its definitional framework: work location, that can be anywhere outside of a centralized organizational work place; usage of ICTs (information and communication technologies) as technical support for telework; time distribution, referring to the amount of time replaced in the traditional workplace; and the diversity of employment relationships between employer and employee, ranging from contract work to traditional full-time employment.
Suggestions include using telework as a tool to retain employees at or near retirement age and using telework to expand hiring of highly trained disabled veterans.
An increase in skill variety is thought to increase the challenge of the job.
The clarity, speed of response, richness of the communication, frequency, and quality of the feedback are often reduced when managers telework.
If this type of distributed work replaces the worker's commute, it would be considered telecommuting.
Task identity is the degree that the individual sees work from beginning to end or completes an identifiable or whole piece of work rather than only a small piece.
Daniel Akaka (D-Hawaii) and George Voinovich (R-Ohio).
A 2007 study of National Science Foundation employees indicated that approximately one-third participated in telework regularly, characterized staff satisfaction with the program, and noted savings in employee time and greenhouse-gas emissions as a result of telework.
STS examines the relationships between people, technology, and the work environment, in order to design work in a way that enhances job satisfaction and increases productivity.
The bill threatened to withhold money from agencies that failed to provide telecommuting options to all eligible employees.
Entrepreneurs and social entrepreneurs often cowork in shared office and workshop facilities provided by business incubators and business accelerator organizations.
According to Job Characteristics Theory, changes in autonomy and feedback influence work behaviors and attitudes more than a change in skill variety, task identity, or task significance.
America has an increasing trend of using teleworking  due to its strong economics and multimedia services.
For many employees, the option to work from home is available as an employee benefit but most participants only do so a fraction of the time.
Teleworkers may have increased satisfaction due to the flexibility and autonomy their jobs provide.
Electronic communication provides fewer cues for teleworkers and thus, they may have more difficulties interpreting and gaining information, and subsequently, receiving feedback.
For communities, telecommuting may offer fuller employment (by increasing the employability of circumstantially marginalized groups such as work at home parents and caregivers, the disabled, retirees, and people living in remote areas), reducing traffic congestion and traffic accidents, relieving pressure on transportation infrastructure, reducing greenhouse gases, reducing energy use, and improving disaster preparedness.
Of the five task characteristics, autonomy has a strong relationship with job satisfaction such that greater autonomy leads to greater job satisfaction.
Telework provides flexibility in scheduling and freedom because being outside the office gives the worker more choices.
However, home workers' promotion rates dropped by half due to apparent performance declines, indicating a potential career cost of home-working.
, estimates suggest that over fifty million U.S. workers (about 40% of the working population) could work from home at least part of the time, but in 2008 only 2.5 million employees, excluding the self-employed, considered their home to be their primary place of business.
The 2012 Status Telework in the Federal Government features teleworking highlights from the past 18 months as well as goals for improving teleworking in the future.
Kate Lister, president of Global Workplace Analytics, came to the conclusion that most workers prefer telecommuting and office work combined.
Increased job satisfaction, decreased turnover intent and role stress related to telecommuting partly because of a decrease in work-family conflict.
They are more concerned with the occasional work that's taken out of the office by non-teleworkers because they lack the training, tools, and technologies that teleworkers receive.
Thus, the amount of time teleworking influences the relationship between telework and job satisfaction.
Telecommuting increases efficiency and workers’ flexibility.
Although the level of communication may decrease for teleworkers, satisfaction with this level of communication can be higher in some samples, like those who are more tenured and have functional instead of social relationships.
In closing, the report listed several ways that the government could make more jobs available through telework.
Telecommuters often maintain a traditional office and usually work from an alternative work site from 1 to 3 days a week.
Similarly, teleworkers have the responsibility to use their equipment and resources to carry out their responsibilities.
