Yates and Warren also named Dvinosauria, a clade of small aquatic temnospondyls from the Carboniferous, Permian, and Triassic.
Major body changes occur in metamorphosis, including the reshaping and strengthening of skull bones, the thickening of postcranial bones, and an increase in body size.
Temnospondyli means "cut vertebrae", as each vertebra is divided into several parts.
Some of these teeth are so large, they are referred to as tusks.
Stegocephalia means "roof-headed" in Greek, a reference to the wide, flat heads of temnospondyls and other early tetrapods.
Capitosaurs include large semiaquatic temnospondyls like ''Mastodonsaurus'' with flat heads and eyes near the back of the skull.
In rhachitomous vertebrae, the intercentra are large and wedge-shaped, and the pleurocentra are relatively small blocks that fit between them.
Cope placed stegocephalians in the class Batrachia, the name then used for Amphibia.
Temnospondyls like ''Sclerocephalus'' are known from both large adult specimens and small larvae, showing an extreme change in body shape.
For example, a 2007 study places them even more basal than euskelians, while a 2008 study keeps them as basal limnarchians.
The clade including Eryopidae and Stereospondylomorpha was named Eryopiformes.
Later, eryopoids and dissorophoids, some well adapted to terrestrial life, also fed on land.
'''1''' Temnospondyli, '''2''' Edopoidea, '''3''' Dvinosauria, '''4''' Euskelia, '''5''' Eryopoidea, '''6''' Dissorophoidea, '''7''' Limnarchia, '''8''' Archegosauroidea,
Most aquatic stereospondyls have flattened heads.
He continued to use Ganocephala and Labyrinthodonta (which he alternatively referred to as Rhachitomi) to distinguish animals based on the absence or presence of occipital condyles.
Soft tissue, such as scales and external gills, were found in many well-preserved branchiosaur fossils from Germany.
During the development of most tetrapods, teeth begin to calcify at their tips.
This is not the case in metoposaurids, meaning that as their bodies grew larger they became less adapted toward a terrestrial lifestyle.
''Balanerpeton woodi'' is the oldest species, having been present over 330 million years ago during the Viséan stage of the Early Carboniferous.
The ability of the tympanum and stapes to effectively transmit vibrations is called impedance matching.
'''9''' Stereospondyli, '''10''' Rhytidostea, '''11''' Brachyopoidea, '''12''' Capitosauria, '''13''' Trematosauria, '''14''' Metoposauroidea
Other stereospondyls probably also lifted their skulls, but they are not as well adapted for such movement.
The earliest described temnospondyl was ''Mastodonsaurus'', named by Georg Friedrich Jaeger in 1828.
Experts disagree over whether temnospondyls were ancestral to modern amphibians (frogs, salamanders, and caecilians), or whether the whole group died out without leaving any descendants.
A 2007 study made a "supertree" of all temnospondyl families, combining the family-level trees of previous studies.
Temnospondyls' vertebrae are divided into several segments.
The rugged surfaces of bones may have supported blood vessels, which could transfer carbon dioxide to the bones to neutralize acidic build up in the blood (early semiaquatic tetrapods would have had difficulty expelling carbon dioxide from their bodies while on land, and these dermal bones may have been an early solution to the problem).
Although the earliest temnospondyls were primarily semiaquatic, they had the ability to feed on land.
Several suborders of stegocephalians were recognized in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Lissamphibians appear to have arisen in the Permian.
Like other Mesozoic temnospondyls, adult metoposaurids were adapted to a semiaquatic lifestyle.
Later in the 19th century, temnospondyls were classified as various members of Stegocephalia, a name coined by American paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope in 1868.
In these species, the shape and proportions of skull bones change in the early stages of development.
Although the two genera both have similarly sized conical teeth, ''Phytosaurus'' was later found to be a crocodile-like reptile.
The dissorophoid family Amphibamidae is thought to be most closely related to Lissamphibia.
In 1841, English palaeontologist Richard Owen referred to the genus as ''Labyrinthodon'' to describe its highly folded or labyrinthine teeth.
It was thought to be the most closely related temnospondyl to lissamphibians and was placed as the sister taxon of the group in a phylogenetic analysis.
He placed microsaurs in Lepospondyli, a group which he characterized as having simple, spool-shaped vertebral centra.
Its stapes is also a better transmitter of sound.
Cope classified Microsauria as a subgroup of Labyrinthodontia, placing many small, amphibian-like animals within it.
In one of the earliest phylogenetic analyses of the group, Gardiner (1983) recognized five characteristics that made Temnospondyli a clade: a bone at the back of the skull, the parasphenoid, is connected to another bone on the underside of the skull, the pterygoid; large openings called interpterygoid vacuities are present between the pterygoids; the stapes (a bone involved in hearing) is connected to the parasphenoid and projects upward; the cleithrum, a bone in the pectoral girdle, is thin; and part of the vertebra called the interdorsal attaches to the neural arch.
Metamorphosis is seen in dissorophoids, eryopids, and zatrachydids, with aquatic larvae developing into adults capable of living on land.
Small teeth that once covered the palate are lost.
In 2000, paleontologists Rainer Schoch and Andrew Milner named a third major clade of stereospondyls, the Rhytidostea.
Other temnospondyls, such as ''Eryops'', have been found with small, disc-like bony scutes that were in life probably embedded in the skin.
The names Stegocephalia and Labyrinthodontia were used interchangeably to refer to the order in which it belonged.
In living tetrapods, the main body of the vertebra is a single piece of bone called the centrum, but in temnospondyls, this region was divided into a pleurocentrum and intercentrum.
Recently, large specimens of ''Apateon gracilis'' were described with adaptations toward a terrestrial lifestyle, indicating that not all branchiosaurs were neotenic.
Small, regularly spaced pits are the first to form, followed by larger ridges.
Many temnospondyls also have canal-like grooves in their skulls called sensory sulci.
Several fossils were described from the Early Permian of Texas in 1998 that may be egg masses of dissorophoid temnospondyls.
Modern amphibians have recently been suggested as descendants of temnospondyls, which would place them within crown Tetrapoda.
The following cladogram is modified from Ruta ''et al.''
Branchiosauria included only a few forms, such as ''Branchiosaurus'' from Europe and ''Amphibamus'' from North America, that had poorly developed bones, external gills, and no ribs.
Säve-Söderbergh used the name Labyrinthodontia in a strict sense (''sensu stricto'') to refer to Rhachitomi and Stereospondyli, excluding Embolomeri.
Trackways referable to small temnospondyls have also been found in Carboniferous and Permian rocks.
Fossils have been found on every continent.
Dissorophoids include small, mostly terrestrial temnospondyls that may be the ancestors of modern amphibians.
In the early 20th century, branchiosaurs would be recognized as larval forms of temnospondyls lacking many of the typical features that define the group, and is no longer recognized as a distinct group.
Branchiosaurs were small-bodied and had simple conical teeth, while labyrinthodonts were larger and had complex, folded dentin and enamel in their teeth.
Most temnospondyls probably reproduced through external fertilization.
They were the first known fossils of amphibian eggs.
The fossils consist of small disks with thin membranes that are probably vitelline membranes and halo-like areas surrounding them that are most likely mucous coatings.
Early tetrapods like temnospondyls have thick stapes with poor impedance matching, so it is now thought that they were not used for hearing.
Their rhachitomous vertebrae, notochord, and lack of occipital condyles (which attached the head to the neck) were features that were also shared with fishes.
The name Temnospondyli was rarely used in the decades that followed.
A third hypothesis is that caecilians descended from lepospondyls and frogs and salamanders evolved from dissorophoids.
One temnospondyl, ''Peltobatrachus'', has armour-like plating that covers both its back and underside.
Dendrerpetontidae has also been included in Edopoidea, and is the oldest known temnospondyl family.
In addition, Schoch named the clade containing all temnospondyls except edopoids Eutemnospondyli and reinstated the name Rhachitomi for the clade containing all temnospondyls except edopoids and dendrerpetontids.
''Batrachosaurus'' is still used as the name of an unrelated brachyopid temnospondyl.
During the Early Triassic (251.0 - 245.0 Mya) one group of successful long-snouted fish-eaters, the trematosauroids, even adapted to a life in the sea, the only known amphibians to do so with the exception of the modern crab-eating frog.
Jaeger named ''Mastodonsaurus'' from a single tooth, and considered it a reptile.
It supported many of the clades that were found by Yates and Warren, but it did not find support for their division of derived stereospondyls into Euskelia and Limnarchia.
Jaeger also named ''Salamandroides giganteus'' in 1828, basing it on partial occiput, or back portion of the skull.
Other temnospondyls, such as archegosaurids, developed long snouts and a close similarity to crocodiles, although they lacked the armor characteristic of the latter group.
Temnospondyli included forms with the centra divided into pleurocentra and intercentra.
The skull morphology of some small temnospondyls has been compared to those of modern frogs and salamanders, but the presence of bicuspid, pedicellate teeth in small, paedomorphic or immature temnospondyls has been cited as the most convincing argument in favor of the temnospondyl origin of lissamphibians.
''Baphetes'' is now placed as an early tetrapod outside Temnospondyli, and ''Rhombopholis'' is now considered a prolacertiform reptile.
Owen thought the name ''Mastodonsaurus'' "ought not to be retained, because it recalls unavoidably the idea of the mammalian genus ''Mastodon'', or else a mammilloid form of the tooth... and because the second element of the word, ''saurus'', indicates a false affinity, the remains belonging, not to the Saurian, but to the Batrachian order of Reptiles."
Several types of dissorophoids do not fully metamorphose, but retain features of juveniles such as gills and small body size in what is known as neoteny.
Using fossil evidence, there are three main theories for the origin of modern amphibians.
While Capitosauria and Trematosauria are still widely used, Rhytidostea is not often supported as a true clade in recent analyses.
They resembled salamanders, and some taxa, such as the genus ''Branchiosaurus'', even retained external gills like the modern-day axolotl.
Most have broad, flat heads that are either blunt (brevirostrine) or elongated (longirostrine).
An alternative possibility is that ''Trimerorhachis'' was cannibalistic, eating its young like many amphibians do today.
In 2008, an amphibamid called ''Gerobatrachus hottoni'' was named from Texas and was nicknamed the "frogamander" for its frog-like head and salamander-like body.
In some temnospondyls, such as ''Nigerpeton'', tusks in the lower jaw pierce the palate and emerge through openings in the top of the skull.
The most basal group of temnospondyls is the superfamily Edopoidea.
Edopoids have several primitive or plesiomorphic features, including a single occipital condyle and a bone called the intertemporal that is absent in other temnospondyls.
Below is a cladogram from Laurin and Reisz (1999) placing Temnospondyli outside crown Tetrapoda:
Large assemblages of metoposaurs with hundreds of individuals preserved together have been found in the southwestern United States.
Temnospondyls have been known since the early 19th century, and were initially thought to be reptiles.
Metoposaurids are distinguished from capitosauroids by the positioning of their eye sockets near the front of their skulls.
During the Late Permian, increasing aridity and the diversification of reptiles contributed into a decline in terrestrial temnospondyls, but semiaquatic and fully aquatic temnospondyls continued to flourish, including the large ''Melosaurus'' of Eastern Europe.
They are attached to plant fossils, suggesting that these temnospondyls laid eggs on aquatic plants much like modern frogs.
As more fossils were uncovered in England, Owen depicted these labyrinthodonts as the "highest" form of batrachian and compared them to crocodiles, which he considered the highest form of reptiles.
The mucous membranes show that the eggs were laid by amphibians, not fish (their eggs lack mucous), but the type of amphibian that laid them cannot be known because no body fossils are preserved with the eggs.
Internal fertilization and similar courtship behavior are seen in modern salamanders.
Other studies place modern amphibians as the descendants of lepospondyls and place temnospondyls in a more basal position within the stem of Tetrapoda.
Their bones are not highly developed for movement on land.
Although temnospondyls are considered amphibians, many had characteristics, such as scales, claws, and armour-like bony plates, that distinguish them from modern amphibians.
(2003) placing Temnospondyli within crown Tetrapoda:
Recent studies show these dense assemblages were instead probably the result of currents accumulating dead individuals in certain areas.
When feeding, they probably opened their mouths by lifting their skulls instead of lowering their lower jaws.
Instead, these thick stapes may have functioned to support the tissue that covers the otic notch.
Romer agreed with this classification, but used the name Temnospondyli to avoid confusion with  Labyrinthodontia in its wider sense (''sensu lato'').
Within Labyrinthodonta were the groups Rhachitomi, Labyrinthodonti, and Embolerimi.
Members of Rhachitomi, such as ''Archegosaurus'' and ''Eryops'', had rhachitomous vertebrae with enlarged intercentra that displaced the pleurocentra.
These environments seem to have had little diversity, as they were inhabited almost exclusively by metoposaurs.
''Plagiosuchus'' has very small teeth and a large area for muscle attachment behind the skull, suggesting that it could suction feed by rapidly opening its mouth.
''Archegosaurus'',  ''Dendrerpeton'', ''Eryops'' and ''Trimerorhachis'' were placed in this group and were considered to be the most primitive members of Reptilia.
Other, more derived temnospondyls, such as the amphibamids, were smaller and more terrestrial.
Crown-group tetrapods are descendants of the most recent common ancestor of all living tetrapods and stem tetrapods are forms that are outside the crown group.
Below is a cladogram modified from Sigurdsen and Bolt (2010) showing the relationships of ''Gerobatrachus'', ''Doleserpeton'', and Lissamphibia:
As temnospondyls continued to flourish and diversify in the Late Permian (260.4 - 251.0 Mya), a major group called Stereospondyli became more dependent on life in the water.
Thus, they were considered a link between early fishes and more advanced forms such as stegocephalians.
Frogs and all other living tetrapods have a rod-like bone called the stapes that aids in hearing by transferring vibrations from the ear drum —or homologous tympanum— to the inner ear.
They are also the most common amphibians from the deposit in which the eggs were found.
Below is a cladogram from Ruta ''et al.''
They have often been interpreted as mass death events caused by droughts in floodplain environments.
This weaker type of backbone indicates the stereospondylous temnospondyls spent more time in water.
One unusual terrestrial temnospondyl, ''Fayella'', has relatively long limbs for its body, and probably lived as an active runner able to chase prey.
In addition to ''Mastodonsaurus'', some of the earliest named genera included ''Metopias'' and ''Rhombopholis'' in 1842, ''Zygosaurus'' in 1848, ''Trematosaurus'' in 1849, ''Baphetes'' and ''Dendrerpeton'' in 1853, ''Capitosaurus'' in 1858, and ''Dasyceps'' in 1859.
''Gerrothorax'' is thought to have lifted its skull to around 50° above horizontal through the flexing of the atlanto-occipital joint between the occipital condyles of the skull and the atlas vertebra of the neck.
Recently, the theory that temnospondyls were the ancestors of all lissamphibians has gained wide support.
Another group of stereospondyls, the plagiosaurs, had wide heads with external gills, and adapted to life at the bottom of lakes and rivers.
Within Stereospondyli, Yates and Warren erected two major clades: Capitosauria and Trematosauria.
Depending on the classification of modern amphibians, they are either included in the crown group Tetrapoda or the stem of Tetrapoda.
However, some fully mature temnospondyls also possess hyobranchial bones but did not have external gills.
Small bones belonging to younger ''Trimerorhachis'' individuals have been found in these pouches.
Some eryopoids became better adapted toward life in water, and shifted their diets toward aquatic organisms.
(1987), including the contact between the postparietal and exoccipital at the back of the skull, small projections (uncinate processes) on the ribs, and a pelvic girdle with each side having a single iliac blade.
Watson was the first to suggest skull lifting as a means of feeding in temnospondyls.
The positioning of the stapes and the shape of the otic region suggests that the tympani of temnospondyls and frogs are homologous, but the tympani of these amphibians are no longer considered homologous with the hearing systems of reptiles, birds, and mammals.
The head of one individual rests under the tail of another in what may be a courtship display.
Two major clades were Euskelia and Limnarchia.
Both elements support a spine-like neural arch, and well-developed interlocking projections called zygapophyses strengthen the connections between vertebrae.
Many temnospondyls are much larger than living amphibians, and superficially resemble crocodiles.
The postcranial skeleton does not develop at the same rate as the skull, with ossification (the replacement of cartilage by bone) happening more slowly.
Leopold Fitzinger named the animal ''Batrachosaurus'' in 1837.
One of the first broad-scale studies of temnospondyl phylogeny was conducted by paleontologist Andrew Milner in 1990.
Temnospondyl larvae are often distinguished by poorly developed bones and the presence of a hyobranchial apparatus, a series of bones that gills would attach to in life.
The Triassic-Jurassic extinction event around 199.6 Mya led to the extinction of most Mesozoic temnospondyls.
This pattern is seen in living amphibians and fossils.
These animals spent most or all their lives in water as aquatic predators, catching their prey by a sudden opening of the upper jaw and sucking in fish or other small animals.
Labyrinthodonti, such as ''Mastodonsaurus'', ''Trematosaurus'', and ''Micropholis'', had lost their pleurocentra, and the intercentra made up the entire body of the vertebrae.
Therefore, ear structures in temnospondyls were not ancestral to those of all other tetrapods.
While most temnospondyls are aquatic in early stages of life, most metoposaurids appear to have been terrestrial in their juvenile stage.
The skulls are rounded or triangular in shape when viewed from above, and are usually covered in pits and ridges.
These impressions show, when alive, they had smooth skin, robust limbs with webbed feet, and a ridge of skin on their undersides.
The structure of its tympanum, a disk-like membrane that functions like an ear drum, is similar to that of frogs and has also been used as evidence for a close relationship.
They are almost 40 million years younger than other basal temnospondyls, implying a long ghost lineage of species that are not yet known in the fossil record.
Compressive forces would have been experienced when biting down on prey.
If this was the case, the bones of these smaller individuals were originally located in the throat and were pushed into the pharyngeal pouch as the animal fossilized.
Within Limnarchia are the superfamily Archegosauroidea and the most derived temnospondyls, the stereospondyls.
Edopoids include the Late Carboniferous  genus ''Edops'' and the family Cochleosauridae.
In the Carnian stage of the Late Triassic (228.0 - 216.5 Mya), capitosauroids were joined by the superficially very similar Metoposauridae.
Recent analyses place Dendrerpetontidae outside Edopoidea in a more derived position.
An entire growth series is exhibited in the wide range of sizes among specimens, but the lack of terrestrially adapted adult forms suggests that these temnospondyls were neotenic.
Unlike labyrinthodonts, they did not have parietal foramena,  small holes in their skulls behind their eye sockets.
The living Darwin's Frog is also a mouth brooder and would be the closest modern analogue to ''Trimerorhachis'' if it cared for its young in this way.
''Mastodonsaurus'' means "breast tooth lizard" after the nipple-like shape of the tip of the tooth.
Bony scutes are also seen in plagiosaurs, but unlike ''Peltobatrachus'', ''Laidleria'', ''Eryops'', and dissorophids, these animals are thought to have been fully aquatic.
As development continues, the external gills disappear.
They placed Dvinosauria within Limnarchia, but more recent studies disagree on their position.
During the Triassic period, these animals dominated the freshwater ecosystems, evolving in a range of both small and large forms.
''Plagiosuchus'', a close relative of ''Gerrothorax'', also has a hyobranchial skeleton that muscles may have attached to.
Like most living frogs, female temnospondyls would have laid masses of eggs in water while males released sperm to fertilize them.
The second major clade, Limnarchia, includes most Mesozoic temnospondyls, as well as some Permian groups.
Another group, the capitosauroids, included medium- and large-sized animals  in length, with large and flat skulls that could be over a meter long in the largest forms such as ''Mastodonsaurus''.
A block of sandstone, described in 2007 from the Early Carboniferous Mauch Chunk Formation of Pennsylvania, included impressions of the bodies of three temnospondyls.
The strong backbone and strong limbs of many ratchitomous temnospondyls allowed them to be partially, and in some cases fully, terrestrial.
Owen recognized the animal was not a "saurian" reptile, yet he also referred Jaeger's ''Phytosaurus'' to the genus.
Temnospondyls are placed as basal tetrapods in phylogenetic analyses, with their exact positioning varying between studies.
These temnospondyls included the largest known amphibian, the 9-m-long ''Prionosuchus'' of Brazil.
In stereospondylous vertebrae, the pleurocentra have been lost entirely, with the intercentra enlarged as the main body of the vertebrae.
The naming of these first specimens was disputed, however.
Because ''Mastodonsaurus'' was named first, it has precedence over the other names as a senior subjective synonym.
Recent studies place a family of temnospondyls called the amphibamids as the closest relatives of modern amphibians.
Among them were ''Dendrerpeton'', once placed in Ganocephala.
Swedish paleontologist Gunnar Säve-Söderbergh removed embolomeres from the group, narrowing its scope to rhachitomes and stereospondyls.
Temnospondyl remains were known since the early part of the 19th century, however.
They were described at various times as batrachians, stegocephalians, and labyrinthodonts, although these names are now rarely used.
The temnospondyl ''Laidleria'' also has extensive plating on its back.
Temnospondyli was named by German palaeontologist Karl Alfred von Zittel in his second edition of ''Handbuch der Palaeontologie'', published in 1888.
Fossils of temnospondyls like ''Metoposaurus'' and ''Cheliderpeton'' show that individuals grew larger past maturity.
Branchiosaurids like ''Branchiosaurus'' and ''Apateon'' are represented by many fossils preserving skin and external gills.
Unlike other temnospondyls, their postcranial skeletons developed quickly but were still partly cartilaginous when fully mature.
The most recent known temnospondyl was the giant chigutisaurid ''Koolasuchus'', known from the Early Cretaceous of Australia.
Temnospondyli became a commonly used name at the turn of the century.
Some temnospondyls, such as ''Cryobatrachus'' and ''Kryostega'', even inhabited Antarctica, which was covered in temperate forests at the time.
The jaw mechanics of the plagiosaurid ''Gerrothorax'' is well known, and is one of the most highly adapted.
Embolomeres are now identified as reptiliomorphs distantly related to temnospondyls.
Other primitive temnospondyls include ''Capetus'' and ''Iberospondylus''.
By this time, temnospondyls had become a common and widespread component of semiaquatic ecosystems.
This tension would have been experienced during suction feeding underwater.
The first primarily aquatic feeders were archegosaurs in the Permian.
Below is the cladogram from Schoch's analysis:
It was first described as a "protolissamphibian", and the specific name ''annectens'' means "connecting" in reference to its inferred transitional position between temnospondyls and lissamphibians.
