The cheeses of the Canaries have generally received good international reviews, noted for their sweetness which differentiates them from certain other European cheeses.
Other areas range from those protected and enclosed in mountains such as Montaña Roja and Montaña Pelada, the valleys and forests with subtropical vegetation and climate, to those with deep gorges and precipices such as at Anaga and Teno.
Lava tubes, or volcanic pipes are volcanic caves, usually in the form of tunnels formed within lava flows more or less fluid reogenética duration of the activity.
From 1929 to 1933 the number of schools nearly doubled.
Water is generally of a very high quality, and all the beaches of the island of Tenerife have been catalogued by the Ministry of Health and Consumption as waters suitable for bathing.
Finally, around 200,000 years ago, eruptions started that raised the ''Pico Viejo-Teide'' area in the centre of the island, over the ''Las Cañadas caldera''.
Agriculture is centred on the northern slopes, and is also determined by the altitude as well as orientation: in the coastal zone, tomatoes and bananas are cultivated, usually in plastic enclosures, these high yield products are for export to mainland Spain and the rest of Europe; in the drier intermediate zone, potatoes, tobacco and maize are grown, whilst in the south, onions are important.
* ''The Basilica of Candelaria'' (in Candelaria): The place where the image of the Virgin of Candelaria can be found, this sanctuary is built in neoclassical style, and is visited daily by the parishioners, who visit the Villa Mariana out of devotion to the Virgin.
File:Tajinaste rojo.jpg|Tenerife bugloss
Of the manor houses, the best examples can be found in La Orotava and in La Laguna, characterized by their balconies and by the existence of interior patios and the widespread use of the wood known as ''pino tea'' ("pitch pine").
After the city of Santa Cruz the major towns and municipalities are San Cristóbal de La Laguna (144,347), Arona (72,328), La Orotava (40,644), Adeje (38,245), Los Realejos (37,224), Granadilla de Abona (36,224), and Puerto de la Cruz (31,131).
As the larger of the two stations, Coast FM can be heard across Tenerife and much of the Canary Islands from its transmitters on 106.6, 92.2 and 89.4.
Shortly after this, though, the start of the Spanish Civil War and the following dictatorship of Francisco Franco constituted a considerable reversal.
In April 1494, coming from Gran Canaria, the conqueror landed on the coast of present-day Santa Cruz de Tenerife and disembarked with about 2,000 men on foot and 200 on horseback.
Underwater fissural eruptions originated from the pillow lava, which are produced by the rapid cooling of the magma when it comes in contact with water, obtaining their peculiar shape.
There are sash windows and it is customary for the chairs inside the house to rest back-to-back to the windows.
After long-term accumulation of these fragments, the birth of the island occurred at the end of the Miocene Epoch.
Mojo, a word probably of Portuguese origin, describes a typical Canarian sauce, served as an accompaniment to food.
His shrine is a cave in Granadilla de Abona, near the coast, where he lived in his youth.
The Basilica of Candelaria|Basílica de Nuestra Senora de la Candelaria can be found on the island (Patron of Canary Islands).
By March 2011, these intentions had been replaced by advanced plans for a single  high-speed rail line, the "South Train" which would connect Santa Cruz de Tenerife with Adeje via Santa Maria de Añaza, Candelaria, San Isidro, Tenerife South Airport, and a main stopover station at Adeje which would be designed to service up to 25,000 passengers per day.
On the other hand, maps dating to the 14th and 15th century, from authors like Bontier and Le Verrier refer to the island as ''Isla del Infierno'', literally meaning "Island of Hell", a reference to the volcanic activity and eruptions of Mount Teide.
Tenerife North Airport and Tenerife South Airport together account for the highest passenger numbers in the Islands with some 14 million passengers annually (AENA report).
The shield that the Cabildo Insular, or Island Government, uses is slightly different from that used by the city government of La Laguna, which utilizes a motto in the arms' border and also includes some palm branches.
The island's former inhabitants, the Guanches, referred to the island as ''Achinet'' or ''Chenet'' (variant spellings are found in the literature).
It serves inter-insular flights as well as national and European flights, and for the last two years, a weekly service to Venezuela.
It was, along with the Parish of the Conception of La Laguna, one of the first parishes of the island.
A known formation called ''Los Azulejos'', composed by green-tinted rocks were created by hydrothermal processes.
Finally, the construction sector with 11.29 percent of the total production has a strategic priority, because it is a sector with relative stability which permits multiple possibilities of development and employment opportunities.
Castillian forces under the ''Adelantado'' ("military governor") de Lugo suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the Guanches in the First Battle of Acentejo in 1494, but the Guanches were eventually overcome by superior technology and surrendered to the Crown of Castile on 25 December 1494.
Mount Gala represents its highest elevation at .
The volcanic eruptions became more violent and had a more explosive character, and resulted in the forming of peculiar geological fragments.
* Wax myrtle: 1000–1500 m. A dryer vegetation, poorer in species.
The other way to arrive on Tenerife is by ferry, either to Santa Cruz de Tenerife or Los Cristianos, near Playa de Las Américas.
* Lower xerophytic zone: 0–700 m. Xerophytic shrubs that are well adapted to long dry spells, intense sunshine and strong winds.
However, the island has  of beaches, such as the one at El Médano, surpassed only in this respect by the island of Fuerteventura.
The zones on Tenerife known as Macizo de Teno, Macizo de Anaga and Macizo de Adeje were formed seven million years ago; these formations are called the ''Ancient Basaltic Series'' or ''Series I''.
The fauna of Tenerife includes some 400 species of fish, 56 birds, five reptiles, two amphibians, 13 land mammals and several thousand invertebrates, along with several species of sea turtles, whales and dolphins.
It comprises about 200 small barren islets or large rocks including Roques de Anaga, Roque de Garachico, and Fasnia adding a further  to the total area.
This massif is not as impressive as the others due to its diminished initial structure, since in addition to with the site's greater geologic age it has experienced severe erosion of its material, thereby losing its original appearance and extent.
Canary Island pine (''Pinus canariensis''), broom (''Genista canariensis''), rock rose (''Cistus'' spp.
* ''The Church of the Conception of La Laguna'' (''Iglesia de la Concepción de La Laguna''): One of the most ancient buildings on Tenerife, its construction was ordered by Alonso Fernández de Lugo.
However, in modern society, this is generally only given to inhabitants of the capital, Santa Cruz.
The Canary Islands have low levels of air pollution thanks to the lack of factories and industry and the tradewinds which naturally move away contaminated air from the islands.
*''Principal Parish of Saint James the Great'' (''Parroquia Matriz del Apóstol Santiago''): Situated in Villa de Los Realejos, this parish church was the first Christian church built on the island after its conquest by Castilian forces.
The north of the island produced various master craftsman who created distinctive balconies, celosias, doors, and windows, as well as furniture consisting of pieces made in fine wood.
The volcano is the third largest on the planet, and its central location, substantial size, looming silhouette in the distance and its snowy landscape give it a unique personality.
Today this territory is made up of El Rosario, Candelaria, Arafo and Güímar
However, although climatic differences in rainfall and sunshine on the island exist, overall annual precipitation is low and the summer months from May to September are normally completely dry.
The Cabildo is composed of the following administrative offices; Presidency, Legislative Body, Government Council, Informative Commissions, Spokesman's office''.
File:Los Gigantes Sunset.JPG|The sun setting over Los Gigantes.
Most seafood is cooked simply, usually boiled, or prepared "a la espalda" (cut into two equally shaped pieces along the spine) or "a la sal" (baked in salt).
Witness to the emigration history of the island is the foundation in the outskirts of Santo Domingo of the village of San Carlos de Tenerife in 1684.
After a ferocious fight which led to many casualties, a defence was organised by General Antonio Gutiérrez de Otero y Santayana to repel the invaders.
Another notable building on the island is the Masonic Temple of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, generally considered the finest example of Masonic temple architecture in Spain; it was the Masonic center of the country until the military occupation of the island by the Franco regime.
The island, which lies at the same latitude as the Sahara Desert, enjoys a warm tropical climate with an average of  in the winter and  in the summer.
Another cult to the Virgin Mary exists in the form of Our Lady of Los Remedios (''la Virgen de Los Remedios''), who is patron of the Roman Catholic diocese of Tenerife (''Diócesis Nivariense'').
Summer temperatures are highest in August, with an average high of  in Santa Cruz, similar to those of places as far north as Barcelona and Majorca, because of the greater maritime influence.
Relatively common is a mixed-type with wheat.
Other valleys tend to be between hills formed by deposits of sediments from nearby slopes, or simply wide ravines which in their evolution have become typical valleys.
Today it includes Puerto de la Cruz, La Orotava, La Victoria de Acentejo, La Matanza de Acentejo, Los Realejos and Santa Úrsula.
Of the two airports on the island, Tenerife South is the most popular tourist destination.
All other municipalities have fewer than 30,000 inhabitants, the smallest municipality being Vilaflor with a population of 1,900.
Four years later, in 1730, another group left which would found the following year the city of San Antonio in Texas.
Another Tenerife-based industry is cabinetwork.
From the start of the colonization of the New World, many expeditions stopped at the island on their way to the Americas, and added to their crews with many ''tinerfeños'' who formed an integral part of the conquest expeditions or simply left in search of better prospects.
There is also an Instituto de Bio-Orgánica Antonio González (Antonio González Bio-Organic Institute) at the University of La Laguna.
The Cañadas Structure I experienced various collapses and emitted explosive material that produced the area known as ''Bandas del sur'' (in the present-day south-southeast of Tenerife).
Traditional houses generally have two storeys, with rough walls of variegated colours.
The first occurred in 1704, when the Arafo, Fasnia and Siete Fuentes volcanoes erupted simultaneously.
The Hospital del Sur de Tenerife (''Tenerife South Hospital'') opened in 2015.
Moray eels (''morenas'') are also eaten, usually fried.
Holy Week in the city of San Cristobal de la Laguna is the largest of the Canary Islands.
Fishing is also a major contributor to the Tenerifian economy, as the Canaries are Spain's second most important fishing grounds.
This new structure, called the ''Pre-Cañadas Structure'' (''Edificio pre-Cañadas''), would be the foundation for what is called the ''Cañadas Structure I''.
Still, the tourist boom in the 1960s changed the outlook of the town, making it cosy and cosmopolitan at the same time, and a favourite for the more mature traveller (notably the German and Spanish tourist).
It was used in reference to the fishermen who would survive by catching poor quality mackerel and citizens who ate potatoes of a low quality.
As with the rest of Spain, Tenerife is largely Roman Catholic.
You will find a taxi rank outside any airport terminal (Tenerife North and Tenerife South).
The Guanches became devoted to a Black Madonna that Christian missionaries from Lanzarote and Fuerteventura left on a beach near the present-day Villa Mariana de Candelaria, which gave rise to the legends and stories associated with the Virgin.
However, between 2000 and 2007, the population rose by 155,705 to 865,070, an annual increase of 3.14 percent.
Tenerife's forests were gradually reduced by population growth and the need to clear land for agriculture for local consumption and for export.
A wide variety of other ingredients are also used, including; almonds, cheese, saffron and fried bread.
Los Rodeos Airport was also the site of the Tenerife Airport Disaster, which killed 583 people and is the deadliest air accident in history.
Another significant act of the feast of the Virgin of Candelaria is called "''Walk to Candelaria''" held on the night of 14 to 15 August in which the faithful make pilgrimage on foot from various parts of the island, even coming from other islands to arrive at Villa Mariana de Candelaria.
Since its creation in March 1913 it has a series of capabilities and duties, stated in the Canary Autonomy Statutes () and regulated by Law 14/1990, of 26 July 1990, of the ''Régimen Jurídico de las Administraciones Públicas de Canarias''.
As this accumulation approached the surface of the water, gases erupted from the magma due to the reduction of the surrounding pressure.
Also by these times there was a new interest on the part of the Crown of populating those empty zones in the Americas to pre-empt the occupation by foreign forces as had happened with the English in Jamaica or the French in the Guianas or western Hispaniola, so Canary Islanders, including many ''tinerfeños'', left for the New World.
These houses are characterized by simple façades and wooden lattices with little ornamentation.
Other important churches include the Church of the Conception in La Orotava (Iglesia de la Concepción); the churches of San Agustín and Santo Domingo in La Orotava; the church of Nuestra Señora de la Peña de Francia in Puerto de la Cruz; the church of San Marcos in Icod de los Vinos; the church of Santa Ana in Garachico; and the Church of the Conception (Iglesia de la Concepción) in Santa Cruz de Tenerife.
The urban nuclei of La Orotava and La Laguna have been declared national historical-artistic monuments.
An 1850 annex to this building was the Escuela Normal Elemental, the archipelago's first teachers' college or normal school, which became the Escuela Normal Superior de Magisterio from 1866 onward.
Perhaps the most important festival of Tenerife, popular both on a national and international level, is the Carnival of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, which has been declared a Festival of International Tourist Interest (''Fiesta de Interés Turístico Internacional'').
Since tourism dominates the Tenerifian economy, the service sector is the largest.
The South Dorsal or ''Dorsal of Adeje'' is part of the last of the structural axis.
This is a typical Canarian dish which simply refers to the way the cooked potatoes look.
Tenerife has a large number of ravines, which are a characteristic element of the landscape, caused by erosion from surface runoff over a long period.
The government buildings and religious structures were built according to the changing styles of each century.
The energy sector which contributes 2.85 percent has a primary role in the development of renewable energy sources.
A second volcanic cycle called the ''Post-Miocene Formations'' or ''Latest Series II, III, IV'' began three million years ago.
Public schools continued their advance during and after the post-Franco Spanish transition to democracy.
Following this report is the largest port number of passengers recorded.
* Thermophile forest: 200–600 m. Transition zone with moderate temperatures and rainfall, but the area has been deteriorated by human activity.
Tenerife is most easily reached by air.
It is dedicated to Saint James the Great, as the ''conquista'' was completed on the saint's feast day on 25 July in 1496.
A large number of steep-walled gorges are present, penetrating deeply into the terrain.
This diversity of natural microclimates and, therefore, habitats, means that a rich and diverse flora (1400 species of plants) exists on the island, with well over a hundred entirely endemic to Tenerife.
Particularly noteworthy are the celebrations in La Orotava where a very large carpet, or tapestry, of different coloured volcanic soils, covers the Plaza del Ayuntamiento (town square).
It is also one of the most important tourist destinations in Spain and the world.
The industrial sector which shares in 5.80 percent is a growing activity in the island, vis-a-vis the new possibilities created by technological advances.
Later, after colonisation, the Hispanisation of the name resulted in the adding of a letter "r" uniting both words to obtain the name Tenerife as a result.
On 2 February we celebrate the feast of the Candelaria.
To the right there is a castle in gules, and to the left, a lion rampant in gules.
The pluviometric maximums are registered on the windward side at an average altitude of between , almost exclusively in the La Orotava mountain range.
These have developed into processions to mark festivals dedicated to Saint Mark in Tegueste, where the wagons are decorated with the fruits of the earth (seeds, cereals, flowers, etc.
It calls at some points of interest including Tenerife's two major hospitals, the university complex of Guajara, and a number of museums and theatres.
In addition, in June 2007 it was recognised by UNESCO as a World Heritage site.
TITSA even run two daily services up Mount Teide – from Puerto de la Cruz (348) and from Los Christianos/Las Americas (342) up to the Teide Parador, Teleferico cable car, Montana Blanca and El Portillo.
Although there are a diversity of industrial estates that exist on the island, the most important industrial activity is petroleum, representing 10 percent of the island's GDP, again largely due to the capital Santa Cruz de Tenerife with its refinery.
Endemic species include Viper's bugloss, Teide white broom, Teide violet etc.
Los Rodeos Airport, the smaller of the two, is located near the metropolitan area Santa Cruz-La Laguna (423,000 inhabitants).
The last eruption of the 18th century happened in 1798 at Cañadas de Teide, in Chahorra.
More recently coastal development has spread northwards from Playa de las Americas and now encompasses the former small enclave of La Caleta (a favoured place for naturist tourists).
The original settlers considered Teide a god and Teide was a place of worship.
The moderating effect of the marine air makes extreme heat a rare occurrence and frost an impossibility at sea level.
These results reflect the general trend in Spain where since 2000 immigration has reversed the general slow down in population growth, following the collapse in the birth rate from 1976.
* Tacoronte: ''Menceyes'': Rumén and Acaymo.
The peak of Teide, at  above sea level and more than  above the ocean floor, is the highest point of the island, Spanish territory and in the Atlantic Ocean.
Two independent ''achimenceyatos'' were created on the island, and the island was divided into nine ''menceyatos'', with the ''menceyes'' within them forming what would be similar to municipalities today.
The Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria it is the largest hospital complex in the Canary Islands.
''Menceyes'': Tegueste, Tegueste II y Teguaco.
Óscar Domínguez was born in La Laguna in 1906 and is famed for his versatility.
The island is about  from the African coast, and approximately  from the Iberian Peninsula.
Today it includes Fasnia, Arico, Granadilla de Abona, San Miguel de Abona and Arona.
''Menceyes'': Cocanaymo and Romén.
South of La Caldera is Guajara Mountain, which has an elevation of , rising above Teide National Park.
Within the network of roads on the island of Tenerife there are other minor roads that used to include the highway from San Andres and Santa Cruz (Holy Cross in English).
The fish dishes along with the meats are often accompanied by wrinkly potatoes (''papas arrugadas'').
This is celebrated across the island, but is particularly notable in the municipalities of La Laguna, La Orotava and Los Realejos, where elaborate processions take place on Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Easter Day, or "Resurrection Sunday".
Tenerife today has 301 centers of childhood education (preschools), 297 primary schools, 140 secondary schools and 86 post-secondary schools.
Also planned is the construction of a bypass road north of the metropolitan area of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, La Laguna.
For this reason, Tenerife is the tenth highest island worldwide.
Education in the hands of religious orders had a certain importance on the island until the 1970 Ley General de Educación ("General Law of Education") shifted the balance from religiously based education to public education.
Flames erupt from the mountain, symbolizing El Teide.
The Teide is one of the 16 Decade Volcanoes identified by the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth's Interior (IAVCEI) as being worthy of particular study in light of their history of large, destructive eruptions and proximity to populated areas.
The Virgin of Candelaria is the patron of the Canary Islands; a feast is held in her honor two times a year, in February and August.
''Menceyes'': Bentinerfe, Inmobach, Bencomo and Bentor.
These dishes are usually accompanied by ''mojo'' (a local sauce) and wrinkly potatoes.
File:Eidechsen Teide.jpg|''Gallotia galloti'', a wall lizard species endemic to Tenerife
There are many black sand pebble beaches on the northern coast, while on the south and south-west coast of the island, the beaches have typically much finer and clearer sand with lighter tones.
Tourism is more prevalent in the south of the island, which is hotter and drier and has many well developed resorts such as Playa de las Americas and Los Cristianos.
In the 19th and most of the 20th century large numbers of foreign tourists came, especially British, showing interest in the agriculture of the islands.
The area known as Costa Adeje (Las Américas-Los Cristianos) has many world-class facilities and leisure opportunities besides sea and sand, such as quality shopping centres, golf courses, restaurants, waterparks, animal parks, and a theatre suitable for musicals or a convention centre.
The emphasis was on cities like Arona or Adeje, shifting to tourist centres like Los Cristianos or Playa de Las Americas, which now house 65 percent of the hotels on the island.
Like Anaga, it includes an area of outcroppings and deep gorges formed by erosion.
Between the 1833 territorial division of Spain and 1927 Santa Cruz de Tenerife was the sole capital of the Canary Islands, until a decree ordered that the capital of the Canary Islands be shared, as it remains at present.
This aims to provide dual cores to Guamasa and Acorán, by way of Los Baldíos, Centenero, Llano del Moro, El Sobradillo, El Tablero, and El Chorrillo, among other neighbourhoods.
Recently Tenerife has experienced population growth significantly higher than the national average.
After a century and a half of relative growth, based on the grape growing sector, there was an extended emigration of families especially to Venezuela and Cuba.
In Tenerife were born two Catholic saints who were of the greatest missionaries in the American continent: Peter of Saint Joseph Betancur and José de Anchieta.
Tinerfe el Grande, son of the ''mencey'' Sunta governed the island from Adeje in the south.
The most important are Valle de La Orotava and Valle de Güímar, both formed by the mass sliding of great quantities of material towards the sea, creating a depression of the land.
They are both affiliated with the education and research network of the Universidad de La Laguna.
Some famous cooks have even made gofio ice cream, receiving good comments from the critics.
The first of these was an institute of secondary education established in 1846 to fill the gap left by the closure of the Universidad de San Fernando (''see University of La Laguna'').
In 2014, 11,473,600 tourists (excluding those from other parts of Spain) came to the Canary Islands.
They are boiled in their skins, in water with lots of salt, and the water is allowed to evaporate, leaving a salty crust.
Around this church were built the dwellings and infrastructure that formed the nucleus of the city of San Cristóbal de La Laguna.
Another prominent structure is the Torres de Santa Cruz, a skyscraper  high (the highest residential building in Spain and one of the tallest skyscrapers in the Canary Islands).
On one side of it, is the volcano Chahorra o Narices del Teide, where the last eruption occurred in the vicinity of Mount Teide in 1798.
Also located on the island Macizo de Anaga since 2015 is Biosphere Reserve and is the place that has the largest number of endemic species in Europe.
Tenerife North Airport was the site of the deadliest accident in aviation history: in 1977 two Boeing 747s collided on a runway, killing 583 people.
This act was passed with the goal of improving the standard of tourism service and promoting environmentally conscious development.
In La Laguna is the Canarian delegation of the Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC, Superior Council of Scientific Investigations), the Instituto Canario de Investigaciones Agrarias (Canarian Institute of Agrarian Investigation), the Instituto de Estudios Canarios (Canarian Institute of Studies) and the Centro Internacional para la Conservación del Patrimonio (the International Center of the Conservation of Patrimony).
The town itself has kept some of its old-harbour town charm mixed with northern European influences.
Puerto de la Cruz has the Instituto de Estudos Hispánicos de Canarias (Institute of Hispanic Studies of the Canaries), attached to Madrid's Instituto de Cultura Hispánica.
The area is partially occupied by the Teide-Pico Viejo strato-volcano and completed by the materials emitted in the different eruptions that took place.
Tenerife had 4,171,384 arrivals that year, excluding the numbers for Spanish tourists which make up an additional 30 percent of total arrivals.
Once the Queen of the festival is elected, the first part of the carnival ends, and thereafter begins the actual street carnival, in which large numbers of people gather in the centre of Santa Cruz, with the carnival lasting ten days.
Due to the geographic situation of Tenerife, the island enjoys an abundance of fish of various kinds.
The main means of transportation in Tenerife is by highways.
There are two airports: Reina Sofia (or Tenerife South Airport), in the south, and Tenerife North Airport, also called Los Rodeos, near Santa Cruz.
These decorated, small pieces are afterwards joined, to produce distinct designs and pieces of cloth.
Also located on the island Macizo de Anaga since 2015 is Biosphere Reserve and is the place that has the largest number of endemic species in Europe.
The ''menceyes'' of Tenerife adopted differing responses to the conquest.
Today this territory is made up of Tacoronte and El Sauzal
Before his rise to power, Francisco Franco was posted to Tenerife in March 1936 by a Republican government wary of his influence and political leanings.
Today this territory is made up of Tegueste, part of the coastal zone of La Laguna.
Both are third-level hospitals, with specialist facilities that serve all of the Canary Islands.
The Teno massif (''Macizo de Teno'') is located on the northwestern edge of the island.
The island is home to the University of La Laguna, which was founded in 1792 and is the oldest university in the Canaries.
The first port also has passenger services, which connect with the mainland port of Cádiz (and vice versa).
The taxis operate all night and there are several hundred of them so you don't have to worry about not being able to catch a cab.
Finally, and most recently, in 1909 that formed the Chinyero cinder cone, in the municipality of Santiago del Teide, erupted.
Writers such as William Shakespeare and Walter Scott make reference to the wine in some of their works.
It has been declared a National Historic Monument.
The celebration of Corpus Christi in Orotava has been declared of Important Cultural Interest among the official Traditional Activities of the Island.
After the banana the most important crops are, in order of importance, tomatoes, grapes, potatoes and flowers.
Flora well adapted to the conditions.
These soils are taken from the Parque Nacional del Teide, and after the celebration, are returned, to preserve the National Park.
