These settlers formed the Watauga Association, a community built on lands leased from the Cherokee peoples.
In 2010, during the 2010 midterm elections, Bill Haslam succeeded Bredesen, who was term-limited, to become the 49th Governor of Tennessee.
Because Tennessee had ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, it was the only one of the formerly secessionist states that did not have a military governor during the Reconstruction period.
Tennessee borders eight other states: Kentucky and Virginia to the north; North Carolina to the east; Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi on the south; Arkansas and Missouri on the Mississippi River to the west.
Memphis has the largest population of any city in the state.
The city of Clarksville is a fifth significant population center, some  northwest of Nashville.
The route of the Natchez Trace was used as the basis for a scenic highway called the Natchez Trace Parkway.
Interstate 65 crosses the state through Nashville, while Interstate 75 serves Chattanooga and Knoxville and Interstate 55 serves Memphis.
Twenty percent of Tennesseans were born outside the South in 2008, compared to a figure of 13.5% in 1990.
This area of lowlands, flood plains, and swamp land is sometimes referred to as the Delta region.
Hostilities erupted between the British and the neighboring Overhill Cherokees, and a siege of Fort Loudoun ended with its surrender on August 7, 1760.
Many of the Confederate defeats can be attributed to the poor strategic vision of General Braxton Bragg, who led the Army of Tennessee from Perryville, Kentucky to another Confederate defeat at Chattanooga.
The geographical center of the state is located in Murfreesboro.
Fort Loudoun became the westernmost British outpost to that date.
The Confederates besieged Chattanooga during the Chattanooga Campaign in early fall 1863, but were driven off by Grant in November.
It owns  in Henning, which was placed into federal trust by the tribe in 2012.
With a yearlong statewide celebration entitled "Tennessee 200", it opened a new state park (Bicentennial Mall) at the foot of Capitol Hill in Nashville.
Memphis is the economic center of West Tennessee and the largest city in the state.
When the Emancipation Proclamation was announced, Tennessee was mostly held by Union forces.
Despite recognized effects of limiting voting by poor whites, successive legislatures expanded the reach of the disfranchising laws until they covered the state.
From 1972 to 1978, after the Supreme Court ruled (''Furman v. Georgia'') capital punishment unconstitutional, there were no further executions.
In the 20th century, except for two nationwide Republican landslides of the 1920s (in 1920, when Tennessee narrowly supported Warren G. Harding over Ohio Governor James Cox, and in 1928, when it more decisively voted for Herbert Hoover over New York Governor Al Smith, a Catholic), the state was part of the Democratic Solid South until the 1950s.
In this instance the Sheriff is no longer the chief law enforcement officer for Davidson County.
In many areas both blacks and poor whites still faced subjectively applied barriers to voter registration that did not end until after passage of national civil rights legislation, including the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
The latter area includes a large African-American population.
Interstates I-24, I-40, and I-65 service the Division, meeting in Nashville.
In 94 of the 95 counties the Sheriff is the chief law enforcement officer in the county and has jurisdiction over the county as a whole.
Following Reconstruction, Tennessee continued to have competitive party politics.
In 2002, businessman Phil Bredesen was elected as the 48th governor.
The average elevation of the Blue Ridge area is  above sea level.
North Carolina ceded the area to the federal government in 1790, after which it was organized into the Southwest Territory.
In 1953 state legislators amended the state constitution, removing the poll tax.
Tennessee has over 82,000 farms, roughly 59 percent of which accommodate beef cattle.
After decades in which urban populations had been underrepresented in many state legislatures, this significant ruling led to an increased (and proportional) prominence in state politics by urban and, eventually, suburban, legislators and statewide officeholders in relation to their population within the state.
In the 2000 presidential election, Vice President Al Gore, a former Democratic U.S.
Tennessee has played a critical role in the development of many forms of American popular music, including rock and roll, blues, country, and rockabilly.
Nashville's 13-county metropolitan area has been the state's largest since c. 1990.
*Lynchburg/Moore County took a much simpler approach and abolished the Lynchburg Police Department when it consolidated and placed all law enforcement responsibility under the sheriff's office.
On June 19, 2010, the Tennessee Commission of Indian Affairs granted state recognition to six Indian tribes which was later repealed by the state's Attorney General because the action by the commission was illegal.
In the 20th century, Tennessee transitioned from an agrarian economy to a more diversified economy, aided by massive federal investment in the Tennessee Valley Authority and, in the early 1940s, the city of Oak Ridge.
In an effort to encourage settlers to move west into the new territory, in 1787 the mother state of North Carolina ordered a road to be cut to take settlers into the Cumberland Settlements—from the south end of Clinch Mountain (in East Tennessee) to French Lick (Nashville).
Gun laws in Tennessee regulate the sale, possession, and use of firearms and ammunition.
The first British settlement in what is now Tennessee was built in 1756 by settlers from the colony of South Carolina at Fort Loudoun, near present-day Vonore.
Each county in Tennessee saw at least $1 million from tourism while 19 counties received at least $100 million (Davidson, Shelby, and Sevier counties were the top three).
Ulysses S. Grant and the U.S. Navy captured control of the Cumberland and Tennessee rivers in February 1862.
The western section of the Tennessee Valley, where the depressions become broader and the ridges become lower, is called the Great Valley.
A full-scale replica of the Parthenon was constructed for the celebration, located in what is now Nashville's Centennial Park.
Most of West Tennessee remained Indian land until the Chickasaw Cession of 1818, when the Chickasaw ceded their land between the Tennessee River and the Mississippi River.
The governor is the only official who is elected statewide.
* Central Band of Cherokee, also known as the Cherokee of Lawrence County, Tennessee.
The state has had major disasters, such as the Great Train Wreck of 1918, one of the worst train accidents in U.S. history, and the ''Sultana'' explosion on the Mississippi River near Memphis, the deadliest maritime disaster in U.S. history.
I-26, although technically an east-west interstate, runs from the North Carolina border below Johnson City to its terminus at Kingsport.
The ruling also applied to numerous other states long controlled by rural minorities, such as Alabama, Vermont, and Montana.
Apart from the former Thirteen Colonies only Vermont and Kentucky predate Tennessee's statehood, and neither was ever a federal territory.
Capital punishment has existed in Tennessee at various times since statehood.
Knoxville's McGhee Tyson Airport (TYS) and Chattanooga's Chattanooga Metropolitan Airport (CHA), as well as the Tri-Cities' Tri-Cities Regional Airport (TRI), provide air service to numerous destinations.
Because Memphis International Airport is the major hub for FedEx Corporation, it is the world's largest air cargo operation.
Tennessee's major industries include agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism.
According to James Mooney, the name "can not be analyzed" and its meaning is lost.
Democratic presidential nominees from Southern states (such as Lyndon B. Johnson, Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton) usually fare better than their Northern counterparts do in Tennessee, especially among split-ticket voters outside the metropolitan areas.
As of May 2016, the state had an unemployment rate of 4.3%.
Tennessee's legislature approved an amendment to the state constitution prohibiting slavery on February 22, 1865.
The last major battles came when the Confederates invaded Middle Tennessee in November 1864 and were checked at Franklin, then completely dispersed by George Thomas at Nashville in December.
Soybeans are also heavily planted in West Tennessee, focusing on the northwest corner of the state.
In recent years, Tennessee has received an influx of people relocating from California, Florida, and several northern states for the low cost of living, and the booming healthcare and automobile industries.
Tennessee sends nine members to the US House of Representatives, of whom there are seven Republicans and two Democrats.
The northern section of the Highland Rim, known for its high tobacco production, is sometimes called the Pennyroyal Plateau; it is located primarily in Southwestern Kentucky.
The state constitution was amended to reject same-sex marriage.
The first was adopted in 1796, the year Tennessee joined the union, and the second was adopted in 1834.
Thus, Tennessee was not among the states enumerated in the Proclamation, and the Proclamation did not free any slaves there.
The state constitution allows no more than two justices of the five-member Tennessee Supreme Court to be from one Grand Division and a similar rule applies to certain commissions and boards.
The FedEx St. Jude Classic is a PGA Tour golf tournament held at Memphis since 1958.
Tennessee is also home to Bristol Motor Speedway which features NASCAR Sprint Cup racing two weekends a year, routinely selling out more than 160,000 seats on each date; it also was the home of the Nashville Superspeedway, which held Nationwide and Indy Racing League races until it was shut down in 2012.
It also ratified the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution (abolishing slavery in every state) on April 7, 1865.
Numerous African Americans were elected to local offices, and some to state office.
Such manipulation of the tax, and therefore the vote, created an opportunity for the rise of urban bosses and political machines.
The 2nd has been held continuously by Republicans or their antecedents since 1859.
Most Tennesseans who self-identify as having American ancestry are of English and Scotch-Irish ancestry.
The Great Smoky Mountains National Park, the nation's most visited national park, is headquartered in the eastern part of the state, and a section of the Appalachian Trail roughly follows the Tennessee-North Carolina border.
Unionization has historically been low and continues to decline as in most of the U.S. generally.
Tennessee's Constitution requires that each County have an elected Sheriff.
It is part of the large geographic land area that begins at the Gulf of Mexico and extends north into southern Illinois.
During Reconstruction, freedmen and former free people of color were granted the right to vote; most joined the Republican Party.
After the formal end of Reconstruction, the struggle over power in Southern society continued.
Local sales taxes are collected in most jurisdictions, at rates varying from 1.5% to 2.75%, bringing the total sales tax to between 8.5% and 9.75%, one of the highest levels in the nation.
Key, Jr. argued in 1949 that:
The U.S. National Indoor Tennis Championships has been held at Memphis since 1976 (men's) and 2002 (women's).
Tennessee was admitted to the Union on June 1, 1796 as the 16th state.
This sharply reduced competition in politics in the state until after passage of civil rights legislation in the mid-20th century.
Over the next decade, the state legislature passed increasingly restrictive laws to control African Americans.
Nashville (the capital), Clarksville, and Murfreesboro are its largest cities.
A branch interstate, I-269 also exists from Millington to Collierville.
Disfranchising legislation accompanied Jim Crow laws passed in the late 19th century, which imposed segregation in the state.
West of the Cumberland Plateau is the Highland Rim, an elevated plain that surrounds the Nashville Basin.
Tennessee celebrated its bicentennial in 1996.
Tennessee has selected governors from different parties since 1970.
Under Johnson's lenient re-admission policy, Tennessee was the first of the seceding states to have its elected members readmitted to the U.S. Congress, on July 24, 1866.
In the 1980 census 1,435,147 Tennesseans claimed "English" or "mostly English" ancestry out of a state population of 3,221,354 making them 45% of the state at the time.
An important trading route called the Natchez Trace, created and used for many generations by American Indians, connected Middle Tennessee to the lower Mississippi River town of Natchez.
Since then, more of the state's voters have shifted to supporting Republicans, and Democratic presidential candidates have carried Tennessee only four times.
Both the Court of Appeals and the Court of Criminal Appeals have 12 judges.
On June 8, 1861, with people in Middle Tennessee having significantly changed their position, voters approved a second referendum calling for secession, becoming the last state to do so.
Chattanooga and Knoxville, both in the eastern part of the state near the Great Smoky Mountains, each has approximately one-third of the population of Memphis or Nashville.
What is now Tennessee was initially part of North Carolina, and later part of the Southwest Territory.
Tennessee politics, like that of most U.S. states, are dominated by the Republican and the Democratic parties.
This case arose out of a lawsuit challenging the longstanding rural bias of apportionment of seats in the Tennessee legislature.
Interstate 40 crosses the state in a west-east orientation.
In the same year 4.6% of the total population was of Hispanic or Latino origin (they may be of any race).
The Blue Ridge area was never more than sparsely populated, and today much of it is protected by the Cherokee National Forest, the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, and several federal wilderness areas and state parks.
Tennessee is the 36th largest and the 17th most populous of the 50 United States.
The Cumberland Plateau rises to the west of the Tennessee Valley; this area is covered with flat-topped mountains separated by sharp valleys.
The Cherokees were not the only American Indians forced to emigrate as a result of the Indian removal efforts of the United States, and so the phrase "Trail of Tears" is sometimes used to refer to similar events endured by other American Indian peoples, especially among the "Five Civilized Tribes".
Poultry, soybeans, and cattle are the state's primary agricultural products, and major manufacturing exports include chemicals, transportation equipment, and electrical equipment.
International travelers to Tennessee accounted for $533 million in spending.
Before 1913 the method of execution was hanging.
The Free Will Baptist denomination is headquartered in Antioch; its main Bible college is in Nashville.
Old and young, men, women and children camped near Union troops.
The Davidson County Sheriff's duties focus on warrant service and jail operations.
The state's lowest point is the Mississippi River at the Mississippi state line: .
The football team has won 13 SEC championships and 25 bowls, including four Sugar Bowls, three Cotton Bowls, an Orange Bowl and a Fiesta Bowl.
Tennessee is also the location of the Volkswagen factory in Chattanooga, a $2 billion polysilicon production facility by Wacker Chemie in Bradley County, and a $1.2 billion polysilicon production facility by Hemlock Semiconductor in Clarksville.
Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander
Stretching west from the Blue Ridge for approximately  is the Ridge and Valley region, in which numerous tributaries join to form the Tennessee River in the Tennessee Valley.
...the size of the poll tax did not inhibit voting as much as the inconvenience of paying it.
Middle Tennessee is one of the primary state population and transportation centers along with the heart of state government.
This may be a result of the experience of Tennessee residents and other Southerners during the period of military control by Union (Northern) forces of the U.S. government after the American Civil War.
Republican George W. Bush received increased support in 2004, with his margin of victory in the state increasing from 4% in 2000 to 14% in 2004.
The Gulf Coastal Plain is, in terms of area, the predominant land region in Tennessee.
Tennessee is home to the most caves in the United States, with over 10,000 documented caves to date.
Beginning during Reconstruction, it had competitive party politics, but a Democratic takeover in the late 1880s resulted in passage of disfranchisement laws that excluded most blacks and many poor whites from voting.
Tennessee features six principal physiographic regions: the Blue Ridge, the Appalachian Ridge and Valley Region, the Cumberland Plateau, the Highland Rim, the Nashville Basin, and the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Food is taxed at a lower rate of 5.25%, but candy, dietary supplements and prepared food are taxed at the full 7% rate.
Legislation included implementation of a poll tax, timing of registration, and recording requirements.
After disenfranchisement of blacks, the GOP in Tennessee was historically a sectional party supported by whites only in the eastern part of the state.
Some accounts suggest it is a Cherokee modification of an earlier Yuchi word.
In 1900, African Americans made up nearly 24% of the state's population, and numbered 480,430 citizens who lived mostly in the central and western parts of the state.
Occupied by Union forces from 1862, it was the first state to be readmitted to the Union at the end of the war.
Tennessee's governor holds office for a four-year term and may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms.
The strongest opposition to secession came from East Tennessee (which later tried to form a separate Union-aligned state).
Tennessee's only graded stakes horse race, the Iroquois Steeplechase, is also held in Nashville each May.
Tennessee is bordered by Kentucky and Virginia to the north, North Carolina to the east, Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi to the south, and Arkansas and Missouri to the west.
Moreover, the Rockabilly Hall of Fame, an online site recognizing the development of rockabilly in which Tennessee played a crucial role, is based in Nashville.
Senator from Tennessee, failed to carry his home state, an unusual occurrence but indicative of strengthening Republican support.
In that postwar decade, it twice voted for Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower, former Allied Commander of the Armed Forces during World War II.
Cargo services in Tennessee are primarily served by CSX Transportation, which has a hump yard in Nashville called Radnor Yard.
Each Sheriff's Office is responsible for warrant service, court security, jail operations and primary law enforcement in the unincorporated areas of a county as well as providing support to the municipal police departments.
The Tennessee General Assembly, the state legislature, consists of the 33-member Senate and the 99-member House of Representatives.
This city was established to house the Manhattan Project's uranium enrichment facilities, helping to build the world's first atomic bomb, which was used during World War II.
The Tennessee income tax does not apply to salaries and wages, but most income from stock, bonds and notes receivable is taxable.
Three counties of the Washington District (now part of Tennessee) broke off from North Carolina in 1784 and formed the State of Franklin.
The assessment ratio is 40% of the value multiplied by the tax rate for the jurisdiction.
The highest court in Tennessee is the state Supreme Court.
The state of Tennessee is geographically, culturally, economically, and legally divided into three Grand Divisions: East Tennessee, Middle Tennessee, and West Tennessee.
The eastern section was made up of yeoman farmers, but Middle and West Tennessee cultivated crops, such as tobacco and cotton, that were dependent on the use of slave labor.
The upper wedge of the Mississippi Delta extends into southwestern Tennessee, and it was in this fertile section that cotton took hold.
* Remnant Yuchi Nation, with members in Sullivan, Carter, Greene, Hawkins, Unicoi, Johnson and Washington counties.
6.6% of Tennessee's population were reported as under 5 years of age, 24.6% under 18, and 12.4% were 65 or older.
The state had two earlier constitutions.
Part of the provision also stated that the limits and jurisdiction of the state would include future land acquisition, referencing possible land trade with other states, or the acquisition of territory from west of the Mississippi River.
In the 1760s, long hunters from Virginia explored much of East and Middle Tennessee, and the first permanent European settlers began arriving late in the decade.
The state of Tennessee is rooted in the Watauga Association, a 1772 frontier pact generally regarded as the first constitutional government west of the Appalachians.
Tennessee imposes an inheritance tax on decedents' estates that exceed maximum single exemption limits ($1,000,000 for deaths in 2006 and thereafter).
Following the Confederate attack upon Fort Sumter in April and Lincoln's call for troops from Tennessee and other states in response, Governor Isham Harris began military mobilization, submitted an ordinance of secession to the General Assembly, and made direct overtures to the Confederate government.
Metropolitan Nashville is one of the fastest-growing areas in the country due in part to these factors.
In 2000, the five most common self-reported ethnic groups in the state were: American (17.3%), African American (13.0%), Irish (9.3%), English (9.1%), and German (8.3%).
Also in 2002, Tennessee amended the state constitution to allow for the establishment of a lottery.
I-24 is an east-west interstate that runs cross-state from Chattanooga to Clarksville.
In April and May 2010, flooding in Middle Tennessee devastated Nashville and other parts of Middle Tennessee.
These served to disenfranchise most African Americans, and their power in the Republican Party, the state, and cities where they had significant population was markedly reduced.
The planned community of Oak Ridge was built from scratch to provide accommodations for the facilities and workers.
As of 2011, 36.3% of Tennessee's population younger than age 1 were minorities.
Nonetheless, enslaved African Americans escaped to Union lines to gain freedom without waiting for official action.
As European colonists spread into the area, the Indian populations were forcibly displaced to the south and west, including all Muscogee and Yuchi peoples, the Chickasaw and Choctaw, and ultimately, the Cherokee in 1838.
The spelling was popularized by the publication of Henry Timberlake's "Draught of the Cherokee Country" in 1765.
The TBI maintains state-of-the-art investigative facilities and is the primary state-level criminal investigative department.
Intangible property is assessed on the shares of stock of stockholders of any loan company, investment company, insurance company or for-profit cemetery companies.
BNSF operates a major intermodal facility in Memphis.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, as of 2015, Tennessee had an estimated population of 6,600,299, which is an increase of 50,947, from the prior year and an increase of 254,194, or 4.01%, since the year 2010.
The earliest variant of the name that became ''Tennessee'' was recorded by Captain Juan Pardo, the Spanish explorer, when he and his men passed through an American Indian village named "Tanasqui" in 1567 while traveling inland from South Carolina.
The average stay was 2.16 nights, compared to 2.03 nights for the US as a whole.
The capital is Nashville, though Knoxville, Kingston, and Murfreesboro have all served as state capitals in the past.
The three counties in Tennessee to adopt metropolitan governments have taken different approaches to resolving the conflict that a Metro government presents to the requirement to have an elected Sheriff.
It has been said to mean "meeting place", "winding river", or "river of the great bend".
Unlike most states, the state does not elect the lieutenant governor directly; the Tennessee Senate elects its Speaker, who serves as lieutenant governor.
It also required both houses of state legislatures to be based on population for representation and not geographic districts such as counties.
It is not known whether this was the same town as the one encountered by Juan Pardo, although recent research suggests that Pardo's "Tanasqui" was located at the confluence of the Pigeon River and the French Broad River, near modern Newport.
They are being used to help breed blight-resistant trees.
The Capture of Memphis and Nashville gave the Union control of the western and middle sections; this control was confirmed at the Battle of Murfreesboro in early January 1863 and by the subsequent Tullahoma Campaign.
From 1916 to 1960 the state executed 125 inmates.
Tens of thousands of taxpaying citizens were without representation for decades into the 20th century.
Constitutional officials in the legislative branch are elected by a joint session of the legislature.
Thousands of former slaves ended up fighting on the Union side, nearly 200,000 in total across the South.
In this valley are numerous towns and two of the region's three urban areas, Knoxville, the 3rd largest city in the state, and Chattanooga, the 4th largest city in the state.
Its branch interstate highways include I-240 in Memphis; I-440 in Nashville; I-840 in Nashville; I-140 from Knoxville to Alcoa; and I-640 in Knoxville.
In February 1861, secessionists in Tennessee's state government—led by Governor Isham Harris—sought voter approval for a convention to sever ties with the United States, but Tennessee voters rejected the referendum by a 54–46% margin.
(Tennessee County was the predecessor to current-day Montgomery County and Robertson County.)
Increasingly the Republican Party has become the party of white conservatives.
* The Tanasi Council, said to have members in Shelby, Dyer, Gibson, Humphreys and Perry counties; and
The following morning, Captain Paul Demeré and a number of his men were killed in an ambush nearby, and most of the rest of the garrison was taken prisoner.
The modern spelling, ''Tennessee'', is attributed to James Glen, the governor of South Carolina, who used this spelling in his official correspondence during the 1750s.
