If the ball hits the net on the first serve and bounces over into the correct diagonal box then it is called a "let" and the server gets two more additional serves to get it in.
According to Honor Godfrey, museum curator at Wimbledon, Wingfield "popularized this game enormously.
Premier events for women form the most prestigious level of events on the Women's Tennis Association Tour after the Grand Slam tournaments.
Some servers are content to use the serve simply to initiate the point; however, advanced players often try to hit a winning shot with their serve.
Inflammation and bleeding are triggered when muscle strain occur which resulted in redness, pain and swelling.
This is increased to 90 seconds when the players change ends (after every odd-numbered game), and a 2-minute break is permitted between sets.
The scoring is the same as a regular game.
The building contains a large collection of tennis memorabilia as well as a hall of fame honouring prominent members and tennis players from all over the world.
The International Tennis Federation (ITF) defines the official diameter as .
This top-10 list was similar to the one published in June 2008 by the Bleacher Report who also ranked Martina Navratilova as the top female player of all time.
This is the case for many school and university level matches.
The Challenger Tour for men is the lowest level of tournament administered by the ATP.
If the second service is also a fault, the server ''double faults,'' and the receiver wins the point.
Although the process of producing the balls has remained virtually unchanged for the past 100 years, the majority of manufacturing now takes place in the Far East.
Muscle strain is one of the most common injuries in tennis.
Two hands give the player more control, while one hand can generate a slice shot, applying backspin on the ball to produce a low trajectory bounce.
", an interjection used as a call from the server to his opponent.
Winning break points, and thus the game, is also referred to as ''breaking serve'', as the receiver has disrupted, or ''broken'' the natural advantage of the server.
Most juniors who enter the international circuit do so by progressing through ITF, Satellite, Future, and Challenger tournaments before entering the main circuit.
Traditionally white, the predominant colour was gradually changed to optic yellow in the latter part of the 20th century to allow for improved visibility.
If the receiver fails to win their break point it is called a ''failure to convert.''
When the receiver is ready, the server will serve, although the receiver must play to the pace of the server.
Players on the main adult tour who are under 18 must have documents signed by a parent or guardian.
Some juniors, however, such as Australian Lleyton Hewitt and Frenchman Gaël Monfils, have catapulted directly from the junior tour to the ATP tour by dominating the junior scene or by taking advantage of opportunities given to them to participate in professional tournaments.
These tournaments also contribute towards a player's ATP rankings points.
Each year, a grass court tournament and an induction ceremony honoring new Hall of Fame members are hosted on its grounds.
In the four Grand Slam tournaments, the singles draws are limited to 128 players for each gender.
In some leagues, especially junior leagues, players make their own calls, trusting each other to be honest.
Martina Navratilova has included Graf on her list of great players.
Ken Rosewall, another player noted for his one-handed backhand, used a very accurate slice backhand through the 1950s and 1960s.
The line that runs across the center of a player's side of the court is called the service line because the serve must be delivered into the area between the service line and the net on the receiving side.
These are often played with no-ad scoring.
There can also be a let if the server serves the ball and the receiver isn't prepared.
The score of a tennis game during play is always read with the serving player's score first.
An Englishman named O.E.
Rarely, a player will go for a high topspin backhand, while themselves in the air.
He was absolutely terrific at marketing and he sent his game all over the world.
:''For individual terms see: Glossary of tennis''
Common tournament configurations include men's singles, women's singles, and doubles, where two players play on each side of the net.
Kramer was among the few who dominated amateur and professional tennis during the late 1940s and early 1950s.
On 21 May 1881, the United States National Lawn Tennis Association (now the United States Tennis Association) was formed to standardize the rules and organize competitions.
A ''game point'' occurs in tennis whenever the player who is in the lead in the game needs only one more point to win the game.
The first player or doubles team to win four points wins the game, regardless of whether the player or team is ahead by two points.
The Masters Series was renamed to the "Masters 1000", the addition of the number 1000 referring to the number of ranking points earned by the winner of each tournament.
If the trailing player wins the game, a ''tie-break'' is played.
Tennis is played by millions of recreational players and is also a popular worldwide spectator sport.
Tennis also became popular in France, where the French Championships dates to 1891 although until 1925 it was open only to tennis players who were members of French clubs.
Federer's biggest rival Rafael Nadal is regarded as the greatest competitor in tennis history by some former players and is regarded to have the potential to be the greatest of all time.
Most players change grips during a match depending on what shot they are hitting; for example, slice shots and serves call for a Continental grip.
Tennis is played on a rectangular, flat surface.
Tennis historian and journalist Bud Collins has called Navratilova "arguably, the greatest player of all time."
Currently four tournaments are Premier Mandatory, five tournaments are Premier 5, and twelve tournaments are Premier.
Meanwhile, technology led to the use of synthetic strings that match the feel of gut yet with added durability.
The ITF's national associations, Tennis Australia (Australian Open), the Fédération Française de Tennis (French Open), the Lawn Tennis Association (Wimbledon) and the United States Tennis Association (US Open) are delegated the responsibility to organize these events.
Tennis writer Steve Flink, in his book ''The Greatest Tennis Matches of the Twentieth Century'', named her as the best female player of the 20th century, directly followed by Martina Navratilova.
If the receiver does, in fact, win their break point, the game is awarded to the receiver, and the receiver is said to have ''converted'' their break point.
Two exceptions are that from 1908 to 1961 the server had to keep one foot on the ground at all times, and the adoption of the tiebreak in the 1970s.
The first player to win two sets in a best-of-three, or three sets in a best-of-five, wins the match.
The modern game of tennis originated in Birmingham, England, in the late 19th century as "'''lawn tennis'''".
They have no adjudicative role.
Because of the contemporary accounts of his death, Louis X is history's first tennis player known by name.
Utilized by World Team Tennis professional competition, ATP tours, WTA tours, ITF Pro Doubles and ITF Junior Doubles.
If an opponent is deep in his court, a player may suddenly employ an unexpected ''drop shot'', by softly tapping the ball just over the net so that the opponent is unable to run in fast enough to retrieve it.
Scoring styles vary, but one popular method is to assign a value of 2 points to each game, with the server taking both points if he or she holds serve and the doubles team each taking one if they break serve.
The latter three circuits also have adults competing in them.
The four Grand Slam tournaments are considered to be the most prestigious tennis events in the world.
If, however, the referee is on the court during play, the referee may overrule the umpire's decision (This would only happen in Davis Cup or Fed Cup matches, not at the World Group level, when a chair umpire from a non-neutral country is in the chair).
The Premier events were introduced in 2009 replacing the previous Tier I and II tournament categories.
In due course this design spread across royal palaces all over Europe.
Nadal is regarded as the greatest clay court player of all time.
As a courtesy to the receiver, the server will often signal to the receiver before the first serve of the game in which new balls are used as a reminder that they are using new balls.
This rule makes it possible to have mixed wheelchair and able-bodied matches.
The first tiering system in women's tennis was introduced in 1988.
The grip affects the angle of the racket face when it hits the ball and influences the pace, spin, and placement of the shot.
This has been introduced in women's tennis for WTA Tour events in 2009 and allows the player to request her coach once per set.
:This is sometimes played instead of a third set.
Juniors may earn income from tennis by participating in the Future, Satellite, or Challenger tours.
hard courts), everyone at their best, I can't help feeling that she crushes the other legends.".
According to how well a person does in sanctioned play, a player is given a rating that is adjusted periodically to maintain competitive matches.
A competent tennis player has eight basic shots in his or her repertoire: the serve, forehand, backhand, volley, half-volley, overhead smash, drop shot, and lob.
Within the Premier category are Premier Mandatory, Premier 5, and Premier tournaments.
Leading juniors are allowed to participate for their nation in the Junior Fed Cup and Davis Cup competitions.
The ''half volley'' is made by hitting the ball on the rise just after it has bounced, also generally in the vicinity of the net, and played with the racket close to the ground.
A ''volley'' is a shot returned to the opponent in mid-air before the ball bounces, generally performed near the net, and is usually made with a stiff-wristed punching motion to hit the ball into an open area of the opponent's court.
In clay-court matches, such as at the French Open, a call may be questioned by reference to the mark left by the ball's impact on the court surface.
During the open era, first Rod Laver and then more recently Björn Borg and Pete Sampras were regarded by many of their contemporaries as among the greatest ever.
141 and used Challenger Series events for match experience and to progress back up the rankings.
A legal return consists of the player or team hitting the ball before it has bounced twice or hit any fixtures except the net, provided that it still falls in the server's court.
"6–2, 4–6, 6–0, 7–5".
Break points are of particular importance because serving is generally considered advantageous, with servers being expected to win games in which they are serving.
Some observers, however, also felt that Kramer deserved consideration for the title.
The boxes this center line creates are called the service boxes; depending on a player's position, he or she will have to hit the ball into one of these when serving.
Below the Challenger Tour are the Futures tournaments, events on the ITF Men's Circuit.
The rankings were determined by an international panel.
Despite its name, this is not where a player legally stands when making a serve.
The two-handed grip gained popularity in the 1970s as Björn Borg, Chris Evert, Jimmy Connors, and later Mats Wilander and Marat Safin used it to great effect, and it is now used by a large number of the world's best players, including Rafael Nadal and Serena Williams.
Another distinguishing feature is the number of players in the singles draw.
The rules of tennis have changed little since the 1890s.
Reach is also limited with the two-handed shot.
The player long considered to have had the best backhand of all time, Don Budge, had a powerful one-handed stroke in the 1930s and 1940s that imparted topspin onto the ball.
Only in the final sets of matches at the Australian Open, the French Open, Wimbledon, the Olympic Games, Davis Cup (until 2015), and Fed Cup are tie-breaks not played.
However, in ITF tournaments like Fed Cup, the balls are changed in a 9–11 style.
A set consists of a sequence of games played with service alternating between games, ending when the count of games won meets certain criteria.
If at least three points have been scored by each player, making the player's scores equal at forty apiece, the score is not called out as "forty-forty", but rather as "''deuce''".
I think his game was the best game ever.
A game is won by the first player to have won at least four points in total and at least two points more than the opponent.
Steffi Graf is considered by some to be the greatest female player.
Under modern rules of tennis, the rackets must adhere to the following guidelines;
The object of the game is to play the ball in such a way that the opponent is not able to play a valid return.
There are 128, more than any other professional tennis tournament.
Beginners need only a racket and balls.
During the 18th century and early 19th century, as real tennis declined, new racket sports emerged in England.
:Instead of playing multiple sets, players may play one "pro set".
It can be executed with either one hand or with both and is generally considered more difficult to master than the forehand.
This draw is composed of 32 seeded players, other players ranked in the world's top 100, qualifiers, and players who receive invitations through wild cards.
A fault is a serve that falls long or wide of the service box, or does not clear the net.
The ''swinging volley'' is hit out of the air as the player approaches the net.
Service alternates game by game between the two players (or teams).
In professional tournaments using this system, players are allowed three unsuccessful appeals per set, plus one additional appeal in the tie-break to challenge close line calls by means of an electronic review.
* The entire racket must be of a fixed shape, size, weight, and weight distribution.
To facilitate and nurture a junior's growth in tennis, almost all tennis playing nations have developed a junior development system.
Laminated wood construction yielded more strength in rackets used through most of the 20th century until first metal and then composites of carbon graphite, ceramics, and lighter metals such as titanium were introduced.
Billie Jean King said in 1999, "Steffi is definitely the greatest women's tennis player of all time."
The final score in sets is always read with the winning player's score first, e.g.
Except where tie-breaks apply, at least one break of serve is required to win a set.
If the leading player wins that game, the player wins the set 7–5.
In December 1999, Graf was named the greatest female tennis player of the 20th century by a panel of experts assembled by the Associated Press.
The comprehensive rules promulgated in 1924 by the International Lawn Tennis Federation, now known as the International Tennis Federation (ITF), have remained largely stable in the ensuing eighty years, the one major change being the addition of the ''tiebreak'' system designed by Jimmy Van Alen.
A legal service starts a ''rally'', in which the players alternate hitting the ball across the net.
A match tie-break (also called ''super tie-break'') is played like a regular tie-break, but the winner must win ten points instead of seven.
A pro set is first to 8 (or 10) games by a margin of two games, instead of first to 6 games.
Further, the patenting of the first lawn mower in 1830, in Britain, is strongly believed to have been the catalyst, world-wide, for the preparation of modern-style grass courts, sporting ovals, playing fields, pitches, greens, etc.
In March 2012 the TennisChannel published a combined list of the 100 greatest men and women tennis players of all time.
A grip is a way of holding the racket in order to hit shots during a match.
The ball must travel past the net into the other players' court.
Sportwriter John Wertheim of Sports Illustrated stated in an article in July 2010 that Serena Williams is the greatest female tennis player ever with the argument that "Head-to-head, on a neutral surface (i.e.
Scoring method created by Jimmy Van Alen.
Another of the early enthusiasts of the game was King Charles V of France, who had a court set up at the Louvre Palace.
She laid out a tennis court at the Staten Island Cricket Club at Camp Washington, Tompkinsville, Staten Island, New York.
Balls must weigh between .
The third and fourth tier of men's tennis tournaments are formed by the ATP World Tour 500 series, consisting of 11 tournaments, and the ATP World Tour 250 series with 40 tournaments.
The receiver may start anywhere on their side of the net.
Advanced players improve their performance through a number of accoutrements.
He has won 17 grand slam titles and 6 world tour finals, the most for any male player.
When the game score reaches three points each, the receiver chooses which side of the court (advantage court or deuce court) the service is to be delivered on the seventh and game-deciding point.
Roger Federer is now considered by many observers to have the most "complete" game in modern tennis.
Occasionally carpet is used for indoor play, with hardwood flooring having been historically used.
The first Championships culminated a significant debate on how to standardize the rules.
Recreational players may agree to play any number of sets, depending upon time availability or stamina.
The net is  high at the posts and  high in the center.
It is currently held in London, England.
Grass, clay, and hardcourts of concrete or asphalt topped with acrylic are the most common.
The Dubai Tennis Championships offer the largest financial incentive to players, with total prize money of US$2,313,975 (2012).
Many experts of tennis, former tennis players and his own tennis peers believe Federer is the greatest player in the history of the game.
These events offer the largest rewards in terms of points and prize money.
In 1926, promoter C. C. Pyle established the first professional tennis tour with a group of American and French tennis players playing exhibition matches to paying audiences.
It ranked Steffi Graf as the greatest female player (in 3rd place overall), followed by Martina Navratilova (4th place) and Margaret Court (8th place).
Players often use sweat bands on their wrists to keep their hands dry and head bands or bandanas to keep the sweat out of their eyes as well.
Additional clear space around the court is required in order for players to reach overrun balls.
* The rackets must not provide any kind of communication, instruction or advice to the player during the match.
The lines to the inside of the doubles sidelines are the singles sidelines and are used as boundaries in singles play.
A successful execution of any of these alternatives requires balance and timing, with less margin of error than the lower contact point backhands, since this shot is a break in the regular pattern of play.
In November at the end of the tennis year, the world's top eight players compete in the ATP World Tour Finals, a tournament with a rotating locale.
In tournament play, the chair umpire announces the end of the match with the well-known phrase "''Game, set, match''" followed by the winning person's or team's name.
The player who is unable to return the ball will not gain a point, while the opposite player will.
They are held annually and comprise, in chronological order, the Australian Open, the French Open, Wimbledon, and the US Open.
He produced a boxed set which included a net, poles, rackets, balls for playing the game &ndash; and most importantly you had his rules.
In rare events (e.g., if they are hurt or if they have caused a hindrance), the umpire may ask them for a statement of what actually happened.
The area between a doubles sideline and the nearest singles sideline is called the doubles alley, which is considered playable in doubles play.
She became fascinated by the game of tennis after watching British army officers play.
Racket handles may be customized with absorbent or rubber-like materials to improve the players' grip.
Balls wear out quickly in serious play and, therefore, in ATP and WTA tournaments, they are changed after every nine games with the first change occurring after only seven games, because the first set of balls is also used for the pre-match warm-up.
The lines that delineate the width of the court are called the baseline (farthest back) and the service line (middle of the court).
Part of the appeal of tennis stems from the simplicity of equipment required for play.
This involves three players, with one person playing a doubles team.
The first player or team to fail to make a legal return loses the point.
Overuse is also common in tennis players from all level.
The ATP World Tour Masters 1000 is a group of nine tournaments that form the second-highest echelon in men's tennis.
The Challenger Series offers prize funds of between US$25,000 and US$150,000.
The relocation is due to cheaper labour costs and materials in the region.
These are the boundaries used when doubles is being played.
Apart from the Olympic Games, Davis Cup, Fed Cup, and Hopman Cup, they are the only tournaments regulated by the International Tennis Federation (ITF).
A match consists of a sequence of sets.
Muscle, cartilage, nerves, bursae, ligaments and tendons may be damaged from overuse.
It had close connections both to various field ("lawn") games such as croquet and bowls as well as to the older racket sport of ''real tennis''.
According to R. D. C. Evans, turfgrass agronomist, "Sports historians all agree that Wingfield deserves much of the credit for the development of modern tennis."
If the lob is not hit deeply enough into the other court, however, an opponent near the net may then hit an ''overhead smash'', a hard, serve-like shot, to try to end the point.
Futures Tournaments offer prize funds of between US$10,000 and US$15,000.
'''Tennis''' is a racket sport that can be played individually against a single opponent (singles) or between two teams of two players each (doubles).
Wimbledon has its own particular methods for disseminating tickets, often leading tennis fans to follow complex procedures to obtain tickets.
However, if the serve is in, it is considered a legal service.
In recent years, some controversy has surrounded the involuntary or deliberate noise caused by players' grunting.
A net is stretched across the full width of the court, parallel with the baselines, dividing it into two equal ends.
The Madrid Masters moved to May and onto clay courts, and a new tournament in Shanghai took over Madrid's former indoor October slot.
In tennis, a junior is a player under 18 who is still legally protected by a parent or guardian.
In such cases, the extra bounce is permitted for the wheelchair users only.
During most of the 19th century, in fact, the term "tennis" referred to real tennis, not lawn tennis: for example, in Disraeli's novel ''Sybil'' (1845), Lord Eugene De Vere announces that he will "go down to Hampton Court and play tennis."
As such, each player plays doubles and singles over the course of a match, with the singles player always serving.
A serve (or, more formally, a "service") in tennis is a shot to start a point.
In December 1873, British army officer Major Walter Clopton Wingfield designed and patented a similar game ;– which he called ''sphairistikè'' (, meaning "ball-playing"), and was soon known simply as "sticky" – for the amusement of guests at a garden party on his friend's estate of Nantclwyd Hall, in Llanelidan, Wales.
