This has resulted in lower production and higher prices throughout the early 21st century, and due to the long maturation of the plant, will likely continue to affect prices for years to come.
The barrels cannot be more than 600 liters (158 gallons), and most are in the 200-liter (52-gallon) range.
Spain's King Carlos IV granted the Cuervo family the first license to commercially make tequila.
Next, yeast turns acetaldehyde into ethyl alcohol which is known as one of the organoleptic compounds produced in fermentation.
Per U.S law, tequila must contain at least 40% alcohol (80 U.S. proof) to be sold in the United States.
Organoleptic compounds enhance flavor and aroma.
The color of the tequila varies greatly on the aging process and the type of wood used for storage.
Some of the most common alcohols present other than ethanol are: isoamyl alcohol, isobutanol, and 1-propanol.
found that cultivating two strains at a temperature of 35 degrees as compared to a temperature of 30 degrees produced more isoamyl alcohol.
Doing so allows the taster to detect subtler fragrances and flavors that would otherwise be missed.
Inexpensive to produce, although far too small for use as jewels, the tiny diamonds were hoped to have numerous commercial and industrial applications such as in computer chips or cutting instruments.
These include the Tequila Sunrise and the Matador.
Only certain ''mezcals'', usually from the state of Oaxaca, are ever sold ''con gusano'' (with worm).
The components that make up tequila do not act individually to give tequila its distinctive flavor and aroma, but rather, depends on the interaction and quantity of each volatile compound.
The volatile compounds responsible for the flavor and aroma profiles of the tequila are put into a category called organoleptic compounds and are known to increase in concentration with a slower fermentation process.
The salt is believed to  lessen the "burn" of the tequila and the sour fruit balances and enhances the flavor.
By regularly trimming any ''quiotes''  (a several-meter high stalk that grows from the center of the plant), the ''jimadores'' prevent the agave from flowering and dying early, allowing it to fully ripen.
Chilling any alcohol can be used to reduce the smell or flavors associated with a lower-quality product.
*''Añejo''  ("aged" or "vintage"): aged a minimum of one year, but less than three years in small oak barrels
Rested (reposado) or aged tequila (añejo) are aged in wooden containers.
It was found that the higher the carbon/ nitrogen ratio, the higher the production of higher alcohols such as isobutyl alcohol and isoamyl alcohol.
Some tequila distilleries label their tequila as "made with blue agave" or "made from blue agave."
*''Reposado''  ("rested"): aged a minimum of two months, but less than a year in oak barrels of any size
First the amount of isoamyl alcohol and isobutanol is the yeast strain.
*''Extra Añejo'' ("extra aged" or "ultra aged"): aged a minimum of three years in oak barrels, this category was established in March 2006.
The tequila regulatory council does not allow ''gusanos'' or scorpions (which are sometimes also added to mezcals) to be included in tequila bottles.
It was shown in a study that the concentration of amyl alcohol increased as the plant aged by a factor 30%.
After harvesting, the ''piñas''  are transported to ovens where they are slowly baked to break down their complex fructans into simple fructoses.
The two main categories of yeast used in tequila are Commercial brewers yeast and yeast that comes from pre cultivated existing yeast that has been preserved.
The white version of tequila, known as silver tequila or blanco, is the product obtained without or very little additional aging process.
Tequila is a distilled beverage that is made from the fermentation of the sugars found from the blue agave plant once it has been cooked, the main sugar being fructose.
For the most part, the change in quality of tequila is due to extreme conditions of improper storage, not due to oxidation.
Tequila is most often made at a 38% alcohol content (76 U.S. proof) for domestic consumption, but can be produced between 31 and 55% alcohol content (62 and 110 U.S. proof).
It is popular in some regions to drink fine tequila with a side of  sangrita—a sweet, sour, and spicy drink typically made from orange juice, grenadine (or tomato juice), and hot chilli.
The preferred oak comes from the US, France, or Canada, and is usually white oak.
The major flavor distinction with 100% agave tequila is the base ingredient, which is more vegetal than grain spirits (and often more complex).
In 2004, the Council decided to allow flavored tequila to be called tequila, with the exception of 100% agave tequila, which still cannot be flavored.
Second, the carbon:nitrogen ratio.
From there, the tequila is either bottled as silver tequila, or it is pumped into wooden barrels to age, where it develops a mellower flavor and amber color.
The arrival happened during an event held at the House of Roosevelt, a well-known club located on The Bund– an area with a long tradition of importing alcoholic beverages in China.
If inoculum is not added, fermentation could take up to 7 days.
Because only so many distilleries are used, multiple brands of tequila come from the same location.
Some producers like to add a small amount of ''bagazo'' back into their fermentation tanks for a stronger agave flavor in the final product.
''Mixtos'' use no less than 51% agave, with other sugars making up the remainder.
TMA (''tristeza y muerte de agave'' — "agave depression and death") is a blight that has reduced the production of the agave grown to produce tequila.
The agave plant contains many terpenes such as vanillin and syringaldehydes which presents a strong and fruity or herbal aroma.
Any alcoholic product, when served as a chilled shot, may be more palatable to the consumer.
Outside Mexico, a single shot of tequila is often served with salt and a slice of lime.
It also contains eugenol which can deliver a hint of spicy flavor to the tequila.
Sodas and other carbonated drinks are a common mixer, as in the Tequila Slammer.
The higher the temperature, the greater concentration of isobutyl and isoamyl alcohols produced.
Tequila is usually bottled in one of five categories:
These parameters include, the type of yeast strain, the age of the agave plant itself, temperature, and the carbon/nitrogen ratio.
Nearly 50 different esters identified in tequila which together give rise to the fruit like flavors and smell.
Since the production of tequila involves heating, Maillard browning reactions occur, and furans are produced during the thermal degradation of sugar.
The bottle which contained the tequila was a two-kilo display of platinum and gold.
In 2003, Mexico issued a proposal that would require all Mexican-made tequila be bottled in Mexico before being exported to other countries.
In general, the longer the controlled fermentation period, the higher yield of esters produced.
All companies producing tequila have their aging processes regulated and fiscalized by the Mexican government.
What is known as gold, joven or oro tequila is usually silver tequila with the addition of grain alcohols and caramel color, however, some higher end gold tequilas may be a blend of silver and reposado.
The manufacturer received a certificate from The Guinness World Records for the most expensive bottle of tequila spirit ever sold.
This factor may be influenced from different agricultural practices that occur to cultivate the different yeasts strains.
The ''jimadores'' must be able to tell when each plant is ready to be harvested, and using a special knife called a ''coa'' (with a circular blade on a long pole), carefully cut away the leaves from the ''piña'' (the succulent core of the plant).
Another popular drink in Mexico is the ''bandera'' (flag, in Spanish), named after the Flag of Mexico, it consists of three shot glasses, filled with lime juice (for the green), white tequila, and sangrita (for the red).
The pulp fiber, or ''bagazo'' , left behind is often reused as compost or animal feed, but can even be burnt as fuel or processed into paper.
During the fermentation process, inoculum is added to the batch to speed the rate of fermentation.
The average annual temperatures in the city of Tequila can reach 31C.
The carbon molecules are then settled upon steel or silicon trays to form a thin and pure uniform layer.
On January 17, 2006, the United States and Mexico signed an agreement allowing the continued bulk import of tequila into the United States.
The red volcanic soil in the surrounding region is particularly well suited to the growing of the blue agave, and more than 300 million of the plants are harvested there each year.
For this reason, tequila producers often use large stainless steel tanks for fermentation.
This is called ''tequila cruda'' and is sometimes referred to as "training wheels", "lick-sip-suck", or "lick-shoot-suck" (referring to the way in which the combination of ingredients is imbibed).
These include fusel oil, methanol, aldehydes, organic acids and esters.
Furthermore, because the characteristics and certain quality (flavor, aroma, color, etc.)
Though the traditional Mexican shot is tequila by itself, lime is the fruit of choice when a chaser must be used.
On 30 August 2013, the first 70,380 bottles of premium tequila from ten brands arrived in Shanghai.
Usually, the differences in taste between tequila made from lowland and highland agave plants is noticeable.
There are more than 300 known compounds in tequila, many of which are produced during the fermentation process, the raw material used, and to a lesser degree, during the maturation.
*''Blanco''  ("white") or ''plata''  ("silver"): white spirit, unaged and bottled or stored immediately after distillation, or aged less than two months in stainless steel or neutral oak barrels
Many of the barrels used are from whiskey distilleries in the US or Canada, and Jack Daniels barrels are especially popular.
When the Spanish conquistadors ran out of their own brandy, they began to distill agave to produce one of North America's first indigenous distilled spirits.
For instance, if stored in improper conditions, the dark and more complex flavors of the añejo tequila are more likely to be tainted than the blanco or the silver tequila.
Under U.S. law (27 CFR 5.22 (g)), Tequila cannot be sold in the U.S. at under 40% alcohol concentration (80 U.S. proof).
Tequila was first produced in the 16th century near the location of the city of Tequila, which was not officially established until 1666.
If the bottle of tequila does not state on the label that it is manufactured from 100% blue agave (no sugars added), then, by default, that tequila is a ''mixto'' (manufactured from at least 60% blue agave).
However, the Tequila Regulatory Council has stated only tequilas distilled with 100% agave can be designated as "100% agave".
When inoculum is added, fermentation can take approximately 20 hours to 3 days.
The higher temperature suggests that this is a much more optimal condition for the yeast to ferment the distilled beverage.
Mexican laws state that tequila can only be produced in the state of Jalisco and limited municipalities in the states of Guanajuato, Michoacán, Nayarit, and Tamaulipas.
Although if temperatures are too high, this can cause the yeast to become less effective.
The higher the ratio, the more alcohol produced.
Some 80 years later, around 1600, Don Pedro Sánchez de Tagle, the Marquis of Altamira, began mass-producing tequila at the first factory in the territory of modern-day Jalisco.
Equal-sized shots of tequila and sangrita are sipped alternately, without salt or lime.
This treatment creates many of the aspects of the dark color and more complex flavors of the'' añejo'' tequila.
Some ''reposados'' can also be aged in new wood barrels to achieve the same woody flavor and smoothness, but in less time.
Rested (''Reposado'') or aged (''Añejo'') tequila must be maturated in 200-liter (or larger) white oak barrels for at least 2 months for the first, and 12 months for the last.
The ''Consejo Regulador del Tequila'' (Tequila Regulatory Council) reported 1377 registered brands from 150 producers for the year 2013.
These tequilas are usually sipped from a snifter glass rather than a shot glass, and savoured instead of quickly gulped.
This process goes on for 24-48 hours.
However, the type of yeast strain used and the carbon/nitrogen factors have the biggest influence on the production of higher alcohols, this is not surprising as higher alcohol and ethanol production is an intrinsic property of the metabolism of each strain.
The temperature of the fermentation process also greatly effects the alcohol content of the resulting product.
The proposal might have resulted in the loss of jobs at plants in California, Arkansas, Missouri, and Kentucky, because Mexican tequila exported in bulk to the United States is bottled in those plants.
Plants grown in the highlands often yield sweeter and fruitier-tasting tequila, while lowland agaves give the tequila an earthier flavor.
Unlike wine that contains tannins which may change over time, even in a bottle if proper storage conditions are not met, spirituous liquors like tequila do not change much once they are bottled.
Finally, as with other popular liquors, a number of shot-related drinking games and "stunt" drinks are used, such as body shots.
Ramon Gonzalez, director of the ''Consejo Regulador del Tequila'', estimates that each of the top 16 producers of tequila had invested up to $3 million to enter the Chinese market.
''Añejos'' are often rested in barrels previously used to rest ''reposados''.
This wort is then distilled once to produce what is called ''"ordinario'' , and then a second time to produce clear "silver" tequila.
*''Joven''  ("young") or ''oro''  ("gold"): unaged silver tequila that may be flavored with caramel coloring, oak extract, glycerin, or sugar-based syrup.
Tequila is recognized as a Mexican designation of origin product in more than 40 countries.
Methanol is thought to be mainly generated through hydrolysis of methylated pectin which is naturally present in the agave plant, but there has been speculations that it is also partly produced from the enzymatic reactions of yeast strains containing pectin methyl esterase enzyme which break up the methoxyl group from the pectin.
In 2008, Mexican scientists discovered a method to produce tiny, nanometer-sized synthetic diamonds from 80-proof (40% alcohol) tequila, which they said has the optimal range of water to ethanol for producing synthetic diamonds.
Therefore, it may be the best to consume the tequila within one or two years after opening.
The Mexican government said that bottling tequila in Mexico would guarantee its quality.
Due to this, each bottle of tequila contains a serial number (NOM) depicting in which distillery the tequila was produced.
During the fermentation process, ethanol is oxidized and one of the main compounds produced are acetaldehydes, which adds the flavor necessary for the final product of tequila.
The entry of premium tequila into the country is expected to increase tequila exports by 20 percent within a decade (exports totaled 170 million liters in 2013).
Also, a number of martini variants involve tequila, and a large number of tequila drinks are made by adding fruit juice.
Fermentation is the conversion of sugars and carbohydrates to alcohol through yeast in aerobic conditions, meaning that oxygen is present during the process.
One of the most abundant esters is ethyl acetate which is synthesized during fermentation by the yeast ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae,'' using alcohol transferase enzyme which links acetic acid to ethanol.
A few producers distill the product a third time, but this removes much of the agave flavor from the tequila.
The final result of these changes are increased concentrations of acids, esters and aldehydes and a decrease in fuel oil concentration.
of the tequila are determined during the aging process inside wood barrels, the quality of the tequila should remain relatively constant after they are bottled.
Groups of drinkers often do this simultaneously.
(3) reactions among the components of tequila, creating new chemical compounds and (4) oxidation of the original contents of tequila and of those extracted from wood.
The traditional margarita uses tequila, Cointreau, and lime juice, though many variations exist.
The organoleptic compounds produced during fermentation include higher order alcohols, methanol, esters, carbonyls, terpenes, and furans.
Similarly, if the temperature is too low, the process occurs too slowly.
By 1608, the colonial governor of Nueva Galicia had begun to tax his products.
(2) extraction of complex wood constituents by tequila, yielding specific aroma and flavor to the final product.
And third, the temperature of fermentation.
There are, however, more than 50 different companies producing tequila in the mexican province of Jalisco, with different maturation times according to the variety of tequila and desired quality of the final product.
The aging process generally imparts a golden color.
Liquor companies in the United States said Mexico just wanted to create bottling jobs in their own country, and also claimed this rule would violate international trade agreements and was in discord with usual exporting practices worldwide.
The most prominent furanic compounds include 2-furaldehyde and 5-methylfuraldehyde, which can contribute to the smoky flavor of tequila.
The worm is actually the larval form of the moth ''Hypopta agavis'', which lives on the agave plant.
The use of either type of yeast can result in different end products of tequila.
Consuming silver tequila provides for the purest form as little aging has occurred.
As well, the spirit must contain between 38-55% alcohol content, which is fermented from a wort, which contains no less than 51% sugars from the agave plant.
It is protected through NAFTA in Canada and the United States, through bilateral agreements with individual countries such as Japan and Israel, and has been a protected designation of origin product in the constituent countries of the European Union since 1997.
Once the bottle is opened, the tequila will be subject to oxidation which will continue to happen even if no more oxygen is introduced.
In contrast, ethanol production begins in the first hours of the fermentation and ends with logarithmic yeast growth.
If harvested too late or too early, the ''piñas'', which can average around  in the lowlands to  in the highlands, will not have the right amount of carbohydrates for fermentation.
Higher order alcohols have a strong aroma, and the quantity present in each tequila depends on the carbon:nitrogen ratio and temperature during the cooking and fermentation processes.
Through the fermentation process, many factors influence the higher alcohol content of tequila, which are molecules such as isobutyl alcohol and isoamyl alcohol, and ethanol.
In Mexico, the most traditional way to drink tequila is neat, without lime and salt.
As with other spirits aged in casks, tequila takes on the flavors of the wood, while the harshness of the alcohol mellows.
After aging of at least one year, the ''añejo'' can be removed from the wood barrels and placed in stainless steel tanks to reduce the amount of evaporation that can occur in the barrels.
There are two steps, first in aerobic conditions, yeast is doubled in colony size every four hours.
The type of yeast most commonly found in tequila is ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'', which contains many strains.
Organoleptic compounds are dependent on yeast.
Agave tequila grows differently depending on the region.
Since tequila is a distilled liquor, it does not require strict storage conditions like wine does, and the same goes with most other distilled spirits such as whiskey, rum, or vodka.
The role of yeast is to, through many enzymatic processes, turn sugars and carbohydrates into alcohol.
The number after NOM is the distillery number, assigned by the government.
The alcohol content in tequila is affected by three factors.
However, over 100 distilleries make over 900 brands of tequila in Mexico and over 2,000 brand names have been registered (2009 statistics).
Some distillers of lower-quality tequila have marketed their product to be served "ice-cold chilled" when used as a shot.
The Tequila Regulatory Council of Mexico originally did not permit flavored tequila to carry the tequila name.
Then the salt is licked off the hand, the tequila is drunk, and the fruit slice is quickly bitten.
If silver or white tequila is the desired final product, distillation is the final process it undergoes.
With 100% agave tequila, ''blanco'' or ''plata'' is harsher with the bold flavors of the distilled agave up front, while ''reposado'' and ''añejo'' are smoother, subtler, and more complex.
The aging process can last between two months and three years and can create or enhance flavors and aromas.
NOM does not indicate the location of the distillery, merely the parent company or, in the case where a company leases space in a plant, the physical plant where the tequila was manufactured.
The rate of fermentation is a key factor in the quality and flavor of tequila produced.
The alcohol content at the end of fermentation lies between 4-9%.
Then, the baked ''piñas'' are either shredded or mashed under a large stone wheel called a ''tahona'' .
A popular cocktail in Mexico is the ''Paloma''.
The margarita glass, frequently rimmed with salt or sugar, is a staple for the entire genre of tequila-based mixed drinks, including the margarita.
A one-liter bottle of limited-edition premium tequila was sold for $225,000 in July 2006 in Tequila, Jalisco, by the company Tequila Ley .925.
This process involves heating the tequila to over 800&nbsp;°C (1,400&nbsp;°F) to break its molecular structure and be vaporized into gaseous hydrogen, carbon, and various simple molecules.
A variety of cocktails are made with tequila, including the margarita, a cocktail that helped make tequila popular in the United States.
Finding one in the plant during processing indicates an infestation and, correspondingly, a lower-quality product.
Also, storage conditions will have more effect on the taste of aged tequila rather than the un-aged tequila.
Production of isoamyl and isobutyl alcohols begins after the sugar level is lowered substantially and continues for several hours after the alcoholic fermentation ends.
Some companies char the wood to impart a smoky flavor, or use barrels previously used with different kinds of alcohol (e.g.
The extracted agave juice is then poured into either large wooden or stainless steel vats for several days to ferment, resulting in a wort, or ''mosto'' , with low alcohol content.
In June 2013, the ban on importation of premium (100% blue agave) tequila into China was lifted following a state visit to Mexico by President Xi Jinping.
Fermentation is also carried out in a non-aseptic environment which increases the bacterial activity of tequila.
In addition, if the bottle has more room for air, the process of oxidation occurs faster on the liquor remaining inside the bottle.
A new ''Norma Oficial Mexicana'' (NOM) for tequila (NOM-006-SCFI-2005) was issued in 2006, and among other changes, introduced a category of tequila called ''extra añejo'' or "ultra-aged" which must be aged a minimum of three years.
Don Cenobio Sauza, founder of Sauza Tequila and Municipal President of the Village of Tequila from 1884–1885, was the first to export tequila to the United States, and shortened the name from "Tequila Extract" to just "Tequila" for the American markets.
The drinkers moisten the back of their hands below the index finger (usually by licking) and pour on the salt.
However, it is also found that there is a higher concentration of methanol found when using younger plants.
The participation of microorganisms from the environment (yeasts and bacteria) makes fermentation a spontaneous process which gives rise to many byproducts that contribute to the flavor and aroma of tequila.
Discrimination tests such as duo-trio and triangle tests are also used to evaluate the quality of the tequila.
Unlike other tequila production steps, fermentation is one of the few steps out of the control of human beings.
Reposado may be rested in oak barrels or casks as large as 20,000 liters (5,280 gallons), allowing for richer and more complex flavors.
The Aztec people had previously made a fermented beverage from the agave plant, long before the Spanish arrived in 1521.
Could also be the result of blending silver tequila with aged or extra-aged tequila.
Lastly the age of the agave plant itself, the older the plant the greater the alcohol production.
A high ratio imparts that there is less nitrogen in the fermentation process, which results in deamination reactions of amino acids, leading to the synthesis of higher alcohols.
The two basic categories of tequila are'' mixtos'' and 100% agave.
''Mixtos'' use both glucose and fructose sugars.
Worts fermented slowly are best because the amount of organoleptic compounds produced are greater.
The agreement also created a "tequila bottlers registry" to identify approved bottlers of tequila and created an agency to monitor the registry.
This may be due to differences in agricultural practices that occur when taking care of plants of different ages.
This can become a large issue in Central Mexico, most precisely the city of Tequila, Jalisco, where most tequila is processed.
However, this misconception continues, despite effort and marketing to represent tequila as a premium liquor—similar to the way Cognac is viewed in relation to other brandies.
Drinking tequila in this way is often erroneously called a Tequila Slammer, which is in fact a mix of tequila and carbonated drink.
