Alarm pheromones can be released when the nest has been breached or is being attacked by enemies or potential pathogens.
The third phase is marked by a decrease in the number of soldiers present and an increase in the number of workers.
In the 1960s additional evidence supporting that hypothesis emerged when F.&nbsp;A. McKittrick noted similar morphological characteristics between some termites and ''Cryptocercus'' nymphs.
Gut protozoa, such as ''Trichonympha'', in turn, rely on symbiotic bacteria embedded on their surfaces to produce some of the necessary digestive enzymes.
This chemical mimicry allows the beetles to integrate themselves within the termite colonies.
Termite alates only leave the colony when a nuptial flight takes place.
Judging from closely related bacterial species, it is strongly presumed that the termites' and cockroach's gut microbiota derives from their dictyopteran ancestors.
In Nigeria, ''Macrotermes nigeriensis'' is used for spiritual protection and to treat wounds and sick pregnant women.
The result is a self-organised process whereby the information that directs termite activity results from changes in the environment rather than from direct contact among individuals.
Dampwood termites are found only in coniferous forests, and drywood termites are found in hardwood forests; subterranean termites live in widely diverse areas.
Foraging workers use semiochemicals to communicate with each other, and workers who begin to forage outside of their nest release trail pheromones from their sternal glands.
The mesothorax and metathorax have well-developed exoskeletal plates; the prothorax has smaller plates.
Termites are found on all continents except Antarctica.
Termites are consumed by people in many different cultures around the world.
Under imminent threat of an attack by parasites, a colony may migrate to a new location.
Other building materials include partly digested plant material, used in carton nests (arboreal nests built from faecal elements and wood), and soil, used in subterranean nest and mound construction.
Nests are considered mounds if they protrude from the earth's surface.
::: Heterotermitinae
Though harder to acquire, queens are regarded as a delicacy.
Termites are usually small, measuring  between  in length.
Termites rely on alarm communication to defend a colony.
The sculptured mounds sometimes have elaborate and distinctive forms, such as those of the compass termite (''Amitermes meridionalis'' and ''A.
This reduces the ability of termites to efficiently digest the cellulose.
The damage caused by termites costs the southwestern United States approximately $1.5&nbsp;billion each year in wood structure damage, but the true cost of damage worldwide cannot be determined.
Termites may attack trees whose resistance to damage is low but generally ignore fast-growing plants.
Some species of termite practice fungiculture.
A termite nest can be considered as being composed of two parts, the inanimate and the animate.
Ants are not the only invertebrates that perform raids.
These signals are frequently used for alarm communication or for evaluating a food source.
: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;'''Nanorder Neoisoptera'''
Epigeal nests (mounds) protrude from the earth with ground contact and are made out of earth and mud.
The soldier caste has anatomical and behavioural specialisations, and their sole purpose is to defend the colony.
The infraorder name Isoptera is derived from the Greek words ''iso'' (equal) and ''ptera'' (winged), which refers to the nearly equal size of the fore and hind wings.
When the fungi are eaten, their spores pass undamaged through the intestines of the termites to complete the cycle by germinating in the fresh faecal pellets.
The oldest unambiguous termite fossils date to the early Cretaceous, but given the diversity of Cretaceous termites and early fossil records showing mutualism between microorganisms and these insects, they likely originated earlier in the Jurassic or Triassic.
File: RayNorris termite cathedral mounds.jpg|Cathedral mounds in the Northern Territory, Australia|alt=.
This orientation has been experimentally shown to assist thermoregulation.
Shelter tubes also provide high humidity and darkness and allow workers to collect food sources that cannot be accessed in any other way.
These termite mounds have a base shaped like the base of a tree, about two meters wide and a meter high.
Certain areas in mounds are used as strong points in case of a breach.
Mounds may also provide shelter and warmth to birds, lizards, snakes and scorpions.
One species in the drywood group is the West Indian drywood termite ''(Cryptotermes brevis)'', which is an invasive species in Australia.
The number of tibial spurs on an individual's leg varies.
Competition between two colonies always results in agonistic behaviour towards each other, resulting in fights.
The Eastgate Centre is a shopping centre and office block in central Harare, Zimbabwe, whose architect, Mick Pearce, used passive cooling inspired by that used by the local termites.
About 3,106 species are currently described, with a few hundred more left to be described.
Many species eat cellulose, having a specialised midgut that breaks down the fibre.
Consistent with all insects, the anatomy of the termite thorax consists of three segments: the prothorax, the mesothorax and the metathorax.
The abdomen increases the queen's body length to several times more than before mating and reduces her ability to move freely; attendant workers provide assistance.
This odour is a result of genetic and environmental factors such as the termites' diet and the composition of the bacteria within the termites' intestines.
Abandoned mounds are viewed as structures created by spirits, believing a local guardian dwells within the mound; this is known as Keramat and Datok Kong.
They also play a vital role in the ecosystem by recycling waste material such as dead wood, faeces and plants.
Nasutes have lost their mandibles through the course of evolution and must be fed by workers.
Termites are among the most successful groups of insects on Earth, colonising most landmasses except for Antarctica.
Soldiers of the species ''Globitermes sulphureus'' commit suicide by autothysis&nbsp;– rupturing a large gland just beneath the surface of their cuticles.
These small brown balls, known as "termite balls", rarely kill the eggs, and in some cases the workers will even tend to them.
In North America, nine subterranean species are pests; in Australia, 16 species have an economic impact; in the Indian subcontinent 26 species are considered pests, and in tropical Africa, 24.
A species of fungus is known to mimic termite eggs, successfully avoiding its natural predators.
These preferences may in part have represented conditioned or learned behaviour.
After mating, the pair will never go outside and will spend the rest of their lives in the nest.
Workers physically unable to use their mandibles while in a fight form a pouch full of chemicals, then deliberately rupture themselves, releasing toxic chemicals that paralyse and kill their enemies.
Not all nests are visible, as many nests in tropical forests are located underground.
In some species, eggs go through four moulting stages and nymphs go through three.
Many plants have developed effective defences against termites.
Nests and mounds protect the termites' soft bodies against desiccation, light, pathogens and parasites, as well as providing a fortification against predators.
Pheromones regulate the caste system in termite colonies, preventing all but a very few of the termites from becoming fertile queens.
One of the few that do, the Zoo Basel in Switzerland, has two thriving ''Macrotermes bellicosus'' populations&nbsp;– resulting in an event very rare in captivity: the mass migrations of young flying termites.
: '''Infraorder Isoptera'''
Molecular evidence suggests that the family Macrotermitinae developed agriculture about 31 million years ago.
Specific structures or other objects such as pellets of soil or pillars cause termites to start building.
''Cryptotermes brevis'', the most widely introduced invasive termite species in the world, has been introduced to all the islands in the West Indies and to Australia.
For example, ''Formica nigra'' captures termites, and those who try to escape are immediately seized and driven underground.
"Termite" derives from the Latin and Late Latin word ''termes'' ("woodworm, white ant"), altered by the influence of Latin ''terere'' ("to rub, wear, erode") from the earlier word ''tarmes''.
Counterbalancing this is the greatly improved water infiltration where termite tunnels in the soil allow rainwater to soak in deeply, which helps reduce runoff and consequent soil erosion through bioturbation.
:: Family Kalotermitidae
Another termite, ''Neocapriterme taracua'', also engages in suicidal defence.
In some species, the mature queen has a greatly distended abdomen and may produce 40,000 eggs a day.
Unlike ants, which undergo a complete metamorphosis, each individual termite goes through an incomplete metamorphosis that proceeds through egg, nymph, and adult stages.
the age of the carcass).
Other methods of defence include intense jerking and secretion of fluids from the frontal gland and defecating faeces containing alarm pheromones.
As discussed above, the shape and orientation of the mounds of the Australian compass termite stabilises their internal temperatures during the day.
Other such buildings include the Learning Resource Center at the Catholic University of Eastern Africa and the Council House 2 building in Melbourne, Australia.
These similarities have led some authors to propose that termites be reclassified as a single family, the Termitidae, within the order Blattodea, which contains cockroaches.
Genetic engineering may enable hydrogen to be generated in bioreactors from woody biomass.
The largest of all extant termites are the queens of the species ''Macrotermes bellicosus'', measuring up to over 10 centimetres (4&nbsp;in) in length.
Studies show that while termite queens mate with the king to produce colony workers, the queens reproduce their replacements (neotenic queens) parthenogenetically.
This happened in September 2008, when thousands of male termites left their mound each night, died, and covered the floors and water pits of the house holding their exhibit.
Most higher termites, especially in the family Termitidae, can produce their own cellulase enzymes, but they rely primarily upon the bacteria.
::: Macrotermitinae
The pantropical subfamily Nasutitermitinae has a specialised caste of soldiers, known as nasutes, that have the ability to exude noxious liquids through a horn-like frontal projection that they use for defence.
As a result, certain beetles and flies have evolved with their hosts.
Termites have a ten-segmented abdomen with two plates, the tergites and the sternites.
For example, ''Megaponera'' is a strictly termite-eating (termitophagous) genus that perform raiding activities, some lasting several hours.
Certain species of ants in the subfamily Ponerinae conduct these raids although other ant species go in alone to steal the eggs or nymphs.
In one species, ''Nasutitermes costalis'', there are three phases in a foraging expedition: first, soldiers scout an area.
African tribes in several countries have termites as totems, and for this reason tribe members are forbidden to eat the reproductive alates.
The aardwolf is an insectivorous mammal that primarily feeds on termites; it locates its food by sound and also by detecting the scent secreted by the soldiers; a single aardwolf is capable of consuming thousands of termites in a single night by using its long, sticky tongue.
:: Family Termopsidae
Some species of termite, including ''Nasutitermes corniger'', form associations with certain ant species to keep away predatory ant species.
Among all predators, ants are the greatest enemy to termites.
Studies show that in comparison to larger termites, smaller termites cannot fly long distances.
Other predators include aardvarks, aardwolves, anteaters, bats, bears, bilbies, many birds, echidnas, foxes, galagos, numbats, mice and pangolins.
Among certain termites, soldiers may use their globular (phragmotic) heads to block their narrow tunnels.
When soldiers guarding nest entrances are attacked by intruders, they engage in autothysis, creating a block that denies entry to any attacker.
The infraorder Isoptera is divided into the following clade and family groups, showing the subfamilies in their respective classification:
''Centromyrmex'' and ''Iridomyrmex'' colonies sometimes nest in termite mounds, and so the termites are preyed on by these ants.
Polycalic species of termites form multiple nests, or calies, connected by subterranean chambers.
Polycalic nests appear to be less frequent in mound-building species although polycalic arboreal nests have been observed in a few species of ''Nasutitermes''.
To termites, any breach of their tunnels or nests is a cause for alarm.
Other researchers advocate the more conservative measure of retaining the termites as the Termitoidae, an epifamily within the cockroach order, which preserves the classification of termites at family level and below.
However, Mastotermitidae termites have multiflagellate sperm with limited motility.
One species alone, ''Hodotermes mossambicus'', was found in the stomach contents of 65 birds and 19 mammals.
Colonies of ''G.&nbsp;tubiformans'' consume less food in spring than they do during autumn when their feeding activity is high.
Colonies of termites have been seen thriving in warm buildings located in cold regions.
The alates fly only for a brief amount of time, so they also rely on their legs.
They range from less than 1&nbsp;cm to several cm in width, but may extend dozens of metres in length.
If a queen is absent, a termite king will produce pheromones which encourage the development of replacement termite queens.
The developed appendages on the physogastric abdomen of ''Austrospirachtha mimetes'' allows the beetle to mimic a termite worker.
Estimated number of species
The wings are removed through a technique that is similar to winnowing.
Some queens have the ability to switch from sexual reproduction to asexual reproduction.
When they do, they excavate a chamber big enough for both, close up the entrance and proceed to mate.
In early English, termites were known as "wood ants" or "white ants".
The reproductive organs are similar to those in cockroaches but are more simplified.
The development of nymphs into adults can take months; the time period depends on food availability, temperature, and the general population of the colony.
Termite queens have the longest lifespan of any insect in the world, with some queens living up to 50 years.
The primitive giant northern termite (''Mastotermes darwiniensis'') exhibits numerous cockroach-like characteristics that are not shared with other termites, such as laying its eggs in rafts and having anal lobes on the wings.
Studies show that when termites encounter each other in foraging areas, some of the termites deliberately block passages to prevent other termites from entering.
Owing to their wood-eating habits, many termite species can do great damage to unprotected buildings and other wooden structures.
''Iridomyrmex'' also inhabits termite mounds although no evidence for any kind of relationship (other than a predatory one) is known.
Their colonies range in size from a few hundred individuals to enormous societies with several million individuals.
However, some species, such as ''Hodotermes mossambicus'', have compound eyes which they use for orientation and to distinguish sunlight from moonlight.
Within China, termite species are restricted to mild tropical and subtropical habitats south of the Yangtze River.
Most termites construct underground colonies rather than multifunctional nests and mounds.
:: Family Termitidae
The three basic segments of a termite antenna include a scape, a pedicel (typically shorter than the scape), and the flagellum (all segments beyond the scape and pedicel).
Workers leave pheromones on these trails, which are detected by other nestmates through olfactory receptors.
::: Foraminitermitinae
Some ant genera are specialist predators of termites.
The mound chimneys are about a meter in diameter and fuse together to form a rounded top.
The number of termites in a colony also varies, with the larger species typically having 100–1,000 individuals.
Termites can be beneficial to agriculture, such as by boosting crop yields and enriching the soil.
Termites can also communicate through mechanical cues, vibrations, and physical contact.
Many soldiers have large heads with highly modified powerful jaws so enlarged they cannot feed themselves.
Termite mounds are the main sources of soil consumption (geophagy) in many countries including Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and South Africa.
+ Diversity of Isoptera by continent:
Different sorts of soldiers include minor and major soldiers, and nasutes, which have a horn-like nozzle frontal projection (a nasus).
Their habit of remaining concealed often results in their presence being undetected until the timbers are severely damaged, leaving a thin layer of a wall that protects them from the environment.
Arboreal carton nests of mangrove swamp-dwelling ''Nasutitermes'' are enriched in lignin and depleted in cellulose and xylans.
Termites are considered to be a major source (11%) of atmospheric methane, one of the prime greenhouse gases, produced from the breakdown of cellulose.
Another giant termite, the extinct ''Gyatermes styriensis'', flourished in Austria during the Miocene and had a wingspan of  and a body length of .
The gut in the lower termites contains many species of bacteria along with protozoa, while the higher termites only have a few species of bacteria with no protozoa.
The alates have eyes along with lateral ocelli.
The beetles share the same cuticle hydrocarbons as the termites and even biosynthesize them.
::: Psammotermitinae
Arthropods and reptiles such as bees, centipedes, cockroaches, crickets, dragonflies, frogs, lizards, scorpions, spiders, and toads consume these insects, while two spiders in the family Ammoxenidae are specialist termite predators.
There are ten tergites, of which nine are wide and one is elongated.
Ants such as ''Megaponera analis'' attack the outside the mounds and Dorylinae ants attack underground.
The termite adds these objects onto existing structures, and such behaviour encourages building behaviour in other workers.
Meanwhile, the higher termites consume a wide variety of materials, including faeces, humus, grass, leaves and roots.
The process of worker termites feeding other nestmates is known as trophallaxis.
When a termite is in flight, its wings remain at a right angle, and when the termite is at rest, its wings remain parallel to the body.
In contrast to all these ant species, and despite their enormous diversity of prey, ''Dorylus'' ants rarely consume termites.
The flagellates have been lost in Termitidae.
:: Family Rhinotermitidae
These insects are particularly important in less developed countries where malnutrition is common, as the protein from termites can help improve the human diet.
The soldiers of the neotropical termite family Serritermitidae have a defence strategy which involves front gland autothysis, with the body rupturing between the head and abdomen.
Most attacks occur at harvest time; crops and trees are attacked during the dry season.
For example, alates in certain species emerge during the day in summer while others emerge during the winter.
Scientists' understanding of the relationship between the termite digestive tract and the microbial endosymbionts is still rudimentary; what is true in all termite species, however, is that the workers feed the other members of the colony with substances derived from the digestion of plant material, either from the mouth or anus.
Approximately 200 species of microbes live inside the termite hindgut, releasing the hydrogen that was trapped inside wood and plants that they digest.
Like ants and some bees and wasps from the separate order Hymenoptera, termites divide labour among castes consisting of sterile male and female "workers" and "soldiers".
54 species of ants are known to inhabit ''Nasutitermes'' mounds, both occupied and abandoned ones.
In addition to causing damage to buildings, termites can also damage food crops.
The tenth abdominal segment has a pair of short cerci.
:: Family Cratomastotermitidae
Various woods differ in their susceptibility to termite attack; the differences are attributed to such factors as moisture content, hardness, and resin and lignin content.
For example, though they might block each other's passages, colonies of ''Macrotermes bellicosus'' and ''Macrotermes subhyalinus'' are not always aggressive towards each other.
Which strategy is used depends on the nature of the corpse a worker is dealing with (i.e.
Some termite species do not have a true worker caste, instead relying on nymphs that perform the same work without differentiating as a separate caste.
Termites are often compared with the social Hymenoptera (ants and various species of bees and wasps), but their differing evolutionary origins result in major differences in life cycle.
In Australia, all ecological groups of termites (dampwood, drywood, subterranean) are endemic to the country, with over 360 classified species.
Most termites are blind, so communication primarily occurs through chemical, mechanical and pheromonal cues.
::: Coptotermitinae
Instead, like juveniles, they are fed by workers.
The appearance of the legs is similar in each caste, but the soldiers have larger and heavier legs.
It is only relatively recently, however, that climate responsive construction techniques have become incorporated into modern architecture.
The mouth parts contain a maxillae, a labium, and a set of mandibles.
Each segment contains a pair of legs.
Termites are consumed in many regions globally, but this practice has only become popular in developed nations in recent years.
To build their nests, termites primarily use faeces, which have many desirable properties as a construction material.
Like other insects, termites have a small tongue-shaped labrum and a clypeus; the clypeus is divided into a postclypeus and anteclypeus.
For example, F.&nbsp;M. Weesner indicated that the Mastotermitidae termites may go back to the Late Permian, 251 million years ago, and fossil wings that have a close resemblance to the wings of ''Mastotermes'' of the Mastotermitidae, the most primitive living termite, have been discovered in the Permian layers in Kansas.
Termites can distinguish nestmates and non-nestmates through chemical communication and gut symbionts: chemicals consisting of hydrocarbons released from the cuticle allow the recognition of alien termite species.
A mound provides termites the same protection as a nest but is stronger.
They have developed a gland that secrete a substance that attracts the workers by licking them.
However, seedlings are vulnerable to termite attacks and need additional protection, as their defence mechanisms only develop when they have passed the seedling stage.
Drywood termites thrive in warm climates, and human activities can enable them to invade homes since they can be transported through contaminated goods, containers and ships.
These robots work independently and can move by themselves on a tracked grid, capable of climbing and lifting up bricks.
Termites are thought to be the descendants of the genus ''Cryptocercus''.
