This is often where the inter-relationship between terrorism and religion occurs.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the United Nations attempts to define the term floundered mainly due to differences of opinion between various members about the use of violence in the context of conflicts over national liberation and self-determination.
The international community has never succeeded in developing an accepted comprehensive definition of terrorism.
Historically, tourism and terrorism have inextricably intertwined.
Modern terrorism had largely taken shape by the turn of the 20th century.
In modern times, terrorism is considered a major threat to society and therefore illegal under anti-terrorism laws in most jurisdictions.
Instead of earlier forms of terrorism based on political assassination, this campaign used modern, timed explosives with the express aim of sowing fear in the very heart of metropolitan Britain, in order to achieve political gains.
This result leads these groups to innovate more cruel and violent strategies.
Terrorists are usually psychologically insensitive to the suffering of others.
Various legal systems and government agencies use different definitions of terrorism in their national legislation.
Some terrorists like Timothy McVeigh were motivated by revenge against a state for its actions against its citizens.
Maximiliano E Korstanje argued that terrorism represents a dialectic of hate, between a group of insurgents whose interests have been placed outside the electoral system and the state which is unable to anticipate the next blow.
This has created a cycle of measures and counter measures by groups in support of and in opposition to terrorist movements.
Others view them as criminals that should be tried in civil courts.
While a democratic nation espousing civil liberties may claim a sense of higher moral ground than other regimes, an act of terrorism within such a state may cause a dilemma: whether to maintain its civil liberties and thus risk being perceived as ineffective in dealing with the problem; or alternatively to restrict its civil liberties and thus risk delegitimizing its claim of supporting civil liberties.
Appear to be intended (i) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; (ii) to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or (iii) to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping; and
Other major sources of funding include kidnapping for ransoms, smuggling (including wildlife smuggling), fraud, and robbery.
State terrorism has been used to refer to terrorist acts committed by governmental agents or forces.
The Financial Action Task Force is an inter-governmental body whose mandate, since October 2001, has included combatting terrorist financing.
Depending on how broadly the term is defined, the roots and practice of terrorism can be traced at least to the 1st-century AD.
Intimate terrorism is more likely to escalate over time, not as likely to be mutual, and more likely to involve serious injury.
Each act of terrorism is a "performance" devised to affect many large audiences.
Communications occur through modern telecommunications, or through old-fashioned methods such as couriers.
During World War II, the Malayan People's Anti-Japanese Army was allied with the British, but during the Malayan Emergency, members of its successor (the Malayan Races Liberation Army), were branded "terrorists" by the British.
Arguably the first organization to utilize modern terrorist techniques was the Irish Republican Brotherhood, founded in 1858 as a revolutionary Irish nationalist group that carried out attacks in England.
Violence by a person against their intimate partner is often done as a way for controlling their partner, even if this kind of violence is not the most frequent.
Occur primarily outside the territorial jurisdiction of the U.S., or transcend national boundaries in terms of the means by which they are accomplished, the persons they appear intended to intimidate or coerce, or the locale in which their perpetrators operate or seek asylum.
Sometimes, states that are close allies, for reasons of history, culture and politics, can disagree over whether or not members of a certain organization are terrorists.
The semantic scope of this term includes not only "terrorists", but while excluding some individuals or groups who have previously been described as "terrorists", and also explicitly excludes state terrorism.
"International terrorism" means activities with the following three characteristics:
Former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher also famously spoke of the close connection between terrorism and the media, calling publicity 'the oxygen of terrorism'.
In 1795, Edmund Burke denounced the Jacobins for letting "thousands of those hell-hounds called Terrorists&nbsp;... loose on the people" of France.
However, the most common image of terrorism is that it is carried out by small and secretive cells, highly motivated to serve a particular cause and many of the most deadly operations in recent times, such as the September 11 attacks, the London underground bombing, 2008 Mumbai attacks and the 2002 Bali bombing were planned and carried out by a close clique, composed of close friends, family members and other strong social networks.
The terms "terrorism" and '''"terrorist"''' (someone who engages in terrorism) carry strong negative connotations.
Still others will argue that terrorists are best treated as a category to themselves and need policies tailored to them.
The Internet has created a new channel for groups to spread their messages.
Over the years, much research has been conducted to distill a terrorist profile to explain these individuals' actions through their psychology and socio-economic circumstances.
Terrorist acts throughout history have been performed on religious grounds with the goal to either spread or enforce a system of belief, viewpoint or opinion.
The Stern Gang received funding from Italian Fascist officers in Beirut to undermine the British Mandate for Palestine.
Others, like Roderick Hindery, have sought to discern profiles in the propaganda tactics used by terrorists.
This strategy, often termed "courageous restraint," has certainly led to some success on the Middle East battlefield, yet it fails to address the central truth: the terrorists we face are mostly homegrown.
Intimate terrorism is one element in a general pattern of control by one partner over the other.
"Terrorism" comes from the French word ''terrorisme'', and originally referred specifically to state terrorism as practiced by the French government during the 1793–1794 Reign of Terror.
Media outlets who wish to convey impartiality may limit their usage of "terrorist" and "terrorism" because they are loosely defined, potentially controversial in nature, and subjective terms.
According to Ali Khan, the distinction lies ultimately in a political judgment.
This may negatively affect a government, while increasing the prestige of the given terrorist group and/or ideology behind a terrorist act.
The validity and scope of religious terrorism is limited to the individual or a group view or interpretation of that belief system's teachings.
The United Nations has created its own online counter-terrorism resource.
Support for this typology has been found in subsequent evaluations.
Similarly, Luke Howie explains that the actions of terrorists are not aimed at effacing entire civilizations, as the media portrays, but in administering an extreme fear so that their claims will be accepted.
Among the non-utilitarian philosophers, Michael Walzer argued that terrorism can be morally justified in only one specific case: when "a nation or community faces the extreme threat of complete destruction and the only way it can preserve itself is by intentionally targeting non-combatants, then it is morally entitled to do so".
In this analysis, state terrorism exhibited as a form of foreign policy was shaped by the presence and use of weapons of mass destruction, and that the legitimizing of such violent behavior led to an increasingly accepted form of this state behavior.
Terrorists also attack national symbols, to show power and to attempt to shake the foundation of the country or society they are opposed to.
Sometimes, doing nothing is the best reaction."
If States abused their power, they should be judged against international conventions dealing with war crimes, international human rights law, and international humanitarian law.
The term "terrorism" itself was originally used to describe the actions of the Jacobin Club during the "Reign of Terror" in the French Revolution.
As with "terrorism" the concept of "state terrorism" is controversial.
The perpetrators of acts of terrorism can be individuals, groups, or states.
However, he also made clear that, "regardless of the differences between governments on the question of definition of terrorism, what is clear and what we can all agree on is any deliberate attack on innocent civilians or non-combatants, regardless of one's cause, is unacceptable and fits into the definition of terrorism."
Terrorist acts frequently have a political purpose.
The more successful the counterinsurgency is, the less force can be used and the more risk must be accepted....
He argues that "the use of terror tactics is common in international relations and the state has been and remains a more likely employer of terrorism within the international system than insurgents."
Various commentators have pointed out the distinction between "act of terror" and "terrorism", particularly when used by the White House.
Sicarii Zealots, though some dispute whether the group, a radical offshoot of the Zealots which was active in Judaea Province at the beginning of the 1st century AD, was in fact terrorist.
Abrahm suggests that terrorist organizations do not select terrorism for its political effectiveness.
According to some definitions, clandestine or semi-clandestine state actors may also carry out terrorist acts outside the framework of a state of war.
Later, these same persons, as leaders of the liberated nations, are called "statesmen" by similar organizations.
Attacks on high-profile symbolic targets are used to incite counter-terrorism by the state to polarize the population.
Four years and a second edition later, Schmid was no closer to the goal of his quest, conceding in the first sentence of the revised volume that the "search for an adequate definition is still on".
Opinions as to which acts of violence by states consist of state-sponsored terrorism vary widely.
Jihadi, mujaheddin, and fedayeen are similar Arabic words that have entered the English lexicon.
Empirical studies on this have found that democracies have little democide.
According to Young and Dugan, these things encourage terrorist groups to organize and generate terror.
The civilian population is the center of gravity—the deciding factor in the struggle....
U.S. Code Title 22 Chapter 38, Section 2656f(d) defines terrorism as:
For this reason, homegrown terrorism has started to be seen as a greater threat, as stated by former CIA Director Michael Hayden.
After the Jacobins lost power, the word "terrorist" became a term of abuse.
Professor of Political Science Michael Stohl cites the examples that include the German bombing of London, the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor, the British firebombing of Dresden, and the U.S. atomic bombing of Hiroshima during World War II.
Some view them as soldiers that can be held at the end of a war and are entitled to various privileges spelled out in the Geneva Conventions.
An associated, and arguably more easily definable, but ''not equivalent'' term is violent non-state actor.
Additionally, Michael Mousseau shows possible relationships between the type of economy within a country and ideology associated with terrorism.
Individual terrorists tend to be motivated more by a desire for social solidarity with other members of their organization than by political platforms or strategic objectives, which are often murky and undefined.
A definition proposed by Carsten Bockstette at the George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies, underlines the psychological and tactical aspects of terrorism:
Pakistan has created and nurtured terrorist groups as policy for achieving tactical objectives against its neighbours, especially India.
Criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the public, a group of persons or particular persons for political purposes are in any circumstance unjustifiable, whatever the considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or any other nature that may be invoked to justify them.
On whether particular terrorist acts, such as killing non-combatants, can be justified as the lesser evil in a particular circumstance, philosophers have expressed different views: while, according to David Rodin, utilitarian philosophers can (in theory) conceive of cases in which the evil of terrorism is outweighed by the good that could not be achieved in a less morally costly way, in practice the "harmful effects of undermining the convention of non-combatant immunity is thought to outweigh the goods that may be achieved by particular acts of terrorism".
In the introduction of the ''U.S.
Terrorism research can be carried out in both military and civilian contexts, for example by research centres such as the British Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence Centre for Violence and Traumatic Stress Studies and the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism (ICCT).
Sometimes, the more force is used, the less effective it is....
Hoffman believes it is possible to identify some key characteristics of terrorism.
"Terror is nothing other than justice, prompt, severe, inflexible," said Jacobin leader Maximilien Robespierre.
A broad array of political organizations have practiced terrorism to further their objectives.
The lack of consensus as to what a terrorist is can affect policies designed to deal with terrorists.
However, the majority of terrorist attacks are carried out by military age men, aged 16–40.
When a political struggle is integrated into the framework of a religious or "cosmic" struggle, such as over the control of an ancestral homeland or holy site such as Israel and Jerusalem, failing in the political goal (nationalism) becomes equated with spiritual failure, which, for the highly committed, is worse than their own death or the deaths of innocent civilians.
to distinguish between actions authorized by a government (and thus "lawful") and those of other actors, including individuals and small groups.
Republicans, typically follow what is known as the Bush Doctrine, advocate the military model of taking the fight to the enemy and seeking to democratize the Middle East.
The attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, were the symbolic epicenter, which marked a new epoch in the use of civil transport against the main power of the planet.
This dilemma, some social theorists would conclude, may very well play into the initial plans of the acting terrorist(s); namely, to delegitimize the state and cause a systematic shift towards anarchy via the accumulation of negative sentiments towards the state system.
There is a connection between the existence of civil liberties, democratic participation and terrorism.
The symbolism of terrorism can exploit human fear to help achieve these goals.
More recently, Ronald Reagan and others in the American administration frequently called the Afghan Mujahideen "freedom fighters" during their war against the Soviet Union, yet twenty years later, when a new generation of Afghan men are fighting against what they perceive to be a regime installed by foreign powers, their attacks were labelled "terrorism" by George W. Bush.
The first type includes people with general psychopathic and violent tendencies.
The ''terror cimbricus'' was a panic and state of emergency in Rome in response to the approach of warriors of the Cimbri tribe in 105 BCE that the Jacobins cited as a precedent when imposing the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution.
"Revolutionary tax" is another major form of funding, and essentially a euphemism for "protection money".
From this event onwards, the spaces of leisure that characterized the pride of West, were conceived as dangerous and frightful.
To avoid detection, a terrorist will look, dress, and behave normally until executing the assigned mission.
Democracies, such as Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, Israel, Indonesia, India, Spain, Germany and the Philippines, have also experienced domestic terrorism.
Some groups, when involved in a "liberation" struggle, have been called "terrorists" by the Western governments or media.
The pejorative connotations of the word can be summed up in the aphorism, "One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter".
Moreover, the international community has been slow to formulate a universally agreed, legally binding definition of this crime.
He also cites the first strike option as an example of the "terror of coercive diplomacy" as a form of this, which holds the world hostage with the implied threat of using nuclear weapons in "crisis management" and argue that the institutionalized form of terrorism has occurred as a result of changes that took place following World War II.
However, one study suggests that suicide terrorism may be an exception to this general rule.
Nechayev founded the Russian terrorist group "People's Retribution" (Народная расправа) in 1869.
This criterion is inherently problematic and is not universally accepted, because: it denies the existence of state terrorism; the same act may or may not be classed as terrorism depending on whether its sponsorship is traced to a "legitimate" government; "legitimacy" and "lawfulness" are subjective, depending on the perspective of one government or another; and it diverges from the historically accepted meaning and origin of the term.
In this regard, Angus Martyn, briefing the Australian Parliament, stated,
To some extent, terrorists appear to jolt the society, however, the western audience experiences a gradual process of desensitization.
Leading terrorism researcher Professor Martin Rudner, director of the Canadian Centre of Intelligence and Security Studies at Ottawa's Carleton University, defines "terrorist acts" as unlawful attacks for political or other ideological goals, and said:
The study suggests that concessions awarded to terrorists during the 1980s and 1990s for suicide attacks increased their frequency.
For instance, for many years, some branches of the United States government refused to label members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) as terrorists while the IRA was using methods against one of the United States' closest allies (the United Kingdom) that the UK branded as terrorism.
Walter Laqueur despaired of defining terrorism in both editions of his monumental work on the subject, maintaining that it is neither possible to do so nor worthwhile to make the attempt.
This meaning can be traced back to Sergey Nechayev, who described himself as a "terrorist".
It is also considered a war crime under the laws of war when used to target non-combatants, such as civilians, neutral military personnel, or enemy prisoners of war.
Likely, one of the main problems of terrorism seems to be the need to capture the attention of an audience.
When states provide funding for groups considered by some to be terrorist, they rarely acknowledge them as such.
Civilian deaths create an extended family of enemies—new insurgent recruits or informants––and erode support of the host nation."
The incident played a crucial role as an inspiration for the development of the early terrorist groups.
IT batterers include two types: "Generally-violent-antisocial" and "dysphoric-borderline".
This is exemplified when a group using irregular military methods is an ally of a state against a mutual enemy, but later falls out with the state and starts to use those methods against its former ally.
Some examples of "terrorism" in non-democratic nations include ETA in Spain under Francisco Franco (although the group's terrorist activities increased sharply after Franco's death), the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists in pre-war Poland, the Shining Path in Peru under Alberto Fujimori, the Kurdistan Workers Party when Turkey was ruled by military leaders and the ANC in South Africa.
These attacks are also used to draw international attention to struggles that are otherwise unreported, such as the Palestinian airplane hijackings in 1970 and the South Moluccan hostage crisis in the Netherlands in 1975.
The Chairman of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee has stated that the Committee was conscious of 12 international Conventions on the subject, and none of them referred to State terrorism, which was not an international legal concept.
State sponsors have constituted a major form of funding; for example, Palestine Liberation Organization, Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine and other groups considered to be terrorist organizations, were funded by the Soviet Union.
A 2007 study by economist Alan B. Krueger found that terrorists were less likely to come from an impoverished background (28% vs. 33%) and more likely to have at least a high-school education (47% vs. 38%).
In the 1970s, the targets of terrorists were politicians and chiefs of police while now international tourists and visitors are selected as main targets of attacks.
WikiLeaks editor Julian Assange has been called a "terrorist" by Sarah Palin and Joe Biden.
The definition of terrorism has proven controversial.
Another early terrorist group was Narodnaya Volya, founded in Russia in 1878 as a revolutionary anarchist group inspired by Sergei Nechayev and "propaganda by the deed" theorist Pisacane.
This involves the use of state resources employed by a state's foreign policies, such as using its military to directly perform acts of terrorism.
The connection between terrorism and tourism has been widely studied since the Luxor massacre in Egypt.
'''Terrorism''' is, in its broadest sense, the use of intentionally indiscriminate violence (terror) in order to achieve a political, religious, or ideological aim.
Religious terrorism is terrorism performed by groups or individuals, the motivation of which is typically rooted in faith-based tenets.
According to data from the Global Terrorism Database, more than 61,000 incidents of non-state terrorism claiming over 140,000 lives have been recorded from 2000 to 2014.
The second type are people who are emotionally dependent on the relationship.
Some official, governmental definitions of terrorism use the criterion of the illegitimacy or unlawfulness of the act.
Revolutionary taxes are typically extorted from businesses (including farms cultivating illicit drugs (such as Papaver somniferum)) and they also "play a secondary role as one other means of intimidating the target population".
The mass media will, on occasion, censor organizations involved in terrorism (through self-restraint or regulation) to discourage further terrorism.
Some claim that attempts to profile terrorists based on personality, physical, or sociological traits are not useful.
The French word ''terrorisme'' in turn derives from the Latin verb ''terrere'' (e, terreo) meaning "to frighten".
Those labeled "terrorists" by their opponents rarely identify themselves as such, and typically use other terms or terms specific to their situation, such as separatist, freedom fighter, liberator, revolutionary, vigilante, militant, paramilitary, guerrilla, rebel, patriot, or any similar-meaning word in other languages and cultures.
As enrooted in the capitalist ethos, terrorism rests on the logic of violence and extortion, where outsiders are used to achieve the in-group's goals.
In January 1858, Italian patriot Felice Orsini threw three bombs in an attempt to assassinate French Emperor Napoleon III.
Although "terrorism" originally referred to acts committed by a government, currently it usually refers to the killing of innocent people for political purposes in such a way as to create a spectacle.
This strategy was used by Al-Qaeda in its attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in the United States on September 11, 2001.
America's thinking on how to defeat radical Islamists is split along two very different schools of thought.
The physical and behavioral description of the terrorist could describe almost any normal person.
, which have been argued to be equivalent to state terrorism.
Groups not part of the state apparatus of in opposition to the state are most commonly referred to as a "terrorist" in the media.
This was highlighted by the ''Quinn v. Robinson'' case.
Conversely James F. Pastor explains the significant relationship between terrorism and the media, and the underlying benefit each receives from the other.
Intimate terrorism (IT) may also involve emotional and psychological abuse.
In the first edition of his magisterial survey, 'Political Terrorism: A Research Guide,' Alex Schmid devoted more than a hundred pages to examining more than a hundred different definitions of terrorism in an effort to discover a broadly acceptable, reasonably comprehensive explication of the word.
Terrorist attacks are often targeted to maximize fear and publicity, usually using explosives or poison.
Army / Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual'', Sarah Sewall states the need for "U.S. forces to make securing the civilian, rather than destroying the enemy, their top priority.
It is common for both parties in a conflict to describe each other as terrorists.
However, this may encourage organizations to perform more extreme acts of terrorism to be shown in the mass media.
Two examples of this phenomenon are the Nobel Peace Prize laureates Menachem Begin and Nelson Mandela.
§ 2331 defines "international terrorism" and "domestic terrorism" for purposes of Chapter 113B of the Code, entitled "Terrorism":
A state can sponsor terrorism by funding or harboring a terrorist group.
The term "counter-terrorism" has a narrower connotation, implying that it is directed at terrorist actors.
It has been practiced by both right-wing and left-wing political organizations, nationalist groups, religious groups, revolutionaries, and ruling governments.
Eight bystanders were killed and 142 injured.
The international community has adopted a series of sectoral conventions that define and criminalize various types of terrorist activities.
These groups benefited from the free flow of information and efficient telecommunications to succeed where others had failed.
There is concern about terrorist attacks employing weapons of mass destruction.
There are several academic journals devoted to the field.
Using extortion as a main tactic, the media lays a fertile ground which amplifies the effects of terrorism on the society.
Democrats, by contrast, generally propose the law enforcement model of better cooperation with nations and more security at home.
Since 1994, the United Nations General Assembly has repeatedly condemned terrorist acts using the following political description of terrorism:
The group developed ideas—such as targeted killing of the 'leaders of oppression'—that were to become the hallmark of subsequent violence by small non-state groups, and they were convinced that the developing technologies of the age—such as the invention of dynamite, which they were the first anarchist group to make widespread use of—enabled them to strike directly and with discrimination.
Groups accused of terrorism understandably prefer terms reflecting legitimate military or ideological action.
These divergences have made it impossible for the United Nations to conclude a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism that incorporates a single, all-encompassing, legally binding, criminal law definition of terrorism.
For example, carrying out a strategic bombing on an enemy city, which is designed to affect civilian support for a cause, would not be considered terrorism if it were authorized by a government.
Former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan has said that it is "time to set aside debates on so-called 'state terrorism'.
The group initiated the Fenian dynamite campaign in 1881, one of the first modern terror campaigns.
According to the contemporary Jewish-Roman historian Josephus, after the Zealotry rebellion against Roman rule in Judea, when some prominent Jewish collaborators with Roman rule were killed, Judas of Galilee formed a small and more extreme offshoot of the Zealots, the Sicarii, in 6 AD.
Barack Obama, commenting on the Boston Marathon bombings of April 2013, declared that "anytime bombs are used to target innocent civilians, it is an act of terror."
Another analysis found only 16% of terrorists came from impoverished families, vs. 30% of male Palestinians, and over 60% had gone beyond high school, vs. 15% of the populace.
Their terror was also directed against Jewish "collaborators", including temple priests, Sadducees, Herodians, and other wealthy elites.
Sewall sums up the book's key points on how to win this battle: "Sometimes, the more you protect your force, the less secure you may be....
In November 2004, a Secretary-General of the United Nations report described terrorism as any act "intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians or non-combatants with the purpose of intimidating a population or compelling a government or an international organization to do or abstain from doing any act".
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has reportedly received funding "via private donations from the Gulf states".
Their suffering accomplishes the terrorists' goals of instilling fear, getting their message out to an audience or otherwise satisfying the demands of their often radical religious and political agendas.
It is not only individual agencies within the same governmental apparatus that cannot agree on a single definition of terrorism.
Terrorist groups usually methodically plan attacks in advance, and may train participants, plant undercover agents, and raise money from supporters or through organized crime.
Evidence regarding this particular method of terrorism reveals that every modern suicide campaign has targeted a democracy–a state with a considerable degree of political freedom.
Experts and other long-established scholars in the field are equally incapable of reaching a consensus.
Terrorism research, also called terrorism and counter-terrorism research, is an interdisciplinary academic field which seeks to understand the causes of terrorism, how to prevent it as well as its impact in the broadest sense.
In his book ''Inside Terrorism'' Bruce Hoffman offered an explanation of why the term ''terrorism'' becomes distorted:
Bruce Hoffman, a scholar, has noted:
