Examples include genital virilisation such as midline fusion, phallic urethra, scrotal thinning and rugation, and phallic enlargement; although the role of testosterone is far smaller than that of dihydrotestosterone.
It is also not usually recommended for improving cognition, the risk of heart disease, bone strength or for generalized well being.
A study at the Universities of Zurich and Royal Holloway London with more than 120 experimental subjects has shown that the sexual hormone can encourage fair behavior.
Testosterone therapy may improve the management of type 2 diabetes.
Fat cells synthesize the enzyme aromatase, which converts testosterone, the male sex hormone, into estradiol, the female sex hormone.
The fairer the offer, the less probable a refusal by the negotiating partner.
Adult testosterone effects are more clearly demonstrable in males than in females, but are likely important to both sexes.
Forms of testosterone for human administration currently available include injectable (such as testosterone cypionate or testosterone enanthate in oil), oral, buccal, transdermal skin patches, transdermal creams, gels, and implantable pellets.
Much of the literature, however, suggests a curvilinear or even quadratic relationship between spatial performance and circulating testosterone, where both hypo- and hypersecretion (deficient- and excessive-secretion) of circulating androgens have negative effects on cognition.
The effects include:
The primary use of testosterone is the treatment of males with too little or no natural testosterone production—males with hypogonadism.
* Loss of scalp hair (Androgenetic alopecia)
Natural selection might have evolved males to be more sensitive to competitive and status challenge situations and that the interacting roles of testosterone are the essential ingredient for aggressive behaviour in these situations.
There is also development of the prostate gland and seminal vessicles.
* Growth of jaw, brow, chin, nose, and remodeling of facial bone contours, in conjunction with human growth hormone
The group of Ernst Laqueur at the University of Amsterdam purified testosterone from bovine testicles in a similar manner in 1934, but isolation of the hormone from animal tissues in amounts permitting serious study in humans was not feasible until three European pharmaceutical giants—Schering (Berlin, Germany), Organon (Oss, Netherlands) and Ciba (Basel, Switzerland)—began full-scale steroid research and development programs in the 1930s.
A number of synthetic analogs of testosterone have been developed with improved bioavailability and metabolic half life relative to testosterone.
On January 31, 2014, reports of strokes, heart attacks, and deaths in men taking FDA-approved testosterone-replacement led the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to announce that it would be investigating the issue.
Testosterone levels and sexual arousal in men are heavily aware of hormone cycles in females.
In the final and rate limiting step, the C-17 keto group androstenedione is reduced by 17-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase to yield testosterone.
Testosterone insufficiency (also termed  hypotestosteronism or hypotestosteronemia) is an abnormally low testosterone production.
It is on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines, the most important medications needed in a basic health system.
Suffering the ridicule of his colleagues, he abandoned his work on the mechanisms and effects of androgens in human beings.
* Posing in high-power nonverbal displays through open, expansive postures can increase testosterone levels.
Men who watch sexually explicit films also report increased motivation, competitiveness, and decreased exhaustion.
The partial synthesis in the 1930s of abundant, potent testosterone esters permitted the characterization of the hormone's effects, so that Kochakian and Murlin (1936) were able to show that testosterone raised nitrogen retention (a mechanism central to anabolism) in the dog, after which Allan Kenyon's group was able to demonstrate both anabolic and androgenic effects of testosterone propionate in eunuchoidal men, boys, and women.
There are many routes of administration for testosterone.
The male generative glands also contain Sertoli cells, which require testosterone for spermatogenesis.
Test subjects with an artificially enhanced testosterone level generally made better, fairer offers than those who received placebos, thus reducing the risk of a rejection of their offer to a minimum.
Adverse effects may also include minor side-effects such as acne and oily skin, as well as, significant hair loss and/or thinning of the hair, which may be prevented with 5-alpha reductase inhibitors ordinarily used for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia, such as finasteride or dutasteride.
Testosterone and other androgens have evolved to masculinize a brain in order to be competitive even to the point of risking harm to the person and others.
Decline of testosterone production with age has led to interest in androgen replacement therapy.
In the testes, testosterone is produced by the Leydig cells.
For postnatal effects in both males and females, these are mostly dependent on the levels and duration of circulating free testosterone.
In some testing programs, an individual's own historical results may serve as a reference interval for interpretation of a suspicious finding.
Physical presence may be required for women who are in relationships for the testosterone–partner interaction, where same-city partnered women have lower testosterone levels than long-distance partnered women.
* Natural or man-made antiandrogens including spearmint tea reduce testosterone levels.
These independent partial syntheses of testosterone from a cholesterol base earned both Butenandt and Ruzicka the joint 1939 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Factors affecting testosterone levels include:
In a Danish study from 2003, men were found to have a total myelinated fiber length of 176,000&nbsp;km at the age of 20, whereas in women the total length was 149,000&nbsp;km (approx.
The rules allowed both fair and unfair offers.
Testosterone may be a treatment for postmenopausal women as long as they are effectively estrogenized.
This is known as hormone replacement therapy or testosterone replacement therapy (TRT), which maintains serum testosterone levels in the normal range.
Hormone supplements cause the endocrine system to adjust its production and lower the natural production of the hormone, so when supplements are discontinued, natural hormone production is lower than it was originally.
It may also be used to increase athletic ability in the form of doping.
The Annual NY Academy of Sciences has also found anabolic steroid use which increase testosterone to be higher in teenagers and this was associated with increased violence.
Most studies support a link between adult criminality and testosterone, although the relationship is modest if examined separately for each sex.
Like most hormones, testosterone is supplied to target tissues in the blood where much of it is transported bound to a specific plasma protein, sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG).
The first one is the Challenge hypothesis which states that testosterone would increase during puberty thus facilitating reproductive and competitive behaviour which would include aggression.
The rise in testosterone levels during competition predicted aggression in males but not in females.
Men who are exposed to scents of ovulating women maintained a stable testosterone level that was higher than the testosterone level of men exposed to nonovulation cues.
Many of these analogs have an alkyl group introduced at the C-17 position in order to prevent conjugation and hence improve oral bioavailability.
In addition, an increase of 30% in deaths and heart attacks in older men has been reported.
When testosterone-deprived rats were given medium levels of testosterone, their sexual behaviors (copulation, partner preference, etc.)
* Sleep (REM dream) increases nocturnal testosterone levels.
He reported in ''The Lancet'' that his vigor and feeling of well-being were markedly restored but the effects were transient, and Brown-Séquard's hopes for the compound were dashed.
However men with high testosterone was significantly 27% less generous in an ultimatum game while men with the lowest testosterone were 560% more generous.
This also made it obvious that additional modifications on the synthesized testosterone could be made, i.e., esterification and alkylation.
A few studies indicate that the testosterone derivative estradiol (one form of estrogen) might play an important role in male aggression.
Brand names of testosterone include Primoteston, Testogel, Androgel, Testoderm, Androderm, and others.
If no agreement was reached, neither party earned anything.
Also, testosterone and DHT may be deactivated or cleared by enzymes that hydroxylate at the 6, 7, 15 or 16 positions.
investigated the role of genotype on such so-called reflexive testosterone increases in male mice.
* Growth of the Adam's apple
The increase in testosterone levels was associated with the degree that the women thought the men were trying to impress them.
Serious side effects may include liver toxicity, heart disease, and behavioral changes.
Small amounts are also made by the adrenal glands and the ovaries in females.
These ubiquitous steroids suggest that sex hormones have an ancient evolutionary history.
In males, testosterone is synthesized primarily in Leydig cells.
Some research has also indicated that if testosterone is eliminated in an adult male human or other adult male primate's system, its sexual motivation decreases, but there is no corresponding decrease in ability to engage in sexual activity (mounting, ejaculating, etc.
Testosterone levels play a major role in risk-taking during financial decisions.
However, it is suggested that after the "honeymoon phase" ends—about one to three years into a relationship—this change in testosterone levels is no longer apparent.
Research in this golden age proved that this newly synthesized compound—testosterone—or rather family of compounds (for many derivatives were developed from 1940 to 1960), was a potent multiplier of muscle, strength, and well-being.
Nevertheless, physicians are cautioned about the cancer risk associated with testosterone supplementation.
During the second trimester, androgen level is associated with gender formation.
There is no FDA approved androgen preparation for the treatment of androgen insufficiency; however, it has been used off-label to treat low libido and sexual dysfunction in older women.
Anabolic steroids (including testosterone) have also been taken to enhance muscle development, strength, or endurance.
The first step in the biosynthesis involves the oxidative cleavage of the sidechain of cholesterol by CYP11A, a mitochondrial cytochrome P450 oxidase with the loss of six carbon atoms to give pregnenolone.
* Pubic hair extends to thighs and up toward umbilicus
It is available as a generic medication.
The price depends on the form of testosterone used.
The structure was worked out by Schering's Adolf Butenandt, at the ''Chemisches Institut'' of Technical University in Gdańsk.
Testosterone is observed in most vertebrates.
* Completion of bone maturation and termination of growth.
For the study subjects took part in a behavioral experiment where the distribution of a real amount of money was decided.
The first period occurs between 4 and 6 weeks of the gestation.
Early infancy androgen effects are the least understood.
Testosterone is contraindicated in pregnancy and not recommended during breastfeeding.
These are the so-called "17-aa" (17-alkyl androgen) family of androgens such as fluoxymesterone and methyltestosterone.
The FDA now requires warnings in the drug labeling of all approved testosterone products regarding deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
This occurs indirectly via estradiol metabolites and hence more gradually in men than women.
Many studies have also been done on the relationship between more general aggressive behavior/feelings and testosterone.
It may cause harm if used during pregnancy or breastfeeding.
In the first weeks of life for male infants, testosterone levels rise.
Treating low androgen levels with testosterone is not generally recommended in women when it is due to hypopituitarism, adrenal insufficiency, or following surgical removal of the ovaries.
* Growth of spermatogenic tissue in testicles, male fertility
A study conducted in 1996 found no immediate short term effects on mood or behavior from the administration of supraphysiologic doses of testosterone for 10 weeks on 43 healthy men.
Testosterone is classified as an anabolic agent and is on the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) List of Prohibited Substances and Methods.
These latter two hormones stimulate the testis to synthesize testosterone.
resumed, but not when given low amounts of the same hormone.
The chemical synthesis of testosterone from cholesterol was achieved in August that year by Butenandt and Hanisch.
* The secosteroid vitamin D in levels of 400–1000&nbsp;IU/d (10–25&nbsp;µg/d) raises testosterone levels.
Men who watch a sexually explicit movie have an average increase of 35% in testosterone, peaking at 60–90 minutes after the end of the film, but no increase is seen in men who watch sexually neutral films.
Women's level of testosterone is higher when measured pre-intercourse vs pre-cuddling, as well as post-intercourse vs post-cuddling.
Sexual thoughts also change the level of testosterone but not level of cortisol in the female body, and hormonal contraceptives may affect the variation in testosterone response to sexual thoughts.
In men, the reduction in LH subsequently leads to rapid suppression of testosterone release from the testes.
This apparent paradox can be resolved by noting that prostate cancer is very common.
Some female athletes may have naturally higher levels of testosterone than others, and may be asked to consent to sex verification and either surgery or drugs to decrease testosterone levels.
Exogenous testosterone may also cause suppression of spermatogenesis, leading to, in some cases, infertility.
Finally, increasing levels of testosterone through a negative feedback loop act on the hypothalamus and pituitary to inhibit the release of GnRH and FSH/LH, respectively.
There is a time lag effect when testosterone is administered, on genital arousal in women.
They do so directly by increasing the muscles' protein synthesis.
If the levels reduce, then there is more empathy by the father than in fathers whose levels go up.
Common side effects from use include acne, swelling, and breast enlargement in males.
It concluded that men with lower thresholds for sexual arousal have a greater likelihood to attend to sexual information and that testosterone may work by enhancing their attention to the relevant stimuli.
Androgens may modulate the physiology of vaginal tissue and contribute to female genital sexual arousal.
The bones and the brain are two important tissues in humans where the primary effect of testosterone is by way of aromatization to estradiol.
A number of lawsuits are currently (2014) underway against testosterone manufacturers, alleging a significantly increased rate of stroke and heart attack in elderly men who use testosterone supplements.
In addition, the amount of testosterone produced by existing Leydig cells is under the control of LH, which regulates the expression of 17-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.
Testosterone levels may decline gradually with age (see andropause).
* Subcutaneous fat in face decreases
There has been speculation that these changes in testosterone result in the temporary reduction of differences in behavior between the sexes.
GnRH antagonists have been used for the treatment of prostate cancer.
Roll-on methods and nasal sprays are currently under development.
In the next step, two additional carbon atoms are removed by the CYP17A enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum to yield a variety of C19 steroids.
In non-human primates, it may be that testosterone in puberty stimulates sexual arousal, which allows the primate to increasingly seek out sexual experiences with females and thus creates a sexual preference for females.
The male brain is masculinized by the aromatization of testosterone into estrogen, which crosses the blood–brain barrier and enters the male brain, whereas female fetuses have alpha-fetoprotein, which binds the estrogen so that female brains are not affected.
* Weight loss may result in an increase in testosterone levels.
The function of this rise in humans is unknown.
Fish make a slightly different form called 11-ketotestosterone.
After a series of scandals and publicity in the 1980s (such as Ben Johnson's improved performance at the 1988 Summer Olympics), prohibitions of anabolic steroid use were renewed or strengthened by many sports organizations.
Levels of testosterone are typically more than five times higher in adult males than females.
Nearly all studies of juvenile delinquency and testosterone are not significant.
Testosterone is significantly correlated with aggression and competitive behaviour and is directly facilitated by the latter.
This has proven contentious, with the Court of Arbitration for Sport suspending the IAAF policy due to insufficient evidence of a link between high androgen levels and improved athletic performance.
There are two theories on the role of testosterone in aggression and competition.
Research on the action of testosterone received a brief boost in 1889, when the Harvard professor Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard (1817–1894), then in Paris, self-injected subcutaneously a "rejuvenating elixir" consisting of an extract of dog and guinea pig testicle.
Like other steroid hormones, testosterone is derived from cholesterol (see figure to the left).
The negotiating partner could subsequently accept or decline the offer.
The second theory is similar and is known as "evolutionary neuroandrogenic (ENA) theory of male aggression".
Studies have also found higher pre-natal testosterone or lower digit ratio to be correlated with higher aggression in males.
In a 1991 study, males were exposed to either visual or auditory erotic stimuli and asked to complete a cognitive task, where the number of errors on the task indicated how distracted the participant was by the stimuli.
Most studies have also found testosterone to be associated with behaviors or personality traits linked with criminality such as antisocial behavior and alcoholism.
Thus it is the challenge of competition among males of the species that facilitates aggression and violence.
Gynecomastia may occur due to testosterone's peripheral conversion to estradiol via aromatase.
Fatherhood also decreases testosterone levels in men, suggesting that the resulting emotional and behavioral changes promote paternal care.
Some drugs indirectly target testosterone as a way of treating certain conditions.
* Licorice can decrease the production of testosterone and this effect is greater in females.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) stated in 2015 that neither the benefits nor the safety of testosterone have been established for low testosterone levels due to aging.
The same research also found fathers (those outside competitive environments) had the lowest testosterone levels compared to other males.
There are some differences between a male and female brain (possibly the result of different testosterone levels), one of them being size: the male human brain is, on average, larger.
In addition, the 3-hydroxyl group is oxidized by 3-β-HSD to produce androstenedione.
It is recommended that physicians screen for prostate cancer with a digital rectal exam and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level before starting therapy, and monitor PSA and hematocrit levels closely during therapy.
The literature suggests that attention, memory, and spatial ability are key cognitive functions affected by testosterone in humans.
This might cause acne.
Rates of use have increased three times in the United States between 2001 and 2011.
Testosterone was first isolated in 1935.
Testosterone was identified as 17β-hydroxyandrost-4-en-3-one (C19H28O2), a solid polycyclic alcohol with a hydroxyl group at the 17th carbon atom.
In many mammals, prenatal or perinatal "masculinization" of the sexually dimorphic areas of the brain by estradiol derived from testosterone programs later male sexual behavior.
Testosterone produces aggression by activating subcortical areas in the brain, which may also be inhibited or suppressed by social norms or familial situations while still manifesting in diverse intensities and ways through thoughts, anger, verbal aggression, competition, dominance and to physical violence.
* Penis or clitoris enlargement
As a medication it is used to treat male hypogonadism and certain types of breast cancer.
A 2002 study found that testosterone increased in heterosexual men after having had a brief conversation with a woman.
In males it is the main sex hormone and plays an important role in the development of the male reproductive system.
Testosterone is only one of many factors that influence aggression and the effects of previous experience and environmental stimuli have been found to correlate more strongly.
Up to the year 2010, studies had not shown any effect on the risk of death, prostate cancer or cardiovascular disease; more recent studies, however, do raise concerns.
A number of methods for detecting testosterone use by athletes have been employed, most based on a urine test.
It is unclear if the use of testosterone for low levels due to aging is beneficial or harmful.
Testosterone is used as a form of doping among athletes in order to improve performance.
They also concluded that this response is related to the male's initial level of sexual arousal.
Moreover, the conversion of testosterone to estradiol regulates male aggression in sparrows during breeding season.
Subjects who interacted with hand guns and an experimental game showed rise in testosterone and aggression.
Differences in sex hormones, including testosterone, have been suggested as an explanation for these differences.
These include the testosterone/epitestosterone ratio (normally less than 6), the testosterone/luteinizing hormone ratio and the carbon-13/carbon-12 ratio (pharmaceutical testosterone contains less carbon-13 than endogenous testosterone).
When testosterone levels are low, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is released by the hypothalamus, which in turn stimulates the pituitary gland to release FSH and LH.
Single men who have not had relationship experience have lower testosterone levels than single men with experience.
Due to an increased incidence of adverse cardiovascular events compared to a placebo group, a Testosterone in Older Men with Mobility Limitations (TOM) trial (a National Institute of Aging randomized trial) was halted early by the Data Safety and Monitoring Committee.
Testosterone can be used as a cream applied to the skin, by injection into a muscle, or be placed in the cheek.
A testicular action was linked to circulating blood fractions&nbsp;– now understood to be a family of androgenic hormones&nbsp;– in the early work on castration and testicular transplantation in fowl by Arnold Adolph Berthold (1803–1861).
This reaction engages penile reflexes (such as erection and ejaculation) that aid in sperm competition when more than one male is present in mating encounters, allowing for more production of successful sperm and a higher chance of reproduction.
Testosterone specific structural brain characteristic can predict aggressive behaviour in individuals.
For example, 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors such as finasteride inhibit the conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a metabolite more potent than testosterone.
* Leg hair, armpit hair
* Aging reduces testosterone release.
These 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors have been used to treat various conditions associated with androgens, such as androgenetic alopecia (male-pattern baldness), hirsutism, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and prostate cancer.
Testosterone is made primarily by the testicles in males.
In the central nervous system, testosterone is aromatized to estradiol.
* Facial hair (sideburns, beard, moustache)
The FDA has required that labels on testosterone include warnings about increased risk of heart attacks and stroke.
* Resistance training increases testosterone levels,  however, in older men, that increase can be avoided by protein ingestion.
Collectively, these results suggest that the presence of competitive activities rather than bond-maintenance activities  are more relevant to changes in testosterone levels.
The study began after a previous, randomized, clinical trial of testosterone therapy in men was stopped prematurely "due to adverse cardiovascular events raising concerns about testosterone therapy safety."
'''Testosterone''' is a medication and naturally occurring steroid hormone.
Men who produce less testosterone are more likely to be in a relationship and/or married, and men who produce more testosterone are more likely to divorce; however, causality cannot be determined in this correlation.
Free testosterone (T) is transported into the cytoplasm of target tissue cells, where it can bind to the androgen receptor, or can be reduced to 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by the cytoplasmic enzyme 5-alpha reductase.
The way testosterone levels change when a child is in distress is indicative of fathering styles.
Studies have also found that testosterone facilitates aggression by modulating vasopressin receptors in the hypothalamus.
In 1927, the University of Chicago's Professor of Physiologic Chemistry, Fred C. Koch, established easy access to a large source of bovine testicles — the Chicago stockyards — and recruited students willing to endure the tedious work of extracting their isolates.
In contrast, GnRH antagonists bind to GnRH receptors in the pituitary gland, blocking the release of luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the pituitary.
Two later studies have empirically confirmed these results.
