The Dallas – Fort Worth Metroplex is one of only twelve American metropolitan areas that hosts sports teams from all the "Big Four" professional leagues.
Warlike tribes made life difficult and dangerous for Europeans through their attacks and resistance to the newcomers.
Native Americans make up 0.5 percent of Texas' population, and number over 118,000 individuals.
The shoreline shifted again to the eastern margin of the state and the Gulf of Mexico passive margin began to form.
Texas is a "tax donor state"; in 2005, for every dollar Texans paid to the federal government in federal income taxes, the state got back about $0.94 in benefits.
After several weeks of retreat, the Texian Army commanded by Sam Houston attacked and defeated Santa Anna's forces at the Battle of San Jacinto.
Texas has a deregulated electric service.
The Houston Cougars and the SMU Mustangs compete in the American Athletic Conference.
In early 1835, wary Texians formed Committees of Correspondence and Safety.
Texas has 254 counties— the most nationwide.
General José de Urrea defeated all the Texian resistance along the coast culminating in the Goliad massacre.
Juneteenth commemorates the announcement of the Emancipation Proclamation in Galveston by General Gordon Granger, almost two and a half years after the original announcement.
An additional 50 leagues of land set aside for the support of two universities would later become the basis of the state's Permanent University Fund.
Almost 80,000 Texans claim African and European heritage, and make up 0.3 percent of the population.
These cities are spread out amongst the state.
Hispanics and Latinos are the second largest group in Texas after non-Hispanic European Americans.
The two that are expected to emerge first are the University of Houston and Texas&nbsp;Tech University, likely in that order according to discussions on the House floor of the 82nd Texas Legislature.
Just over 200,000 Indian Americans make Texas their home.
The state created a comprehensive plan for higher education, funded in large part by oil revenues, and a central state apparatus designed to manage state institutions more efficiently.
Based on Census Bureau data released on February 2011, for the first time in recent history, Texas' white population is below 50 percent (45 percent) and Hispanics grew to 38 percent.
The vast geographic, economic, and cultural diversity within the state itself prohibits easy categorization of the whole state into a recognized region of the United States.
Texas's most notable Unionist was the state Governor, Sam Houston.
Other fields were later discovered nearby in East Texas, West Texas, and under the Gulf of Mexico.
Whether a Native American tribe was friendly or warlike was critical to the fates of European explorers and settlers in that land.
The current Texas Constitution was adopted in 1876.
This orogenic crest is today buried beneath the Dallas–Waco—Austin–San Antonio trend.
Texas also permits the creation of "special districts", which provide limited services.
On November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas.
Students in Texas take the State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness (STAAR) in primary and secondary school.
"Far West Texas" or the "Trans-Pecos" region is the state's Basin and Range Province.
These events allowed Galveston to take over as the chief port city.
With 10 climatic regions, 14 soil regions and 11 distinct ecological regions, regional classification becomes problematic with differences in soils, topography, geology, rainfall, and plant and animal communities.
Collegiate athletics have deep significance in Texas culture, especially football.
Thus, the FY 2015 dates from September 1, 2014 through August 31, 2015.
The county provides limited services to unincorporated areas and to some smaller incorporated areas.
Texas Motor Speedway hosts annual NASCAR Cup Series and IndyCar Series auto races since 1997.
The state's fiscal year spans from the previous calendar year's September 1 to the current year's August 31.
There are over 222,000 Salvadorans and over 130,000 Puerto Ricans in Texas.
Hondurans, Salvadorans, and Guatemalans make up roughly 75% of illegal immigrants in South Texas.
Texas throughout the 21st century has been hammered by drought.
Southwest Airlines, headquartered in Dallas, has its operations at Dallas Love Field.
Twenty-three other empresarios brought settlers to the state, the majority of whom were from the United States.
Americans with origins from the Pacific are the smallest minority in Texas.
During his term, the state set aside three leagues of land in each county for equipping public schools.
Migrants abandoned the worst hit sections of Texas during the Dust Bowl years.
After these decisive victories, the United States invaded Mexican territory ending the fighting in Texas.
In 1749, the Spanish peace treaty with the Lipan Apache angered many tribes, including the Comanche, Tonkawa, and Hasinai.
Texas ranks close to last in access to healthcare, quality of care, avoidable hospital spending, and equity among various groups.
The state's numerous oil tycoons are also a popular pop culture topic as seen in the hit TV series ''Dallas''.
School districts have the power to tax their residents and to assert eminent domain over privately owned property.
IAH offers service to the most Mexican destinations of any U.S. airport.
Austin's settlers, the Old Three Hundred, made places along the Brazos River in 1822.
Texas has compensated by building both America's largest highway and railway systems in length.
Three federally recognized Native American tribes reside in Texas: the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe, the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe, and the Ysleta Del Sur Pueblo.
The Speaker of the House leads the House, and the lieutenant governor, the Senate.
Other major rivers include the Pecos, the Brazos, Colorado, and Red River.
Cabeza de Vaca reported that in 1528, when the Spanish landed in the area, "half the natives died from a disease of the bowels and blamed us."
According to a June 2014 ''Los Angeles Times'' article, illegal immigrants are arriving at a rate of more than 35,000 a month.
Until the 1970s, the commission controlled the price of petroleum because of its ability to regulate Texas's oil reserves.
The 1900 Galveston hurricane subsequently devastated that city, killing about 8,000 people  or possibly as many as 12,000.
The first railroad to enter Texas from the north, completed in 1872, was the .
German descendants inhabit much of central and southeast-central Texas.
When Republican President George W. Bush served as Texas's governor, the state had a Democratic lieutenant governor, Bob Bullock.
Hoping that more settlers would reduce the near-constant Comanche raids, Mexican Texas liberalized its immigration policies to permit immigrants from outside Mexico and Spain.
This group forms over 37 percent of Texas' population.
The Legislature meets in regular session biennially for just over 100 days, but the governor can call for special sessions as often as desired (notably, the Legislature cannot call itself into session).
The four other university systems: the University of Houston&nbsp;System, the University of North&nbsp;Texas System, the Texas&nbsp;State System, and the Texas&nbsp;Tech System are not funded by the Permanent University Fund.
File:Houston Ship Channel.jpg|Port of Houston along the Houston Ship Channel
The TCU Horned Frogs and SMU Mustangs also share a rivalry and compete annually in the Battle for the Iron Skillet.
Artists such as Blind Lemon Jefferson, Robert Johnson, Huddie "Lead Belly" Ledbetter, and Bessie Smith played in early Deep Ellum clubs.
The Rangers were integral to several important events of Texas history and some of the best-known criminal cases in the history of the Old West.
Most cities in the state, those over 5,000 in population, have home-rule governments.
In recent times, urban centers of the state have increased in size, containing two-thirds of the population in 2005.
Texas has the headquarters of many high technology companies, such as Dell, Inc., Texas Instruments, Perot Systems, Rackspace and AT&T.
As of 2010 it shares the top of the list of the most Fortune 500 companies with California at 57.
In the same manner they kill deer, encircling them with fires, and they do it also to deprive the animals of pasture, compelling them to go for food where the Indians want."
Despite these efforts, the legislature passed a map heavily in favor of Republicans, based on 2000 data and ignoring the estimated nearly one million new residents in the state since that date.
Most of the population centers are located in areas of former prairies, grasslands, forests, and the coastline.
The term "six flags over Texas" refers to several nations that have ruled over the territory.
People identifying as multiracial form 1.9 percent of the population, and number over 448,000 people.
New laws also called for the enforcement of customs duties angering both native Mexican citizens (''Tejanos'') and recent immigrants.
As of 2010, six Texas cities had populations greater than 600,000 people.
Texas has the most farms and the highest acreage in the United States.
Lockheed builds the F-16 Fighting Falcon, the largest Western fighter program, and its successor, the F-35 Lightning II in Fort Worth.
Texas is also home to over 187,000 Vietnamese and 136,000 Chinese.
Cabeza de Vaca also made observations about the way of life of the Ignaces Natives of Texas: "They went about with a firebrand, setting fire to the plains and timber so as to drive off the mosquitos, and also to get lizards and similar things which they eat, to come out of the soil.
Cherokee made up 0.1 percent of the population, and numbered over 19,400 members.
Lastly, over 111,000 people are of other Asian ancestry groups, such as Cambodian, Thai, and Hmong.
Both were established by the Texas Constitution and hold stakes in the Permanent University Fund.
Although Texas permits cities and counties to enter "interlocal agreements" to share services, the state does not allow consolidated city-county governments, nor does it have metropolitan governments.
Its Per Capita personal income in 2009 was $36,484, ranking 29th in the nation.
News of the defeats sparked panic amongst Texas settlers.
The most common accent and/or dialect spoken by natives throughout Texas is sometimes referred to as Texan English, which itself is a sub-variety of a broader category of American English known as Southern American English.
Constitution on March 23.
Pangea began to break up in the Triassic, but seafloor spreading to form the Gulf of Mexico occurred only in the mid and late Jurassic.
The founders of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) used the Texas agency as one of their models for petroleum price control.
The size and unique history of Texas make its regional affiliation debatable; it can be fairly considered a Southern or a Southwestern state, or both.
The state's Bill of Rights is much larger than its federal counterpart, and has provisions unique to Texas.
Many elite research medical centers are located in Texas.
The table below consists of averages for August (generally the warmest month) and January (generally the coldest) in selected cities in various regions of the state.
The state does not have townships— areas within a county are either incorporated or unincorporated.
These three rank among the 10 most populous cities of the United States.
Causes of the state's vast greenhouse gas emissions include the state's large number of coal power plants and the state's refining and manufacturing industries.
The colony lasted only four&nbsp;years before succumbing to harsh conditions and hostile natives.
Around 146,000 adherents of religions such as Hinduism and Sikhism live in Texas.
Night-time summer temperatures range from the upper 50s °F (14&nbsp;°C) in the West Texas mountains to  in Galveston.
In central Texas, the southern section of the State Highway 130 toll road has a speed limit of , the highest in the nation.
Opposition within the republic from the nationalist faction, along with strong abolitionist opposition within the United States, slowed Texas's admission into the Union.
At this time, blacks comprised 30 percent of the state's population, and they were overwhelmingly enslaved.
Union troops briefly occupied the state's primary port, Galveston.
The Texas Ranger Division of the Texas Department of Public Safety is a law enforcement agency with statewide jurisdiction.
If it were an independent country, Texas would be the 40th largest behind Chile and Zambia.
Texas has 730 airports, second most of any state in the nation.
The phrase, "everything is bigger in Texas," has been in regular use since at least 1950; and was used as early as 1913.
After this period, they supported Republicans for local and state offices as well, and most whites have become Republican Party members.
As of 2010, 65.8% (14,740,304) of Texas residents age 5 and older spoke only English at home, while 29.2% (6,543,702) spoke Spanish, 0.75 percent (168,886) Vietnamese, and Chinese (which includes Cantonese and Mandarin) was spoken by 0.56% (122,921) of the population over the age of five.
The number of voters dropped dramatically, and the Democrats crushed competition from the Republican and Populist parties.
They have acted as riot police and as detectives, protected the Texas governor, tracked down fugitives, and functioned as a paramilitary force both for the republic and the state.
The resulting "oil boom" transformed Texas.
The tents they make are like field tents, and they set them up over some poles they have made for this purpose, which come together and are tied at the top, and when they go from one place to another they carry them on some dogs they have, of which they have many, and they load them with the tents and poles and other things, for the country is so level, as I said, that they can make use of these, because they carry the poles dragging along on the ground.
Snow falls multiple times each winter in the Panhandle and mountainous areas of West Texas, once or twice a year in North Texas, and once every few years in Central and East Texas.
Dallas hosts the State Fair of Texas each year at Fair Park.
It is one of the 32 states that practice capital punishment, and since the US Supreme Court allowed capital punishment to resume in 1976, 40% of all US executions have taken place in Texas.
A fierce rivalry, the Lone Star Showdown, also exists between the state's two largest universities, Texas A&M University and the University of Texas at Austin.
The city's music revolves around the nightclubs on 6th Street; events like the film, music, and multimedia festival South by Southwest; the longest-running concert music program on American television, ''Austin City Limits''; and the Austin City Limits Music Festival held in Zilker Park.
The final battle of the Civil War was fought near Brownsville, Texas at Palmito Ranch with a Confederate victory.
In return, for US$18,250,000, Mexico gave the U.S. undisputed control of Texas, ceded the Mexican Cession in 1848, most of which today is called the American Southwest, and Texas's borders were established at the Rio Grande.
Trinity University, a private, primarily undergraduate liberal arts university in San Antonio, has ranked first among universities granting primarily bachelor's and select master's degrees in the Western United States for 20 consecutive years by ''U.S.
The Houston Ship Channel spans  wide by  deep by  long.
One Texan industry that thrived after the Civil War was cattle.
While Texas had won its independence, political battles raged between two factions of the new Republic.
On 31 May 2016, several cities experienced record setting flooding
The University Interscholastic League (UIL) organizes most primary and secondary school competitions.
The executive branch positions consist of the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Comptroller of Public Accounts, Land Commissioner, Attorney General, Agriculture Commissioner, the three-member Texas Railroad Commission, the State Board of Education, and the Secretary of State.
** Texas A&M University
Other devastating Texas hurricanes include the 1915 Galveston hurricane, Hurricane Audrey in 1957 which killed over 600 people, Hurricane Carla in 1961, Hurricane Beulah in 1967, Hurricane Alicia in 1983, Hurricane Rita in 2005, and Hurricane Ike in 2008.
As of 2008, Texas had the 4th highest incarceration rate in the US.
Texas joined the newly created Confederate States of America on March 4, 1861 ratifying the permanent C.S.
Mexico, the state's largest trading partner, imports a third of the state's exports because of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
The Carnegie Foundation classifies three of Texas's universities as Tier&nbsp;One research institutions: The University of Texas at Austin, the Texas&nbsp;A&M University, and the University of Houston.
During the spring Texas wildflowers such as the state flower, the bluebonnet, line highways throughout Texas.
As of 2014, Texas had a gross state product (GSP) of $1.648 trillion, the second highest in the U.S. Its GSP is greater than the GDPs of Australia and South Korea, which are the world's 12th- and 13th-largest economies, respectively.
The Mississippian and Pennsylvanian sediments in the north; Permian sediments in the west; and Cretaceous sediments in the east, along the Gulf coast and out on the Texas continental shelf contain oil.
On December 29, 1845, Congress admitted Texas to the U.S. as a constituent state of the Union.
The large size of Texas and its location at the intersection of multiple climate zones gives the state highly variable weather.
Nine years later, shipwrecked Spanish explorer Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca and his cohort became the first Europeans in what is now Texas.
Creole language is spoken in East Texas.
In the 1890s, 100,000 blacks voted in the state; by 1906, only 5,000 could vote.
The regulatory authority, the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) maintains the state's immense highway system, regulates aviation, and public transportation systems.
This region is dominated by prairie and steppe.
African Americans of both Hispanic and non-Hispanic origin number at roughly 2.7 million individuals.
Austin, ''The&nbsp;Live&nbsp;Music&nbsp;Capital&nbsp;of&nbsp;the&nbsp;World'', boasts "more live music venues per capita than such music hotbeds as Nashville, Memphis, Los Angeles, Las Vegas or New York City."
The Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex is home to three major evangelical seminaries and a host of Bible schools.
The Southwestern Exposition and Livestock Show in Fort Worth is the oldest continuously running rodeo incorporating many of the state's most historic traditions into its annual events.
While Texas has few natural lakes, Texans have built over 100 artificial reservoirs.
According to the Tax Foundation, Texans' state and local tax burdens rank among the lowest in the nation, 7th lowest nationally; state and local taxes cost $3,580 per capita, or 8.4 percent of resident incomes.
Other groups with large numbers in Texas include Hondurans, Guatemalans, Nicaraguans and Cubans, among others.
Thirty-six (36) separate and distinct public universities exist in Texas, of which 32 belong to one of the six state university systems.
Many immigrants openly flouted Mexican law, especially the prohibition against slavery.
Texans also enjoy the rodeo.
Archaeologists have found that three major indigenous cultures lived in this territory, and reached their developmental peak before the first European contact.
Texas has four metropolitan areas with populations greater than a million: , , , and .
The Deep Ellum district within Dallas became popular during the 1920s and 1930s as the prime jazz and blues hotspot in the Southern United States.
El Paso and Amarillo are exceptions with July and December respectively being the warmest and coldest months respectively, but with August and January only being narrowly different.
In 2015, the population of illegal immigrants living in Texas was around 0.8 million.
File:Cowboys Stadium full view.jpg|Cowboys Stadium, home of the Dallas Cowboys
Violence marked the early months of Reconstruction.
Cattle is the state's most valuable agricultural product, and the state leads nationally in production of sheep and goat products.
Oligocene volcanic rocks are found in far west Texas in the Big Bend area.
Municipal, school district, and special district elections are nonpartisan, though the party affiliation of a candidate may be well-known.
Except for some municipal benches, partisan elections select judges at all levels of the judiciary; the governor fills vacancies by appointment.
Texas had only one city, Austin, ranked 21st, in the top 25 among the "fittest cities" in America.
Mexico controlled the territory until 1836 when Texas won its independence, becoming an independent Republic.
The state is ranked forty-second in the percentage of residents who engage in regular exercise.
To fund recent growth in the state highways, Texas has 17 toll roads (see list) with several additional tollways proposed.
The sun is what they worship most."
When France began settling Louisiana, mostly in the southern part of the state, in 1716 Spanish authorities responded by founding a new series of missions in East Texas.
Outside of the "Big Four" leagues, Texas also has one WNBA team (the San Antonio Stars) and two Major League Soccer teams (the Houston Dynamo and FC Dallas).
File:Austin Metrorail.jpg|Capital MetroRail in Austin
Oil production eventually averaged three million barrels per day at its peak in 1972.
The "Lone Star" can be found on the Texan state flag and on the Texan state seal.
Adding to Texas's traditional culture, established in the 18th and 19th centuries, immigration has made Texas a melting pot of cultures from around the world.
As of April 2013, the state's unemployment rate is 6.4 percent.
Texas voters lean toward fiscal conservatism, while enjoying the benefits of huge federal investment in the state in military and other facilities achieved by the power of the Solid South in the 20th century.
During this time of political turmoil, Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna personally led an army to end the revolt.
The Great Depression and the Dust Bowl dealt a double blow to the state's economy, which had significantly improved since the Civil War.
A State Convention considering secession opened in Austin on January 28, 1861.
* the Pueblo from the upper Rio Grande region, centered west of Texas;
In 1940, Texas was 74 percent Anglo, 14.4 percent black, and 11.5 percent Hispanic.
The world's first rodeo was hosted in Pecos, Texas.
Dallas in the North Central region averages a more moderate  per year.
Instead, the state collects revenue from property taxes (though these are collected at the county, city, and school district level; Texas has a state constitutional prohibition against a state property tax) and sales taxes.
The first railroad to operate in Texas was the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos and Colorado Railway, opening in August 1853.
The Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board (THECB) ranks the state's public universities into three distinct tiers:
The state's refineries can process  of oil a day.
Texas has 254 counties, which is more than any other state by 95 (Georgia).
Texas plays host to several species of wasps.
These Precambrian igneous and metamorphic rocks underlie most of the state, and are exposed in three places: Llano uplift, Van Horn, and the Franklin Mountains, near El Paso.
The late Paleozoic mountains collapsed as rifting in the Jurassic period began to open the Gulf of Mexico.
A blanket of Miocene sediments known as the Ogallala formation in the western high plains region is an important aquifer.
