It had become dominant at Constantinople from the 5th century on and was used throughout the Byzantine church.
The stemmatic method assumes that each witness is derived from one, and only one, predecessor.
While Christianity has been relatively receptive to textual criticism, application of it to the Jewish (Masoretic) Torah and the Qur'an is, to the devout, taboo.
Some critics believe that a clear-text edition gives the edited text too great a prominence, relegating textual variants to appendices that are difficult to use, and suggesting a greater sense of certainty about the established text than it deserves.
McKerrow had articulated textual criticism's goal in terms of "our ideal of an author's fair copy of his work in its final state".
The step of ''examination'', or ''examinatio'' is applied to find corruptions.
In the European Union critical and scientific editions may be protected also by the relevant neighboring right that protects critical and scientific publications of public domain works as made possible by art.
The change of name indicated the shift to a broader agenda than just American authors.
Given a manuscript copy, several or many copies, but not the original document, the textual critic might seek to reconstruct the original text (the archetype or autograph) as closely as possible.
Maas comments further that "A dictation revised by the author must be regarded as equivalent to an autograph manuscript".
5th–16th centuries CE
Although Melville pronounced the changes an improvement, Tanselle rejected them in his edition, concluding that "there is no evidence, internal or external, to suggest that they are the kinds of changes Melville would have made without pressure from someone else."
He also collated the various editions of the Book of Mormon down to the present to see what sorts of changes have been made through time.
Erasmus, the editor, selected a manuscript from the local Dominican monastery in Basle and corrected its obvious errors by consulting other local manuscripts.
The principles of textual criticism, although originally developed and refined for works of antiquity, the Bible, and Shakespeare,
If two competing readings occur equally often, then the editor uses judgment to select the correct reading.
Before mechanical printing, literature was copied by hand, and many variations were introduced by copyists.
The method also assumes that scribes only make new errors&nbsp;– they do not attempt to correct the errors of their predecessors.
Since each scribe or printer commits different errors, reconstruction of the lost original is often aided by a selection of readings taken from many sources.
In such a case, while there can be no logical reason for giving preference to the copy-text, in practice, if there is no reason for altering its reading, the obvious thing seems to be to let it stand."
Applying this principle leads to taking the more difficult (unharmonized) reading as being more likely to be the original.
3rd–9th centuries CE
For instance, there will typically be fewer early copies, and a larger number of later copies.
The critical apparatus presents the author's work in three parts: first, a list or description of the evidence that the editor used (names of manuscripts, or abbreviations called sigla); second, the editor's analysis of that evidence (sometimes a simple likelihood rating),; and third, a record of rejected variants of the text (often in order of preference).
The age of printing made the scribal profession effectively redundant.
Professor Douglas Stuart states: "It is fair to say that the verses, chapters, and books of the Bible would read largely the same, and would leave the same impression with the reader, even if one adopted virtually every possible ''alternative'' reading to those now serving as the basis for current English translations."
This assumption has often come under attack.
In his writings, Tanselle refers to "unconstrained authorial intention" or "an author's uninfluenced intentions."
According to Davis, the funds coordinated by the CEAA over the same period were more than $6&nbsp;million, counting funding from universities, university presses, and other bodies.
In biology, the technique is used to determine the evolutionary relationships between different species.
By 1939, in his ''Prolegomena for the Oxford Shakespeare'', McKerrow had changed his mind about this approach, as he feared that a later edition&nbsp;– even if it contained authorial corrections&nbsp;– would "deviate more widely than the earliest print from the author's original manuscript."
The Westcott and Hort text, which was the basis for the Revised Version of the English bible, also used the copy-text method, using the Codex Vaticanus as the base manuscript.
But, fearing the arbitrary exercise of editorial judgment, McKerrow stated that, having concluded that a later edition had substantive revisions attributable to the author, "we must accept all the alterations of that edition, saving any which seem obvious blunders or misprints."
Nonetheless, for over 250 years, New Testament scholars have argued that no textual variant affects any doctrine.
Homoioteleuton occurs when two words/phrases/lines end with the same sequence of letters.
The method takes its name from the word ''stemma''.
At that time BYU Professor Ellis Rasmussen and his associates were asked by the LDS Church to begin preparation for a new edition of the Holy Scriptures.
The first published, printed edition of the Greek New Testament was produced by this method.
Another scribal tendency is called homoioteleuton, meaning "same endings".
'''Stemmatics''', '''stemmology''' or '''stemmatology''' is a rigorous approach to textual criticism.
The oldest known copy of the Qur'an so far belongs to this collection: it dates to the end of the 7th–8th centuries.
The lack of autograph manuscripts applies to many cultures other than Greek and Roman.
Believers in sacred texts and scriptures sometimes are reluctant to accept any form of challenge to what they believe to be divine revelation.
There are far fewer witnesses to classical texts than to the Bible, so scholars can use stemmatics and, in some cases, copy text editing.
However, unlike the New Testament where the earliest witnesses are within 200&nbsp;years of the original, the earliest existing manuscripts of most classical texts were written about a millennium after their composition.
In some cases, McKerrow would choose a later witness, noting that "if an editor has reason to suppose that a certain text embodies later corrections than any other, and at the same time has no ground for disbelieving that these corrections, or some of them at least, are the work of the author, he has no choice but to make that text the basis of his reprint."
Although a reading supported by the majority of witnesses is frequently preferred, this does not follow automatically.
The CEAA's ''Statement of Editorial Principles and Procedures'', first published in 1967, adopted the Greg–Bowers rationale in full.
Thus, even the high aims of eclectic (or, as it is sometimes known, 'critical') editing can be called into question, because of the unsure phenomenological status of the documentary and historical."
All texts are subject to investigation and systematic criticism where the original verified first document is not available.
It underlies most modern translations of the New Testament.
Two common considerations have the Latin names ''lectio brevior'' (shorter reading) and ''lectio difficilior'' (more difficult reading).
There are many other more sophisticated considerations.
NIV, NAB, NABRE, Douay, JB and NJB (albeit, with some reliance on the Byzantine text-type), TNIV, NASB, RSV, ESV, EBR, NWT, LB, ASV, NC, GNB
This contains the text that the author has determined most closely approximates the original, and is accompanied by an ''apparatus criticus'' or critical apparatus.
Not all EU member States have transposed art.
It is not a copy of any particular manuscript, and may deviate from the majority of existing manuscripts.
As far as the Hebrew Bible referenced by Old Testament is concerned, almost all of the textual variants are fairly insignificant and hardly affect any doctrine.
For works where an author's manuscript survived&nbsp;– a case Greg had not considered&nbsp;– Bowers concluded that the manuscript should generally serve as copy-text.
The steps of ''examinatio'' and ''emendatio'' resemble copy-text editing.
The most common division today is as follows:
that process which it sought to determine the original text of a document or a collection of documents, and to exhibit, freed from all the errors, corruptions, and variations which may have been accumulated in the course of its transcription by successive copying."
Many ancient works, such as the Bible and the Greek tragedies, survive in hundreds of copies, and the relationship of each copy to the original may be unclear.
Eclectic readings also normally give an impression of the number of witnesses to each available reading.
For him—and, I would contend, for the idealist, or 'eclectic' editing with which he and Greg-Bowers are often identified, whereby an idealist 'text that never was' is constructed out of the corrupt states of extant documents—ontology is only immanent, never assuredly present in historical, particularized text, for it can be achieved only at the unattainable level of nous rather than phenomenon.
In his 1796 edition, he established fifteen critical rules.
Consequently, New Testament textual critics have adopted eclecticism after sorting the witnesses into three major groups, called text-types.
were concerned with preserving the works of antiquity, and this continued through the medieval period into early modern times until the invention of the printing press.
Although some earlier unpublished studies had been prepared, not until the early 1970s was true textual criticism applied to the Book of Mormon.
He also closely examined the Printer’s Manuscript (owned by the Community of Christ—RLDS Church in Independence, Missouri) for differences in types of ink or pencil, in order to determine when and by whom they were made.
Textual criticism has been practiced for over two thousand years.
The bibliographer Ronald B. McKerrow introduced the term ''copy-text'' in his 1904 edition of the works of Thomas Nashe, defining it as "the text used in each particular case as the basis of mine."
It underlies the Textus Receptus used for most Reformation-era translations of the New Testament.
Close-call decisions are usually resolved in favor of the copy-text.
That reading is then the most likely candidate to have been original.
As Shillingsburg notes, "English scholarly editions have tended to use notes at the foot of the text page, indicating, tacitly, a greater modesty about the "established" text and drawing attention more forcibly to at least some of the alternative forms of the text".
Cladistics is a technique borrowed from biology, where it was originally named ''phylogenetic systematics'' by Willi Hennig.
Some manuscripts show evidence that particular care was taken in their composition, for example, by including alternative readings in their margins, demonstrating that more than one prior copy (exemplar) was consulted in producing the current one.
For example, where there are more than two witnesses at the same level of the tree, normally the critic will select the dominant reading.
It contains the most harmonistic readings, paraphrasing and significant additions, most of which are believed to be secondary readings.
This makes it more like an automated approach to stemmatics.
Most of this tradition appear to come from around Alexandria, Egypt and from the Alexandrian Church.
The Alexandrian text-type(also called the "Neutral Text" tradition; less frequently, the "Minority Text")
Readings supported by a ''majority'' of witnesses are also usually preferred, since these are less likely to reflect accidents or individual biases.
"Brevior lectio, nisi testium vetustorum et gravium auctoritate penitus destituatur, praeferenda est verbosiori.
In fact, the other techniques can be seen as special cases of stemmatics in which a rigorous family history of the text cannot be determined but only approximated.
Having completed the stemma, the critic proceeds to the next step, called ''selection'' or ''selectio'', where the text of the archetype is determined by examining variants from the closest hyparchetypes to the archetype and selecting the best ones.
Librarii enim multo proniores ad addendum fuerunt, quam ad omittendum."
In Islamic tradition, the Qur'an was memorised and written down by Muhammad's companions and copied as needed.
The resulting text, except for the accidentals, is constructed without relying predominantly on any one witness.
In contrast to this approach, some textual critics prefer to identify the single best surviving text, and not to combine readings from multiple sources.
Where the editor concludes that the text is corrupt, it is corrected by a process called "emendation", or ''emendatio'' (also sometimes called ''divinatio'').
The method works from the principle that "community of error implies community of origin."
Bowers and Tanselle argue for rejecting textual variants that an author inserted at the suggestion of others.
Printed editions, while less susceptible to the proliferation of variations likely to arise during manual transmission, are nonetheless not immune to introducing variations from an author's autograph.
Instead, the critic forms opinions about individual witnesses, relying on both external and internal evidence.
The Hodges–Farstad edition of the Greek New Testament attempts to use stemmatics for some portions.
While this assumption is applicable to the evolution of living creatures, it is not always true of manuscript traditions, since a scribe can work from two different manuscripts at once, producing a new copy with characteristics of both.
Bowers's approach was to preserve the stylistic and literary changes of 1896, but to revert to the 1893 readings where he believed that Crane was fulfilling the publisher's intention rather than his own.
To secure commercial publication in 1896, Crane agreed to remove profanity, but he also made stylistic revisions.
However, it may be no more than fortuitous that more witnesses have survived that present a particular reading.
Larson proceeded to publish a useful set of well-argued articles on the phenomena which he had discovered.
Bowers was also influential in defining the form of critical apparatus that should accompany a scholarly edition.
W. W. Greg noted, "That if a scribe makes a mistake he will inevitably produce nonsense is the tacit and wholly unwarranted assumption."
His rationale was adopted and significantly expanded by Fredson Bowers (1905–1991).
Sometimes these considerations can be in conflict.
About 12,000 fragments belonged to 926 copies of the Qur'an, the other 2,000 were loose fragments.
One aspect of that effort entailed digitizing the text and preparing appropriate footnotes, another aspect required establishing the most dependable text.
In his commentary, he established the rule ''Proclivi scriptioni praestat ardua'', ("the harder reading is to be preferred").
The Center also ceased its role in the allocation of funds.
The second, ''lectio difficilior potior'' (the harder reading is stronger), recognizes the tendency for harmonization—resolving apparent inconsistencies in the text.
Although biblical books that are letters, like Greek plays, presumably had one original, the question of whether some biblical books, like the Gospels, ever had just one original has been discussed.
In McKerrow's method as originally introduced, the copy-text was not necessarily the earliest text.
For example, readings that depart from the known practice of a scribe or a given period may be deemed more reliable, since a scribe is unlikely on his own initiative to have departed from the usual practice.
Instead of a scribe miscopying his source, a compositor or a printing shop may read or typeset a work in a way that differs from the autograph.
Editors who follow Greg's rationale produce ''eclectic'' editions, in that the authority for the "accidentals" is derived from one particular source (usually the earliest one) that the editor considers to be authoritative, but the authority for the "substantives" is determined in each individual case according to the editor's judgment.
After considering all relevant factors, the textual critic seeks the reading that best explains how the other readings would arise.
Another was ''Lectio brevior praeferenda'', "the shorter reading is better", based on the idea that scribes were more likely to add than to delete.
In a purely eclectic approach, no single witness is theoretically favored.
5 into national law.
He suspected that editors tended to favor trees with two branches, as this would maximize the opportunities for editorial judgment (as there would be no third branch to "break the tie" whenever the witnesses disagreed).
They also argued that "Readings are approved or rejected by reason of the quality, and not the number, of their supporting witnesses", and that "The reading is to be preferred that most fitly explains the existence of the others.
The Center's latest guidelines (2003) no longer prescribe a particular editorial procedure.
In 1988, with that preliminary phase of the project completed, Professor Skousen took over as editor and head of the FARMS Critical Text of the Book of Mormon Project and proceeded to gather still scattered fragments of the Original Manuscript of the Book of Mormon and to have advanced photographic techniques applied to obtain fine readings from otherwise unreadable pages and fragments.
All the notes accounting for the analysis and why and how such changes have been made represent a different work autonomously copyrightable if the other requirements are satisfied.
Critics will often prefer the readings supported by the ''oldest'' witnesses.
Lastly, the stemmatic method assumes that every extant witness is derived, however remotely, from a single source.
But where a revision is "vertical" (''i.e.
The textual critic's task, therefore, is to sort through the variants, eliminating those most likely to be ''un''-original, hence establishing a "critical text", or critical edition, that is intended to best approximate the original.
In the stemmatic method, a manuscript that is derived from more than one source is said to be ''contaminated''.
In its application in textual criticism, the text of a number of different manuscripts is entered into a computer, which records all the differences between them.
The practice is based on the principle that the more independent transmission histories are, the less likely they will be to reproduce the same errors.
The role of the textual critic is necessary when these basic criteria are in conflict.
Legitimate textual criticism may be resisted by both believers and skeptics.
Many of these rules, although originally developed for biblical textual criticism, have wide applicability to any text susceptible to errors of transmission.
Greg's rationale as practiced by Bowers and Tanselle has come to be known as the "Greg–Bowers" or the "Greg–Bowers–Tanselle" method.
Other types of evidence must be used for that purpose.
The ultimate objective of the textual critic's work is the production of a "'''critical edition'''" containing a scholarly curated text.
Scientific and critical editions can be protected by copyright as works of authorship if enough creativity/originality is provided.
Best-text editing (a complete rejection of eclecticism) became one extreme.
The scribe, having finished copying the first, skips to the second, omitting all intervening words.
The critic Joseph Bédier (1864–1938) launched a particularly withering attack on stemmatics in 1928.
Karl Lachmann (1793–1851) greatly contributed to making this method famous, even though he did not invent it.
have been applied to many works, extending backwards from the present to the earliest known written documents, in Mesopotamia and Egypt—a period of about five millennia.
All things being equal, textual scholars expect that a larger time gap between an original and a manuscript means more changes in the text.
Yale University has in the meantime published an edition of the Book of Mormon which incorporates all aspects of Skousen’s research.
The difference between cladistics and more traditional forms of statistical analysis is that, rather than simply arranging the manuscripts into rough groupings according to their overall similarity, cladistics assumes that they are part of a branching family tree and uses that assumption to derive relationships between them.
This family constitutes a group of early and well-regarded texts, including Codex Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus.
The process of ''selectio'' resembles eclectic textual criticism, but applied to a restricted set of hypothetical hyparchetypes.
He concluded that this outcome was unlikely to have occurred by chance, and that therefore, the method was tending to produce bipartite stemmas regardless of the actual history of the witnesses.
Brooke Foss Westcott (1825–1901) and Fenton J.
Johann Jakob Griesbach (1745–1812) published several editions of the New Testament.
Various considerations can be used to decide which reading is the most likely to be original.
Emendations not supported by any known source are sometimes called ''conjectural'' emendations.
Franz Anton Knittel defended the traditional point of view in theology and was against the modern textual criticism.
The first is the general observation that scribes tended to add words, for clarification or out of habit, more often than they removed them.
The stemmatic method's final step is ''emendatio'', also sometimes referred to as "conjectural emendation."
The third volume of that first edition was published in 1987, but was already being superseded by a second, revised edition of the entire work, greatly aided through the advice and assistance of then Yale doctoral candidate Grant Hardy, Dr. Gordon C. Thomasson, Professor John W. Welch (the head of FARMS), Professor Royal Skousen, and others too numerous to mention here.
Recent authors have also proposed that the Qur'an may have been written in Arabic–Syriac.
Tanselle explained the rationale for this approach:
Starting in the 19th century, scholars sought more rigorous methods to guide editorial judgment.
When a text has been improved by the scribe, it is said to be ''sophisticated'', but "sophistication" impairs the method by obscuring a document's relationship to other witnesses, and making it more difficult to place the manuscript correctly in the stemma.
A. Hort (1828–1892) published an edition of the New Testament in Greek in 1881.
An edited text that draws from multiple sources is said to be ''eclectic''.
Textual criticism of the Talmud has a long pre-history but has become a separate discipline from Talmudic study only recently.
The result of the process is a text with readings drawn from many witnesses.
In establishing the critical text, the textual critic considers both "external" evidence (the age, provenance, and affiliation of each witness) and "internal" or "physical" considerations (what the author and scribes, or printers, were likely to have done).
The New Testament has been preserved in more than 5,800 Greek manuscripts, 10,000 Latin manuscripts and 9,300 manuscripts in various other ancient languages including Syriac, Slavic, Ethiopic and Armenian.
"If we succeed in establishing the text of the archetype, the ''constitutio'' (reconstruction of the original) is considerably advanced.
Between 1966 and 1975, the Center allocated more than $1.5&nbsp;million in funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities to various scholarly editing projects, which were required to follow the guidelines (including the structure of editorial apparatus) as Bowers had defined them.
At the same time, the critical text should document variant readings, so the relation of extant witnesses to the reconstructed original is apparent to a reader of the critical edition.
Eclecticism allows inferences to be drawn regarding the original text, based on the evidence of contrasts between witnesses.
The process of constructing the stemma is called ''recension'', or the Latin ''recensio''.
Although Greg argued that an editor should be free to use his judgment to choose between competing substantive readings, he suggested that an editor should defer to the copy-text when "the claims of two readings&nbsp;...&nbsp;appear to be exactly balanced.&nbsp;...
Interest in applying textual criticism to the Qur'an has also developed after the discovery of the Sana'a manuscripts in 1972, which possibly date back to the 7–8th centuries.
W. W. Greg did not live long enough to apply his rationale of copy-text to any actual editions of works.
Since the canons of criticism are highly susceptible to interpretation, and at times even contradict each other, they may be employed to justify a result that fits the textual critic's aesthetic or theological agenda.
They proposed nine critical rules, including a version of Bengel's rule, "The reading is less likely to be original that shows a disposition to smooth away difficulties."
Starting in the 1970s, G. Thomas Tanselle vigorously took up the method's defense and added significant contributions of his own.
"The editorial standards that form the criteria for the award of the CSE "Approved Edition" emblem can be stated here in only the most general terms, since the range of editorial work that comes within the committee's purview makes it impossible to set forth a detailed, step-by-step editorial procedure."
The mere addition of a word, or substitution of a term with another one believed to be more correct, usually does not achieve such level of originality/creativity.
He suggests that where a revision is "horizontal" (''i.e.
Following Greg, the editor would then replace any of the manuscript readings with substantives from printed editions that could be reliably attributed to the author: "Obviously, an editor cannot simply reprint the manuscript, and he must substitute for its readings any words that he believes Hawthorne changed in proof."
The stemmatic method requires the textual critic to group manuscripts by commonality of error.
The Ancient Greek word στέμματα and its loanword in classical Latin ''stemmata'' may refer to "family trees".
The sheer number of witnesses presents unique difficulties, chiefly in that it makes stemmatics in many cases impossible, because many writers used two or more different manuscripts as sources.
The phrase "lower criticism" is used to describe the contrast between textual criticism and "higher criticism", which is the endeavor to establish the authorship, date, and place of composition of the original text.
He therefore concluded that the correct procedure would be "produced by using the earliest "good" print as copy-text and inserting into it, from the first edition which contains them, such corrections as appear to us to be derived from the author."
One of the earliest was Johann Albrecht Bengel (1687–1752), who in 1734 produced an edition of the Greek New Testament.
Much of the research is in Hebrew and German language periodicals.
The Western text-type
Tanselle argues that:
The principle is sound without regard for the literary period."
The "exactly balanced" variants are said to be ''indifferent''.
Since errors tend to accumulate, older manuscripts should have fewer errors.
In the 1970s, 14,000 fragments of Qur'an were discovered in an old mosque in Sanaa, the Sana'a manuscripts.
Various scholars have developed guidelines, or ''canons'' of textual criticism, to guide the exercise of the critic's judgment in determining the best readings of a text.
It is not always apparent which single variant represents the author's original work.
Citing the example of Nathaniel Hawthorne, he noted:
It is required, therefore, that the critic can distinguish erroneous readings from correct ones.
