Immediately following what many media described as a "judicial coup", a senior member of the Armed Forces met with factions of the governing coalition to get their members to join the opposition and the Democrat Party was able to form a government, a first for the party since 2001.
The 1997 Constitution was the first constitution to be drafted by popularly elected Constitutional Drafting Assembly, and was popularly called the "people's constitution".
Western influence nevertheless led to many reforms in the 19th century and major concessions, most notably the loss of a large territory on the east side of the Mekong to the French and the step-by-step absorption by Britain of the Shan and Karen people areas and Malay Peninsula.
The head of the Thai army, Gen. Theerachai Nakvanich, has announced the setting up of re-education camps for critics of the regime, "aimed at people who are still unable to understand the workings of the government and the National Council for Peace and Order".
The summit was eventually held in Thailand in October 2009.
The night markets in the Silom area and on Khaosan Road are mainly tourist-oriented, selling items such as T-shirts, handicrafts, counterfeit watches and sunglasses.
The Andaman Sea is a precious natural resource as it hosts the most popular and luxurious resorts in Asia.
Although sometimes considered a Thai dialect, it is a Lao dialect, and the region in where it is traditionally spoken was historically part of the Lao kingdom of Lan Xang.
The 2005 election had the highest voter turnout in Thai history, and Thai Rak Thai Party won an absolute majority.
Thailand was long the world's largest exporter of rice, and Thais domestically consume over 100&nbsp;kg of milled rice per person per year.
The first session must be opened by the king in person by reading a Speech from the Throne; this ceremony is held in the Ananta Samakhom Throne Hall.
The players must volley a ball over a net and force it to hit the ground on the opponent's side.
It became a newly industrialised country and a major exporter in the 1990s.
Two Thai soldiers died in Iraq in an insurgent attack.
Hmong is a member of the Hmong–Mien languages, which is now regarded as a language family of its own.
This is down from 70% in 1980.
On 21 August 2014 she was replaced by army chief General Prayut Chan-o-cha.
In recent years, Thailand has taken an increasingly active role on the international stage.
In 2014, pick-ups accounted for 42% of all new vehicle sales in Thailand.
Its capital and most populous city is Bangkok.
One estimate published in 2003 placed the trade at US$4.3 billion per year or about 3% of the Thai economy.
More controversially, he established close, friendly ties with the Burmese dictatorship.
Thai national festivals range from Thai New Year Songkran to Loy Krathong.
Many tourists follow courses during their stay in Thailand.
The Gulf of Thailand covers  and is fed by the Chao Phraya, Mae Klong, Bang Pakong, and Tapi Rivers.
In 2003, Thailand served as APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) host.
Members of the House of Representatives served four-year terms, while senators served six-year terms.
Education is compulsory up to and including age 14, with the government providing free education through to age 17.
In addition to rainfall caused by the southwest monsoon, the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)  and tropical cyclones also contribute to producing heavy rainfall during the rainy season.
It is a major non-NATO ally and Priority Watch List Special 301 Report of the United States.
The organisation also accused the government of violating the election law by abusing state power in presenting new projects in a bid to seek votes.
This interim constitution was later surpassed by the permanent constitution on 24 August 2007.
Two Cambodian and three Thai soldiers were killed.
It is also a popular sport in other countries in Southeast Asia.
According to George Cœdès, "The Thai first enter history of Farther India in the eleventh century with the mention of ''Syam'' slaves or prisoners of war in" Champa epigraphy, and "in the twelfth century, the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat" where "a group of warriors" are described as ''Syam''.
The Chao Phraya and the Mekong River are the indispensable water courses of rural Thailand.
The ban on political activities was lifted in July 2007, following the 30 May dissolution of the Thai Rak Thai party.
The Royal Thai Armed Forces ( constitute the military of the Kingdom of Thailand.
Southern Thailand is characterized by mild weather year round with less diurnal and seasonal variations in temperatures due to maritime influences.
About a year later, a set of new "Red Shirts" protests resulted in 87 deaths (mostly civilian and some military) and 1,378 injured.
Throughout this time, the form of government has ranged from military dictatorship to electoral democracy, but all governments have acknowledged a hereditary monarch as the head of state.
Although there were 100,000 domesticated elephants in Thailand in 1850, the population of elephants has dropped to an estimated 2,000.
However, a century later, the power of Sukhothai was overshadowed by the new Kingdom of Ayutthaya, established in the mid-14th-century in the lower Chao Phraya River or Menam area.
Regional co-operation is progressing in economic, trade, banking, political, and cultural matters.
Indian influence on Thai culture was partly the result of direct contact with Indian settlers, but mainly it was brought about indirectly via the Indianized kingdoms of Dvaravati, Srivijaya, and Cambodia.
The signature of King Mongkut (r. 1851 – 1868) reads ''SPPM'' (Somdet Phra Poramenthra Maha) ''Mongkut King of the Siamese'', giving the name "Siam" official status until 24 June 1939 when it was changed to Thailand.
Thai Buddhism has evolved over time to include many regional beliefs originating from Hinduism, animism, as well as ancestor worship.
He may also appoint the crown prince or a representative to carry out this duty.
Several other dialects exist, and coincide with the regional designations.
The first session of the National Assembly must take place within thirty days after the general election of the House of Representatives.
Thaksin sought to position Thailand as a regional leader, initiating various development projects in poorer neighbouring countries like Laos.
Due both to the weakening of the US dollar and an increasingly strong Thai currency, by March 2008 the dollar was hovering around the 33 baht mark.
Those who completed two years of reserve training will only have to do six months of full-time training, while those who complete three years or more of reserve training will be exempted entirely.
The stadium holds 25,000.
File:Siamese envoys at Versailles.jpg|Kosa Pan present King Narai's letter to Louis XIV at Versailles, 1 September 1686.
The head of the Thai Armed Forces (จอมทัพไทย, ''Chom Thap Thai'') is the king, although this position is only nominal.
In response to the intensive protests, Yingluck dissolved parliament on 9 December 2013 and proposed a new election for 2 February 2014, a date that was later approved by the election commission.
The court system (ศาล, san) included a constitutional court with jurisdiction over the constitutionality of parliamentary acts, royal decrees, and political matters.
Its maritime boundaries include Vietnam in the Gulf of Thailand to the southeast, and Indonesia and India on the Andaman Sea to the southwest.
Other sports in Thailand are slowly growing as the country develops its sporting infrastructure.
They later changed their minds.
Another widely enjoyed pastime, and once a competitive sport, is kite flying.
These include: The appointment of a regent, any alteration to the 1924 Palace Law of Succession, the opening of the first session, the announcement of policies by the Cabinet of Thailand, the approval of the declaration of war, the hearing of explanations and approval of a treaty and the amendment of the Constitution.
It attracts many locals as well as foreigners.
Summer or the pre–monsoon season runs from mid–February until mid–May and is characterized by warmer weather.
The Thai National Anthem (), written by Luang Saranupraphan during the extremely patriotic 1930s, refers to the Thai nation as: ''prathet Thai'' (Thai: ประเทศไทย).
According to research by Chulalongkorn University on the Thai illegal economy, prostitution in Thailand in the period between 1993 and 1995, made up around 2.7% of the GDP.
The new draft constitution would grant the constitutional court final authority in times of crisis, a power previously held by the King.
The PollWatch Foundation, Thailand's most prominent election watchdog, declared that vote buying in this election, specifically in the north and the northeast, was more serious than in the 2001 election.
The institute, financed by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), houses the only large scale synchrotron in Southeast Asia.
In accordance with the constitution the Senate is elected to a six-year term, while the House is elected to a four-year term.
Shortly thereafter, Japan was granted free passage, and on 21 December 1941, Thailand and Japan signed a military alliance with a secret protocol, wherein Tokyo agreed to help Thailand regain territories lost to the British and French.
In the southern parts of Thailand, abundant rainfall occurs in both the northeast and southwest monsoon seasons with a peak in September for the western coast and a peak in November–January on the eastern coast.
Following the decline and fall of the Khmer empire in the 13th–15th century, the Buddhist Tai kingdoms of Sukhothai, Lanna, and Lan Xang (now Laos) were on the rise.
To accommodate foreign visitors, the Thai government established a separate tourism police with offices in the major tourist areas and its own central emergency telephone number.
Thailand had a 2013 GDP of US$673 billion (on a purchasing power parity PPP basis).
In 2014 the literacy rate was 93.5%.
Thais have a strong sense of hospitality and generosity, but also a strong sense of social hierarchy.
The country remains an active member of ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Bangkok is at provincial level and thus often counted as a province.
The Burmese–Siamese War (1765–1767) left Ayutthaya burned and sacked by King Hsinbyushin Konbaung.
Increasing numbers of migrants from neighbouring Myanmar, Laos, and Cambodia, as well as from Nepal and India, have pushed the total number of non-national residents to around 3.5 million , up from an estimated 2 million in 2008, and about 1.3 million in the year 2000.
Basketball is a growing sport in Thailand, especially on the professional sports club level.
Martial law was declared formally ended on 1 April 2015.
The Thailand national basketball team had its most successful year at the 1966 Asian Games where it won the silver medal.
About 55% of the arable land area is used for rice production.
Martial law was partially revoked in January 2007.
Royal Thai Armed Forces Day is celebrated on 18 January, commemorating the victory of Naresuan of the Ayutthaya Kingdom in battle against the crown prince of the Taungoo Dynasty in 1593.
However, despite efforts to clean up the system, vote buying and electoral violence remained electoral problems in 2005.
Thai Malays represent 3% of the population, with the remainder consisting of Mons, Khmers and various "hill tribes".
As part of its effort to increase international ties, Thailand has reached out to such regional organisations as the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
However, certain areas on the windward sides of mountains such as Ranong province in the west coast of southern Thailand and eastern parts of Trat Province receive more than  of rainfall per year.
In response to the Electoral Commission (EC)'s registration process for party-list candidates—for the scheduled election in February 2014—anti-government protesters marched to the Thai-Japanese sports stadium, the venue of the registration process, on 22 December 2013.
Affected populations include the Asiatic black bear, Malayan sun bear, white-handed lar, pileated gibbon and binturong.
Thailand exports over US$105 billion worth of goods and services annually.
Gas grenades were fired at "yellow-shirt" protesters, that were protesting against the "red-shirts" and in favour of the government, by unknown gunmen killing one pro-government protester, the government stated that the Red Shirts were firing the weapons at civilians.
Varieties of Chinese are also spoken by the large Thai Chinese population, with the Teochew dialect best-represented.
Protests recommenced in late 2013, as a broad alliance of protestors, led by former opposition deputy leader Suthep Thaugsuban, demanded an end to the so-called Thaksin regime.
Thailand is a large producer of natural gas, with reserves of at least 10 trillion cubic feet.
This had been the case since the foundation of the Sukhothai Kingdom in the 12th century as the king was seen as a "Dharmaraja" or "king who rules in accordance with Dharma", (the Buddhist law of righteousness).
Thailand is the second largest consumer of pick-up trucks in the world, after the US.
there were 877 districts (อำเภอ, amphoe) and the 50 districts of Bangkok (เขต, khet).
Most Thai popular magazines use English headlines as a chic glamour factor.
Volleyball is rapidly growing as one of the most popular sport.
Thailand produces roughly one-third of the oil it consumes.
The country's official language is Thai and the primary religion is Theravada Buddhism, which is practised by around 95% of the population.
In the far south, Kelantan-Pattani Malay is the primary language of Malay Muslims.
The National Assembly may host a "joint-sitting" of both Houses under several circumstances.
The two houses of the National Assembly have two different terms.
Thailand has been called the golf capital of Asia as it is a popular destination for golf.
The well-known Lumpini Boxing Stadium will host its final Muay Thai boxing matches on 7 February 2014 after the venue first opened in December 1956.
Prior to the 12th century however, the first Thai or Siamese state is traditionally considered to be the Buddhist Sukhothai Kingdom, which was founded in 1238.
Yingluck insisted that she would continue her duties until the scheduled election in February 2014, urging the protesters to accept her proposal: "Now that the government has dissolved parliament, I ask that you stop protesting and that all sides work towards elections.
Thailand has developed increasingly close ties with other ASEAN members: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Brunei, Laos, Cambodia, Myanmar, and Vietnam, whose foreign and economic ministers hold annual meetings.
Thailand experienced the world's highest economic growth rate from 1985 to 1996 – averaging 12.4% annually.
The word ''Siam'' has been identified with the Sanskrit ''Śyāma'' (श्याम, meaning "dark" or "brown").
Abhisit appointed Peoples Alliance for Democracy leader Kasit Piromya as foreign minister.
Bangkok shopping malls offer a variety of international and local brands.
Similar to other regions in Southeast Asia, Thailand was heavily influenced by the culture and religions of India, starting with the Kingdom of Funan around the 1st century CE to the Khmer Empire.
It is the second largest importer of oil in SE Asia.
The "Pratunam Market" specialises in fabrics and clothing.
A blanket amnesty for people involved in the 2010 protests, altered at the last minute to include all political crimes – including all convictions against Thaksin – triggered a mass show of discontent, with numbers variously estimated between 98,500 (the police) and 400,000 (an aerial photo survey done by the Bangkok Post), taking to the streets.
Its traditions incorporate a great deal of influence from India, China, Cambodia, and the rest of Southeast Asia.
A succession of military dictators followed Pridi's ousting — Phibun again, Sarit Dhanarajata and Thanom Kittikachorn — under whom traditional, authoritarian rule was combined with increasing modernisation and westernisation under the influence of the US.
European traders arrived in the early 16th century, beginning with the envoy of Portuguese duke Afonso de Albuquerque in 1511, followed by the French, Dutch, and English.
Due to its inland nature and latitude, the north, northeast, central and eastern parts of Thailand experience a long period of warm weather.
It is believed that at least 10% of tourist dollars are spent on the sex trade.
Yingluck is the nation's first female prime minister and her role was officially endorsed in a ceremony presided over by King Bhumibol Adulyadej.
The king of Thailand is the official patron of IRRI.
The country attracts a large number of golfers from Japan, Korea, Singapore, South Africa, and Western countries who come to play golf in Thailand every year.
Nonetheless, dry spells commonly occur for 1 to 2 weeks from June to early July.
'''Thailand''' (  or  ; ), officially the '''Kingdom of Thailand''' (), formerly known as '''Siam''' (), is a country at the centre of the Indochinese peninsula in Southeast Asia.
Some of these groups spill over into Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia and Malaysia and have mediated change between their traditional local culture, national Thai, and global cultural influences.
The wai is a sign of respect and reverence for another, similar to the namaste greeting of India and Nepal.
The south and the eastern tip of the east have a tropical monsoon climate.
The PDRC insisted that the prime minister stand down within 24 hours, regardless of her actions, with 160,000 protesters in attendance at Government House on 9 December.
Politically, there are six geographical regions which differ from the others in population, basic resources, natural features, and level of social and economic development.
Active participation in Buddhism is among the highest in the world.
Without meeting much resistance, a military junta overthrew the interim government of Thaksin Shinawatra on 19 September 2006.
Political uncertainty was identified as the primary cause of a decline in investor and consumer confidence.
Thailand is also host to several other minority languages, the largest of which is the Lao dialect of Isan spoken in the northeastern provinces.
Other notable players produced by the country include Ratchayothin Yotharuck, Noppon Saengkham and Dechawat Poomjaeng.
The north of the country is the mountainous area of the Thai highlands, with the highest point being Doi Inthanon in the Thanon Thong Chai Range at  above sea level.
The new constitution was approved by referendum on 19 August, which led to a return to a democratic general election on 23 December 2007.
This can occasionally lead to floods.
Seniority is paramount in Thai culture.
The article focused on the departure of nearly 180,000 Cambodians from Thailand due to fears of an immigration clampdown, but concluded with information on the Thai economy's contraction of 2.1% quarter-on-quarter, from January to the end of March 2014.
By the success of the women team, the men team has been growing as well.
The end of the period was marked by Thanom's resignation, following a massacre of pro-democracy protesters led by Thammasat students.
The eastern shore of the Gulf of Thailand is an industrial centre of Thailand with the kingdom's premier deepwater port in Sattahip and its busiest commercial port, Laem Chabang.
Thailand had an urban population of 45.7% , concentrated mostly in and around the Bangkok Metropolitan Area.
(Buddhist Era) in educational settings, the civil service, government, and on contracts and newspaper datelines.
A person who completed one year out of three will only have to serve full-time for one year.
The Cambodian government claimed its army had killed at least four Thais and captured 10 more, although the Thai government denied that any Thai soldiers were killed or injured.
The exception is the southern parts of Thailand where it receives abundant rainfall, particularly during October to November.
It was built for the 1998 Asian Games by construction firm Christiani and Nielsen, the same company that constructed the Democracy Monument in Bangkok.
The Chang Thailand Slammers won the 2011 ASEAN Basketball League Championship.
Growth in 2002, 2003, and 2004 was 5–7% annually.
Thailand's prevalent religion is Theravada Buddhism, which is an integral part of Thai identity and culture.
Recent insurgent uprisings may be a continuation of separatist fighting which started after World War II with Sukarno's support for the PULO.
, the Thai automotive industry was the largest in Southeast Asia and the 9th largest in the world.
However, only males over the age of 21, who have not gone through reserve training of the Army Reserve Force Students, are given the option of volunteering for the armed forces, or participating in the random draft.
The driest areas are on the leeward side in the central valleys and northernmost portion of south Thailand where mean annual rainfall is less than .
Foreigners typically pay between 1,000–2,000 baht to view a match, with prices depending on the location of the seating.
Hunters have decimated the populations of tigers, leopards, and other large cats for their valuable pelts.
Thailand became the first country in the world to host an international 80&nbsp;kg welterweight rugby tournament in 2005.
Between 1962 and 1983, the agricultural sector grew by 4.1% per year on average and continued to grow at 2.2% between 1983 and 2007.
An initial draft constitution was rejected by government officials in 2015.
Thailand has contributed troops to reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Thus the year 2015 is 2558 BE in Thailand.
Thailand is the largest newspaper market in Southeast Asia with an estimated circulation of over 13 million copies daily in 2003.
Although such trade is illegal, the famous Bangkok market Chatuchak is still known for the sale of endangered species.
It is not uncommon to see Thais cheering their favourite English Premier League teams on television and walking around in replica kit.
The Internet is censored by the Thai government, making some sites unreachable.
It is bordered to the north by Myanmar and Laos, to the east by Laos and Cambodia, to the south by the Gulf of Thailand and Malaysia, and to the west by the Andaman Sea and the southern extremity of Myanmar.
Approximately 200,000 Asian labourers (mainly romusha) and 60,000 Allied prisoners of war (POWs) worked on the Burma Railway, which is commonly known as the "Death Railway".
This resulted in the army returning fire with rubber bullets and some live ammunition.
Muslims constitute the second largest religious group in Thailand, comprising 4.6% of the population.
It is currently used mostly for football matches.
At the time of the 2010 census, the average Thai household size was 3.2 people.
Growth (2.2%) was dampened by the softening of the global economy in 2001, but picked up in the subsequent years owing to strong growth in Asia, a relatively weak baht encouraging exports, and increased domestic spending as a result of several mega projects and incentives of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, known as Thaksinomics.
The standard is based on the dialect of the central Thai people, and it is written in the Thai alphabet, an abugida script that evolved from the Khmer alphabet.
The success in sports like weightlifting and taekwondo at the last two summer Olympic Games has demonstrated that boxing is no longer the only medal option for Thailand.
Plans have resurfaced for a canal which would connect the Andaman Sea to the Gulf of Thailand, analogous to the Suez and the Panama Canals.
Local sports clubs which also compete in the TRU include the British Club of Bangkok, the Southerners Sports Club (Bangkok) and the Royal Bangkok Sports Club.
Most of the country receives a mean annual rainfall of .
The Khana Ratsadon decided that the people were not yet ready for an elected assembly.
Suthep and the PDRC led the protest, of which security forces claimed that approximately 270,000 protesters joined.
Numerous tribal languages are also spoken, including many Austroasiatic languages such as Mon, Khmer, Viet, Mlabri and Orang Asli; Austronesian languages such as Cham and Moken; Sino-Tibetan languages like Lawa, Akha, and Karen; and other Tai languages such as Tai Yo, Phu Thai, and Saek.
Several different ethnic groups, many of which are marginalised, populate Thailand.
It is on Thammasat University's Rangsit campus.
The Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI) is a Thai synchrotron light source for physics, chemistry, material science, and life sciences.
The 1997 People's Constitution also promoted human rights more than any other constitution.
As with many of the developing nations during the Cold War, Thailand then went through decades of political instability characterised by a number of coups d'état, as one military regime replaced another, but eventually progressed towards a stable, prosperous democracy in the 1980s.
For example, the capital of Chiang Mai Province (''Changwat Chiang Mai'') is ''Mueang Chiang Mai'' or ''Chiang Mai''.
Despite European pressure, Thailand is the only Southeast Asian nation to never have been colonised.
It is also the duty of the king to prorogue sessions through a royal decree when the House term expires.
The first line of the national anthem is: ''prathet thai ruam lueat nuea chat chuea thai'' (), "Thailand is the unity of Thai flesh and blood."
Thailand has the highest percentage of arable land, 27.25%, of any nation in the Greater Mekong Subregion.
Additionally, "the Mongols, after the seizure of Ta-li on January 7, 1253 and the pacification of Yunnan in 1257, did not look with disfavor on the creation of a series of Thai principalities at the expense of the old Indianized kingdoms."
