Yet even Herodotus' claims on Babylonian influence are contested by some modern historians, such as L. Zhmud, who points out that the division of the day into twelve parts (and by analogy the year) was known to the Egyptians already in the second millennium, the gnomon was known to both Egyptians and Babylonians, and the idea of the "heavenly sphere" was not used outside of Greece at this time.
Thales applied his method to objects that changed to become other objects, such as water into earth (or so he thought).
In the work Aristotle unequivocally reported Thales’ hypothesis about the nature of all matter – that the originating principle of nature was a single material substance: water.
Aristotle defined the soul as the principle of life, that which imbues the matter and makes it live, giving it the animation, or power to act.
He points out that Ptolemy makes use of this and another cycle in his book ''Mathematical Syntaxis'' but attributes it to Greek astronomers earlier than Hipparchus and not to Babylonians.
He goes further joining with other historians (F. Martini, J.L.
When the mythical man wants to explain the world the way he sees it, he explains it based on gods and powers.
These figures sufficed for the Egyptians and Thales.
What is the rise in cubits?
This in no way diminishes the stature of Thales; on the contrary, his genius receives only now the honour that is due to it, the honour of having developed a logical structure for geometry, of having introduced proof into geometry."
The development of doctrine in the hands of ''Thales'', Anaximander, and Anaximenes, for instance, can only be understood as the elaboration of a single idea in a school with a continuous tradition.''
The Egyptians expressed their fractions as the sum of fractions, but the decimals are sufficient for the example.
Thales thought the Earth must be a flat disk which is floating in an expanse of water.
The ''seked'' is a measure of the angle.
This is primarily a biographical work, as the name indicates.
whether he was a Milesian or a Phoenician, whether he left any writings or not, whether he was married or single-much less on the actual ideas and achievements with which he is credited."
He maintained that "All things are full of gods", and to understand the nature of things was to discover the secrets of the deities, and through this knowledge open the possibility that one could be greater than the grandest Olympian.
From Thales on, however, philosophers had a tendency to depersonify or objectify mind, as though it were the substance of animation per se and not actually a god like the other gods.
In the West, Thales represents a new kind of inquiring community as well.
He holds that Thales "living ever in sight of his beloved sea" would see water seem to draw all "traffic in wine and oil, milk and honey, juices and dyes" to itself, leading him to "a vision of the universe melting into a single substance that was valueless in itself and still the source of wealth."
Many, most notably Aristotle, regard him as the first philosopher in the Greek tradition, and he is otherwise historically recognised as the first individual in Western civilisation known to have entertained and engaged in scientific thought, (i.e.
He is the one who, in the Prologue to that work, is responsible for the division of the early philosophers into "Ionian" and "Italian", but he places the Academics in the Ionian school and otherwise evidences considerable disarray and contradiction, especially in the long section on forerunners of the "Ionian School".
The most natural epithets of Thales are "materialist" and "naturalist", which are based on ousia and physis.
Philosophers were either Ionian or Italian.
and Simplicius of Cilicia in the 6th century C.E.
: "We cannot read the universe from the past..."
(No writing attributed to him has survived.)
Hence, Aristotle, immediately after he has called him the originator of philosophy brings forward the reasons which Thales was believed to have adduced in confirmation of that assertion; for that no written development of it, or indeed any book by ''Thales'', was extant, is proved by the expressions which Aristotle uses when he brings forward the doctrines and proofs of the Milesian.
Dicks points out a further problem arises in the surviving information on Thales, for rather than using ancient sources closer to the era of Thales, the authors in later antiquity ("epitomators, excerptors, and compilers") actually "preferred to use one or more intermediaries, so that what we actually read in them comes to us not even at second, but at third or fourth or fifth hand.
Representing the scholarly consensus Dicks states that "the tradition about him even as early as the fifth century B.C., was evidently based entirely on hearsay....It would seem that already by Aristotle's time the early Ionians were largely names only to which popular tradition attached various ideas or achievements with greater or less plausibility".
The social significance of water in the time of Thales induced him to discern through hardware and dry-goods, through soil and sperm, blood, sweat and tears, one fundamental fluid stuff...water, the most commonplace and powerful material known to him."
First, because it tells us something about the primal origin of all things; second, because it does so in language devoid of image or fable, and finally, because contained in it, if only embryonically, is the thought, 'all things are one.'"
There was also an extensive oral tradition.
He is additionally attributed with the first observation of the Hyades and with calculating the position of the Pleiades.
containing  soul(s)).
He is the first known individual to use deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to Thales' Theorem.
He had conquered most of the states of coastal Anatolia, including the cities of the Ionians.
:"That from which is everything that exists and from which it first becomes and into which it is rendered at last, its substance remaining under it, but transforming in qualities, that they say is the element and principle of things that are.
Early sources report that one of Anaximander's more famous pupils, Pythagoras, visited Thales as a young man, and that Thales advised him to travel to Egypt to further his philosophical and mathematical studies.
Whatever his status, the king gave the problem to him, and he got the army across by digging a diversion upstream so as to reduce the flow, making it possible to ford the river.
Accordingly, the sources say that Thales believed that "all things were full of gods."
: ''"In the beginning, SPIRIT within (spiritus intus) strengthens Heaven and Earth'',
In Babylonian religion the water is lifeless and sterile until a god acts upon it, but for Thales water itself was divine and creative.
While some historians, like B. Snell, maintain that Aristotle was relying on a pre-Platonic written record by Hippias rather than oral tradition, this is a controversial position.
According to Hieronymus, historically quoted by Diogenes Laertius, Thales found out the height of pyramids by comparison between the shadows cast by a person and the pyramids.
: "The view that all matter is one is quite a reputable scientific hypothesis."
With the third you sight the ship and calculate the ''seked'' from the height of the stick and its distance from the point of insertion to the line of sight.
Thales understood similar triangles and right triangles, and what is more, used that knowledge in practical ways.
The latter sources on Thales are several  "ascriptions of commentators and compilers who lived anything from 700 to 1,000&nbsp;years after his death" which include "anecdotes of varying degrees of plausibility" and in the opinion of some historians (such as D. R. Dicks) of "no historical worth whatsoever".
The run is 70&nbsp;cubits, 490 palms.
Fletcher holds that as there is no viable predecessor to the title of first Greek mathematician, the only question is whether Thales qualifies as a practitioner in that field; he holds that "Thales had at his command the techniques of observation, experimentation, superposition and deduction…he has proved himself mathematician."
Aristotle explains that Thales' objective in doing this was not to enrich himself but to prove to his fellow Milesians that philosophy could be useful, contrary to what they thought, or alternatively, Thales had made his foray into enterprise because of a personal challenge put to him by an individual who had asked why if Thales were intelligent, by way of being a reputed philosopher, he had yet to attain wealth.
The channels ran around both sides of the camp.
He called for the Ionian mercantile states participating in this ritual to convert it into a democratic federation under the protection of Poseidon that would hold off the forces of pastoral Persia.
Knowledge of two angles (the ''seked'' and a right angle) and an enclosed leg (the altitude) allows you to determine by similar triangles the second leg, which is the distance.
While Herodotus reported that most of his fellow Greeks believe that Thales did divert the river Halys to assist King Croesus' military endeavors, he himself finds it doubtful.
Philosophical man is a "new cultural configuration" based in stepping back from "pregiven tradition" and taking up a rational "inquiry into what is true in itself;" that is, an ideal of truth.
It begins with isolated individuals such as Thales, but they are supported and cooperated with as time goes on.
In present-day trigonometry, cotangents require the same units for run and rise (base and perpendicular), but the papyrus uses cubits for rise and palms for run, resulting in different (but still characteristic) numbers.
We would go on to calculate the cotangent as 70 divided by 93 to get 3/4 or .75 and looking that up in a table of cotangents find that the angle of rise is a few minutes over 53&nbsp;degrees.
Moreover, they were writing from an oral tradition that was widespread and well known in the Greece of their day.
An arche (from , "to rule") dominates an object in some way.
Some ancient writers qualify them as Milesioi, "of Miletus."
It is noteworthy that the first particle known to carry electric charge, the electron, is named for the Greek word for amber, ἤλεκτρον (''ēlektron'').
Diogenes Laërtius quotes the chronicle of Apollodorus of Athens as saying that Thales died at the age of 78 during the 58th Olympiad (548–545&nbsp;BC) and attributes his death to heat stroke while watching the games.
Feldman concludes that Thales saw "that water was a revolutionary leveler and the elemental factor determining the subsistence and business of the world" and "the common channel of states."
Mathematics, astronomy, and medicine already existed.
The others remained in an Ionian League of 12 cities (excluding Miletus now), and were subjugated by the Persians.
More practically Thales used the same method to measure the distances of ships at sea, said Eudemus as reported by Proclus ("in Euclidem").
And it will be found that the hypothesis, if it is to be called by that name, of a regular organisation of scientific activity will alone explain all the facts.
Many philosophers followed Thales' lead in searching for explanations in nature rather than in the supernatural; others returned to supernatural explanations, but couched them in the language of philosophy rather than of myth or of religion.
Miletus, however, received favorable terms from Cyrus.
He would have seen that minerals could be processed from water such as life-sustaining salt and gold taken from rivers.
Thales, according to Aristotle, asked what was the nature (Greek ''arche'') of the object so that it would behave in its characteristic way.
Moreover, the ordinary citizen, unless he was a seafaring man or a merchant, could not afford the grand tour in Egypt, and did not consort with noble lawmakers such as Solon.
"They say that Thales was the first to demonstrate that the circle is bisected by the diameter, the cause of the bisection being the unimpeded passage of the straight line through the centre."
The end result was a total removal of mind from substance, opening the door to a non-divine principle of action.
Pointedly historian S. N. Bychkov holds that the idea that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal likely came from Egypt.
In Diogenes Laërtius' ''Lives of Eminent Philosophers'' Chapter 1.39, Laërtius relates the several stories of an expensive object that is to go to the most wise.
Aristotle considered Thales’ position to be roughly the equivalent to the later ideas of Anaximenes, who held that everything was composed of air.
Thales (who died around 30&nbsp;years before the time of Pythagoras and 300&nbsp;years before Euclid, Eudoxus of Cnidus, and Eudemus of Rhodes) is often hailed as "the first Greek mathematician".
They attributed to Egyptians "an immemorial knowledge of certain subjects" (including geometry) and would claim Egyptian origin for some of their own ideas to try and lend them "a respectable antiquity" (such as the "Hermetic" literature of the Alexandrian period).
Thales was known for his innovative use of geometry.
A second is made level.
writing nearly a millennium after his era).
Dicks cites historian O. Neugebauer who relates that "No Babylonian theory for predicting solar eclipse existed at 600&nbsp;B.C., as one can see from the very unsatisfactory situation 400&nbsp;years later; nor did the Babylonians ever develop any theory which took the influence of geographical latitude into account."
He used "Ionian" in a broader sense, including also the Athenian academics, who were not Pre-Socratics.
For example, he said:
There is no basis for an Ionian or Italian unity.
Looking specifically at Thales' influence during the pre-Socratic era, it is clear that he stood out as one of the first thinkers who thought more in the way of ''logos'' than ''mythos''.
He goes on to tell us that in addition to applying the knowledge he gained in Egypt "He himself discovered many propositions and disclosed the underlying principles of many others to his successors, in some case his method being more general, in others more empirical."
Croesus was defeated before the city of Sardis by Cyrus, who subsequently spared Miletus because it had taken no action.
For example, rather than assuming that earthquakes were the result of supernatural whims Thales explained them by hypothesizing that the Earth floats on water and that earthquakes occur when the Earth is rocked by waves.
"Pamphila says that, having learnt geometry from the Egyptians, he Thales was the first to inscribe in a circle a right-angled triangle, whereupon he sacrificed an ox."
Both the oral and the written were commonly read or known by all educated men in the region.
They sought for the substance of phenomena and may have studied with each other.
Boodin defines an "emergent" materialism, in which the objects of sense emerge uncertainly from the substrate.
As the Egyptian and Babylonian geometry at the time was "essentially arithmetical", they used actual numbers and "the procedure is then described with explicit instructions as to what to do with these numbers" there was no mention of how the rules of procedure were made, and nothing toward a logically arranged corpus of generalized geometrical knowledge with analytical 'proofs' such as we find in the words of Euclid, Archimedes, and Apollonius."
It is, and for three reasons.
How was the power to move other things without the movers changing to be explained?
It seems likely that Thales viewed the Earth as solidifying from the water on which it floated and the oceans that surround it.
Nevertheless, several years later, anxious for family, he adopted his nephew Cybisthus.
This first version of the story would constitute the first historically known creation and use of futures, whereas the second version would be the first historically known of creation and use of options.
He is generally recognized as having brought something new to human thought.
A right triangle with two equal legs is a 45-degree right triangle, all of which are similar.
John Burnet (1892) noted
The earliest sources on Thales (living before 320&nbsp;BC) are often the same for the other Milesian philosophers (Anaximander, and Anaximenes).
When asked why he didn’t die if there was no difference, he replied "because there is no difference."
Proclus wrote "Thales was the first to go to Egypt and bring back to Greece this study."
Most agree that Thales' stamp on thought is the unity of substance, hence Bertrand Russell:
There are two theorems of Thales in elementary geometry, one known as Thales’ theorem having to do with a triangle inscribed in a circle and having the circle's diameter as one leg, the other theorem being also called the intercept theorem.
Thales predicted the solar eclipse of May 28, 585&nbsp;BC.
The ''seked'' is at the base of problems 56, 57, 58, 59 and 60 of the Rhind papyrus – an ancient Egyptian mathematical document.
(The exact meaning of his use of the word ''polos'' is unknown, current theories include: "the heavenly dome", "the tip of the axis of the celestial sphere", or a spherical concave sundial.)
The war endured for five years, but in the sixth an eclipse of the Sun (mentioned above) spontaneously halted a battle in progress (the Battle of Halys).
In addition Eudemus attributed to him the discovery that a circle is bisected by its diameter, that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal and that vertical angles are equal.
Topos is in Newtonian-style space, since the verb, chorei, has the connotation of yielding before things, or spreading out to make room for them, which is extension.
The Catholic Encyclopedia notes that Aristotle called him a physiologist, with the meaning "student of nature."
Feldman points out that Thales held that the lodestone was alive as it drew metals to itself.
From a philosophic point of view, any grouping at all would have been just as effective.
But what about the changing itself?
He points out that works confirmed to have existed in the sixth century BC by Anaximander and Xenophanes had already disappeared by the fourth century BC, so the chances of Pre-Socratic material surviving to the age of Aristotle is almost nil (even less likely for Aristotle's pupils Theophrastus and Eudemus and less likely still for those following after them).
The idea did not originate with him, as the Greeks in general believed in the distinction between mind and matter, which was ultimately to lead to a distinction not only between body and soul but also between matter and energy.
It is not clear that the theory of matter and form existed as early as Thales, and if it did, whether Thales espoused it.
Cooke notes "This relation however, is controversial."
The lodestone and the amber must be alive, and if that were so, there could be no difference between the living and the dead.
According to Herodotus (and as determined by modern methods), Thales predicted the solar eclipse of May 28, 585&nbsp;BC.
Aristotle wrote (''De Anima'' 411 a7-8) of Thales: ...''Thales thought all things are full of gods''.
Since there were 7 palms in a cubit, the ''seked'' was 7 times the cotangent.
Thales concluded that one could prove that all vertical angles are equal if one accepted some general notions such as: all straight angles are equal, equals added to equals are equal, and equals subtracted from equals are equal.
...Obviously this use of intermediate sources, copied and recopied from century to century, with each writer adding additional pieces of information of greater or less plausibility from his own knowledge, provided a fertile field for errors in transmission, wrong ascriptions, and fictitious attributions".
Thales involved himself in many activities, taking the role of an innovator.
Thales added something to these different collections of knowledge to produce a universality, which, as far as writing tells us, was not in tradition before, but resulted in a new field.
Thales' most famous philosophical position was his cosmological thesis, which comes down to us through a passage from Aristotle's ''Metaphysics''.
Aristotle posits the origin of Thales thought on matter generally containing souls, to Thales thinking initially on the fact of, because magnets move iron, the presence of movement of matter indicated this matter contained life.
Mythical thought does not differentiate between things and persons and furthermore it does not differentiate between nature and culture.
This combined with his contemporary's idea of "spontaneous generation" allow us to see how Thales could hold that water could be divine and creative.
Almost all of the other Pre-Socratic philosophers proceed after him to provide explanations of natural things by way of there being a unity of everything because of the existence of a single ultimate substance, instead of explanation given by mythology.
Thales received instruction from an Egyptian priest.
Once an answer has been arrived at, the next logical step is to ask how Thales compares to other philosophers, which leads to his classification (rightly or wrongly).
Much as we would like to have a date on the seven sages, we must reject these stories and the tempting date if we are to believe that Thales was a native of Miletus, predicted the eclipse, and was with Croesus in the campaign against Cyrus.
Ever since, interested persons have been asking what that new something is.
"This theorem, that when two straight lines cut one another, the vertical and opposite angles are equal, was first discovered, as Eudemus says, by Thales, though the scientific demonstration was improved by the writer of ''Elements''."
Some historians, such as D. R. Dicks takes issue with the idea that we can determine from the questionable sources we have, just how influenced Thales was by Babylonian sources.
These sources were either roughly contemporaneous (such as Herodotus) or lived within a few hundred years of his passing.
As Herodotus says Egypt was the birthplace of geometry he must have learnt that while there.
Thales did address the topic, approaching it through lodestone and amber, which, when electrified by rubbing together, also attracts.
Cooke notes that it may possibly also appear in the second book of Euclid's ''Elements'', "which contains geometric constructions equivalent to certain algebraic relations that are frequently encountered in the cuneiform tablets."
He was aware of the existence of the lodestone, and was the first to be connected to knowledge of this in history.
For example, Plato praises him (coupled with Anacharsis) for being the originator of the potter's wheel and the anchor.
The difference between these two more profound ways of seeing the world is that ''mythos'' is concentrated around the stories of holy origin, while ''logos'' is concentrated around the argumentation.
Though once very widespread, it was not generally adopted by rationalist and modern science, as it mainly is useful in metaphysical analyses, but does not lend itself to the detail that is of interest to modern science.
Feldman recalls the stories of Thales measuring the distance of boats in the harbor, creating mechanical improvements for ship navigation, giving an explanation for the flooding of the Nile (vital to Egyptian agriculture and Greek trade), and changing the course of the river Halys so an army could ford it.
It seems that Thales had predicted this solar eclipse.
Likewise as he must have been in Egypt he had to have done something with the Pyramids - thus the tale of measuring them.
He was stopped by the river Halys, then unbridged.
that he measured the height of the pyramids by their shadows at the moment when his own shadow was equal to his height.
Aristotle conjectured that Thales reached his conclusion by contemplating that the "nourishment of all things is moist and that even the hot is created from the wet and lives by it."
The ancient source, Apollodorus of Athens, writing during the 2nd century BCE, thought Thales was born about the year 625 BCE.
In addition to Proclus, Hieronymus of Rhodes also cites Thales as the first Greek mathematician.
; the Egyptians could also calculate correctly the volume of the frustum of a pyramid with a square base (the Babylonians used an incorrect formula for this), and used a formula for the area of a circle...which gives a value for π of 3.1605--a good approximation."
Feldman points out that while other thinkers recognized the wetness of the world "none of them was inspired to conclude that everything was ultimately aquatic."
Diogenes Laërtius tells us that the Seven Sages were created in the archonship of Damasius at Athens about 582&nbsp;BC and that Thales was the first sage.
Aristotle then proceeded to proffer a number of conjectures based on his own observations to lend some credence to why Thales may have advanced this idea (though Aristotle didn’t hold it himself).
The Ionian cities should be demoi, or "districts".
While Aristotle's conjecture on why Thales held water as the originating principle of matter is his own thinking, his statement that Thales held it as water is generally accepted as genuinely originating with Thales and he is seen as an incipient matter-and-formist.
If things were alive, they must have souls.
There was no such school in any sense.
Physis (φύσις) comes from phyein (φύειν), "to grow", related to our word "be".
Later scholastic thinkers would maintain that in his choice of water Thales was influenced by Babylonian or Chaldean religion, that held that a god had begun creation by acting upon the pre-existing water.
Diogenes Laërtius quotes two letters from Thales: one to Pherecydes of Syros offering to review his book on religion, and one to Solon, offering to keep him company on his sojourn from Athens.
Thales saw a commonality with the powers of living things to act.
It was fairly certain that he came from a wealthy, established family, in a class which customarily provided higher education for their children.
Dicks points out that there is no agreement "among the 'authorities' even on the most fundamental facts of his life--e.g.
Van der Waerden is among those advocating the idea of Mesopotamian influence, writing "It follows that we have to abandon the traditional belief that the oldest Greek mathematicians discovered geometry entirely by themselves…a belief that was tenable only as long as nothing was known about Babylonian mathematics.
Contrasting the work of the more ancient writers with those of the later, Dicks points out that in the works of the early writers Thales and the other men who would be hailed as "the Seven Sages of Greece" had a different reputation than that which would be assigned to them by later authors.
The Seven Sages were most likely already in existence, as Croesus was also heavily influenced by Solon of Athens, another sage.
Answers fall into (at least) two categories, the theory and the method.
In neighbouring Lydia, a king had come to power: Croesus, who was somewhat too aggressive for the size of his army.
Dicks points out that "certain doctrines that later commentators invented for Thales...were then accepted into the biographical tradition" being copied by subsequent writers who were then cited by those coming after them "and thus, because they may be repeated by different authors relying on different sources, may produce an illusory impression of genuineness."
Dicks examines the cycle referred to as  'Saros' - which Thales is held to have used and which is believed to stem from the Babylonians.
Aristotle reported Thales's hypothesis that the originating principle of nature and the nature of matter was a single material substance: water.
Feldman considers Thales' environment and holds that Thales would have seen tears, sweat, and blood as granting value to a person's work and the means how life giving commodities travelled (whether on bodies of water or through the sweat of slaves and pack-animals).
As the battle was indecisive but paralyzing to both sides, Croesus marched home, dismissed his mercenaries and sent emissaries to his dependents and allies to ask them to dispatch fresh troops to Sardis.
Compared to Aristotle, Diogenes is not much of a philosopher.
The Greeks often invoked idiosyncratic explanations of natural phenomena with reference to the will of anthropomorphic gods and heroes.
Some say that he left no writings, others say that he wrote ''On the Solstice'' and ''On the Equinox''.
Thales is recognised as having made a break from understanding the world and universe by mythological explanations to instead find explanations for the existence of natural things and phenomena by theories and hypothesis, ergo science.
"Thales is said to have been the first to have known and to have enunciated the theorem that the angles at the base of any isosceles triangle are equal, though in the more archaic manner he described the equal angles as similar."
Because of Thales' elevated status in Greek culture an intense interest and admiration followed his reputation.
Dicks and other historians divide the ancient sources about Thales into those before 320&nbsp;BC and those after that year (some such as Proclus writing in the 5th century C.E.
So it was given to Thales, went the round of all the sages, and came back to Thales again.
He asked if an object changes, is it the same or different?
Other quotes from Proclus list more of Thales' mathematical achievements:
He would’ve seen fish and other food stuffs gathered from it.
'''Thales of Miletus''' (; , ''Thalēs'';  624&nbsp;– c. 546&nbsp;BC) was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher, mathematician and astronomer from Miletus in Asia Minor, current day Milet in Turkey and one of the Seven Sages of Greece.
Instead of referring to the person, Zeus, they talked about the great mind:
: ''Agitates the whole mass, and mixes itself with GREAT MATTER (magno corpore)"''
"Eudemus in his ''History of Geometry'' attributes this theorem the equality of triangles having two angles and one side equal to Thales.
Thales probably had his own equipment rigged and recorded his own
