The Kamyaka forest is mentioned as being situated at the head of the Thar desert, near Lake Trinavindu.
Jodhpur sandstone is mostly used in monuments, important buildings, residential buildings, and such.
In the last 15–20 years, the Rajasthan desert has seen many changes, including a manifold increase of both the human and animal population.
Lithic tools belonging to the prehistoric Aterian culture of the Maghreb have been discovered in Middle Paleolithic deposits in the Thar Desert.
Its roots also encourage ''nitrogen'' fixation, which produces higher crop yields.
This promises to transform the local economy, which has long suffered from the harshness of the desert.
Barmer district has the highest cattle population out of which sheep and goats are in majority.
''Tecomella undulata'' is mainly used as a source of timber.
It can also be used for small turning work and tool-handles.
The Thar is one of the most heavily populated desert areas in the world with the main occupations of its inhabitants agriculture and animal husbandry.
It takes a fine finish.
Ancient Archaeological evidences of habitations have been recovered from Sambhar and Didwana lakes which shows their antiquity and historical importance.
Forestry has an important part to play in the amelioration of the conditions in semi-arid and arid lands.
The bark obtained from the stem is used as a remedy for syphilis.
Most human settlements are found near the two seasonal streams of the Karon-Jhar hills.
Agroforestry model is best suited to the people of desert.
Pods are locally called ''sangar'' or ''sangri''.
Live stock is very important to the Thar desert people.
Even the bark, having an astringent bitter taste, was reportedly eaten during the severe famine of 1899 and 1939.
This form of tourism provides income to many operators and camel owners in Jaisalmer as well as employment for many camel trekkers in the desert villages nearby.
There the Pandavas lived in an ascetic asylum (3,10).
It is considered as the home of birds and provides shelter for other desert wildlife.
Also known for their fine leather messenger bags made from wild camels native to the area.
On an average, the yield of green forage from a full grown tree is expected to be about 60&nbsp;kg with complete lopping having only the central leading shoot, 30&nbsp;kg when the lower two third crown is lopped and 20&nbsp;kg when the lower one third crown is lopped.
After the construction of the Indira Gandhi Canal, irrigation facilities were available over an area of 6770&nbsp;km² in Jaisalmer district and 37&nbsp;km² in Barmer district.
People from various parts of the world come to see the Pushkar ka Mela (Pushkar Fair) and oases.
Camels are an integral part of the desert life and the camel events during the Desert Festival confirm this fact.
Evenings are meant for the main shows of music and dance.
The Objective of the Institute is to carry out scientific research in forestry in order to provide technologies to increase the vegetative cover and to conserve the biodiversity in the hot arid and semi arid region of Rajasthan, Gujarat and Dadara & Nagar Haveli union territory.
It also acts as a windbreak and helps in stabilizing shifting sand dunes.
''Prosopis cineraria'' is much valued as a fodder tree.
''Tecomella undulata'' has medicinal properties as well.
At present, there are ten times more animals per person in Rajasthan than the national average, and overgrazing is also a factor affecting climatic and drought conditions.
The Thar Desert is the most densely populated desert in the world, with a population density of 83 people per km2.
Some Institutes have done good work in Agroforestry.
The small population is mostly pastoral, and hide and wool industries are prominent.
Animal husbandry has become popular due to the difficult farming conditions.
Both the turban and the moustache have been centuries old symbols of honor in Rajasthan.
"Neyeli Lignite Barsinghpur Project" is in progress to establish two thermal power units of capacity 125 megawatts each at Barsinghpur in Bikaner district.
It is world's largest irrigation which is being extended in an attempt to make the desert arable.
The natural vegetation of this dry area is classed as Northwestern thorn scrub forest occurring in small clumps scattered more or less openly.
But the poverty leaves no other option to these jhugiwalas (people living in jhugis).
The Indian peafowl is a resident breeder in the Thar region.
Agricultural production is mainly from kharif crops, which are grown in the summer season and seeded in June and July.
In the Rigveda there is also mention of a river named ''Aśvanvatī'' along with the river Drishadvati.
Rama uses his ''agneyashtra''-''amogha'' to dry up the sea named ''drumakulya'' situated on north of ''Lavanasagara''.
About 23 species of lizard and 25 species of snakes are found here and several of them are endemic to the region.
The region faces frequent droughts.
One example from a case study of horticulture showed that in situation of budding in 35 plants of Ber and Guar (Gola, Seb & Mundia variety developed in CAZRI), using only one hectare of land, yielded 10,000&nbsp;kg.
It is used for house-building, chiefly as rafters, posts scantlings, doors and windows, and for well construction water pipes, upright posts of Persian wheels, agricultural implements and shafts, spokes, fellows and yoke of carts.
They have evolved excellent survival strategies, their size is smaller than other similar animals living in different conditions, and they are mainly nocturnal.
The minimum forest area is in Churu district only 80&nbsp;km2.
It originates in the Shivalik Hills of Himachal Pradesh and flows through Punjab and Haryana to Rajasthan; just southwest of Sirsa, Haryana and by the side of ''talwara jheel'' in Rajasthan, this seasonal river feeds two irrigation canals that extend into Rajasthan.
Besides providing water for agriculture, the canal will supply drinking water to hundreds of people in far-flung areas.
*herbs and grasses: ''Ochthochloa compressa'', ''Dactyloctenium scindicum'', ''Cenchrus biflorus'', ''Cenchrus setigerus'', ''Lasiurus scindicus'', ''Cynodon dactylon'', ''Panicum turgidum'', ''Panicum antidotale'', ''Dichanthium annulatum'', ''Sporobolus marginatus'', ''Saccharum spontaneum'', ''Cenchrus ciliaris'', ''Desmostachya bipinnata'', ''Eragrostis'' species, ''Ergamopagan'' species, ''Phragmites'' species, ''Tribulus terrestris'', ''Typha'' species, ''Sorghum halepense'', ''Citrullus colocynthis''
It took three days for Pandavas to reach the Kamyaka forest, setting out from Hastinapura, on their chariots (3,11).
Some of the best breeds of bullocks such as Kankrej (Sanchori) and Nagauri are from desert region.
''Tecomella undulata'' plays an important role in the ecology.
At that time the present day Bikaner and Jodhpur areas were known as Kurujangala and Madrajangala provinces.
Some leading companies in the field are working on establishing wind mills in Barmer, Jaisalmer and Bikaner districts.
Barmer district is in the news due to its large oil basin.
Domestic and international tourists frequent the desert seeking adventure on camels for anything from a day to several days.
According to 1980 housing census in Pakistan, there were 241,326 housing units of one or two very small rooms.
The forage yield per tree varies a great deal.
This in turn results into the decrease in agricultural production.
The Thar Desert extends between the Aravalli Hills in the north-east, the Great Rann of Kutch along the coast and the alluvial plains of the Indus River in the west and north-west.
Due to the diversified habitat and ecosystem, the vegetation, human culture and animal life in this arid region is very rich in contrast to the other deserts of the world.
Salt water lakes in the Thar Desert include the Sambhar, Kuchaman, Didwana in Rajasthan and Kharaghoda in Gujarat.
These trees have become a profitable option for farmers.
The Indira Gandhi Canal irrigates northwestern Rajasthan while the Government of India has started a centrally sponsored Desert Development Program based on watershed management with the objective of preventing the spread of desert and improving the living conditions of people in the desert.
The main places with deposits of petroleum are Baghewal, Kalrewal, and Tawariwal in Jaisalmer district and Gudha Malani area in Barmer district.
Density and size of patches increase from west to east following the increase in rainfall.
which is about 9% of the geographical area.
Agriculture is not a dependable proposition in this area because after the rainy season, at least one third of crops fail.
The Ramayana mentions ''Lavanasagara'' (the Salt-ocean) when Rama goes to attack Lanka with the army of vanaras.
This desert comprises a very dry part, the Marusthali region in the west, and a semidesert region in the east with fewer sand dunes and slightly more precipitation.
This ecotourism industry ranges from cheaper backpacker treks to plush Arabian night style campsites replete with banquets and cultural performances.
It has rich salt deposits at Sambhar.
There are a number of salt water lakes in Thar desert.
''Prosopis cineraria'' provides wood of construction class.
Seeds are used against abscess.
Mangala, Bhagyam and Aishwariya are the major oil fields in the district.
They finally reached the banks of the Sarasvati River where they saw the forest of Kamyaka, the favourite haunt of ascetics, situated on a level and wild plain on the banks of the Sarasvati (3-5,36) abounding in birds and deer (3,5).
Water scarcity plays an important role in shaping life in all parts of Thar.
There are few local tree species suitable for planting in the desert, which are slow growing.
Heartwood contains quinoid.
According to an estimate Rajasthan state has got a potential of 5500 Megawatt wind power generation as such it is in the priority of the state govt.
Other mammals of the Thar Desert include a subspecies of red fox (''Vulpes vulpes pusilla'') and the caracal.
The main occupation of the people is agriculture and animal husbandry.
Human habitations on the banks of Sarasvati and Drishadvati had shifted to the east and south directions prior to the ''Mahabharata'' period.
Rainfall is limited to  per year, mostly falling from July to September.
Its wood is strong, tough and durable.
The sheep-wool from Rajasthan is considered best for carpet making industry in the world.
''Acacia tortilis'' has proved to be the most promising species for desert afforestation and the jojoba is another promising species of economic value found suitable for planting in these areas.
Wells that successfully bear sweet water attract nearby settlement, but are difficult to dig, possibly claiming the lives of the well-diggers.
One can see eagles, harriers, falcons, buzzards, kestrel and vultures.
Desert safaris on camels have become increasingly popular around Jaisalmer.
Jalore is biggest centre of granite processing units.
Solar energy also has a great potential in this region as most of the days during a year are cloud free.
This festival is held once a year during winters.
The pods have a sweetish pulp and are also used as fodder for livestock.
The Thar region of Rajasthan is a major opium production and consumption area.
Other interesting competitions on the fringes are the moustache and turban tying competitions, which not only demonstrate a glorious tradition but also inspire its preservation.
Lignite based Thermal power plant has been established at Giral in Barmer district.
Chokla, Marwari, Jaisalmeri, Magra, Malpuri, Sonadi, Nali and Pungal breeds of sheep are found in the region.
The Nadistuti hymn in the Rigveda (10.75) mentions the Sarasvati between the Yamuna in the east and the Sutlej in the west, and later Vedic texts like Tandya and Jaiminiya Brahmanas as well as the Mahabharata mention that the Sarasvati dried up in a desert.
The live stock depends for grazing on common lands in villages.
The state is the second largest source of cement in India.
Many species of Eucalyptus, Acacia, Cassia and other genera from Israel, Australia, US, Russia, Zimbabwe, Chile, Peru and Sudan have been tried in Thar Desert.
of Ber and 250&nbsp;kg.
The most important tree species in terms of providing a livelihood in Thar desert communities is ''Prosopis cineraria''.
Pod yield is nearly 1.4 quintals of pods/ha with a variation of 10.7% in dry locations.
The forest area is mainly in southern districts of Rajasthan like Udaipur and Chittorgarh.
Most scholars agree that at least some of the references to the Sarasvati in the Rigveda refer to the Ghaggar-Hakra River, while the Helmand River is often quoted as the locus of the early Rigvedic river.
It was conceived to halt spreading of the desert to fertile areas.
During the treks tourists are able to view the fragile and beautiful ecosystem of the Thar desert.
The natural vegetation of the Thar Desert is composed of the following tree, shrub and herb species:
Jambūdvīpaprajñapti or the treatise on the island of roseapple tree contains a description of Jambūdvīpa and life biographies of Ṛṣabha and King Bharata.
The forest cover in desert is low.
Dried pods also form rich animal feed, which is liked by all livestock.
Irrigation had already been provided in an area of 3670&nbsp;km² in Jaisalmer district.
Thar region of Rajasthan is the biggest wool-producing area in India.
The people have a great passion for folk music and folk poetry.
This diverts the much needed cattledung from the field to the hearth.
The river Luni is the only natural water source that drains inside a lake in the desert.
Animal husbandry, trees and grasses, intercropped with vegetables or fruit trees, is the most viable model for arid, drought-prone regions.
The lopped branches are good as fencing material.
''Prosopis cineraria'' is most important top feed species providing nutritious and highly palatable green as well as dry fodder, which is readily eaten by camels, cattle, sheep and goats, constituting a major feed requirement of desert livestock.
Dressed in brilliantly hued costumes, the people of the desert dance and sing haunting ballads of valor, romance and tragedy.
These are Sambhar, Pachpadra, Tal Chhapar, Falaudi and Lunkaransar where Sodium chloride salt is produced from salt water.
The Rajasthan Canal system is the major irrigation scheme of the Thar Desert and is conceived to reclaim it and also to check spreading of the desert to fertile areas.
During famine years in the desert the nomadic rebari people move with large herds of sheep and camel to the forested areas of south Rajasthan or nearby states like Madhya Pradesh for grazing the cattle.
A fresh water source named Pushkar surrounded by ''Marukantara'' was created.
The endemic floral species include ''Calligonum polygonoides'', ''Prosopis cineraria'', ''Acacia nilotica'', ''Tamarix aphylla'', ''Cenchrus biflorus''.
Due to the lack of water in this region, transformation of the grasslands into cropland has been very slow.
The importance of animal husbandry can be understood from the organization of large number of cattle fairs in the region.
The Thar desert seems an ideal place for generation of electricity from wind power.
The desert's part in Pakistan also has a rich multifaceted culture, heritage, traditions, folk tales, dances and music due to its inhabitants who belong to different religions, sects and castes
The sand is highly mobile due to strong winds occurring before the onset of the monsoon.
A large irrigation and power project has reclaimed areas of the northern and western desert for agriculture.
''Tecomella undulata'' is one more tree species, locally known as '''Rohida''', which is found in Thar Desert regions of northwest and western India.
Stretches of sand in the desert are interspersed by hillocks and sandy and gravel plains.
Rajasthan desert festivals are celebrated with great zest and zeal.
Locally it is called ''Loong''.
These lakes receive rain water during monsoon and evaporate during the dry season.
Some important mills for making Woolen thread established in desert area are: Jodhpur Woolen Mill, Jodhpur; Rajasthan Woolen Mill, Bikaner and India Woolen Mill, Bikaner.
''Prosopis cineraria'' wood is reported to contain high calorific value and provide high quality fuel wood.
High velocity winds blow soil from the desert, depositing some on neighboring fertile lands, and causing shifting sand dunes within the desert.
The dried pods locally called ''Kho-Kha'' are eaten.
Some wildlife species, which are fast vanishing in other parts of India, are found in the desert in large numbers such as the blackbuck (''Antilope cervicapra''), chinkara (''Gazella bennettii'') and Indian wild ass (''Equus hemionus khur'') in the Rann of Kutch.
The peacock is designated as the national bird of India and the provincial bird of the Punjab (Pakistan).
A colourful culture rich in tradition prevails in this desert.
This stone is termed "chittar patthar".
About 40% of the total population of Rajasthan live in the Thar Desert.
The degree of crowding was six persons per housing unit and three persons per room.
Reliance Energy is working on establishing power generation through underground gasification technique in Barmer district with an outlay of about 30&nbsp;billion rupees.
The Luni flows through part of Ajmer, Barmer, Jalor, Jodhpur, Nagaur, Pali, and Sirohi districts and Mithavirana Vav Radhanpur region of Banaskantha North Gujarat.
Some scholars consider both the Sarasvati and Aśvanvatī to be the same river.
Fire wood is their main fuel, of the total consumption of wood about 75 percent is firewood.
Rajasthan State Power Corporation has established its first wind power-based power plant at Amarsagar in Jaisalmer district.
The wood is excellent for firewood and charcoal.
Continuing till late into the night, the number of spectators swells up each night and the grand finale, on the full moon night, takes place by silvery sand dunes.
Sandstone is found in Jodhpur and Naguar districts.
The trees are heavily lopped particularly during winter months when no other green fodder is available in the dry tracts.
The lack of a constant water supply causes much of the local population to live as nomads.
*trees and shrubs: ''Acacia jacquemontii'', ''Balanites roxburghii'', ''Ziziphus zizyphus'', ''Ziziphus nummularia'', ''Calotropis procera'', ''Suaeda fruticosa'', ''Crotalaria burhia'', ''Aerva javanica'', ''Clerodendrum multiflorum'', ''Leptadenia pyrotechnica'', ''Lycium barbarum'', ''Grewia tenax'', ''Commiphora mukul'', ''Euphorbia neriifolia'', ''Cordia sinensis'', ''Maytenus emarginata'', ''Capparis decidua'', ''Mimosa hamata''
Sand dunes are stabilised by erecting micro-windbreak barriers with scrub material and subsequent afforestation of the treated dunes with seedlings of shrubs such as phog, senna, castor oil plant and trees such as gum acacia, ''Prosopis juliflora'' and lebbek tree.
Cattle and goats eat leaves of the tree.
The wind storm proves these jhugis unsustainable all the times.
These are then harvested in September and October and include bajra, pulses such as guar, jowar (''Sorghum vulgare''), maize (''zea mays''), sesame and groundnuts.
In India, the inhabitants comprise Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs.
Green pods also form rich animal feed, which is liked by drying the young boiled pods.
The  long Indira Gandhi Canal brings fresh water to the Thar Desert.
Jodhpur, the largest city in the region, lies in the scrub forest zone.
Container manufacturing is another important wood-based industry, which depends heavily on desert-grown trees.
Jodhpur has also got mines of red stone locally known as ''ghatu patthar'' used in construction.
The Pandavas, on their way to exile in the woods, left Pramanakoti on the banks of the Ganges and went towards Kurukshetra, travelling in a western direction and crossing the Yamuna and Drishadvati rivers.
The Ghaggar is another intermittent river in India, flowing during the monsoon rains.
The Indian epics describe this region as ''Lavanasagara'' (Salt-ocean).
The breeding centres have been developed for Karakul and Merino sheep at Suratgarh, Jaitsar and Bikaner.
Cattle fairs are normally named after the folk-deities.
Rajasthan has a forest area of 31150&nbsp;km2.
The trade name of the tree species is '''Desert teak''' or '''Marwar teak'''.
The soil of the Thar Desert remains dry for much of the year and is prone to wind erosion.
Its major tributaries are the Sukri, Mithri, Bandi, Khari, Jawai, Guhiya and Sagi from the left, and the Jojari River from the right.
Natural (tobas) or man-made (johads), both types of small, intermittent ponds, are often the only source of water for animals and humans in the true desert areas.
The Luni River is the only river integrated into the desert.
Rajasthan is pre-eminent in quarrying and mining in India.
Thar Desert provides the recreational value in terms of desert festivals organized every year.
The fair has snake charmers, puppeteers, acrobats and folk performers.
There is large storage of good quality petroleum in Jaisalmer and Barmer districts.
It is one of the institutes of the Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education ( ICFRE ) working under the Ministry of Environment & Forests, Govt.
It originates in the Pushkar valley of the Aravalli Range, near Ajmer and ends in the marshy lands of Rann of Kutch in Gujarat, after travelling a distance of 530&nbsp;km.
Over the past few decades the development of irrigation features including canals and tube wells have changed the crop pattern with desert districts in Rajasthan now producing rabi crops including wheat, mustard and cumin seed along with cash crops.
The living standard of the people in the desert is low.
Therefore, exotic tree species were introduced for plantation.
Potable groundwater is also rare in the Thar desert.
It acts as a soil-binding tree by spreading a network of lateral roots on the top surface of the soil.
The salt is derived by the weathering of rocks in the region.
Solar energy based plant has been established at Bhaleri in Churu district to convert hard water into drinking water.
