The growth following 1900 was partially caused by the housing act of 1901, which stimulated the expansion of cities such as The Hague.
* The Hague Academy of International Law
* International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, (ICTY)
The city expanded massively to the south west and the destroyed areas were quickly rebuilt.
Another popular music venue in The Hague is Muziekcafé de Paap.
As of 1 January 2014, The Hague counts 509,779 inhabitants, making it the third largest city of the Netherlands.
Surinamese people are more religiously mixed, although Hinduism is the most common.
This 'Plan Berlage' decided the spacious and homely streets for several decades.
Shortly thereafter the Scottish-American millionaire Andrew Carnegie made the necessary funds  available to build the Peace Palace  to house the PCA.
* '''Laak''' (40,222 inhabitants) is the smallest district of the city, south east of its centre, for the most part, built in the 20th and 21st century.
Today 1 in 10 residents make their living from the tourism sector.
The city sustained heavy damage during World War II.
The population peaked at 600,000 inhabitants around 1965.
Major motorways connecting to The Hague include the A12, running to Utrecht and the German border.
mixed Dutch-Indonesian) community.
Many streets were specifically built for the large number of civil servants employed in the country's government and for the Dutchmen who were retiring from the administration of the Netherlands East Indies.
In the 1990s, with the consent of Dutch Parliament, The Hague annexed fairly large areas from neighbouring towns as well as from not even bordering ones, on which the complete new residential areas were built and are still being built.
Other significant skyscrapers include the Hoftoren, New Babylon, Het Strijkijzer and De Kroon.
In 1248, his son and successor William II, King of the Romans, decided to extend the residence to a palace, which would later be called the Binnenhof (''Inner Court'').
* Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization
The festive tradition around the beginning of herring season is much older, however.
In World War II, a large amount of the western portion of The Hague was destroyed by the Germans.
The Koninklijke Schouwburg, home to the Nationaal Toneel, can also be found in the city centre - on the Korte Voorhout.
One of the country's largest music venues, Paard van Troje, can be found in the centre of The Hague.
* Iran-United States Claims Tribunal
These include the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the International Criminal Court (ICC), the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Each of these is responsible for a number of particular policy areas and one or two city district.
The Kneuterdijk Palace, built in 1716, is now home to the Council of State of the Netherlands, and the Lange Voorhout Palace is now occupied by the Escher Museum, dedicated to Dutch graphical artist M. C. Escher.
Several films have been (partially) shot in The Hague, including Hum Tum (2004), Ocean's Twelve (2004) and Zwartboek (2006).
Dating from the late 19th century, it contains many expensive and speciality shops.
Notable buildings include the Kurhaus and farther inland, the Peace Palace.
* '''Centrum''' (99,283 inhabitants) forms the heart of The Hague.
The Hague is built partially on sand dunes and partially on peat; the border roughly runs parallel to the Laan van Meerdervoort.
The exact date of the ceremony varies each year.
The tallest buildings of The Hague are both 146-metre-tall ministries of Security and Justice and the Interior and Kingdom Relations of the Netherlands, designed by Hans Kollhoff.
City life concentrates around the Hofvijver and the Binnenhof, where the Parliament is located.
Since King's Day is a national holiday and thus a day off, many people also go out and party on the evening before King's Day.
Compared to 2011 Belgians booked 27% more hotel nights, while the Germans were good for 24% more hotel nights, and the French booked 20% more hotel nights.
It is believed by some that there is a separation between ''Hagenaars'' living on sand, and ''Hagenezen'' living on peat.
Other destinations include Leiden, Haarlem, Zwolle, Groningen, Leeuwarden, Amersfoort, Enschede and Breda, Eindhoven.
The 14% average increase in visits by foreign tourists more than compensated for the slight decrease of less than 1% by Dutch visitors.
The Hague is the fourth major centre for the United Nations, after New York, Geneva and Vienna.
The two most popular religions are Christianity (32%) and Islam (16%).
* '''Segbroek''' (60,054 inhabitants) is a district located between Scheveningen and Loosduinen.
The Spuiplein is a modern fourth square in the city centre, opposite the Nieuwe Kerk.
The city itself uses "Den Haag" in all its communication.
The Hollands Spoor railway station and The Hague University are located here, as well as the site of the planned mixed use development Nieuw Binckhorst.
It is the oldest and largest high school United Nations simulation in the world.
Built in the 1970s, this section of motorway (the "Utrechtsebaan") is now heavily overburdened.
New European Ensemble is an ensemble for contemporary music consisting on international musicians.
The King of the Netherlands lives in the royal palace Huis ten Bosch, located in this forest.
After the Napoleonic Wars, modern-day Belgium and the Netherlands were combined in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands to form a buffer against France.
When the government started to play a more prominent role in Dutch society after 1850, The Hague quickly expanded.
Professional life in the city is dominated by the large number of civil servants and diplomats working in the city; , 26% of the jobs in The Hague are those offered by the Dutch government or the international institutions.
This "Leidsebaan" was supposed to start in the city centre and then follow the railway line The Hague - Amsterdam.
As a compromise, Brussels and Amsterdam alternated as capital every two years, with the government remaining in The Hague.
Many streets are named after places in the Netherlands East Indies (as well as other former Dutch colonies such as Suriname) and there is a sizable "Indo" (i.e.
A direct result of these meetings was the establishment of the world's first organisation for the settlement of international disputes: the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA).
The city has many civil servants and diplomats.
From 1588, The Hague also became the seat of the government of the Dutch Republic.
As the procession returns to the Noordeinde Palace, the road is lined with members of the Dutch Royal Armed Forces and in the afternoon the Royal Family appears on the palace balcony to address an adoring and often frenzied public (''balkonscène'').
It can be reached from Central Station by RandstadRail Line E, with an Airport Shuttle to and from Meijersplein Station.
The Binnenhof, the Noordeinde Palace, the Mauritshuis museum, the Nieuwe Kerk, the Grote Kerk, the Old City Hall and the current City Hall are located here.
* '''Scheveningen''' (53,425 inhabitants) is the wealthy northernmost district of The Hague.
The ''Plein'' (literally "Square") is taken by several large sidewalk cafés where often politicians may be spotted.
Several large international businesses have their headquarters in The Hague, including Royal Dutch Shell, the world's second largest company in terms of revenue.
Many of the city's logistical and minor-industrial services are located in the Binckhorst in the Laak district, which contains many sizeable warehouses.
* International Institute of Social Studies of Erasmus University Rotterdam (ISS)
''Den Haag Sculptuur'' is an open-air exhibition of sculptures.
Only in 1806, when the Kingdom of Holland was a puppet state of the First French Empire, was the settlement granted city rights by Louis Bonaparte.
Between 1800 and 1960, the city saw a considerable growth from 40,000 in 1800 to 200,000 in 1900 and eventually 600,000 in 1960.
With a population of 520,704 inhabitants (as of 1 April 2016) and more than one million inhabitants including the suburbs, it is the third largest city of the Netherlands, after Amsterdam and Rotterdam.
Many Jews were killed during the German occupation.
RandstadRail connects The Hague to nearby cities, Zoetermeer, Rotterdam and Leidschendam-Voorburg.
The city is the Dutch second biggest tourist destination, after Amsterdam.
The Hague also hosts several annual music festivals.
* NATO Communications and Information Agency, (NCI Agency)
One railway station can be found here: Den Haag Moerwijk.
Most of the canals were drained in the late 19th century but many have been restored recently.
The number of hotel nights in The Hague increased by 5%; in particular, visitors from neighbouring countries are finding their way to The Hague.
Scheveningen forms a second cultural centre of The Hague, having its own Pathé cinema as well as the musical theatre Circustheater although, especially in the summer, most night life concentrates around the sea-front boulevard with its bars, restaurants and gambling halls.
Vlaggetjesdag, literally ''Flag Day'' is the annual celebration of the arrival of the year's first herring (Hollandse Nieuwe) in Scheveningen.
In the 15th century, the smarter ''des Graven hage'' came into use, literally "The Count's Wood", with connotations like "The Count's Hedge, Private Enclosure or Hunting Grounds".
At the heart of the city centre across the palace gardens is the home of Summerschool Den Haag, international school for dance with guestteachers such as Valentina Scaglia, Igone de Jongh, and Maia Makhateli.
Dudok planned its renewal, putting apartment blocks for the middle class in open park-like settings.
A modern beach resort, Scheveningen is a popular tourist destination.
The proportion of Dutch people is 49.9%, while that of Western immigrants is 15.6%, and that of non-western immigrants is 34.4%.
Since early times, possibly as far back as the 16th century, the stork has been the symbol of The Hague.
That is, excepting some medieval close-knitted streets in the centre.
Because of its history, the historical inner city of The Hague differs in various aspects from the nearby smaller cities of Leiden and Delft.
At the beginning of the Eighty Years' War, the absence of city walls proved disastrous, as it allowed Spanish troops to easily occupy the town.
This large conurbation centred on The Hague and Rotterdam is, in turn, part of the Randstad - specifically a band of municipalities called the South Wing (Zuidvleugel).
The Hague is the largest Dutch city on the North Sea and includes two distinct beach resorts.
Indonesian, Turks, Moroccans and Surinamese people are particularly likely to adhere to a religion.
The older parts of the town have many characteristically wide and long streets.
The Royal Conservatory of The Hague and the Royal Academy of Art are also located there, as well as The Hague University, a vocational university and a branch of The Open University of the Netherlands.
It is traditionally celebrated with fairs and flea markets throughout the city.
In 1948 The Hague Congress was held with 750 delegates from 26 European countries, providing them with the opportunity to discuss ideas about the development of the European Union.
Their seat was located in The Hague.
In addition to the omnipresent herring, this day also features a number of activities unrelated to fish.
Crossing Border Festival is an annual festival in November, focusing on music and literature.
The village that originated around the Binnenhof was first mentioned as ''Haga'' in a charter dating from 1242.
Tourism is an important sector in The Hague.
It has a large church dating from the 15th century, an impressive City Hall (built as such) from the 16th century, several large 17th-century palaces, a 17th-century Protestant church built in what was then a modern style, and many important 18th-century buildings.
Plans were made in the late 1990s for a second artery road into the city (the "Rotterdamsebaan" or previously called "Trekvliettracé") which is due to be built between 2016 and 2019.
Most recently, on 1 March 2009, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, a U.N. tribunal to investigate and prosecute suspects in the 2005 assassination of Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, opened in the former headquarters of the Netherlands General Intelligence Agency in Leidschendam, a town within the greater area of The Hague.
's-Gravenhage was officially used for the city from the 17th century onwards.
Moreover, The Hague International Model United Nations, annually in January, is a five-day conference held at the World Forum, gathering over 4,000 students from over 200 secondary schools across the globe.
In July or August, The city hosts a series of weekly firework displays by the sea front in Scheveningen, as part of an international fireworks festival and competition.
Outdoor concerts throughout the city centre of The Hague draw tens of thousands of visitors every year.
* Hague Academy of International Law, center for high-level education in both public and private international law
The target was an installation of V-2 rockets in the nearby Haagse Bos park, but because of navigational errors, the bombs fell on a heavily populated and historic part of the city.
The area used to be part of Rijswijk, until the municipality of The Hague bought the land in 1844.
In 2012, the city welcomed 1.2 million tourists (an increase of 80,000 compared to the previous year), half of whom came from abroad.
Since herring was most appropriate for smoking around September, most fishing boats fished flatfish or round-bodied fish during a part of the summer so as to avoid a surplus of fresh herring.
Plans for a subway were shelved in the early 1970s.
* Special Tribunal for Lebanon
The King is driven in the coach from Noordeinde Palace to the Ridderzaal in the Binnenhof.
The city of The Hague contributes substantially to international politics: The Hague is home to over 150 international organisations.
It was a village unto itself until 1923, when it was annexed by The Hague.
This division is reflected in the local accent: The more affluent citizens are usually called "Hagenaars" and speak so-called ''bekakt Haags'' ("posh"), this contrasts with the ''Hagenezen'', who speak ''plat Haags'' ("vulgar"); see Demographics below.
There has never been any large-scale industrial activity in The Hague, with the possible exception of the fishing activities of the harbour in Scheveningen.
With 10 million visitors a year, it is the most popular beach town in the Benelux area.
In order for the administration to maintain control over city matters, The Hague never received official city status, although it did have many of the privileges normally granted only to cities.
Crossing Border Festival, State-X and The Hague Jazz festival are among other music festivals in The Hague.
Some works have been executed, but removed already in the 1980s.
A large part of the south western city was planned by the progressive Dutch architect H.P.
Hundreds of thousands of people gather in Scheveningen for the festivities, and the fishing boats are decorated especially for the occasion.
After several annexations and housing construction, The Hague has since grown again, celebrating its 500,000th inhabitant in 2011.
* Europol, European Police Office
Other connecting motorways are the A4, which connects the city with Amsterdam, and the A13, which runs to Rotterdam and connects to motorways towards the Belgian border.
* '''Escamp''' (118,483 inhabitants) is the most populous district of The Hague, built largely after the Second World War as part of The Hague's large expansion to the south east.
The former Dutch colony of the East Indies, now Indonesia, has left its mark on The Hague.
It is still used for political events, such as the annual speech from the throne by the Dutch monarch.
There is an international service to Antwerp and Brussels.
* Netherlands Institute of International Relations 'Clingendael'
This evening is called King's Night, or ''Koningnach'' in The Hague.
The Hague originated around the 13th century Binnenhof, and this is still considered the cultural centre of the city.
* International Court of Justice, located in the Peace Palace
The establishments of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal (1981), the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (1993) and the International Criminal Court (2002) in the city further consolidated the role of The Hague as a center for international legal arbitration.
A festive day, children in The Hague are free from school so they may watch the procession of the Golden Coach.
The conurbations around The Hague and Rotterdam are close enough to be a single conurbation in some contexts.
The district is divided into Leidschenveen and Ypenburg, which were part of Leidschendam, Nootdorp and Rijswijk before the areas were annexed by The Hague in 2002.
Public transport in The Hague consists of a tramway network and a sizeable number of bus routes, operated by HTM Personenvervoer.
The district is divided into six neighbourhoods.
Generally the wealthier neighbourhoods lie on sand, and the poorer neighbourhoods on peat.
It is significantly smaller and attracts mainly local residents.
After the war, The Hague was, at one point, the largest building site in Europe.
In fact, the number and variety of foreign residents (especially the expatriates) make the city quite culturally diverse, with many foreign pubs, shops and cultural events.
* Permanent Court of Arbitration, the oldest institution for international dispute resolution.
The population has decreased until around 2005, but since then has begun to grow again, driven by students and east European immigrants.
The ''Grote Markt'' (literally "Great Market") is completely strewn with chairs and tables, summer or winter.
* Hague Institute for the Internationalisation of Law (HiiL)
* International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR, appeals court only).
Today, this name is only used in some official documents like birth and marriage certificates.
The less popular of the city's two seaside resorts, Kijkduin is located here.
In line with the city's history as an important convention center and the current presence of institutions such as the ICJ, The Hague's city council employs a city branding strategy that aims to establish The Hague as the Legal Capital of the World and the International City of Peace and Justice.
After the elections, the municipal executive was formed by a coalition existing of D66, PvdA, VVD, HSP and CDA.
It consists of four light rail lines (2, 3, 4 and 19 to Zoetermeer, Rijswijk, Delft and Leidschendam-Voorburg) and one subway line (E to Rotterdam).
This was the site of Ypenburg Airport which was a military airport during the Second World War.
The 10th edition, in 2007, celebrated the 400 years of the relationship between the Netherlands and Australia.
The Hague has a service-oriented economy.
* Eurojust, European Union body composed of national prosecutors
Kijkduin, in the south west, is The Hague's other beach resort.
Located in the west of the Netherlands, The Hague is in the centre of the Haaglanden conurbation and lies at the southwest corner of the larger Randstad conurbation.
The tribunal itself is in Arusha, Tanzania.
The layout of the city is more spacious than other Dutch cities and because of the incorporation of large and old nobility estates, the creation of various parks and the use of green zones around natural streams, it is a much more green city than any other in the Netherlands.
It does not have a cramped inner city, bordered by canals and walls.
* Carnegie Foundation
Of The Hague's native Dutch population, almost all religious people belong to Christianity.
From the 13th century onwards, the counts of Holland used The Hague as their administrative centre and residence when in Holland.
Besides the City Hall, this is also the location of the Dr. Anton Philipszaal, home to the Residentie Orchestra, and the Lucent Danstheater, home to the internationally celebrated modern dance company Nederlands Dans Theater.
The district also includes the financial centre of the city, the Beatrixkwartier.
The "t" is left out because ''nacht'' is pronounced as ''nach'' in The Hague.
In modern administrative law, "city rights" have no place anymore.
Houses are generally low-rise (often not more than three floors).
Just under 40% of the population of The Hague regularly attends a house of worship.
After the separation of Belgium in 1830, Amsterdam remained the capital of the Netherlands, while the government was situated in The Hague.
Tong Tong Fair, formerly ''Pasar Malam Besar'', is the largest festival in the world for Indo culture.
The main beach resort Scheveningen, in the northwestern part of the city is a popular destination for tourists as well as for inhabitants.
Despite efforts of the municipality, public support for the proposed theatre remains low.
King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands and Queen Máxima of the Netherlands live in Huis ten Bosch in the Haagse Bos, and work in the Noordeinde Palace in the city centre.
The municipality expects the growth to continue to 513,000 inhabitants in 2020.
The first edition took place in 1993.
In the 1970s and 1980s, mostly white middle-class families moved to neighbouring towns like Voorburg, Leidschendam, Rijswijk and, most of all, Zoetermeer.
The foundation of The Hague as an "international city of peace and justice" was laid in 1899, when the world's first Peace Conference took place in The Hague on Tobias Asser's initiative, followed by a second in 1907.
* Hague Conference on Private International Law, (HCCH), the oldest and preeminent private international law harmonisation institution
The Hague is divided into eight official districts which are, in turn, divided into neighbourhoods.
* International Criminal Court, (ICC)
Just over half of The Hague's population identifies with a religious group.
The ensemble has its main base in the city.
Every third Tuesday in September is Prinsjesdag, or ''Prince's Day'', the opening of Dutch parliament.
However, with several direct trains per hour from the railway stations Hollands Spoor and Centraal, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is more frequently used by people travelling to and from The Hague by air.
* Leiden University College The Hague
Large employers in this sector include the ministries of Defence, Justice, Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, Foreign Affairs, the Interior and Transport, Public Works and Water Management.
It has a long sandy beach and its own esplanade, pier and lighthouse, but also a Pathé cinema, a musical theatre and a casino.
There are two main railway stations in The Hague: Hollands Spoor (HS) and Centraal Station (CS), only  distant from each other.
It also gets more sunshine.
The ''Buitenhof'' (literally "Outer Court", located just outside the Binnenhof) contains a six screen Pathé cinema and a handful of bars and restaurants in the immediate vicinity.
People that live on the sand are ''Hagenaars'', those that live on peat are ''Hagenezen''.
