Plutarch recounts that "honors he enjoyed were far beyond those paid to other foreigners; nay, he actually took part in the King's hunts and in his household diversions".
Themistocles now developed a second strategy.
This ship was blown off course by a storm, and ended up at Naxos, which an Athenian fleet was in the process of besieging.
This in turn meant that the Athenians must prepare to abandon Athens.
His ability as attorney and arbitrator, used in the service of the common people, gained him further popularity.
Diodorus and Plutarch next recount a similar tale, namely that Themistocles stayed briefly with an acquaintance (Lysitheides or Nicogenes) who was also acquainted with the Persian king, Artaxerxes I.
Furthermore, Plutarch reports that at the next Olympic Games: "when Themistocles entered the stadium, the audience neglected the contestants all day long to gaze on him, and pointed him out with admiring applause to visiting strangers, so that he too was delighted, and confessed to his friends that he was now reaping in full measure the harvest of his toils in behalf of Hellas."
To persuade the Spartans to defend Attica, Themistocles had to show them that the Athenians were willing to do everything necessary for the success of the alliance.
In the aftermath of Thermopylae, Boeotia fell to the Persians, who then began to advance on Athens.
The route to southern Greece (Boeotia, Attica and the Peloponnesus) would require the army of Xerxes to travel through the very narrow pass of Thermopylae.
Admetus, however, allowed Themistocles to escape, giving him a large sum of gold to aid him on his way.
Who, facing the united might of all Asia, has found himself at the side of his city when its inhabitants had been driven from their homes, and still won the victory?"
In advancing naval power, Themistocles was probably advocating a course of action he thought essential for the long-term prospects of Athens.
In 510&nbsp;BC, he persuaded the Spartan king Cleomenes I to launch an attack on Athens, which succeeded in overthrowing Hippias.
Indeed, becoming aware of the Persian preparations for the coming invasion, the Athenians voted for the construction of more ships than Themistocles had initially asked for.
However, the support of the nobility began to coalesce around the man who would become Themistocles's great rival—Aristides.
Due to subterfuge on the part of Themistocles, the Allies lured the Persian fleet into the Straits of Salamis, and the decisive Greek victory there was the turning point in the invasion, which ended the following year by the defeat of the Persians at the land Battle of Plataea.
He was made governor of Magnesia, and lived there for the rest of his life.
Meanwhile, the Spartans actively worked against him, trying to promote Cimon (son of Miltiades) as a rival to Themistocles.
In short, the entire Athenian fleet must be dispatched to Artemisium.
The tyrant Peisistratos had died in 527&nbsp;BC, passing power to his sons, Hipparchus and Hippias.
The Peloponnesian Allies prepared to now defend the Isthmus of Corinth, thus abandoning Athens to the Persians.
It was Thucydides's judgement that Themistocles was "a man who exhibited the most indubitable signs of genius; indeed, in this particular he has a claim on our admiration quite extraordinary and unparalleled".
Themistocles, with his power-base firmly established among the poor, moved naturally to fill the vacuum left by Miltiades's death, and in that decade became the most influential politician in Athens.
On a personal level, Cleisthenes wanted to return to Athens; however, he also probably wanted to prevent Athens becoming a Spartan client state.
However, the loss of the simultaneous Battle of Thermopylae to the Persians made their continued presence at Artemisium irrelevant, and the Allies thus evacuated.
It seems clear that, towards the end of the decade, Themistocles had begun to accrue enemies, and had become arrogant; moreover his fellow citizens had become jealous of his prestige and power.
The Allied commanders seem to have taken this news rather uncomplainingly, and Holland therefore suggests that they were party to Themistocles's ruse all along.
Themistocles claimed that the Allied commanders were infighting, that the Peloponnesians were planning to evacuate that very night, and that to gain victory all the Persians needed to do was to block the straits.
Plutarch has the ship docking at Cyme in Aeolia, and Diodorus has Themistocles making his way to Asia in an undefined manner.
However, he aroused the hostility of Sparta by ordering Athens to be re-fortified, and his perceived arrogance began to alienate him from the Athenians.
Like many contemporaries, little is known of his early years.
Plutarch indicates that he met in Athens a lineal descendant of Themistocles (also called Themistocles) who was still being paid these revenues, 600&nbsp;years after the events in question.
Tension between the two camps built over the winter, so that the ostracism of 482&nbsp;BC became a direct contest between Themistocles and Aristides.
Touring the taverns, the markets, the docks, canvassing where no politician had thought to canvas before, making sure never to forget a single voter's name, Themistocles had set his eyes on a radical new constituency" However, he took care to ensure that he did not alienate the nobility of Athens.
Themistocles appears to have been aiming to fight a battle that would cripple the Persian navy, and thus guarantee the security of the Peloponnesus.
They wished to restore the fortifications of Athens, but the Spartans objected on the grounds that no place north of the Isthmus should be left that the Persians could use as a fortress.
To do this, every able-bodied Athenian male would be required to man the ships.
And Themistocles had two sons older than these three, Neocles and Diocles.
Elected archon in 493&nbsp;BC, he convinced the polis to increase the naval power of Athens, a recurring theme in his political career.
His mother is more obscure; according to Plutarch, she was either a Thracian woman called Abrotonon, or Euterpe, a Carian from Halicarnassus.
Both Diodorus and Plutarch suggest he was quickly restored to the favour of the Athenians.
According to Thucydides, who wrote within living memory of the events, the ship eventually landed safely at Ephesus, where Themistocles disembarked.
In 483&nbsp;BC, a massive new seam of silver was found in the Athenian mines at Laurium.
It should be noted that both Diodorus and Plutarch considered that the charges were false, and made solely for the purposes of destroying Themistocles.
He could also excellently divine the good and evil which lay hid in the unseen future.
Themistocles grew up in a period of upheaval in Athens.
In fine, whether we consider the extent of his natural powers, or the slightness of his application, this extraordinary man must be allowed to have surpassed all others in the faculty of intuitively meeting an emergency."
In whose term as general have the resources been more inferior and the dangers they faced greater?
A force of 10,000 hoplites was dispatched under the command of the Spartan polemarch Euenetus and Themistocles to the Vale of Tempe, which they believed the Persian army would have to pass through.
The Peloponnesian contingents wanted to sail to the coast of the Isthmus to concentrate forces with the army.
At any rate, it seems to have been Themistocles's particular mix of virtues and vices that made him such an effective politician.
The Athenian people thus overthrew Isagoras, repelled a Spartan attack under Cleomenes, and invited Cleisthenes to return to Athens, to put his plan into action.
While the battle did not end the Persian invasion, it effectively ensured that all Greece would not be conquered, and allowed the Allies to go on the offensive in 479&nbsp;BC.
The Magnesians built a "splendid tomb" in their market place for Themistocles, which still stood during the time of Plutarch, and continued to dedicate part of their revenues to the family of Themistocles.
Plutarch reports that, as might be imagined, Artaxerxes was elated that such a dangerous and illustrious foe had come to serve him.
Certainly, in the years (487&nbsp;BC) following, the heads of the prominent families, including the Alcmaeonids, were exiled.
His naval policies would have a lasting impact on Athens as well, since maritime power became the cornerstone of the Athenian Empire and golden age.
Since Themistocles' long-standing advocacy of Athenian naval power enabled the Allied fleet to fight, and his stratagem brought about the Battle of Salamis, it is probably not an exaggeration to say, as Plutarch does, that Themistocles, "...is thought to have been the man most instrumental in achieving the salvation of Hellas."
Themistocles had many daughters, of whom Mnesiptolema, whom he had by a second marriage, was wife to Archeptolis, her brother by another mother, and became priestess of Cybele; Italia was married to Panthoides, of the island of Chios; Sybaris to Nicomedes the Athenian.
In 478&nbsp;BC, the Hellenic alliance was reconstituted without the Peloponnesian states, into the Delian League, in which Athens was the dominant power.
Themistocles seems to have realised that for the Greeks to survive the coming onslaught required a Greek navy that could hope to face up to the Persian navy, and he therefore attempted to persuade the Athenians to build such a fleet.
:"Themistocles was a man who exhibited the most indubitable signs of genius; indeed, in this particular he has a claim on our admiration quite extraordinary and unparalleled.
Under the guidance of Pericles, the Delian league gradually evolved into the Athenian Empire, the zenith of Athenian power and influence.
All three chroniclers agree that Themistocles's next move was to contact the Persian king; in Thucydides, this is by letter, while Plutarch and Diodorus have a face-to-face meeting with the king.
The Delian league took the war to Persia, eventually invading Persian territory and dominating the Aegean.
At some point in his travels, Themistocles's wife and children were extricated from Athens by a friend, and joined him in exile.
Furthermore, although the admirals all voted for Themistocles in second place, they all voted for themselves in first place, so that no-one won the prize for individual achievement.
He also instructed the Athenians to build 20 triremes per year, to ensure that their dominance in naval matters continued.
Then Aristides came before the people and said of the deed which Themistocles purposed to do, that none other could be more advantageous, and none more unjust.
The Rhodian poet Timocreon was among his most eloquent enemies, composing slanderous drinking songs.
The Athenians were certainly aware throughout this period that the Persian interest in Greece had not ended; Darius's son and successor, Xerxes I, had continued the preparations for the invasion of Greece.
Themistocles died with his reputation in tatters, a traitor to the Athenian people; the "saviour of Greece" had turned into the enemy of liberty.
In the ensuing battle, the cramped conditions in the Straits hindered the much larger Persian navy, which became disarrayed, and the Allies took advantage to win a famous victory.
Themistocles proposed that the silver should be used to build a new fleet of 200 triremes, while Aristides suggested it should instead be distributed among the Athenian citizens.
Although further away from Athens, Piraeus offered three natural harbours, and could be easily fortified.
Themistocles introduced tax breaks for merchants and artisans, to attract both people and trade to the city to make Athens a great mercantile centre.
'''Themistocles''' (;   ''Themistoklẽs''; "Glory of the Law"; c. 524&ndash;459&nbsp;BC) was an Athenian politician and general.
He began building up a support base among these newly empowered citizens:  "he wooed the poor; and they, not used to being courted, duly loved him back.
His friends also managed to send him many of his belongings, although up to 100 talents worth of his goods were confiscated by the Athenians.
It is probable that in early 479 BC, Themistocles was stripped of his command; instead, Xanthippus was to command the Athenian fleet, and Aristides the land forces.
Themistocles was evidently sociable and appears to have enjoyed strong personal loyalty from his friends.
However, perhaps inevitably, there were also rumours surrounding his death; that finding that he could not keep the promises that he had made to the king, he committed suicide by taking poison, or drinking bull's blood.
However, his reputation in Athens was rehabilitated by Pericles in the 450s&nbsp;BC, and by the time Herodotus wrote his history, Themistocles was once again seen as a hero.
It is clear from Herodotus, however, that Themistocles would be the real leader of the fleet.
They demanded that he be tried by the 'Congress of Greeks', rather than in Athens, although it seems that in the end he was actually summoned to Athens to stand trial.
Themistocles himself took command of the Athenian contingent of the fleet, and went to Artemisium.
During the winter, the Allies held a meeting at Corinth to celebrate their success, and award prizes for achievement.
The Spartans claimed the command of land forces, and since the Greek (hereafter referred to as "Allied") fleet would be dominated by Athens, Themistocles tried to claim command of the naval forces.
As Holland has it:  "What precise heights of oratory he attained, what stirring and memorable phrases he pronounced, we have no way of knowing...only by the effect it had on the assembly can we gauge what surely must have been its electric and vivifying quality—for Themistocles' audacious proposals, when put to the vote, were ratified.
In response, realising the importance of the Athenian fleet to their security, and probably seeking to massage Themistocles's ego, the Spartans brought Themistocles to Sparta.
So Themistocles told Aristides that his purpose was to burn the naval station of the confederate Hellenes, for that in this way the Athenians would be greatest, and lords of all.
Perhaps realising he had little hope of surviving this trial, Themistocles fled, first to Kerkyra, and thence to Admetus, king of Molossia.
After Marathon, probably in 489, Miltiades, the hero of the battle, was seriously wounded in an abortive attempt to capture Paros.
"Themistocles once declared to the people of Athens that he had devised a certain measure which could not be revealed to them, though it would be helpful and salutary for the city, and they ordered that Aristides alone should hear what it was and pass judgment on it.
Either way, the Allies prepared for battle, and Themistocles delivered a speech to the marines before they embarked on the ships.
At the decisive Battle of Plataea, the Allies destroyed the Persian army, while apparently on the same day, the Allied navy destroyed the remnants of the Persian fleet at the Battle of Mycale.
The 'congress' met again in the spring of 480&nbsp;BC.
At the time, Athens was embroiled in a long-running war with the Aeginetans, and building a fleet would allow the Athenians to finally defeat them at sea.
In the years after Marathon, and in the run up to the second Persian invasion he became the most prominent politician in Athens.
Themistocles's archonship saw the beginnings of a major theme in his career; the advancement of Athenian sea-power.
The Athenian aristocracy, and indeed Greek aristocrats in general, were loath to see one person pre-eminent, and such maneuvers were commonplace.
Themistocles left three sons by Archippe, daughter to Lysander of Alopece,—Archeptolis, Polyeuctus, and Cleophantus.
When the Persian fleet finally arrived at Artemisium after a significant delay, Eurybiades, who both Herodotus and Plutarch suggest was not the most inspiring commander, wished to sail away without fighting.
Themistocles first went to live in exile in Argos.
In itself, this did not mean that Themistocles had done anything wrong; ostracism, in the words of Plutarch,  "was not a penalty, but a way of pacifying and alleviating that jealousy which delights to humble the eminent, breathing out its malice into this disfranchisement."
Aristides refused to countenance this; conversely Themistocles was not pleased that only 100 ships would be built.
It is possible to draw some conclusions about Themistocles's character.
Miltiades was given a massive fine for the crime of 'deceiving the Athenian people', but died weeks later as a result of his wound.
In the aftermath of the invasion, the Athenians began rebuilding their city under the guidance of Themistocles.
Plutarch considers this to be false.
Thucydides and Plutarch say that Themistocles asked for a year's grace to learn the Persian language and customs, after which he would serve the king, and Artaxerxes granted this.
According to Herodotus, after the Persian navy began its maneuvers, Aristides arrived at the Allied camp from Aegina.
Themistocles thus fled from Greece and was temporarily given sanctuary by Alexander I of Macedon at Pydna before traveling to Asia Minor, where he entered the service of the Persian king Artaxerxes I.
Aristides had been recalled from exile along with the other ostracised Athenians on the order of Themistocles, so that Athens might be united against the Persians.
In Athens itself, he lost favour by building a sanctuary of Artemis, with the epithet ''Aristoboulẽ'' ("of good counsel") near his home, a blatant reference to his own role in delivering Greece from the Persian invasion.
Aristides cast himself as Themistocles's opposite—virtuous, honest and incorruptible—and his followers called him "the just".
Since Diodorus's history includes such luminaries as Alexander the Great and Hannibal, this is high praise indeed.
These twin victories completed the Allied triumph, and ended the Persian threat to Greece.
"What other man, while Sparta still had the superior strength and the Spartan Eurybiades held the supreme command of the fleet, could by his single-handed efforts have deprived Sparta of that glory?
Themistocles advised the king on his dealings with the Greeks, although it seems that for a long period, the king was distracted by events elsewhere in the empire, and thus Themistocles "lived on for a long time without concern".
Indeed, Athens would create the Delian League in 478&nbsp;BC, uniting the naval power of the Aegean Islands and Ionia under Athenian leadership.
Neocles died when he was young by the bite of a horse, and Diocles was adopted by his grandfather, Lysander.
A Thessalian delegation suggested that the allies could muster in the narrow Vale of Tempe, on the borders of Thessaly, and thereby block Xerxes's advance.
In what has been characterized as the first referendum, Aristides was ostracised, and Themistocles's policies were endorsed.
An able theoretical expositor of all that came within the sphere of his practice, he was not without the power of passing an adequate judgment in matters in which he had no experience.
To bring about this battle, Themistocles used a cunning mix of subterfuge and misinformation, psychologically exploiting Xerxes's desire to finish the invasion.
Therefore one may well be amazed that the Athenians were willing to rid themselves of a man of such genius."
By delaying in this manner, Themistocles gave the Athenians enough time to fortify the city, and thus ward off any Spartan attack aimed at preventing the re-fortification of Athens.
Some authors report that he was unruly as a child and was consequently disowned by his father.
Themistocles probably aimed to make Athens the dominant naval power in the Aegean.
Mardonius wintered in Boeotia and Thessaly, and the Athenians were thus able to return to their city, which had been burnt and razed by the Persians, for the winter.
Salamis was the turning point in the second Persian invasion, and indeed the Greco-Persian Wars in general.
This was 'ostracism'&mdash;each Athenian citizen was required to write on a shard of pottery (''ostrakon'') the name of a politician that they wished to see exiled for a period of ten years.
Indeed, Diodorus goes so far as to say that  "But if any man, putting envy aside, will estimate closely not only the man's natural gifts but also his achievements, he will find that on both counts Themistocles holds first place among all of whom we have record.
Over three days of battle, the Allies held their own against the much larger Persian fleet, but sustained significant losses.
For the Athenians, and Themistocles personally, the winter would be a testing one.
Finally, in 431&nbsp;BC, this tension erupted into the Peloponnesian War, the first of a series of conflicts that tore Greece apart for the next century; an unforeseen, if indirect, legacy of Themistocles's.
However, the other naval powers, including Corinth and Aegina refused to give command to the Athenians, and Themistocles pragmatically backed down.
Plato the philosopher mentions Cleophantus as a most excellent horseman, but otherwise insignificant person.
After returning to Athens in the winter, Plutarch reports that Themistocles made a proposal to the city while the Greek fleet was wintering at Pagasae:
He also appears to have been corrupt (at least by modern standards), and was known for his fondness of bribes.
As Plato tells it, the heckler hails from the small island of Seriphus; Themistocles retorts that it is true that he would not have been famous if he had come from that small island, but that the heckler would not have been famous either if he had been born in Athens.
Eventually, in either 472 or 471&nbsp;BC, he was ostracised.
Desperate to avoid identification, Themistocles pestered the captain of the ship to continue the journey immediately.
There, he was awarded a special prize "for his wisdom and cleverness", and won high praise from all.
He was made governor of the district of Magnesia on the Maeander River in Asia Minor, and assigned the revenues of three cities: Magnesia (about 50 talents per year—"for bread"); Myus ("for opson"); and Lampsacus ("for wine").
Themistocles avoided mentioning Persia, deeming that it was too distant a threat for the Athenians to act on, and instead focused their attention on Aegina.
Plutarch reports that Themistocles also secretly proposed to destroy the beached ships of the other Allied navies to ensure complete naval dominance—but was overruled by Aristides and the council of Athens.
At this point Themistocles accepted a large bribe from the local people for the fleet to remain at Artemisium, and used some of it to bribe Eurybiades to remain, while pocketing the rest.
Themistocles sent a servant, Sicinnus, to Xerxes, with a message proclaiming that Themistocles was "on king's side and prefers that your affairs prevail, not the Hellenes".
However, this episode may be seen as the beginning of the Spartan mistrust of Themistocles, which would return to haunt him.
Instead, as a compromise, the Spartans (an insignificant naval power), in the person of Eurybiades were to command the naval forces.
Xerxes's actions indicate that he was keen to finish the conquest of Greece in 480&nbsp;BC, and to do this, he needed a decisive victory over the Allied fleet.
As a result, Themistocles's motion was carried easily, although only 100 warships of the trireme type were to be built.
He was proud and vain, and anxious for recognition of his deeds.
However, as happened to many prominent individuals in the Athenian democracy, Themistocles's fellow citizens grew jealous of his success, and possibly tired of his boasting.
Plutarch further reports that Themistocles was preoccupied, even as a child, with preparing for public life.
However, in the aftermath, the other noble ('eupatrid') families of Athens rejected Cleisthenes, electing Isagoras as archon, with the support of Cleomenes.
Themistocles also now returned to his naval policy, and more ambitious undertakings that would increase the dominant position of his native state.
This was essentially a maritime alliance of Athens and her colonies, the Aegean islands, and the Ionian cities.
From this point on, Themistocles appears to have been more-or-less in charge of the Allied effort at Artemisium.
His relationship with power was of a particularly personal nature; while he undoubtedly desired the best for Athens, many of his actions also seem to have been made in self-interest.
He does not detract from Themistocles's achievements, but also highlights his failings.
Aristides, as champion of the ''zeugites'' (the upper, 'hoplite-class') vigorously opposed such a policy.
The career of a politician in Athens thus became fraught with more difficulty, since displeasing the population was likely to result in exile.
This could easily be blocked by the Greek hoplites, despite the overwhelming numbers of Persians; furthermore, to prevent the Persians bypassing Thermopylae by sea, the Athenian and allied navies could block the straits of Artemisium.
He was one of a new breed of non-aristocratic politicians who rose to prominence in the early years of the Athenian democracy.
Moreover, Themistocles's doctrine of Athenian naval power, and the establishment of Athens as a major power in the Greek world were of enormous consequence during the 5th century BC.
Undoubtedly the greatest achievement of Themistocles's career was his role in the defeat of Xerxes's invasion of Greece.
By his own native capacity, alike unformed and unsupplemented by study, he was at once the best judge in those sudden crises which admit of little or of no deliberation, and the best prophet of the future, even to its most distant possibilities.
Plutarch offers a more nuanced view of Themistocles, with more of a critique of Themistocles's character.
In the run up to the Persian invasion, Themistocles had thus become the foremost politician in Athens.
Perhaps overconfident and expecting no resistance, the Persian navy sailed into the Straits, only to find that, far from disintegrating, the Allied navy was ready for battle.
However, perceiving that they now had a prime opportunity to bring Themistocles down for good, the Spartans again levelled accusations of Themistocles's complicity in Pausanias's treason.
Since there was a bounty on Themistocles's head, this acquaintance devised a plan to safely convey Themistocles to the Persian king in the type of covered wagon that the King's concubines travelled in.
When, after a year, Themistocles returned to the king's court, he appears to have made an immediate impact, and "he attained...very high consideration there, such as no Hellene has ever possessed before or since".
Neanthes of Cyzicus and Phanias add two more, the city of Palaescepsis ("for clothes") and the city of Percote with bedding and furniture for his house.
Tension grew throughout the century between Athens and Sparta, as they competed to be the leading state in Greece.
However, perhaps tired of the Athenians pointing out their role at Salamis, and of their demands for the Allies to march north, the Allies awarded the prize for civic achievement to Aegina.
Yet, set against these negative traits, was an apparently natural brilliance and talent for leadership:
The Peloponnesians refused to countenance marching north of the Isthmus to fight the Persian army; the Athenians tried to shame them into doing so, with no success.
From Molossia, Themistocles apparently fled to Pydna, from where he took a ship for Asia Minor.
Diodorus also extensively praises Themistocles, going as far as to offer a rationale for the length at which he discusses him: "Now on the subject of the high merits of Themistocles, even if we have dwelt over-long on the subject in this digression, we believed it not seemly that we should leave his great ability unrecorded."
In the summer of that year, after receiving an Athenian ultimatum, the Peloponnesians finally agreed to assemble an army and march to confront Mardonius, who had reoccupied Athens in June.
This move marked him out as a 'man of the people', and allowed him to interact more easily with ordinary citizens.
The Spartans now saw an opportunity to destroy Themistocles, and implicated him in the treasonous plot of their own general Pausanias.
In the wake of this prosecution, the Athenian people chose to use a new institution of the democracy, which had been part of Cleisthenes's reforms, but remained so far unused.
The Spartans sent ambassadors to Admetus, threatening that the whole of Greece would go to war with the Molossians unless they surrendered Themistocles.
Xerxes evidently took the bait, and the Persian fleet was sent out to effect the block.
Hipparchus was murdered in 514&nbsp;BC, and in response to this, Hippias became paranoid and started to rely increasingly on foreign mercenaries to keep a hold on power.
The Athenian people, facing the gravest moment of peril in their history, committed themselves once and for all to the alien element of the sea, and put their faith in a man whose ambitions many had long profoundly dreaded."
Themistocles died at Magnesia in 459&nbsp;BC, at the age of 65, according to Thucydides, from natural causes.
The establishment of the democracy was to radically change Athens:"And so it was that the Athenians found themselves suddenly a great power...they gave vivid proof of what equality and freedom of speech might achieve"
Thucydides evidently held Themistocles in some esteem, and is uncharacteristically flattering in his praise for him (see above).
Aristides told Themistocles that the Persian fleet had encircled the Allies, which greatly pleased Themistocles, as he now knew that the Persians had walked into his trap.
Taking advantage of his incapacitation, the powerful Alcmaeonid family arranged for him to be prosecuted.
The new system of government in Athens opened up a wealth of opportunity for men like Themistocles, who previously would have had no access to power.
In performing this subterfuge, Themistocles seems to have been trying to lure the Persian fleet into the Straits.
However, in an early example of his cunning, Themistocles persuaded "well-born" children to exercise with him in Cynosarges, thus breaking down the distinction between "alien and legitimate".
