However, "Teddy" remained much more popular with the public, even though Roosevelt openly despised it.
Roosevelt proved highly energetic, and an equal match for William Jennings Bryan's famous barnstorming style of campaigning.
The Republican progressives interpreted the 1910 defeats as compelling argument for the complete reorganization of the party in 1911, and Roosevelt reacted with renewed interest in more personal political endeavors.
While at Harvard, Roosevelt began a systematic study of the role played by the young US Navy in the War of 1812.
On November 18, 1956, the United States Postal Service released a 6¢ Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Roosevelt.
Roosevelt sought an inheritance tax so the great fortunes could not pay out in perpetuity.
Roosevelt has been portrayed many times in film and on television.
While the party executives were pleased with their success in engineering Roosevelt's next political foray, Roosevelt, very much to the contrary, thought he had "stood the state machine on its head".
Roosevelt, as an experienced hunter and anatomist, correctly concluded that since he was not coughing blood, the bullet had not reached his lung, and he declined suggestions to go to the hospital immediately.
As Governor of New York State before becoming Vice President in March 1901, Roosevelt signed an act replacing the Police Commissioners with a single Police Commissioner.
Roosevelt said that the American character – indeed a new "American race" (ethnic group) had emerged from the heroic wilderness hunters and Indian fighters, acting on the frontier with little government help.
Theodore Sr. was the fifth son of businessman Cornelius Van Schaack "C.V.S."
Nevertheless, he was energetic and mischievously inquisitive.
As president, he repeatedly warned men that they were becoming too office-bound, too complacent, too comfortable with physical ease and moral laxity, and were failing in their duties to propagate the race and exhibit masculine vigor.
He is utterly unfit for leadership and this is a time when we need leadership."
McKinley died on September 14, and Roosevelt was sworn in at the Ansley Wilcox House.
To buttress his hold on the party's nomination, Roosevelt made it clear that anyone opposing Cortelyou would be considered to be opposing the President.
He successfully led efforts to organize ranchers to address the problems of overgrazing and other shared concerns; his work resulted in the formation of the Little Missouri Stockmen's Association.
He even ordered changes made in the minting of a coin whose design he disliked, and ordered the Government Printing Office to adopt simplified spellings for a core list of 300 words, according to reformers on the Simplified Spelling Board.
He was forced to rescind the latter after substantial ridicule from the press and a resolution of protest from the House of Representatives.
They supported him for Vice President, and no one else of prominence was actively seeking that job.
Though indictment was obtained, the case was ultimately dismissed in federal court—it was not a federal offense, but one enforceable at the state court level.
Roosevelt wrote, perhaps prophetically, to a friend that the trip had cut his life short by ten years.
Frank Albertson played Roosevelt in the episode "Rough and Ready" of the CBS series ''My Friend Flicka.''"''''
President Harrison appointed Roosevelt to the United States Civil Service Commission, where he served until 1895.
The final credentials of the state delegates at the national convention were determined by the national committee, which was controlled by the party leaders, headed by the incumbent president.
Family trips abroad, including tours of Europe in 1869 and 1870, and Egypt in 1872, also had a lasting impact.
He entered Harvard College on September 27, 1876; his father told him "Take care of your morals first, your health next, and finally your studies".
Roosevelt's reforming zeal ran afoul of the insurance and franchise businesses, who had a major voice in the New York GOP.
It is the work of an American scholar and gentleman; and all Americans should be sincerely grateful to you for writing it.
Roosevelt also served as honorary president of the American School Hygiene Association from 1907 to 1908, and in 1909 he convened the first White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children.
Roosevelt had attempted to refashion Taft into a younger version of himself, but as soon as Taft began to display his individuality, the former president expressed his disenchantment.
This organization preserved Roosevelt's papers in a 20-year project, preserved his photos and established four public sites: the reconstructed Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site, New York City, dedicated in 1923 and donated to the National Park Service in 1963; Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Park, Oyster Bay, Long Island, New York, dedicated in 1928 and given to the people of Oyster Bay; Theodore Roosevelt Island in the Potomac River in Washington, D.C., given to the federal government in 1932; Sagamore Hill (house), Roosevelt's Oyster Bay home, opened to the public in 1953 and was donated to the National Park Service in 1963 and is now the Sagamore Hill National Historic Site.
As president, his stated preferences were relatively inclusive, across the then diverse and mostly European sources of immigration:
As president, 1901–1909, Roosevelt made building up a world-class fighting fleet of high priority, sending his "white fleet" around the globe in 1908–1909 to make sure all the naval powers understood the United States was now a major player.
Along with Thomas Jefferson, Roosevelt was the most well-read of all American politicians.
A friend of Roosevelt's, Father John Augustine Zahm, a Catholic priest and scientist at the University of Notre Dame, had searched for new adventures and found them in the forests of South America.
Roosevelt himself was not usually a target, but his speech in 1906 coined the term "muckraker" for unscrupulous journalists making wild charges.
Thee's fourth cousin, James Roosevelt I, who was also a businessman, was the father of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
In 1916, he campaigned energetically for Charles Evans Hughes and repeatedly denounced Irish-Americans and German-Americans whom he described as unpatriotic, saying they put the interests of Ireland and Germany ahead of America's by supporting neutrality.
He had discovered the significant benefits of physical exertion to minimize his asthma and bolster his spirits.
Roosevelt turned to his own man, George B. Cortelyou of New York, the first Secretary of Commerce and Labor.
The Democrats had raised $700,000 campaign contributions, one-third of the Republican contributions.
Roosevelt was forced to disband the volunteers.
At age nine, he recorded his observation of insects in a paper entitled "The Natural History of Insects".
Roosevelt said "Seven-eights of the negro delegates, and about the same proportion of white men representing negro districts in the South, went for Mr.
Roosevelt was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi literary society, the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and the Porcellian Club; he was also an editor of ''The Harvard Advocate''.
Roosevelt was soon put forth as the Republican party's candidate for the District's House seat in Albany.
He insisted to Madison Grant that race and ethnicity did not matter because men of foreign parentage across the nation fought well, including Jews....Roosevelt took the final step toward believing in racial equality.
On September 2, 1901, Roosevelt first publicized an aphorism that thrilled his supporters at the Minnesota State Fair: "Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far."
Upon Roosevelt's return to New York, friends and family were startled by his physical appearance and fatigue.
Meanwhile, Roosevelt won in Illinois, Minnesota, Nebraska, South Dakota, California, Maryland and Pennsylvania; Roosevelt also won Taft's home state of Ohio.
I will break their necks with the utmost cheerfulness if you say the word!"
He served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy under William McKinley, resigning after one year to serve with the Rough Riders, where he gained national fame for courage during the Spanish–American War.
Dalton says, "Today he is heralded as the architect of the modern presidency, as a world leader who boldly reshaped the office to meet the needs of the new century and redefined America's place in the world."
To throw off his infantry rival, Wheeler left one regiment of his Cavalry Division, the 9th, at Siboney so that he could claim that his move north was only a limited reconnaissance if things went wrong.
Roosevelt attended the 1884 GOP National Convention in Chicago and gave a speech convincing delegates to nominate African American John R. Lynch, an Edmund's supporter, to be temporary chair.
Roosevelt campaigned vigorously across the country, helping McKinley's re-election in a landslide victory based on a platform of peace, prosperity, and conservatism.
On June 26, 2006, Roosevelt was on the cover of ''TIME'' magazine with the lead story, "The Making of America—Theodore Roosevelt—The 20th Century Express": "At home and abroad, Theodore Roosevelt was the locomotive President, the man who drew his flourishing nation into the future."
DuBois to work with more energy for racial justice.
These primary elections, while demonstrating Roosevelt's continuing popularity with the electorate, were not pivotal.
He was also impressed by an invitation to speak before an audience of ten thousand, the largest crowd he had addressed up to that date.
Men working closely with Roosevelt customarily called him "Colonel" or "Theodore".
Building the Panama Canal was designed not just to open Pacific trade to East Coast cities, but also to enable the new Navy to move back and forth across the globe.
Among other items, Roosevelt brought with him four tons of salt for preserving animal hides, a lucky rabbit's foot given to him by boxer John L. Sullivan, a Holland & Holland double rifle in .500/450 donated by a group of 56 admiring Britons, a Winchester 1895 rifle in .405 Winchester, an Army (M1903) Springfield in .30-06 caliber stocked and sighted for him, a Fox No.
He brought 40 antitrust suits, and broke up major companies, such as the largest railroad and Standard Oil, the largest oil company.
Roosevelt was particularly adamant that Spain be ejected from Cuba, to foster the latter's independence and to demonstrate the U.S. resolve to reinforce the Monroe Doctrine.
The latitude granted to the Europeans by the arbiters was in part responsible for the "Roosevelt Corollary" to the Monroe Doctrine, which the President issued in 1904: "Chronic wrongdoing or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere, ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere, the adherence of the United States to the Monroe doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police power."
The 1912 primaries represented the first extensive use of the presidential primary, a reform achievement of the progressive movement.
In the 1888 presidential election, Roosevelt successfully campaigned, primarily in the Midwest, for Benjamin Harrison.
The couple married at St George's, Hanover Square in London, England.
The pursuit of an isthmus canal in Central America during this period focused on two possible routes—Nicaragua and Panama, which was then a rebellious district within Colombia.
He was a member of the New York State Assembly (New York Co., 21st D.) in 1882, 1883 and 1884.
Roosevelt also reacted by focusing on work, specifically by re-energizing a legislative investigation into corruption of the New York City government, which arose from a concurrent bill proposing that power be centralized in the mayor's office.
Roosevelt, moving to the left of his Republican Party base, called for a series of reforms that were mostly not passed.
In other areas he also sought a postal savings system (to provide competition for local banks), and he asked for campaign reform laws.
Initial reports suggested that his condition was improving, so Roosevelt, after visiting the ailing president, embarked for the west.
He also spoke in support of organized labor to further chagrin big business, but to their delight, he endorsed the gold standard, protective tariffs and lower taxes.
During his tenure, a Municipal Lodging House was established by the Board of Charities, and Roosevelt required officers to register with the Board; he also had telephones installed in station houses.
His friends were pushing, and so were his foes.
He assumed guard over them for forty hours without sleep, while reading Leo Tolstoy to keep himself awake.
At the same time, Roosevelt prophetically said, "My feeling is that the Democrats will probably win if they nominate a progressive".
Biographer H. W. Brands argues that "The most obvious drawback to the home schooling Roosevelt received was uneven coverage of the various areas of human knowledge".
Roosevelt refused to join other Mugwumps in supporting Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York and the Democratic nominee in the general election.
Historians are sharply critical of Roosevelt's criminal prosecutions of the ''World'' and the ''News'', but are divided on whether actual corruption in acquiring and building the Panama Canal took place.
Riis described how his book affected Roosevelt:
He never forgave Wilson, and quickly published ''The Foes Of Our Own Household,'' an indictment of the sitting president.
Roosevelt had an analytical mind, even as he was itching for war.
On January 16, 2001, President Bill Clinton awarded Theodore Roosevelt the Medal of Honor posthumously for his charge on San Juan Hill, Cuba, during the Spanish–American War.
He secured passage of the 1906 Hepburn Bill, with help from Democrats, which increased the regulating power of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
His vice president was Charles Warren Fairbanks of Indiana.
As governor of New York, he boxed with sparring partners several times each week, a practice he regularly continued as President until being hit so hard in the face he became blind in his left eye (a fact not made public until many years later).
Biographer Brands states, "Even his friends occasionally wondered whether there wasn't any custom or practice too minor for him to try to regulate, update or otherwise improve."
The victories came at a cost of 200 killed and 1000 wounded.
Roosevelt was a prolific author, writing with passion on subjects ranging from foreign policy to the importance of the national park system.
Theodore Roosevelt introduced the phrase "Square Deal" to describe his progressive views in a speech delivered after leaving the office of the Presidency in August 1910.
He called for a federal income tax, but the Supreme Court in the 1890s had ruled any income tax would require a constitutional amendment.
At the end of his life TR repudiated the Madison Grants and other racists and promised W.E.B.
In the 21st century, historians have paid renewed attention to President Roosevelt as "The Wilderness Warrior" and his energetic promotion of the conservation movement.
Taft promoted a progressivism that stressed the rule of law; he preferred that judges rather than administrators or politicians make the basic decisions about fairness.
In his broad outline, he stressed equality of opportunity for all citizens and emphasized the importance of fair government regulations of corporate "special interests".
The initial expedition started somewhat tenuously on December 9, 1913, at the height of the rainy season.
Returning to the USA, he became frustrated with Taft's approach as his successor.
Historians generally agree that Roosevelt moved "quickly and decisively" to prosecute misconduct in his administration.
However, liberals have criticized him for his interventionist and imperialist approach to nations he considered "uncivilized".
Eventually some of his proposals were enacted under his successors.
Roosevelt eventually became entirely disenchanted with law and diverted his attention to politics at Morton Hall on 59th Street, the headquarters for New York's 21st District Republican Association.
Roosevelt's father significantly influenced him.
In February 1912, Roosevelt announced in Boston, "I will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me.
While Roosevelt followed the tradition of incumbents in not actively campaigning on the stump, he sought to control the campaign's message through specific instructions to Cortelyou.
In 1894, a group of reform Republicans approached Roosevelt about running for Mayor of New York again; he declined, mostly due to his wife's resistance to being removed from the Washington social set.
He studied biology intently and was already an accomplished naturalist and a published ornithologist; he read prodigiously with an almost photographic memory.
He is a hero to liberals for his proposals in 1907–12 that presaged the modern welfare state of the New Deal Era, and put the environment on the national agenda.
Historians marvel that Roosevelt managed to appoint so many first-rate men with Platt's approval.
For his aggressive use of United States antitrust law, he became known as the "trust-buster".
On November 6, 1903 Francis J. Heney was appointed special prosecutor who obtained 146 indictments involving an Oregon Land Office bribery ring.
By then, he could not walk because of the infection in his injured leg and an infirmity in the other, which was due to a traffic accident a decade earlier.
Tokyo was angered over the segregation of Japanese children in San Francisco schools.
When the members of the association encouraged him to run for public office, he dropped out of law school to do so, later saying, "I intended to be one of the governing class."
Returning a war hero, he was elected governor of New York in 1898.
He incorporated Mahan's ideas into American naval strategy when he served as assistant secretary of the Navy in 1897–98.
His lifelong interest in zoology began at age seven when he saw a dead seal at a local market; after obtaining the seal's head, Roosevelt and two cousins formed what they called the "Roosevelt Museum of Natural History".
On his 22nd birthday, Roosevelt married socialite Alice Hathaway Lee, daughter of banker George Cabot Lee and Caroline Watts Haskell.
His court policies in particular caused his anointed successor, William Howard Taft, to lead a counter-crusade that defeated Roosevelt in 1912.
Elected in 1904 to a full term, Roosevelt continued to promote progressive policies, but many of his efforts and much of his legislative agenda were eventually blocked in Congress.
Roosevelt has consistently been ranked by scholars as one of the greatest U.S. presidents.
Platt insisted that he be consulted; Roosevelt appeared to comply, but then made his own decisions.
The book describes the scientific discovery, scenic tropical vistas, and exotic flora and fauna experienced during the adventure.
In 1883, Roosevelt became the Assembly Minority Leader.
Turn three hundred low families of New York into New Jersey, support them for fifty years in vicious idleness, and you will have some idea of what the Indians are.
Hewitt won with 41% (90,552 votes), and George was held to 31% (68,110 votes).
Roosevelt and his men departed Tampa on June 13, landed in Daiquiri, Cuba, on June 23, 1898, and marched to Siboney.
Roosevelt was included with Presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln at the Mount Rushmore Memorial, designed in 1927 with the approval of Republican President Calvin Coolidge.
Roosevelt conspicuously declined to make a statement requested by Garfield—that he flatly refuse a nomination.
In 1906, following a disputed election, an insurrection ensued in Cuba; Roosevelt sent Taft, the Secretary of War, to monitor the situation; he was convinced that he had the authority to unilaterally authorize Taft to deploy Marines if necessary, without congressional approval.
Roosevelt later articulated the abiding influence of the courageous men he read about, including those in his family: "I was nervous and timid.
He won 4.1 million votes (27%), compared to Taft's 3.5 million (23%).
While out of office, he made a living as a writer and magazine editor.
After the cartoonist Clifford K. Berryman illustrated the President with a bear, a toy maker heard the story and named the teddy bear after Roosevelt.
From 1890 to 1908, Southern legislatures dominated by white conservative Democrats had completed the disenfranchisement of most blacks, and therefore most Republicans in the region, through a series of new constitutions and laws creating barriers to voter registration.
Criminals should be sterilized and feeble-minded persons forbidden to leave offspring behind them."
Despite Roosevelt's continued decline and loss of over 50 pounds (20&nbsp;kg), Commander Rondon reduced the pace of the expedition to allow for his commission's mapmaking and other geographical tasks, which required regular stops to fix the expedition's position by sun-based survey.
Assisted by two uncles, he scrutinized original source materials and official US Navy records.
The tensions were ended, but Japan also agreed not to allow unskilled workers to emigrate to the U.S.
Their daughter, Alice Lee Roosevelt, was born on February 12, 1884.
We have no use for the German or Irishman who remains such...
Roosevelt's attacks on Wilson helped the Republicans win control of Congress in the off-year elections of 1918.
Roosevelt's goal was to encourage his middle-class reform-minded base to add conservation to their list of issues.
Roosevelt received criticism  for paying the bankrupt Panama Canal Company and the New Panama Canal Company $40,000,000 for the rights and equipment to build the canal.
We welcome the German and the Irishman who becomes an American.
Unlike Roosevelt, Taft never attacked business or businessmen in his rhetoric.
On September 6, President McKinley was shot by an anarchist acting alone while in Buffalo, New York.
Roosevelt was also an avid reader of poetry.
After two weeks at the GOP convention, Roosevelt asked his followers to leave the hall, and they moved to the Auditorium Theatre.
Financed by Andrew Carnegie and by his own writings, Roosevelt's party hunted for specimens for the Smithsonian Institution and for the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
Frustrated at home, Roosevelt led a two-year expedition in the Amazon Basin, nearly dying of tropical disease.
Though the other two campaigners stopped their own campaigns during the week Roosevelt was in the hospital, they resumed it once he was released.
Roosevelt's theme was that McKinley had brought America peace and prosperity and deserved reelection.
Having gotten a taste of national politics, Roosevelt felt less aspiration for advocacy on the state level; he then retired to his new "Chimney Butte Ranch" on the Little Missouri.
He had an older sister, Anna (nicknamed "Bamie"), a younger brother, Elliott, and a younger sister, Corinne.
Regarding African-Americans, Roosevelt told a civil rights leader:
He did well in science, philosophy, and rhetoric courses but continued to struggle in Latin and Greek.
Roosevelt was greatly impressed by the performance of ethnic American soldiers in the world war.
Roosevelt was particularly concerned with the motives of Germany's Kaiser Wilhelm.
Ironically, in the 1912 campaign, McDonald was Woodrow Wilson's bodyguard.
After noticing the reporters huddled outside the White House in the rain one day, he gave them their own room inside, effectively inventing the presidential press briefing.
Following the assassination of President McKinley in September 1901, Roosevelt, at age 42, succeeded to the office, becoming the youngest United States President in history.
Roosevelt agreed with Burroughs' criticisms, and published several essays of his own denouncing the booming genre of "naturalistic" animal stories as "yellow journalism of the woods".
On the night of January 5, 1919, Roosevelt suffered breathing problems.
Black delegates from the South played a key role: they voted heavily for Taft and put him over the top.
Roosevelt brought his desire to address the common interests of citizens to the west.
He reoriented, and began writing about frontier life for national magazines; he also published three books – ''Hunting Trips of a Ranchman'', ''Ranch Life and the Hunting-Trail'', and ''The Wilderness Hunter''.
In the end, he realized that he had to support Blaine to maintain his role in the GOP, and he did so in a press release on July 19.
Wilson thereafter named the Democrat McDonald as the U.S.
GOP precinct workers warned voters that the independent radical candidate Henry George was leading and that Roosevelt would lose, thus causing a last-minute defection of GOP voters to the Democratic candidate Abram Hewitt.
The most striking evolution in the twenty-first century historiography of Theodore Roosevelt is the switch from a partial arraignment of the imperialist to a quasi-unanimous celebration of the master diplomatist....
In foreign policy, he focused on Central America, where he began construction of the Panama Canal.
To this end, he exercised regularly and took up boxing, tennis, hiking, rowing, polo, and horseback riding.
He also established the first 51 bird reserves, four game preserves, and 150 National Forests, including Shoshone National Forest, the nation's first.
The Meat Inspection Act of 1906 banned misleading labels and preservatives that contained harmful chemicals.
He entered Columbia Law School, and was an able student, but he often found law to be irrational; he spent much of his time writing a book on the War of 1812.
In May 1902, anthracite coal miners went on strike, threatening a national energy shortage.
Roosevelt's party landed in Mombasa, British East Africa (now Kenya), traveled to the Belgian Congo (now Democratic Republic of the Congo), before following the Nile to Khartoum in modern Sudan.
Land fraud and speculation were found involving Oregon federal timberlands.
In March 1917, Congress gave Roosevelt the authority to raise a maximum of four divisions similar to the Rough Riders, and Major Frederick Russell Burnham was put in charge of both the general organization and recruitment.
Roosevelt seized the opportunity and began pressing his national security views regarding the Pacific and the Caribbean on McKinley.
Roosevelt attacked the fundamental axioms of eugenics, warning against "twisted eugenics".
He greatly expanded the United States Navy, and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project the United States' naval power around the globe.
Critics charged that an American investor syndicate allegedly divided the large payment among themselves.
Republicans aligned with Taft nationally would control the Republican Party for decades.
In 1907, Roosevelt became embroiled in a widely publicized literary debate known as the nature fakers controversy.
Roosevelt wrote: "My father, Theodore Roosevelt, was the best man I ever knew.
When Roosevelt used the word 'race', he meant the entirety of the ''human race'' or Americans as one race and culture.
Secretary of the Navy John D. Long was more concerned about formalities than functions, was in poor health, and left major decisions to Roosevelt.
He ran a "lily-white" campaign in the South in 1912.
In deference to Hanna's conservative loyalists, Roosevelt at first offered the party chairmanship to Cornelius Bliss, but he declined.
Because of the bullet wound, Roosevelt was taken off the campaign trail in the final weeks of the race (which ended on election day, November 5).
While at Harvard, Roosevelt participated in rowing and boxing; he was once runner-up in a Harvard boxing tournament.
Woodrow Wilson's vice president, Thomas R. Marshall, said that "Death had to take Roosevelt sleeping, for if he had been awake, there would have been a fight."
The office of Vice President was a powerless sinecure, and did not suit Roosevelt's aggressive temperament.
