Only 1,200 Jews live in the city today.
It was first established in 1926 and takes place every year at the  ''Thessaloniki International Exhibition Center''.
The city has long been known in Greece for its vibrant city culture, including having the most cafes and bars per capita of any city in Europe; and as having some of the best nightlife and entertainment in the country, thanks to its large young population and multicultural feel.
As a result, the city is a major transportation hub for the whole of south-eastern Europe, carrying, among other things, trade to and from the neighbouring countries.
Other recreation spaces throughout the Thessaloniki Metropolitan Area include the ''Fragma Thermis'', a landscaped parkland near Thermi and the Delta wetlands west of the city center; while urban beaches that have continuously been awarded the blue flags, are located along the  coastline of Thessaloniki's southeastern suburbs of Thermaikos, about  away from the city center.
Greeks of the Resistance helped save some of the Jewish residents.
A master-plan, with designs for a new terminal building and apron has also been released, and is seeking for funding.
After the fall of the kingdom of Macedon in 168&nbsp;BC, Thessalonica became a free city of the Roman Republic under Mark Antony in 41&nbsp;BC.
Many French and especially Italian Jews (from Livorno and other cities), influential in introducing new methods of education and developing new schools and intellectual environment for the Jewish population, were established in Thessaloniki.
The city layout changed after 1870, when the seaside fortifications gave way to extensive piers, and many of the oldest walls of the city were demolished, including those surrounding the White Tower, which today stands as the main landmark of the city.
In 1903 an anarchist group known as the Boatmen of Thessaloniki planted bombs in several buildings in Thessaloniki, including the Ottoman Bank, with some assistance from the IMRO.
In the 1946 monarchy referendum, the majority of the locals voted in favour of a republic, contrary to the rest of Greece.
Tsimiski Street and Proxenou Koromila avenue are the city's most famous shopping streets and are among Greece's most expensive and exclusive high streets.
The expansion of Eleftherias Square towards the sea completed the new commercial hub of the city and at the time was considered one of the most vibrant squares of the city.
Thessaloniki also lay at the southern end of the main north-south route through the Balkans along the valleys of the Morava and Axios river valleys, thereby linking the Balkans with the rest of Greece.
The Via Egnatia also functioned as an important line of communication between the Roman Empire and the nations of Asia, particularly in relation to the Silk Road.
The city later became the capital of one of the four Roman districts of Macedonia.
Thessaloniki remains one of Greece's most important railway hubs and has the biggest marshalling yard in the country.
Such include the Macedonian Museum of Contemporary Art, housing exhibitions from a number of well-known Greek and foreign artists.
Some of the most notable mansions and villas of the old-era of the city remain along Vasilissis Olgas Avenue.
The importance of Thessaloniki to Nazi Germany can be demonstrated by the fact that, initially, Hitler had planned to incorporate it directly in the Third Reich (that is, make it part of Germany) and not have it controlled by a puppet state such as the Hellenic State or an ally of Germany (Thessaloniki had been promised to Yugoslavia as a reward for joining the Axis on 25 March 1941).
The area provides access to the ''Seich Sou'' Forest National Park and features panoramic views of the whole city and the Thermaic Gulf.
Today, Thessaloniki has become one of the most important trade and business hubs in Southeastern Europe, with its port, the Port of Thessaloniki being one of the largest in the Aegean and facilitating trade throughout the Balkan hinterland.
On average, Thessaloniki experiences frost (sub-zero temperature) 32 days a year.
As parts of the early Byzantine walls were demolished, this allowed the city to expand east and west along the coast.
It contained sites for public buildings and provided for the restoration of Byzantine churches and Ottoman mosques.
Some stations of the Thessaloniki Metro will house a number of archaeological finds.
In Purchasing Power Parity, the same indicators are €19,851&nbsp;billion (2nd) and €17,200 (15th) respectively.
During the 20th century, after the Armenian Genocide and the defeat of the Greek army in the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22), many fled to Greece and a large part of them was established in Thessaloniki.
On 18 March 1913 George I of Greece was assassinated in the city by Alexandros Schinas.
Two of the country's largest universities are located in central Thessaloniki: Aristotle University and the University of Macedonia.
In local speech, the city's name is typically pronounced with a dark and deep ''L'' characteristic of Macedonian Greek accent.
They have been listed since 1988.
The evolution of Imperial Byzantine architecture and the prosperity of Thessaloniki go hand in hand, especially during the first years of the Empire, when the city continued to flourish.
The plan also envisions the creation of new wide avenues in the outskirts of the city and the creation of pedestrian-only zones in the city centre.
Nearly one-quarter of the total population of approximately 271,157 became homeless.
''Olympion Theater'', the site of the Thessaloniki International Film Festival and the ''Plateia Assos Odeon multiplex'' are the two major cinemas in downtown Thessaloniki.
By the 8th century, the city had become an important administrative center of the Byzantine Empire, and handled much of the Empire's Balkan affairs.
Thessaloniki's climate is directly affected by the sea it is situated on.
Two churches and many synagogues and mosques were lost.
** '''A1/E75 W''' ''(Republic of Macedonia, Larissa, Athens)''
The Thessaloniki International Film Festival is established as one of the most important film festivals in Southern Europe, with a number of notable film makers such as Francis Ford Coppola, Faye Dunaway, Catherine Deneuve, Irene Papas and Fatih Akın taking part, and was established in 1960.
The forum complex also boasts two Roman baths, one of which has been excavated while the other is buried underneath the city.
During that time, the city saw the creation of more notable Christian churches that are now UNESCO World Heritage Sites, such as Hagia Sophia of Thessaloniki, the Church of the Acheiropoietos, the Church of Panagia Chalkeon.
Thessaloniki passed out of Byzantine hands in 1204, when Constantinople was captured by the forces of the Fourth Crusade and incorporated the city and its surrounding territories in the Kingdom of Thessalonica — which then became the largest vassal of the Latin Empire.
In 2004 the city hosted a number of the football events as part of the 2004 Summer Olympics.
** '''A25 (ΕΟ67) S''' ''(Airport, Nea Moudania)''
Between 1995 and 2008 Thessaloniki's GDP saw an average growth rate of 4.1% per annum (ranging from +14.5% in 1996 to -11.1% in 2005) while in 2011 the economy contracted by -7.8%.
The city is also the birthplace of a number of important international personalities, which include Bulgarians (Atanas Dalchev), Jews (Moshe Levy, Daniel Zion, Samuel ben Joseph Uziel, Shlomo Halevi Alkabetz), Slav Macedonians (Dimo Todorovski) and Turks (Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, Nâzım Hikmet, Afet İnan, Cahit Arf, Mehmet Cavit Bey, Salih Omurtak, Sabiha Sertel, Halil Rifat Pasha).
Thessaloniki's importance was mostly in the field of shipping, but also in manufacturing, while most of the city's trade was controlled by ethnic Greeks.
Such modernists introduced also new techniques and ideas from the industrialized Western Europe and from the 1880s the city began to industrialize.
During the Ottoman era, Thessaloniki's Sephardic community comprised more than half the city's population; Jewish merchants were prominent in commerce until the ethnic Greek population increased after independence in 1912.
Thessaloniki has more UNESCO World Heritage Sites listed than any other city in Greece, a total of 15 monuments.
One apartment building in central Thessaloniki collapsed during the second earthquake, killing many, raising the final death toll to 51.
In 2012, the city hosted its first gay parade, namely the ''Thessaloniki Pride'' which took place between 22 and 23 June.
The Greek ministry of tourism considers Thessaloniki to be Greece's second most important commercial port, and companies such as Royal Caribbean International have expressed interest in adding the Port of Thessaloniki to their destinations.
Built for the most wealthy residents and designed by well known architects they are used today as museums, art galleries or remain as private properties.
Then with the title ''"Gymnasium of Thessaloniki"'' functioned until the liberation in 1912.
Thessaloniki is home to numerous notable Byzantine monuments, including the Paleochristian and Byzantine monuments of Thessaloniki, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, as well as several Roman, Ottoman and Sephardic Jewish structures.
It destroyed the city's historic center and a large part of its architectural heritage, but paved the way for modern development and allowed Thessaloniki the development of a proper European city center, featuring wider diagonal avenues and monumental squares; which the city initially lacked – much of what was considered to be 'essential' in European architecture.
Southeastern Thessaloniki up until the 1920s was home to the city's most affluent residents and formed the outermost suburbs of the city at the time, with the area close to the Thermaic Gulf coast called ''Exoches'', from the 19th century holiday villas which defined the area.
The Documentary Festival, founded in 1999, has focused on documentaries that explore global social and cultural developments, with many of the films presented being candidates for FIPRESCI and Audience Awards.
In 2010, more than 15.8&nbsp;million tons of products went through the city's port, making it the second-largest port in Greece after Aghioi Theodoroi, surpassing Piraeus.
The site was chosen because it was the place where Jews residents were rounded up before embarking to trains for concentration camps.
Some of the sites were not restored until the 1980s.
After the Balkan Wars, Thessaloniki was incorporated into the Greek Kingdom.
Following the completion of the runway works, the airport will be able to serve intercontinental flights and cater for larger aircraft in the future.
Today this area of the city is also home to 3 of the city's main football stadiums, the Thessaloniki Concert Hall, the ''Posidonio'' aquatic and athletic complex, the Naval Command post of Northern Greece and the old royal palace (called Palataki), located on the most westerly point of Karabournaki cape.
Thessaloniki was the 2014 European Youth Capital.
Many of its architectural treasures still remain, adding value to the city as a tourist destination, while several early Christian and Byzantine monuments of Thessaloniki were added to the UNESCO World Heritage list in 1988.
No Jews were recorded in the census.
Manufacturing, shipping and trade were the most important components of the city's economy during the Ottoman period, and the majority of the city's trade at the time was controlled by ethnic Greeks.
Other monuments of the city's past, such as the ''Incantadas'', a Caryatid portico from the ancient forum, have been removed or destroyed over the years.
Several traders supported the introduction of a large textile-production industry, superseding the weaving of cloth in a system of artisanal production.
The city was founded around 315&nbsp;BC by the King Cassander of Macedon, on or near the site of the ancient town of Therma and 26 other local villages.
Under the kingdom of Macedon the city retained its own autonomy and parliament and evolved to become the most important city in Macedon.
The ministry has said that the project will take an estimated 15 years to be completed, in 2025.
The city lies in a transitional climatic zone, so its climate displays characteristics of several climates.
The area extends to Kalamaria and Pylaia, about  from the White Tower in the city center.
An Arab naval attack in 904 resulted in the sack of the city.
During the Ottoman period, the city's population of mainly Greek Jews, then as now now called Romaniotes, and Ottoman Muslims (including those of Turkish and Albanian origin, as well as Bulgarian Muslim and Greek Muslim convert origin) grew substantially.
The city's main university, Aristotle University, is the largest in Greece and the Balkans.
During this time, the city saw the building of banks, large hotels, theatres, warehouses, and factories.
Thessaloniki rose to economic prominence as a major economic hub in the Balkans during the years of the Roman Empire.
The maximum recorded temperature in the city was .
Thessaloniki is renowned for its major shopping streets and lively laneways.
Thessaloniki is home to a number of prominent archaeological sites.
A basilical church was first built in the 5th century AD dedicated to St.Demetrius.
The municipality of Thessaloniki's budget for the reconstruction of important areas of the city and the completion of the waterfront, opened in January 2014, was estimated at around  million ( million) for the year 2011 alone.
The city held this status until it was transferred to Venice in 1423.
In 379, when the Roman Prefecture of Illyricum was divided between the East and West Roman Empires, Thessaloniki became the capital of the new Prefecture of Illyricum.
On 19–20 June 1978, the city suffered a series of powerful earthquakes, registering 5.5 and 6.5 on the Richter scale.
On 8 November 1912 (26 October Old Style), the feast day of the city's patron saint, Saint Demetrius, the Greek Army accepted the surrender of the Ottoman garrison at Thessaloniki.
Clockwise it heads northeast around the city, passing through the northwestern suburbs, the forest of ''Seich Sou'' and through to the southeast suburb/borough of Kalamaria.
The city is viewed as a romantic one in Greece, and as such Thessaloniki is commonly featured in Greek songs.
They deported and exterminated approximately 96% of Thessaloniki's Jews of all ages during the Holocaust.
All variations of the city's name derive from the original (and current) appellation in Ancient Greek, i.e.
A large number of radio stations also broadcast from Thessaloniki as the city is known for its music contributions.
In 390, Gothic troops under the Roman Emperor Theodosius I, led a massacre against the inhabitants of Thessalonica, who had risen in revolt against the Gothic soldiers.
Recently a second building was also constructed and designed by Japanese architect Arata Isozaki.
At 273,282 TEUs, it is also Greece's second-largest container port after Piraeus.
Many businesses were destroyed, as a result, 70% of the population were unemployed.
On 30 December 1915 an Austrian air raid on Thessaloniki alarmed many town civilians and killed at least one person, and in response the Allied troops based there arrested the German and Austrian and Bulgarian and Turkish vice-consuls and their families and dependents and put them on a battleship, and billeted troops in their consulate buildings in Thessaloniki.
(; from , ''Thessalos'', and , ''Nikē''), literally translating to "Thessalian Victory".
In 1943 the Nazis began brutal, inhumane actions against the historic Jewish population in Thessaloniki, forcing them into a ghetto near the railroad lines and beginning deportation to concentration and labor camps where they dehumanized their captives.
According to the Kallikratis reform, as of 1 January 2011 the Thessaloniki Urban Area () which makes up the "City of Thessaloniki", is made up of six self-governing municipalities () and one municipal unit ().
Another popular snack is ''koulouri''.
Over 160,000 ethnic Greeks deported from the former Ottoman Empire - particularly Greeks from western Asia Minor and Pontic Greeks as well as Caucasus Greeks from various parts of Eastern Anatolia and the South Caucasus - were resettled in the city, changing its demographics.
For the expansion towards the airport, the Attiko Metro company is considering the construction of an overground network or a monorail.
Architects who designed some of the most notable buildings of the city, in the late 19th and early 20th century, include Vitaliano Poselli, Pietro Arrigoni, Xenophon Paionidis, Eli Modiano, Moshé Jacques, Jean Joseph Pleyber, Frederic Charnot, Ernst Ziller, Roubens Max, Levi Ernst, Angelos Siagas and others, using mainly the styles of Eclecticism and Art Nouveau.
In recent years Thessaloniki has begun to turn into a major port for cruising in the eastern Mediterranean.
According to the 1478 census  Selânik (سلانیك), as the city came to be known in Ottoman Turkish, had a population of 4,320 Muslims, 6,094 Greek Orthodox and some Catholics.
Events such as the Thessaloniki International Trade Fair and the Thessaloniki International Film Festival are held annually, while the city also hosts the largest bi-annual meeting of the Greek diaspora.
There is also an Armenian church at the center of the city.
The city also has a number of multiplex cinemas in major shopping malls in the suburbs, most notably in Mediterranean Cosmos, the largest retail and entertainment development in the Balkans.
Not only did the Jewish-Greek population of Thessaloniki perish during the Holocaust, but a unique civilization filled with rich culture and beauty was lost.
Greek schoolbook (G.K. Moraitopoulos, 1882)
Discussions are already underway for future expansions, in order for the metro network to also serve major transport hubs of the city, notably the Macedonia InterCity Bus Terminal (KTEL) and Macedonia International Airport.
Ottoman government census
** '''ΕΟ16, SW''' ''(Polygyros, Ouranopolis)''
Northwestern Thessaloniki is also home to ''Moni Lazariston'', located in Stavroupoli, which today forms one of the most important cultural centers for the city.
Air traffic to and from the city is served by Macedonia International Airport for international and domestic flights.
The museum contains historic information about Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and his life, especially while he was in Thessaloniki.
The large octagonal portion of the complex, most of which survives to this day, is believed to have been an imperial throne room.
The new city plan included axes, diagonal streets and monumental squares, with a street grid that would channel traffic smoothly.
Part of the plan has been implemented with extensive pedestrianization's within the city center by the municipality of Thessaloniki and the revitalization the eastern urban waterfront/promenade, ''Nea Paralia'' (, literally ''new beach''), with a modern and vibrant design.
According to the Köppen climate classification, it is a Mediterranean climate (''Csa'') that borders on a semi-arid climate (''BSk''), as well as a humid subtropical climate (''Cfa''), observed on the periphery of the region.
Another important musical genre of the city's heritage is the Sephardic music of the Jewish community.
Later it became the capital of all the Greek provinces of the Roman Empire because of the city's importance in the Balkan peninsula.
Aristotle University was founded in 1926 and is currently the largest university in Greece by number of students, which number at more than 80,000 in 2010, and is a member of the Utrecht Network.
Another important archaeological site is the imperial palace complex which Roman emperor Galerius, located at Navarinou Square, commissioned when he made Thessaloniki the capital of his portion of the Roman Empire.
The Atatürk Museum in Thessaloniki is the historic house where Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, founder of modern-day Turkey, was born.
The Bulgarian army arrived one day after the surrender of the city to Greece and Tahsin Pasha, ruler of the city, told the Bulgarian officials that "I have only one Thessaloniki, which I have surrendered".
Thanks to a private donation of €180,000, it was announced on 6 December 2011 that a replica of the Incantadas would be commissioned and later put on display in Thessaloniki.
The city's main newspapers and some of the most circulated in Greece, include ''Makedonia'', which was also the first newspaper published in Thessaloniki in 1911 and ''Aggelioforos''.
Throughout its history, Thessaloniki has been home to a number of well-known figures like Nikolaos Polychronakos.
This consisted of the sanjaks of Selanik, Serres and Drama between 1826 and 1912.
A total of 30 cruise ships are expected to arrive at Thessaloniki in 2011.
When Sultan Murad II captured Thessaloniki and sacked it in 1430, contemporary reports estimated that about one-fifth of the city's population was enslaved.
Since then, it operates as ''" 1st High School of Thessaloniki"'' and having a continuous operating history of nearly 700 years is one of the oldest educational institutions of Europe, and the oldest of Greek education.
By c. 1500, the numbers had grown to 7,986 Greeks, 8,575 Muslims, and 3,770 Jews.
They could not wait for the government to create a new urban plan for rebuilding, which was eventually done.
The strategic plan for the construction of the Thessaloniki Metro envisions that the city will have a system of 3 lines by 2018 or 2020 at the latest.
Most of southeastern Thessaloniki is characterized by its modern architecture and apartment buildings, home to the middle-class and more than half of the municipality of Thessaloniki population.
The Dimitria festival, founded in 1966 and named after the city's patron saint of St. Demetrius, has focused on a wide range of events including music, theatre, dance, local happenings, and exhibitions.
Thessaloniki is Greece's second major economic, industrial, commercial and political centre, and a major transportation hub for the rest of southeastern Europe; its commercial port is also of great importance for Greece and the southeastern European hinterland.
Thessaloniki became the largest center in Europe of the Sephardic Jews, who nicknamed the city ''la madre de Israel'' (Israel's mother) and "Jerusalem of the Balkans".
Although the initial complex was not built in Roman times, it was largely refurbished in the 2nd century.
The alternative name '''Salonica''' (also '''Thessalonica''' or '''Salonika''') derives from the variant form Σαλονίκη (''Saloníki'') in colloquial Greek speech, and has given rise to the form of the city's name in several languages.
Historically important industries for the economy of Thessaloniki included tobacco (in 1946 35% of all tobacco companies in Greece were headquartered in the city, and 44% in 1979) and banking (in Ottoman years Thessaloniki was a major center for investment from western Europe, with the Bank of Thessaloniki () having a capital of 20&nbsp;million French francs in 1909).
Additionally, a TEI (Technological Educational Institute), namely the Alexander Technological Educational Institute of Thessaloniki, is located in the western suburb of Sindos; home also to the industrial zone of the city.
Ano Poli also, is the highest point in Thessaloniki and as such, is the location of the city's ''acropolis'', its Byzantine fort, the Heptapyrgion, a large portion of the city's remaining walls, and with many of its additional Ottoman and Byzantine structures still standing.
It was conquered by the Ottomans in 1430, and passed from the Ottoman Empire to modern Greece on 8 November 1912.
After the Second Balkan War, Thessaloniki and the rest of the Greek portion of Macedonia were officially annexed to Greece by the Treaty of Bucharest in 1913.
They deported over 43,000 of the city's Jews in concentration camps, where most were killed in gas chambers.
Furthermore, an additional line has also been established, although with the use of regional trains, between Thessaloniki and the city of Edessa.
'''Public transport''' in Thessaloniki is served by buses.
or include the name in their title.
Thessaloniki's summers are hot with rather humid nights.
Despite the large effort that was made in 2004 to improve the motorway features of the Thessaloniki ring road, the motorway is still insufficient to tackle Thessaloniki's increasing traffic and metropolitan population.
with a population of 150,000 in the mid-12th century.
In 1423, Despot Andronicus, who was in charge of the city, ceded it to the Republic of Venice with the hope that it could be protected from the Ottomans who were besieging the city (there is no evidence to support the oft-repeated story that he sold the city to them).
When the Ottoman Empire took control of Thessaloniki in 1430, most of the city's churches were converted into mosques, but have survived to this day.
The ring road ends at a large junction with the A25 motorway, which then continues south to Chalkidiki, passing through Thessaloniki's outer southeast suburbs.
The service is operated using Siemens Desiro EMU trains on a modernised electrified double track and stops at 11 refurbished stations, covering the journey in 1 hour and 33 minutes.
Upon the conquest of Thessaloniki, some of its inhabitants escaped, including intellectuals such as Theodorus Gaza "Thessalonicensis" and Andronicus Callistus.
The central road arteries that pass through the city centre, designed in the Ernest Hebrard plan, include those of Tsimiski, Egnatia, Nikis, Mitropoleos, Venizelou and St Demetrius avenues.
During the coldest winters, temperatures can drop to .
It is also the birthplace of various Saints and other religious figures, such as Cyril and Methodius, creators of the first Slavic alphabet, Saint Mitre, Patriarch Philotheus I of Constantinople and Archbishop Demetrios of America.
Frappé was invented in the Thessaloniki International Trade Fair in 1957 and has since spread throughout Greece and Cyprus to become a hallmark of the Greek coffee culture.
The tremors caused considerable damage to a number of buildings and ancient monuments, but the city withstood the catastrophe without any major problems.
Today southeastern Thessaloniki has in some way become a natural extension of the city center, with the avenues of Megalou Alexandrou, Georgiou Papandreou (Antheon), Vasilissis Olgas, Delfon, Konstantinou Karamanli (Nea Egnatia) and Papanastasiou passing through it, enclosing an area traditionally called ''Dépôt'' (''Ντεπώ''), from the name of the old tram station, owned by a French company.
Prior to the Kallikratis reform, the Thessaloniki Urban Area was made up of twice as many municipalities, considerably smaller in size, which created bureaucratic problems.
The Italian Jews Allatini brothers led Jewish entrepreneurship, establishing milling and other food industries, brickmaking and processing plants for tobacco.
Many of Greece's most celebrated musicians and movie stars were born in Thessaloniki, such as Zoe Laskari, Costas Hajihristos, Antonis Remos, Paschalis Terzis, Natassa Theodoridou, Katia Zygouli, Kostas Voutsas, Marios Iliopoulos and Marinella.
Communities of descendants of Thessaloniki Jews&nbsp;– both Sephardic and Romaniote&nbsp;– live in other areas, mainly the United States and Israel.
Thessaloniki was also a Janissary stronghold where novice Janissaries were trained.
Another group is the Armenian community which dates back to the Ottoman period.
The fire swept through the centre of the city, leaving 72,000 people homeless; according to the Pallis Report, most of them were Jewish (50,000).
This era of the Despotate of Epirus is also known as the Empire of Thessalonica.
the city's total student population was estimated around 200,000.
Other industrial and technological museums in the city include the Railway Museum of Thessaloniki, which houses an original Orient Express train, the War Museum of Thessaloniki and others.
By the 1680s, about 300 families of Sephardic Jews, followers of Sabbatai Zevi, had converted to Islam, becoming a sect known as the ''Dönmeh'' (convert), and migrated to Salonika, whose population was majority Jewish.
The name of the city came from the name of a princess, Thessalonike of Macedon, half sister of Alexander the Great, so named because of her birth on the day of the Macedonian victory at the Battle of Crocus Field (353/352&nbsp;BCE).
Some scholars hold that the First Epistle to the Thessalonians is the first written book of the New Testament.
Winters are relatively dry, with common morning frost.
Some historians believe that the complex must have been in use as an imperial residence until the 11th century.
In March 1926, Greece re-emphasized that all citizens of Greece enjoyed equal rights, and a considerable proportion of the city's Jews decided to stay.
An important metropolis by the Roman period, Thessaloniki was the second largest and wealthiest city of the Byzantine Empire.
Today, a community of around 1200 remains in the city.
For 2013, ''National Geographic Magazine'' included Thessaloniki in its top tourist destinations worldwide, while in 2014 ''Financial Times'' FDI magazine (Foreign Direct Investments) declared Thessaloniki as the best mid-sized European city of the future for human capital and lifestyle.
The church of Hagios Demetrios was burnt down during the Great Thessaloniki Fire of 1917, as did many other of the city's monuments, but it was rebuilt.
Greek government census
Merchants, traders and refugees from all over Europe settled in the city.
Numerous public and private vocational institutes () provide professional training to young students, while a large number of private colleges offer American and UK academic curriculum, via cooperation with foreign universities.
The western end of the route begins at the junction with the A1/A2 motorways in ''Lachanagora'' District.
The Thessaloniki Museum of Photography also houses a number of important exhibitions, and is located within the old port of Thessaloniki.
The Archaeological Museum of Thessaloniki was established in 1962 and houses some of the most important ancient Macedonian artifacts, including an extensive collection of golden artwork from the royal palaces of Aigai and Pella.
The city walls were torn down between 1869 and 1889, efforts for a planned expansion of the city are evident as early as 1879, the first tram service started in 1888 and the city streets were illuminated with electric lamp posts in 1908.
Lonely Planet listed Thessaloniki among the world's "ultimate party cities".
