The Thirty Years' War devastated entire regions, with famine and disease significantly decreasing the populations of the German and Italian states, the Crown of Bohemia, and the Southern Netherlands.
To fight Christian, Ferdinand II employed the military help of Albrecht von Wallenstein, a Bohemian nobleman who had made himself rich from the confiscated estates of his Protestant countrymen.
After that, the imperialist and the Protestant German sides met for negotiations, producing the Peace of Prague (1635), which entailed a delay in the enforcement of the Edict of Restitution for 40 years and allowed Protestant rulers to retain secularized bishoprics held by them in 1627.
Torstensson went on to occupy Jutland, and after the Royal Swedish Navy under Carl Gustaf Wrangel inflicted a decisive defeat on the Danish Navy in the battle of Fehmern Belt in an action of 13 October 1644, forcing them to sue for peace.
They ousted the Habsburgs and instead elected Frederick V, Elector of the Rhenish Palatinate as their monarch.
Ferdinand, educated by the Jesuits, was a staunch Catholic who wanted to impose religious uniformity on his lands.
With Tilly dead, Ferdinand II returned to the aid of Wallenstein and his large army.
After the Mantuan War, between France and the Habsburgs in Italy, the northern half of the Italian peninsula was in the throes of a bubonic plague epidemic (Italian Plague of 1629–1631).
This victory effectively ended the involvement of the Palatinate in the war.
The Ottomans defeated the Poles, who were supporting the Habsburgs in the Thirty Years' War, at the Battle of Cecora in September–October 1620, but were not able to further intervene efficiently before the Bohemian defeat at the Battle of the White Mountain in November 1620.
This unraveled much of the support for the Bohemians, particularly in the court of Saxony.
These events caused widespread fears throughout northern and central Europe, and triggered the Protestant Bohemians living in the dominion of Habsburg Austria to revolt against their nominal ruler, Ferdinand II.
John Theibault agrees with the conclusions in Günther Franz's ''Der Dreissigjährige Krieg und das Deutsche Volk'' (1940), that population losses were great but varied regionally (ranging as high as 50%) and says his estimates are the best available.
The majority of mercenaries recruited by Gustavus Adolphus were German, but Scottish soldiers were also very numerous.
Some historians regard the period from 1621 to 1625 as a distinct portion of the Thirty Years' War, calling it the "Palatinate phase".
However, several Protestant princes feared that the emperor, a devout Catholic, intended to keep Jülich-Cleves-Berg for himself to prevent the United Duchies falling into Protestant hands.
Later, Poles defeated the Ottomans at the Battle of Chocim and the war ended with a ''status quo''.
The northern Protestant states, angered by the violation of their rights to choose that had been granted in the Peace of Augsburg, banded together to form the Protestant Union.
The same year, the Protestant forces, lacking Gustav's leadership, were smashed at the First Battle of Nördlingen by the Spanish-Imperial forces commanded by Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand.
In 1632, it contributed only one-fifth of that (476,439 daler) towards the cost of an army more than three times as large (149,000 men).
The war began when the newly elected Holy Roman Emperor, Ferdinand II, tried to impose religious uniformity on his domains, forcing Roman Catholicism on its peoples.
A vast number of minor independent duchies, free cities, abbeys, prince-bishoprics, and petty lordships (whose authority sometimes extended to no more than a single village) rounded out the empire.
These rulers avoided religious wars within the empire by allowing the different Christian faiths to spread without coercion.
Denmark's King Christian IV had obtained for his kingdom a level of stability and wealth that was virtually unmatched elsewhere in Europe.
There, they captured many valuable treasures, including the ''Codex Gigas'', which is still today preserved in Stockholm.
This influential work later was credited with bringing an end to the practice of witch-burning in some areas of Germany and its gradual abolition throughout Europe.
Thus, at the beginning of the 17th century, the Rhine lands and those south to the Danube were largely Catholic, while Lutherans predominated in the north, and Calvinists dominated in certain other areas, such as west-central Germany, Switzerland, and the Netherlands.
This protected the Lutheran rulers of northeastern Germany, but not those of the south and west (whose lands had been occupied by the imperial or league armies prior to 1627).
Meanwhile, in Upper Bavaria, 274 suspected witches were put to the torch in the Bishopric of Eichstatt in 1629, while another 50 perished in the adjacent Duchy of Palatinate-Neuburg that same year.
Much to the consternation of their Spanish ruling cousins, the Habsburg emperors who followed Charles V (especially Ferdinand I and Maximilian II, but also Rudolf II, and his successor Matthias) were content to allow the princes of the empire to choose their own religious policies.
In some lordships and cities, the numbers of Calvinists, Catholics, and Lutherans were approximately equal.
When Arras fell, the way was opened to the French to take all of Flanders.
Fighting also took place in Africa and Asia.
Philip IV of Spain was reluctantly forced to divert his attention from the war in northern Europe to deal with his problems at home.
The war caused serious dislocations to both the economies and populations of central Europe, but may have done no more than seriously exacerbate changes that had begun earlier.
This had the continued reliance on the Anglo-Dutch brigade as the main agency of English military participation against the Habsburgs, though regiments also fought for Sweden thereafter.
Villages were especially easy prey to the marauding armies.
In the opening phase, this had an Anglo-Dutch regiment under Horace Vere head to the Palatinate, a Scots-Dutch regiment under Colonel John Seton move into Bohemia, and that to be joined by a mixed "Regiment of Brittanes" (Scots and English) led by the Scottish Catholic Sir Andrew Gray.
At this point, the Catholic League persuaded Ferdinand II to take back the Lutheran holdings that were, according to the Peace of Augsburg, rightfully the possession of the Catholic Church.
The House of Stuart in England had been involved in attempts to secure peace in Europe (through the Spanish Match), and had intervened in the war against both Spain and France.
The Bohemians, desperate for allies against the emperor, applied to be admitted into the Protestant Union, which was led by their original candidate for the Bohemian throne, the Calvinist Frederick V, Elector Palatine.
The witch hunts expanded into Baden following its reconquest by Tilly, while the defeat of Protestantism in the Palatinate opened the way for their eventual spread to the Rhineland.
This forced Lutheran residents to choose between conversion or exile.
To fight this war by diversion, Cardinal Richelieu had been supplying aid to the Catalonians.
An ardent devotee of the Counter-Reformation, Ehrenberg was eager to consolidate Catholic political authority in the territories he administered.
The ensuing French campaign against the Spanish forces in Flanders culminated with a decisive French victory at Rocroi in May 1643.
The same year, however, the French were defeated by the Imperial and Catholic League forces at the battle of Tuttlingen.
This was a serious blow to Protestant ambitions in the region.
The Palatinate thus assumed a strategic importance in European affairs out of all proportion to its size.
Ambassadors were exchanged, with Heinrich Bitter visiting Constantinople in January 1620, and Mehmed Aga visiting Prague in July 1620.
Philip IV could no longer physically send reinforcements to the Low Countries.
Meanwhile, Sweden and Denmark, both Lutheran kingdoms, sought to assist the Protestant cause in the Empire, and wanted to gain political and economic influence there, as well.
This, along with the shrewd diplomacy of Ferdinand III, allowed it to play an important role in the following decades and to regain some authority on the other German states to face the growing threats of the Ottoman Empire and France.
After dismissing Wallenstein in 1630, Ferdinand II became dependent on the Catholic League.
Oñate conspired to transfer the electoral title from the Palatinate to the Duke of Bavaria in exchange for his support and that of the Catholic League.
However, the French army's effort on the Rhine had little result, in contrast to its string of victories in Flanders and Artois.
Apart from Austria and perhaps Bavaria, none of those entities was capable of national-level politics; alliances between family-related states were common, due partly to the frequent practice of partible inheritance, i.e.
His army did, however, win an important success at the Battle of Vlotho in 1638 against a combined Swedish-English-Palatine force.
The second was Wolfgang William, Count Palatine of Neuburg, who was the son of Duke John William's second-eldest sister, Anna of Cleves.
While Spain was fighting in France, Portugal&nbsp;– which had been under personal union with Spain for 60 years&nbsp;– acclaimed John IV of Braganza as king in 1640, and the House of Braganza became the new dynasty of Portugal.
This new order was embodied in the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659, which finally ended the war between France and Spain.
Minorities of each creed existed almost everywhere, however.
In 1648, the Swedes (commanded by Marshal Carl Gustaf Wrangel) and the French (led by Turenne and Condé) defeated the Imperial army at the Battle of Zusmarshausen and the Spanish at Lens.
Ferdinand was compelled to call on his nephew, King Philip IV of Spain, for assistance.
Tensions escalated further in 1609, with the War of the Jülich Succession, which began when John William, Duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg, the ruler of the strategically important United Duchies of Jülich-Cleves-Berg, died childless.
Lutherans also witnessed the defection of the lords of the Palatinate (1560), Nassau (1578), Hesse-Kassel (1603), and Brandenburg (1613) to the new Calvinist faith.
They were joined in the revolt by much of Upper Austria, whose nobility was then chiefly Lutheran and Calvinist.
splitting a lord's inheritance among his various sons.
File:Veduta z obléhání Brna Švédy v roce 1645.jpg|Unsuccessful Swedish siege of Brno, 1645
On 23 May 1618, an assembly of Protestants seized them and threw them (and also secretary Philip Fabricius) out of the palace window, which was some  off the ground.
Mansfeld remained in the Dutch Republic, but Christian wandered off to "assist" his kin in the Lower Saxon Circle, attracting the attentions of Count Tilly.
Previously, many people had borne overlapping, sometimes conflicting political and religious allegiances.
The hardship and turmoil the conflict had produced among the general population enabled the hysteria to spread quickly to other parts of Germany.
As the rebellion collapsed, the widespread confiscation of property and suppression of the Bohemian nobility ensured the country would return to the Catholic side after more than two centuries of Hussite and other religious dissent.
By 1630, 219 men, women, and children had been burned at the stake in the city of Würzburg itself, while an estimated 900 people are believed to have been put to death in the rural areas of the province.
As he was an imperial elector, this could have produced a Protestant majority in the College that elected the Holy Roman Emperor, a position that Catholics had always held.
Although their arrival in the Netherlands did help to lift the siege of Bergen-op-Zoom (October 1622), the Dutch could not provide permanent shelter for them.
The excesses of this period inspired the Jesuit scholar and poet Friedrich Spee (himself a former "witch confessor") to author his scathing legal and moral condemnation of the witch trials, the ''Cautio Criminalis''.
The total number of Scots in Swedish service by the end of the war is estimated at some 30,000 men, no less than 15 of whom served with the rank of major-general or above.
The Thirty Years' War ended with the treaties of Osnabrück and Münster, part of the wider Peace of Westphalia.
Spain was unable to resist the continuing drumbeat of French victories—Gravelines was lost to the French in 1644, followed by Hulst in 1645 and Dunkirk in 1646.
Mansfeld died some months later of illness, apparently tuberculosis, in Dalmatia.
For instance, in 1621, Hamburg had been forced to accept Danish sovereignty.
With the news that Mansfeld would not be supporting him, Christian's army began a steady retreat toward the safety of the Dutch border.
The background of the Dutch Revolt is also necessary to understanding the events leading up to the Thirty Years' War.
Thus, Christian, as war-leader of the Lower Saxon Circle, entered the war with an army of only 20,000 mercenaries, some of his allies from England and Scotland and a national army 15,000 strong, leading them as Duke of Holstein rather than as King of Denmark.
The Battle of Prague in 1648 became the last action of the Thirty Years' War.
Despite the odds being stacked against them, the Swedish army won.
The revolt became an international conflict with the involvement of England in the Anglo-French War (1627–29).
The rise of Bourbon France, the curtailing of Habsburg ambition, and the ascendancy of Sweden as a great power created a new balance of power on the continent, with France emerging from the war strengthened and increasingly dominant in the latter part of the 17th century.
The reduction of population in the German states was typically 25% to 40%.
Henceforth, the inhabitants of a given state were understood to be subject first and foremost to the laws and edicts of their respective state authority, not to the claims of any other entity, be it religious or secular.
This violent wave of witch-hunting first erupted in the territories of Franconia during the time of the Danish intervention.
Denmark's cause was aided by France, which together with Charles I, had agreed to help subsidize the war, not the least because Christian was a blood uncle to both the Stuart king and his sister Elizabeth of Bohemia through their mother, Anne of Denmark.
The war also bankrupted most of the combatant powers.
At that time, forces under Ambrogio Spinola, 1st Marquis of the Balbases, the Genoese commander of the Spanish army, would be able to pass through friendly territories to reach the Dutch Republic.
Negotiations concluded with the Treaty of Lübeck in 1629, which stated that Christian IV could retain control over Denmark (incl.
Sweden did not take part in the Peace of Prague and it continued the war together with France.
Gustavus Adolphus knew that Wallenstein was waiting for the attack and was prepared, but found no other option.
The war altered the previous political order of European powers.
This was possible due to subsidies from France, and the recruitment of prisoners (most of them taken at the Battle of Breitenfeld) into the Swedish army.
Many features of the war spread disease.
Had the Bohemian rebellion remained a local conflict, the war could have been over in fewer than 30 months.
Wallenstein lacked a fleet, and neither the Hanseatic ports nor the Poles would allow the building of an imperial fleet on the Baltic coast.
While a separate conflict, the Smolensk War became an integral part of Thirty Years' confrontation.
Frederick, now landless, made himself a prominent exile abroad and tried to curry support for his cause in Sweden, the Netherlands, and Denmark.
It was the last major religious war in mainland Europe, ending the large-scale religious bloodshed accompanying the Reformation, which had begun over a century before.
Religious tensions remained strong throughout the second half of the 16th century.
The war ranks with the worst famines and plagues as the greatest medical catastrophe in modern European history.
In the territory of Brandenburg, the losses had amounted to half, while in some areas, an estimated two-thirds of the population died.
In the same year, Gabriel Bethlen, the Calvinist prince of Transylvania, died.
Also, some historians contend that the human cost of the war may actually have improved the living standards of the survivors.
This event, known as the (Second) Defenestration of Prague, started the Bohemian Revolt.
However, his policy of war by diversion continued to pay dividends to France.
There, the Lutheran majority barred the Catholic residents of the Swabian town from holding an annual Markus procession, which provoked a riot.
Although irrelevant at the time, both powers increased their strength over time, and 18th-century Europe had another political reconstruction in which they had a greater role; the episode ended with the Seven Years' War.
The Catholic League's army (which included René Descartes in its ranks as an observer) pacified Upper Austria, while Imperial forces under Johan Tzerclaes, Count of Tilly, pacified Lower Austria.
The emperor, who had been preoccupied with the Uskok War, hurried to muster an army to stop the Bohemians and their allies from overwhelming his country.
Ferdinand had wanted them to administer the government in his absence.
He was later to recall him, after the Swedes, led by King Gustavus Adolphus, had successfully invaded the Holy Roman Empire and turned the tables on the Catholics.
These results left only the Imperial territories of Austria safely in Habsburg hands.
News of these French victories provided strong encouragement to separatist movements in the Spanish province of Catalonia and in Portugal.
The sheer volume of trials and executions during this time would mark the period as the peak of the European witch-hunting phenomenon.
Initially a war between various Protestant and Catholic states in the fragmented Holy Roman Empire, it gradually developed into a more general conflict involving most of the great powers.
Then, for a time, widespread fighting ensued until 1640, with neither side gaining an advantage.
At the Battle of Breitenfeld (1631), Gustavus Adolphus's forces defeated the Catholic League led by Tilly.
However, reinforced by Louis II de Bourbon, Prince de Condé, it defeated its opponent in the Second Battle of Nördlingen.
In the last decades of the war, both typhus and dysentery had become endemic in Germany.
On 15 May 1648, the Peace of Münster was signed, ending the Thirty Years' War.
In 1630, Sweden had paid at least 2,368,022 daler for its army of 42,000 men.
Bavaria was defeated, devastated, and occupied, but it gained some territory as a result of the treaty in 1648.
The only hostile state that stood in his way was the Electorate of the Palatinate.
The Holy Roman Empire was a fragmented collection of largely independent states.
Anna was married to John Sigismund, Elector of Brandenburg.
France then entered the conflict, beginning the final period of the Thirty Years' War.
Mannheim and Heidelberg fell in 1622, and Frankenthal was finally transferred two years later, thus leaving the Palatinate in the hands of the Spaniards.
After the atrocities committed in Bohemia, Saxony finally gave its support to the union and decided to fight back.
In Cologne, that territory's Prince-Archbishop, Ferdinand of Bavaria, presided over a particularly infamous series of witchcraft trials that included the controversial prosecution of Katharina Henot, who was burned at the stake in 1627.
At the Battle of Jankau near Prague, the Swedish army defeated the Imperial army under Gallas and could occupy Bohemian lands and threaten Prague, as well as Vienna.
The war by diversion had its intended effect.
Count Bucquoy, the commander of the Imperial army, defeated the forces of the Protestant Union led by Count Mansfeld at the Battle of Sablat, on 10 June 1619.
With Trier, Alsace, and Lorraine all in French hands and the Dutch in charge of Limburg, the Channel and the North Sea, the "Spanish Road" connecting Habsburg Spain with the Habsburg possessions in the Netherlands and Austria was severed.
Lacking good census information, historians have extrapolated the experience of well-studied regions.
However, the war reached a climax and the tide of the war turned clearly toward the French and against Spain in 1640 starting with the siege and capture of the fort at Arras.
When the Imperial and Danish armies clashed in Saxony and Thuringia during 1625 and 1626, disease and infection in local communities increased.
The Peace of Augsburg began to unravel: some converted bishops refused to give up their bishoprics, and certain Habsburg and other Catholic rulers of the Holy Roman Empire and Spain sought to restore the power of Catholicism in the region.
They banded together and formed the League of Evangelical Union in 1608, under the leadership of the Elector Palatine Frederick IV (1583–1610), whose son, Frederick V, married Elizabeth Stuart, the Scottish-born daughter of King James VI of Scotland and I of England and Ireland.
However, the war in the Palatinate continued: Famous mercenary leaders – such as, particularly, Count Ernst von Mansfeld – helped Frederick V to defend his countries, the Upper and the Rhine Palatinate.
Gustavus Adolphus allied with France in the Treaty of Bärwalde (January 1631).
Ferdinand II may have feared that Wallenstein would switch sides, and arranged for his arrest after removing him from command.
The Protestant cause seemed to wax toward a quick overall victory.
Spain, wishing to finally crush the Dutch rebels in the Netherlands and the Dutch Republic, intervened under the pretext of helping its dynastic Habsburg ally, Austria.
The chronicles do show that epidemic disease was not a condition exclusive to war time, but was present in many parts of Germany for several decades prior to 1618.
Leslie held Stralsund until 1630, using the port as a base to capture the surrounding towns and ports  to provide a secure beach-head for a full-scale Swedish landing under Gustavus Adolphus.
The upper hand had now switched from the league to the union, led by Sweden.
In the east, the Protestant Hungarian Prince of Transylvania, Gabriel Bethlen, led a spirited campaign into Hungary with the support of the Ottoman Sultan, Osman II.
During the unsuccessful siege of Nuremberg, in 1632, civilians and soldiers in both the Imperial and Swedish armies succumbed to typhus and scurvy.
(Spinola's preferred route would take him through the Republic of Genoa, the Duchy of Milan, through the Val Telline, around hostile Switzerland bypassing along the north shore of Lake Constance, then through Alsace, the Archbishopric of Strasbourg, then through the Electorate of the Palatinate, and then finally through the Archbishopric of Trier, Jülich and Berg, and on to the Dutch Republic).
Wallenstein pledged his army, which numbered between 30,000 and 100,000 soldiers, to Ferdinand II in return for the right to plunder the captured territories.
France declared war on Spain in May 1635 and the Holy Roman Empire in August 1636, opening offensives against the Habsburgs in Germany and the Low Countries.
On 6 August 1623, 10 miles short of the border, Tilly's more disciplined army caught up with them.
Ferdinand II's suspicion of Wallenstein resumed in 1633, when Wallenstein attempted to arbitrate the differences between the Catholic and Protestant sides.
Some of the Protestant leaders of Bohemia feared they would be losing the religious rights granted to them by Emperor Rudolf II in his Letter of Majesty (1609).
During this time, the witch hunts also continued their unchecked growth, as new and increased incidents of alleged witchcraft began surfacing in the territories of Westphalia.
During that era, almost everyone was vested on one side of the dispute or another.
Ferdinand II was a devout Roman Catholic and relatively intolerant when compared to his predecessor, Rudolf II.
Over five months later, on 24 October, the Treaties of Münster and Osnabrück were signed.
Cardinal Richelieu, the chief minister of King Louis XIII of France, considered the Habsburgs too powerful, since they held a number of territories on France's eastern border, including portions of the Netherlands.
This prompted foreign intervention by Duke Maximilian of Bavaria (1573–1651) on behalf of the Catholics.
Information about numerous epidemics is generally found in local chronicles, such as parish registers and tax records, that are often incomplete and may be exaggerated.
In addition, the Spanish ambassador to Vienna, Don Íñigo Vélez de Oñate, persuaded Protestant Saxony to intervene against Bohemia in exchange for control over Lusatia.
From 1630 to 1634, Swedish-led armies drove the Catholic forces back, regaining much of the lost Protestant territory.
Both claimants were Protestants.
The Dutch Republic enjoyed contrasting fortune; it ended its revolt against Spain in 1648 and subsequently enjoyed a time of great prosperity and development in which it became one of the world's foremost economic and naval powers.
the duchies of Sleswick and Holstein) if he would abandon his support for the Protestant German states.
On 14 March 1647, Bavaria, Cologne, France, and Sweden signed the Truce of Ulm.
Those that survived, like the small village of Drais near Mainz, would take almost a hundred years to recover.
Wallenstein's army marched north, occupying Mecklenburg, Pomerania, and Jutland itself, but proved unable to take the Danish capital Copenhagen on the island of Zealand.
A year later, they met again in another Protestant victory, this time accompanied by the death of Tilly.
The two Swedish armies combined and confronted the imperialists at the Battle of Wittstock.
Denmark was funded by tolls on the Oresund and also by extensive war reparations from Sweden.
Beginning in 1634, Dresden, Munich, and smaller German communities such as Oberammergau recorded large numbers of plague casualties.
France aligned her strategy with the allied Swedes in Wismar (1636) and Hamburg (1638).
With Denmark out of the war, Torstenson then pursued the Imperial army under Gallas from Jutland in Denmark south to Bohemia.
This treaty failed to satisfy France, however, because of the renewed strength it granted the Habsburgs.
France remained the largest Catholic kingdom unaligned with the Habsburg powers, and would later actively wage war against Spain.
The Habsburg cause in the next few years would seem to suffer unrecoverable reverses.
Some regions were affected much more than others.
After five months, the Swedish army, severely worn out, had to withdraw.
In 1643, Louis XIII died, leaving his five-year-old son Louis XIV on the throne.
They were paid off and sent to occupy neighboring East Frisia.
Fearful of the Catholic policies of Ferdinand II, Gabriel Bethlen requested a protectorate by Osman II, so "the Ottoman Empire became the one and only ally of great-power status which the rebellious Bohemian states could muster after they had shaken off Habsburg rule and had elected Frederick V as a Protestant king".
Other religious conflicts occurred in the years to come, but no great wars.
The king-elect then sent two Catholic councillors (Vilem Slavata of Chlum and Jaroslav Borzita of Martinice) as his representatives to Prague Castle in Prague in May 1618.
In the ensuing Battle of Stadtlohn, Christian was decisively defeated, losing over four-fifths of his army, which had been some 15,000 strong.
These men were led by Colonel Alexander Leslie, who became governor of the city.
However, in Wurzburg, the persecutions continued until the death of Ehrenberg in July, 1631.
The French conquered Arras from the Spanish following a siege that lasted from 16 June to 9 August 1640.
Hoping to gain an advantage in the dispute, Wolfgang William converted to Catholicism; John Sigismund, though, converted to Calvinism (although Anna of Prussia stayed Lutheran).
Lower Austria revolted soon after, and in 1619, Count Thurn led an army to the walls of Vienna itself.
