Thompson found a financial backer, Thomas F. Ryan, and started the Auto-Ordnance Company in 1916 for the purpose of developing his ''auto rifle''.
However, users complained it was limited in capacity.
In addition, the gun performed better than most after exposure to rain, dirt, and mud.
It fired the more powerful .45 Remington–Thompson cartridge which fired a heavier 250-grain (16.2&nbsp;gram) bullet at higher muzzle velocities of about 1,450&nbsp;fps (440&nbsp;m/s), with greater range than the .45 ACP.
Ammunition was manufactured in Australia or obtained from adjacent American troops.
The Navy Model 1928 has several names among collectors: the 'Colt Overstamp', 'The 1921 Overstamp', '28 Navy', or just '28N'.
During the Korean War, American troops were surprised to encounter Chinese Communist troops heavily armed with Thompsons, especially during surprise night assaults.
The M1921 was famous throughout its career with police and criminals and in motion pictures.
In the Malayan Campaign, the Burma Campaign and the Pacific Theater, Lend-Lease issue Thompsons were used by the British Army, Indian Army, Australian Army infantry and other Commonwealth forces.
For these reasons, the 20-round and later 30-round box magazines soon proved most popular with military users of the M1928A1, and drum compatibility was not included in the design of the wartime M1 and M1A1 models.
The main difference between the M1 and M1A1 was the bolt.
This model gained fame from its use by criminals during Prohibition, and was nicknamed "tommy gun" by the media.
During the Greek Civil War, the Thompson submachine gun was used by both sides.
The Thompson was used in World War II in the hands of Allied troops as a weapon for scouts, non-commissioned officers (corporal, sergeant, and higher), and patrol leaders, as well as commissioned officers, tank crewmen, and soldiers performing raids on German positions.
The M1928A1 variant entered mass production before the attack on Pearl Harbor, as on-hand stocks ran out.
A fully automatic firearm that has been converted to semi-automatic fire, such as the Model 1927, is prohibited by the Firearms Act 1988 as, also, is any centre fire purpose made semi-automatic weapon such as the Model 1927A1.
M1s were issued with the 30-round box magazine and would accept the earlier 20-round box, but would not accept the drum magazine.
The selective-fire (semi- or full automatic) Thompson fires from the "open bolt" position, in which the bolt is held fully to rearward by the sear when cocked.
The Model 1919 was limited to about 40 units, the first units built did not use the drums, as it was too difficult to fire.
In the U.S. Army, many Pacific War jungle patrols were originally equipped with Thompsons in the early phases of the New Guinea and Guadalcanal campaigns, but soon began employing the BAR in its place as a point defense weapon.
It attached and detached by sliding sideways, which made magazine changes slow and also created difficulty in clearing a cartridge malfunction ("jam").
Many of these weapons were captured and placed into service with American soldiers and Marines for the balance of the war.
The FBI used Thompsons until they were declared obsolete and ordered destroyed in the early 1970s.
The Thompson was one of the earliest submachine guns to incorporate a double-column, double-feed box magazine design, which undoubtedly contributed to the gun's reputation for reliability.
The weapons had very high cyclic rates up to 1,500&nbsp;rpm.
The first test of a Thompson in Ireland was performed by West Cork Brigade commander Tom Barry in presence of IRA leader Michael Collins.
While searching for a way to allow such a weapon to operate safely without the complexity of a recoil or gas operated mechanism, Thompson came across a patent issued to John Bell Blish in 1915 based on adhesion of inclined metal surfaces under pressure.
This rate of fire, combined with a rather heavy trigger pull and a stock with an excessive drop, increases the tendency for the barrel to climb off target in automatic fire.
Additionally, the 50- and 100-round drum magazines were developed.
In an attempt to expand interest and sales overseas, Auto-Ordnance entered into a partnership with and licensed the Birmingham Small Arms Company Limited (BSA) in England to produce a European model.
An empty box was easily reloaded with loose rounds.
With the start of World War II, major contracts from several countries saved the manufacturer from bankruptcy.
21AC at the original price of $200.00, with the plain M1921 designated No.
The gun's ability to deliver large quantities of short-range automatic assault fire proved very useful in both defense and assault during the early part of the conflict.
It is officially known as the "Thompson Semi-Automatic Carbine, Model of 1927A1."
The British had used improvised bolts or wood screws to reinforce M1928 stocks.
Military users of the M1928A1 had complaints about the "L" fifty-round drum magazine; the British Army officially criticised "their excessive weight, the rattling sound they made...." and shipped thousands back to the U.S. in exchange for box magazines.
The flip-up adjustable Lyman rear sight was replaced with a fixed L sight.
During the Vietnam War, some South Vietnamese army units and defense militia were armed with Thompson submachine guns, and a few of these weapons were used by reconnaissance units, advisors, and other American troops.
Fifteen thousand were produced by Colt for Auto-Ordnance.
The Auto-Ordnance replica of the Thompson M1 and M1A1 is known as the TM1, and may be found marked "Thompson Semi-Automatic Carbine, Caliber .45M1".
It was later replaced by the M16 assault rifle.
Wartime production variants had a fixed rear sight without the triangular sight guard wings and a non-ribbed barrel, both like those found on the M1/M1A1.
It has been referred to by one researcher as the "gun that made the twenties roar."
The 30-round magazine became more common.
An M1928A1 which also came with an unusual inline stock, modified with elevated sights to increase accuracy also existed.
These modern versions should not be confused with the original semi-automatic Model of 1927 which was a slightly modified Model of 1921 produced by Colt for Auto-Ordnance.
Not only did some U.S. soldiers have use of them in Vietnam, but they encountered them as well.
The Model 1927A3 is a semi-automatic, .22 caliber version of the Thompson produced by Auto-Ordnance in West Hurley.
The semi-automatic versions are less regulated by federal law.
This concept had already been developed by German troops using their own Bergmann MP18, the world's first submachine gun, in concert with ''sturmtruppen'' tactics.
It featured an aluminum receiver to reduce weight.
For example, to own one the person must be "grandfathered" and have owned one before the bill was passed against it.
A special purpose machine pistol variant of the Thompson is manufactured by RPB Industries of Atlanta.
Early versions of the Thompson, the Model of 1919, had a fairly high cyclic rate of fire, as high as 1,200&nbsp;rounds per minute (rpm), with most Model of 1921 at 800&nbsp;rpm.
21A at a reduced price of $175.00.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation first acquired Thompsons in 1933 following the Kansas City Massacre.
The rifle can only be sold to other grandfathered individuals, this keep prices extremely low as the number of prohibited licensed individuals is very small and dwindling with time.
It was found that the only cartridge currently in U.S. service suitable for use with the lock was the .45 ACP round.
The ''Persuader'' was a belt-fed version developed in 1918, and the ''Annihilator'' was fed from a 20- or 30-round box magazine, which was an improved model developed in 1918 and 1919.
The Thompson submachine gun varies in field strip procedure, depending on the variant.
The slots adjoining the magazine well allowing use of a drum magazine were removed.
The Thompsons were then given to the Royal Australian Air Force and Royal Australian Navy.
Payne replaced the actuator with a heavier one and the recoil spring with a stiffer one; the changes reduced the rate of fire from 800 to the 600&nbsp;rpm of the U.S.Navy Model of 1928.
Many of the Colt models had French-language manuals packed with them as they had been abruptly diverted to England after the fall of France.
To fix this, the armorers removed the Blish Lock and replaced it with a hex bolt to keep the cocking handle and bolt together.
They used the Thompson extensively in jungle patrols and ambushes, where it was prized for its firepower, though it was criticized for its hefty weight and poor reliability.
This was one of the major complaints against the weapon made by service members of the U.S. Army issued the Thompson.
Military Police were fond of it, as were paratroopers, who "borrowed" Thompsons from members of the mortar squad for use on patrols behind enemy lines.
The Model 1928 was the first type widely used by military forces, with the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps as major buyers through the 1930s.
It was later replaced by the Owen Machine Carbine.
As of changes to Federal Law (prior to 2011) the 1927A5 .45 ACP Pistol is now simply classified as a "Firearm" or "Any Other Weapon (AOW) as it neither fits the neither the definition of a Pistol or Rifle under current law..
The Thompson submachine gun was also known informally as the "'''Tommy  Gun'''", "'''Trench Broom'''", "'''Trench Sweeper'''", "'''Chicago Typewriter'''", "'''Chicago Piano'''", "'''Chicago Style'''", "'''Chicago Organ Grinder'''", "'''The Chopper'''", and simply "'''The Thompson'''".
Most Model 1927s owned by police have been converted back to full-auto.
The law also placed restrictions on the possession, transfer, and transport of the weapons.
M1s were made by Savage Arms and by Auto-Ordnance.
The New York City Police Department was the largest purchaser of the Model of 1919.
There were fewer than 40 pre-production prototypes.
Late M1s had triangular guard wings added to the rear L sight, which were standardized on the M1A1.
New Zealand commando forces initially used Thompsons, but switched them for the more reliable, lighter, and more accurate Owen during the Solomon Islands and Guadalcanal campaigns.
Difficulties in supply eventually led to its replacement in Australian Army units in 1943 by other submachine guns such as the Owen and Austen.
Compared to modern 9mm submachine guns, the .45 Thompson is quite heavy, weighing roughly the same as the contemporary M1 Garand semi-automatic rifle, and requires lots of cleaning.
It was a common sight in the media of the time, being used by both law enforcement officers and criminals.
The Model 1927A1 is the semi-automatic replica of the Thompson Models of 1921 and 1927.
(In 1923, the Army had rejected the .45 Remington–Thompson, which had twice the energy of the .45 ACP).
Some of the first batches of Thompsons were bought in America by agents of the Irish Republic, notably Harry Boland.
The Viet Cong liked the weapon, and used both captured models as well as manufacturing their own copies in small jungle workshops.
Ammunition was scarce as it was either in small lots of Lend-Lease commercial ammo or obtained from adjacent American troops.
The M1921 was quite expensive to manufacture, with the original retail price around $200, because of its high-quality wood furniture and finely machined parts.
The Model 1921 (M1921) was the first major production model.
The first shipment of Persuaders arrived in New York to be shipped overseas on November 11, 1918, the day the Armistice went into effect.
According to historian Peter Hart, "The Thompson remained a key part of both the Official IRA and Provisional IRA arsenals until well into the 1970s when it was superseded by the Armalite and the AK-47."
Reloading an empty drum with cartridges was an involved process.
It was quickly attached and detached, and was removed downward, making clearing jams easier.
The Japanese captured enough Thompson M1928 SMGs and ammunition when they captured Hong Kong and Malaysia that it became a limited standard weapon.
The reinforced stock and protective sight wings were standard.
The Army introduced the U.S. M3 and M3A1 submachine guns in 1943 with plans to produce the latter in numbers sufficient to cancel future orders for the Thompson, while gradually withdrawing it from first-line service.
The 1928 Thompson would be the last small arm adopted by the U.S. Army that used a year designation in the official nomenclature.
Responding to a request for further simplification, the M1 was standardized in April 1942 as the '''United States Submachine Gun, Cal.
In the field, some soldiers taped two "XX" magazines together in what would be known as "jungle style" to speed magazine changes.
This model was designed as an automatic Colt .45 to "sweep" trenches with bullets.
The Model 1927 was the open bolt semi-automatic-only version of the M1921.
A total of 653 were purchased, but 495 were seized by US customs authorities in New York in June 1921.
Almost all Model of 1919s were made without buttstocks and front sights, and the final version closely resembled the later Model of 1921.
Many variations have been noted within this model.
Late M1s also had simplified fire control switches, also carried over to the M1A1.
It has been produced since 2008 by Kahr Arms of Worcester, Massachusetts as the "M1927A1 TA5".
By the time of the Korean War, the Thompson had seen much use by the U.S. and South Korean military, even though Thompson had been replaced as standard issue by the M3/M3A1.
Because of their quality and craftsmanship, as well as their gangster-era and WWII connections, Thompsons are sought as collector's items.
The Thompson Submachine Gun was developed by General John T. Thompson who originally envisioned an ''auto rifle'' (semi-automatic rifle) to replace the bolt action service rifles then in use.
Thompson intended the weapon as an automatic "trench-broom" to sweep enemy troops from the trenches, filling a role for which the Browning Automatic Rifle (BAR) had been proven ill-suited.
The perceived popularity of submachine guns such as the Thompson with violent gangsters in the 1920s and 1930s was one of the main reasons given for passage of the National Firearms Act by the United States Congress in 1934.
Two alternatives to the "L" drum and "XX" box magazines were tested December 6, 1941, at Fort Knox: an extended thirty-round box magazine and a forty-round magazine made by welding two 20-round magazines face to face, jungle style.
In February 1944, the M1A1 reached a low price of $45 each, including accessories and spare parts, although the difference in price between the M1 and M1A1 was only $0.06.
In 1926, the Cutts Compensator (a recoil brake) was offered as an option for the M1921; Thompsons with the compensator were cataloged as No.
The Colt Patent Fire Arms Manufacturing Company in Hartford, Connecticut was contracted by the Auto-Ordnance Corporation to manufacture the initial mass production of 15,000 Thompson Submachine Guns in 1920.
In contrast, the "XX" twenty-round box magazine was light and compact, it tended not to rattle, and could be inserted with the bolt safely closed.
For WWII, approximately 1,700,000 Thompson Submachine Guns were produced by Auto-Ordnance and Savage Arms, with 1,387,134 being the simplified World War II M1 and M1A1 variants (without the Blish lock and oiling system).
A Model 1921A believed to have been owned by Bonnie and Clyde, but without historical documentation to substantiate this provenance, sold at auction on January 21, 2012 in Kansas City for $130,000.
They were not found to be very effective in Ireland; in only 32% of actions where it was used did the Thompson cause serious casualties (death or serious injury) to those attacked.
The opposing Communist fighters of the Democratic Army of Greece were also using Thompson submachine guns, either captured from government forces or inherited from ELAS.
By the end of the war, the M1A1 was replaced with the even lower-cost M3 (commonly called the "Grease Gun").
The internal design is completely different to operate from the closed bolt and the carbine has barrel length of 16.5&nbsp;inches (42 cm) (versus open bolt operation and barrel length of  for the full automatic versions).
A Swedish variant of the M1928A1, the ''Kulsprutepistol m/40'' (submachine gun, model 40), served in the Swedish Army between 1940 and 1951.
Some experimental calibers were .45 ACP (11.4x23mm), .22LR, .32 ACP, .38 ACP, and 9mmP.
The Army did not give the Model of 1923 much consideration, so it was not adopted.
It surpassed any similar weapons currently in their service.
While not a new model in the usual sense of incorporating major changes, in 1926 the Cutts Compensator (a recoil brake) was offered as an option for the M1921; Thompsons with the compensator were cataloged as No.
Federal sales were followed by sales to several police departments in the US and minor international sales to various armies and constabulary forces, chiefly in Central and South America.
It has had, and continues to have, considerable significance in popular culture, especially in works about the U.S.'s Prohibition era and World War II, and hence is among the best-known firearms in recent history.
It had an extended receiver with a recoil buffer and fed from 20 round magazines.
The Model 1921 was thereafter referred to as Model 1921A or Model 1921AC, though some collectors still refer to it as the Model 1921.
Only one prototype was made in .351 WSL using a standard 20" barrel and an ROF of 1000rpm.
In 1939, Thompsons cost the government $209 apiece.
A new magazine catch with the provision for retaining drum magazines removed, was produced, but most M1s and later M1A1s retained the original.
Over 1.5 million military Thompson submachine guns were produced during World War II.
The Marines used their Thompsons in the Banana Wars and in China.
By the spring of 1942, cost reduction design changes had brought this down to $70.
A .30-06 variant was intended as a rival to the M1918 BAR.
Section leaders carried them instead of pistols or rifles.
This was the weapon Brigadier General Thompson demonstrated at Camp Perry in 1920.
However, the war ended two days before prototypes could be shipped to Europe.
The Model 1927A5 is a semi-automatic pistol version, .45 ACP version of the Thompson originally produced by Auto-Ordnance in West Hurley.
At an Auto-Ordnance board meeting in 1919 to discuss the marketing of the "Annihilator," with the war now over, the weapon was officially renamed the "Thompson Submachine Gun."
It introduced a horizontal forearm, improved inline stock for accuracy, 14-inch (35.5 cm) barrel, bipod and bayonet lug.
Thompson requested  Payne develop a method of reducing the cyclic rate of fire.
The Thompson also found service with the KNIL during their  attempt to retake their former colony of Indonesia.
.45, M1A1''', could be produced in half the time of the M1928A1, and at a much lower cost.
They shipped their remaining stocks to arm the forces of Lon Nol's Khmer Republic in 1975.
The 20-round Type XX magazines had their peep-holes welded shut to keep sand out and the 50-round Type L drums were discontinued.
The original Model 1927 is classified as a machine gun under the National Firearms Act of 1934 (a) by being "readily convertible" by swapping parts and (b) by a 1982 BATF ruling making all open bolt semi-automatic firearms manufactured after the date of this ruling classified as machine guns.
The M1A1, standardized in October 1942 as the '''United States Submachine Gun, Cal.
(The concept of welding two box magazines face-to-face was carried over with the UD 42 submachine gun.)
The Cutts compensator, barrel cooling fins, and Blish lock were omitted while the buttstock was permanently affixed.
A notable variant of the Model 1928 with an aluminum receiver and tenite grip, buttstock, and forend, was made by Savage.
Captured examples were later used by Indonesian forces against Dutch forces.
The Thompson achieved most of its early notoriety in the hands of Prohibition and Depression-era gangsters, motorized bandits and the lawmen who pursued them, and in Hollywood films about their exploits, most notably in the St Valentine's Day Massacre.
Through Lend-Lease, the Soviet Union also received the Thompson, but due to a shortage of appropriate ammunition, its use was not widespread.
Testers considered both superior to either the "XX" box or "L" drum.
In addition, the Soviet Union received M1928A1s, included as standard equipment with the M3 light tanks obtained through Lend-Lease.
The remainder made their way to the Irish Republican Army by way of Liverpool and were used in the last month of the Irish War of Independence (1919–21).
First issued in 1943, the M1 uses a simple blowback operation, with the charging handle moved to the side.
It has been produced since 1999 by Kahr Arms of Worcester, Massachusetts.
At the end of World War II, the Thompson, with a total wartime production of over 1.5 million, outnumbered the M3/M3A1 submachine guns in service by nearly three to one.
During the Cuban Revolution, the Thompson submachine gun was used by some of Fidel Castro's guerrillas.
There were two main experimental models of the Thompson.
In the 1930s, Taiyuan Arsenal produced copies of the Thompson for Yan Xishan, the warlord of Shanxi province.
A metal sling mount was fitted to the left side of the wooden buttstock.
Many Thompsons were distributed to Chinese armed forces as military aid before the fall of Chiang Kai-Shek's government to Mao Zedong's Communist forces in 1949 during the Chinese Civil War.
It was available to civilians, although poor sales resulted from the expense of the weapon: the Thompson gun, with one Type XX 20 shot "stick" magazine, was priced at $200.00 in 1921 (at that time, a Ford automobile sold for $400.00).
They soon discovered that the weapon was prone to jamming due to sand.
The possession of any fully automatic firearm is prohibited in the UK by the Firearms Act 1968, prohibited firearms can be possessed on a section 5 certificate.
It was primarily developed in Cleveland, Ohio.
The staff of Savage Arms looked for ways to simplify the M1928A1, producing a prototype in Feb 1942 which was tested at Aberdeen Proving Ground in March 1942; Army Ordnance approved adoption as the M1 in April 1942.
In 1927, the U.S. Navy ordered 500 Thompsons but requested a lower rate of fire.
This platform was based on the M1921/27 variants and worked well but due to the war effort was found expensive for mass production and defied the concept of a Light Rifle due to its weight.
The weapons were never issued to the Red Army because of a lack of .45 ACP ammunition on the Eastern Front; they were simply put in storage, although a picture exists of what appears to be Thompsons being used by Russian M3 Stuart crews in the Caucasus.
They were then captured and used by the Khmer Rouge.
The gun was prized by those lucky enough to get one and proved itself in the close street fighting that was encountered frequently during the invasion of France.
In its original design, it was finished more like a sporting weapon, with an adjustable rear sight, a blued, finned barrel and vertical foregrip (or pistol grip) and the Blish lock.
When the trigger is depressed, the bolt is released, traveling forward to chamber and simultaneously fire the first and subsequent rounds until either the trigger is released or the ammunition is exhausted.
The "Thompson Submachine Gun" inscription was machined over to replace it with "Thompson Semi-Automatic Carbine", and the "Model 1921" inscription was also machined over to replace it with "Model 1927."
21A at a reduced price of $175.00.
In 1940 Commonwealth troops in Egypt and North Africa were issued commercial model Lend-Lease Colt- and Savage-manufactured M1928s.
By late 1917, the limits of the Blish Principle were discovered: rather than working as a locked breech, it functioned as a friction-delayed blowback action.
On these guns, the model number '1921' on the receiver was updated by stamping an '8' over the last '1'.
One of its provisions was that owners of fully automatic firearms were required to register them with the predecessor agency of the modern Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF).
These were produced in small quantities and have a different appearance than the classic style.
The M1 Thompson drum magazine was rather fragile, and cartridges tended to rattle inside it, producing unwanted noise.
21AC at the original price of $200.00, with the plain M1921 designated No.
The box tripped the bolt open lock when empty, facilitating magazine changes.
The Hellenic Armed Forces, gendarmerie and police units were equipped with Thompson submachine guns supplied by the British and later in the war by the United States.
The Thompson had to be cocked, bolt retracted ready to fire, to attach the drum.
The Model 1923 was a heavy submachine gun introduced to potentially expand the Auto-Ordnance product line and was demonstrated for the U.S. Army.
The 30-round box was approved as standard in December 1941 to replace the "XX" and "L" magazines.
However, it did form the basis of the Thompson Light Rifle, a development of this variant with a barrel shroud which housed a quick barrel change device similar to the MG42 but was refused in favor of the aforementioned M1 Carbine.
In the European theater, the gun was widely utilized in British and Canadian commando units, as well as in the U.S. Army paratrooper and Ranger battalions, where it was issued more frequently than in line infantry units because of its high rate of fire and its stopping power, which made it very effective in the kinds of close combat these special operations troops were expected to undertake.
After the demobilization of ELAS, an unspecified number of arms were not surrendered to the government but kept hidden, and were later used by the Democratic Army of Greece.
Although the drum magazine provided significant firepower, in military service it was found to be overly heavy and bulky, especially when slung on patrol or on the march.
The cost at this time was US$225 per weapon, with $5 per 50-round drum and $3 for 20-round magazine.
