* Leonard Huxley, (1860–1933) author, father of Julian, Aldous and Andrew Huxley.
These tender children should not be taught that which you do not yourselves believe".
Huxley's dismissal of positivism damaged it so severely that Comte's ideas withered in Britain.
So, at a friend's suggestion, he applied for an appointment in the Royal Navy.
The Board voted against his idea, but it also voted against the idea that public money should be used to support students attending church schools.
exams and consequently did not qualify with a university degree.
Finally, in 1884 he sank into another depression, and this time it precipitated his decision to retire in 1885, at the age of only 60.
Morality and duty are often at war with natural instincts; ethics cannot be derived from the ''struggle for existence''.
However, gradually Huxley moved away from this conservative style of thinking as his understanding of palaeontology, and the discipline itself, developed.
Huxley wrote back: My dear Julian&nbsp;– I could never make sure about that Water Baby... My friend who wrote the story of the Water Baby was a very kind man and very clever.
Now 16, Huxley entered Sydenham College (behind University College Hospital), a cut-price anatomy school whose founder, Marshall Hall, discovered the reflex arc.
The first publication by Darwin of his ideas came when Wallace sent Darwin his famous paper on natural selection, which was presented by Lyell and Hooker to the Linnean Society in 1858 alongside excerpts from Darwin's notebook and a Darwin letter to Asa Gray.
Huxley had already become part-owner of the ''Natural History Review'' bolstered by the support of Lubbock, Rolleston, Busk and Carpenter (X-clubbers and satellites).
A practical example of the latter is his famous 1868 lecture ''On a Piece of Chalk'' which was first published as an essay in ''Macmillan's Magazine'' in London later that year.
Despite this unenviable start, Huxley was determined to educate himself.
All except Spencer were Fellows of the Royal Society.
Vines became Professor of Botany at Cambridge; W.T.
Darwin had dropped a hint when, in the conclusion to the ''Origin'', he wrote: "In the distant future... light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history".
Also in 1862 a series of talks to working men was printed lecture by lecture as pamphlets, later bound up as a little green book; the first copies went on sale in December.
On the day Wilberforce repeated some of the arguments from his ''Quarterly Review'' article (written but not yet published), then ventured onto slippery ground.
The moving spirit was a portmanteau worker, Wm.
* Sir Julian Huxley FRS was the first Director of UNESCO and a notable evolutionary biologist and humanist.
Thomas Henry Huxley was born in Ealing, then a village in Middlesex.
A fourth effect was to promote professionalism in science, with its implied need for scientific education.
In November 1864, Huxley succeeded in launching a dining club, the X Club, composed of like-minded people working to advance the cause of science; not surprisingly, the club consisted of most of his closest friends.
It's the same as asking to see every step in the transformation (or the splitting) of one species into another.
After a stream of good articles the ''NHR'' failed after four years; but it had helped at a critical time for the establishment of evolution.
The letters of Alfred Newton include one to his brother giving an eye-witness account of the debate, and written less than a month afterwards.
Then later in life came the Copley Medal in 1888 and the Darwin Medal in 1894; the Geological Society awarded him the Wollaston Medal in 1876; the Linnean Society awarded him the Linnean Medal in 1890.
It may be right to see Huxley's life and work as contributing to the secularisation of British society which gradually occurred over the following century.
The subject was raised at the 1860 BA Oxford meeting, when Huxley flatly contradicted Owen, and promised a later demonstration of the facts.
Darwin's theory was opposed by the Lord Bishop of Oxford, Samuel Wilberforce, and those supporting Darwin included Huxley and their mutual friends Hooker and Lubbock.
The essay undermines Rousseau's ideas on man as a preliminary to undermining his ideas on the ownership of property.
They had five daughters and three sons:
The periodical market was quite crowded at the time, but most probably the critical factor was Huxley's time; he was simply over-committed, and could not afford to hire full-time editors.
In this, he rejected Owen's theory that the bones of the skull and the spine were homologous, an opinion previously held by Goethe and Lorenz Oken.
After his mother, his eldest sister Lizzie was the most important person in his life until his own marriage.
Some modern Christian apologists consider Huxley the father of antitheism, though he himself maintained that he was an agnostic, not an atheist.
Huxley had been planning to leave Oxford on the previous day, but, after an encounter with Robert Chambers, the author of ''Vestiges'', he changed his mind and decided to join the debate.
On his tour of America Huxley was shown the remarkable series of fossil horses, discovered by O. C. Marsh, in Yale's Peabody Museum.
There were nine members, who decided at their first meeting that there should be no more.
A third effect was to serve notice that Darwinian ideas could not be easily dismissed: on the contrary, they would be vigorously defended against orthodox authority.
In 1870, he was president of the British Association at Liverpool and, in the same year was elected a member of the newly constituted London School Board.
* ''Report of a sad case recently tried before the Lord Mayor, Owen versus Huxley''.
In this argument Huxley is diametrically opposed to his old friend Herbert Spencer.
Huxley was also a major influence in the direction taken by British schools: in November 1870 he was voted onto the London School Board.
Michael Ruse finds no mention of evolution or Darwinism in any of the exams set by Huxley, and confirms the lecture content based on two complete sets of lecture notes.
This excerpt from a letter to Jessie, his eldest daughter is full of affection:
The Admiralty retained him as a nominal assistant-surgeon, so he might work on the specimens he collected and the observations he made during the voyage of the ''Rattlesnake''.
Perhaps the best known of these topics is ''Evolution and Ethics'', which deals with the question of whether biology has anything particular to say about moral philosophy.
The journal was switched to pro-Darwinian lines and relaunched in January 1861.
"No one fact tells so strongly against Owen... as that he has never reared one pupil or follower".
Important also, Darwin was a field naturalist, but Huxley was an anatomist, so there was a difference in their experience of nature.
Later on, as a young adult, he made himself an expert, first on invertebrates, and later on vertebrates, all self-taught.
That is an article of exclusively human manufacture."
Huxley's famous response to the idea of natural selection was "How extremely stupid not to have thought of that!"
Huxley's friend William Flower gave a public dissection to show that the same structures (the posterior horn of the lateral ventricle and hippocampus minor) were indeed present in apes.
Marian Huxley (1859–1887), married artist John Collier in 1879.
A key event had already occurred in 1857 when Richard Owen presented (to the Linnean Society) his theory that man was marked off from all other mammals by possessing features of the brain peculiar to the genus ''Homo''.
:"The doctrine that all men are, in any sense, or have been, at any time, free and equal, is an utterly baseless fiction."
Huxley supported the reading of the Bible in schools.
He had references on character and certificates showing the time spent on his apprenticeship and on requirements such as dissection and pharmacy.
The lobed-finned fish (such as coelacanths and lung fish) have paired appendages whose internal skeleton is attached to the shoulder or pelvis by a single bone, the humerus or femur.
During those years there was also work on human fossil anatomy and anthropology.
The peak of the X Club's influence was from 1873 to 1885 as Hooker, Spottiswoode and Huxley were Presidents of the Royal Society in succession.
It is therefore our responsibility to make ethical choices (see Ethics and Evolutionary ethics).
I don't think it will be a harmonic meeting altogether.
Though we do not know the exact words of the Oxford debate, we do know what Huxley thought of the review in the ''Quarterly'':
Huxley united the Hydroid and Sertularian polyps with the Medusae to form a class to which he subsequently gave the name of ''Hydrozoa''.
Two of Leonard's sons suffered serious depression: Trevennen committed suicide in 1914 and Julian suffered a breakdown in 1913, and five more later in life.
They were parents of the physicist Thomas Eckersley and the first BBC Chief Engineer Peter Eckersley.
This seems to put Huxley as a compatibilist in the Free Will vs Determinism debate.
Like some other British scientists of the nineteenth century such as Alfred Russel Wallace, Huxley was brought up in a literate middle-class family which had fallen on hard times.
In 1845, under Wharton Jones' guidance, Huxley published his first scientific paper demonstrating the existence of a hitherto unrecognised layer in the inner sheath of hairs, a layer that has been known since as Huxley's layer.
* ''The Water Babies, a fairy tale for a land baby'' by Charles Kingsley (serialised in ''Macmillan's Magazine'' 1862–63, published in book form, with additions, in 1863).
); T. Jeffery Parker became Professor of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy at University College, Cardiff; and William Rutherford became the Professor of Physiology at Edinburgh.
He was the youngest biologist to receive such recognition.
Noel Huxley (1856–1860), died aged 4.
The problems continued sporadically into the third generation.
John Morley, the editor, said "No article that had appeared in any periodical for a generation had caused such a sensation".
It is an interesting fact that the methods of the field naturalists who led the way in developing the theory of evolution (Darwin, Wallace, Fritz Müller, Henry Bates) were scarcely represented at all in Huxley's program.
He was apprenticed for short periods to several medical practitioners: at 13 to his brother-in-law John Cooke in Coventry, who passed him on to Thomas Chandler, notable for his experiments using mesmerism for medical purposes.
Huxley had little formal schooling and was virtually self-taught.
There were many other elections and appointments to eminent scientific bodies; these and his many academic awards are listed in the ''Life and Letters''.
A good example was ''The physical basis of life'', a lecture given in Edinburgh on 8 November 1868.
The experience was enough for Huxley to give credence to Darwin's gradualism, and to introduce the story of the horse into his lecture series.
He wrote up the voyage in the standard Victorian two volume format.
Rachel Huxley (1862–1934), married civil engineer Alfred Eckersley in 1884.
Huxley's Croonian Lecture, delivered before the Royal Society in 1858 on ''The Theory of the Vertebrate Skull'' was the start.
Huxley's interest in education went still further than school and university classrooms; he made a great effort to reach interested adults of all kinds: after all, he himself was largely self-educated.
(Tom Huxley's 'low set' included Hooker 'in the green and vegetable line' and 'Charlie Darwin, the pigeon-fancier'; Owen's 'crib in Bloomsbury' was the British Museum, of which Natural History was but one department.
He got into trouble with an old bone man, called Mantell, who never could be off complaining as Owen prigged his bones.
In the early 1870s the Royal School of Mines moved to new quarters in South Kensington; ultimately it would become one of the constituent parts of Imperial College London.
Huxley retired in 1885, after a bout of depressive illness which started in 1884.
"I do not advocate burning your ship to get rid of the cockroaches".
Despite this concern about evidence, Huxley saw that if evolution came about through variation, reproduction and selection then other things would also be subject to the same pressures.
For a start, Huxley dismisses religion as a source of moral authority.
Huxley's position on selection was agnostic; yet he gave no credence to any other theory.
If so, then something must have happened to horses in North America, since none were there when Europeans arrived.
Huxley's descendants include children of Leonard Huxley:
Huxley and his wife had five daughters and three sons:
And, as we now know, that is what did happen over large areas of North America from the Eocene to the Pleistocene: the ultimate causative agent was global temperature reduction (see Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum).
Huxley, a boy who left school at ten, became one of the most knowledgeable men in Britain.
The issue was reprinted seven times and protoplasm became a household word; ''Punch'' added 'Professor Protoplasm' to his other soubriquets.
Henry Huxley (1865–1946), became a fashionable general practitioner in London.
He was the second youngest of eight children of George Huxley and Rachel Withers.
Huxley was slow to accept some of Darwin's ideas, such as gradualism, and was undecided about natural selection, but despite this he was wholehearted in his public support of Darwin.
Other papers on the morphology of the cephalopods and on brachiopods and rotifers are also noteworthy.
That Huxley and Wilberforce remained on courteous terms after the debate (and able to work together on projects such as the Metropolitan Board of Education) says something about both men, whereas Huxley and Owen were never reconciled.
Another consequence was to alert him to the importance of public debate: a lesson he never forgot.
At the same time, Richard Owen, whilst writing an extremely hostile anonymous review of the ''Origin'' in the ''Edinburgh Review'', also primed Samuel Wilberforce who wrote one in the ''Quarterly Review'', running to 17,000 words.
About Huxley himself we have a more complete record.
:If I confine my retrospect of the reception of the 'Origin of Species' to a twelvemonth, or thereabouts, from the time of its publication, I do not recollect anything quite so foolish and unmannerly as the ''Quarterly Review'' article...
Sir William Burnett, the Physician General of the Navy, interviewed him and arranged for the College of Surgeons to test his competence (by means of a ''viva voce'').
Tyndall was a particularly close friend; for many years they met regularly and discussed issues of the day.
Signed 'Gorilla', this turned out to be by Sir Philip Egerton MP, amateur naturalist, fossil fish collector and&nbsp;— Richard Owen's patron!
His pension was a fairly handsome £1500 a year.
The struggle was to culminate in some severe defeats for Owen.
Its publication in 1859 completely convinced Huxley of evolution and it was this and no doubt his admiration of Darwin's way of amassing and using evidence that formed the basis of his support for Darwin in the debates that followed the book's publication.
In 1925, to celebrate his centenary, ''Nature'' issued a supplement devoted to Huxley.
The extended argument on the ape brain, partly in debate and partly in print, backed by dissections and demonstrations, was a landmark in Huxley's career.
When at last he got a grant from the Royal Society for the printing of plates, Huxley was able to summarise this work in ''The Oceanic Hydrozoa'', published by the Ray Society in 1859.
The ''Rattlesnake'' left England on 3 December 1846 and, once they had arrived in the southern hemisphere, Huxley devoted his time to the study of marine invertebrates.
Huxley's courses for students were so much narrower than the man himself that many were bewildered by the contrast: "The teaching of zoology by use of selected animal types has come in for much criticism"; Looking back in 1914 to his time as a student, Sir Arthur Shipley said "Although Darwin's later works all dealt with living organisms, yet our obsession was with the dead, with bodies preserved, and cut into the most refined slices".
The platform featured Brodie and Professor Beale, and Robert FitzRoy, who had been captain of HMS ''Beagle'' during Darwin's voyage, spoke against Darwin.
Perhaps he thought I could see as much in the water as he did&nbsp;– There are some people who see a great deal and some who see very little in the same things.When you grow up I dare say you will be one of the great-deal seers, and see things more wonderful than the Water Babies where other folks can see nothing.
Finally Huxley was made Assistant Surgeon ('surgeon's mate') to HMS ''Rattlesnake'', about to start for a voyage of discovery and surveying to New Guinea and Australia.
A rough analysis shows that five commissions involved science and scientific education; three involved medicine and three involved fisheries.
She died of pneumonia in her mid-twenties.
He began to send details of his discoveries back to England, where publication was arranged by Edward Forbes FRS (who had also been a pupil of Knox).
No other biologist held such an extreme view.
It is surely strange that Huxley's courses did not contain an account of the evidence collected by those naturalists of life in the tropics; evidence which they had found so convincing, and which caused their views on evolution by natural selection to be so similar.
Thus, our emotions, our intellect, our tendency to prefer living in groups and spend resources on raising our young are part and parcel of our evolution, and therefore inherited.
Huxley's reply to the effect that he would rather be descended from an ape than a man who misused his great talents to suppress debate—the exact wording is not certain—was widely recounted in pamphlets and a spoof play.
And Huxley hangs out in Jermyn Street.
Today we would perhaps emphasise the extraordinary structural arrangement of those chemicals as the key to understanding what cells do, but little of that was known in the nineteenth century.
A theory is a species of thinking, and its right to exist is coextensive with its power of resisting extinction by its rivals.’  This is the same idea as meme theory put forward by Richard Dawkins in 1976.
the huge Cretaceous aquatic bird ''Hesperornis'', and the dinosaur footprints along the Connecticut River were worth the trip by themselves, but the horse fossils were really special.
The modern account of the evolution of the horse has many other members, and the overall appearance of the tree of descent is more like a bush than a straight line.
There were his lecture courses for working men, many of which were published afterwards, and there was the use he made of journalism, partly to earn money but mostly to reach out to the literate public.
From 1860–63 Huxley developed his ideas, presenting them in lectures to working men, students and the general public, followed by publication.
The topic had been stimulated by Huxley seeing the cytoplasmic streaming in plant cells, which is indeed a sensational sight.
Marsh was part palaeontologist, part robber baron, a man who had hunted buffalo and met Red Cloud (in 1874).
The horse series also strongly suggested that the process was gradual, and that the origin of the modern horse lay in North America, not in Eurasia.
Huxley's ideas on this topic were summed up in January 1861 in the first issue (new series) of his own journal, the ''Natural History Review'': "the most violent scientific paper he had ever composed".
Darwin's ideas and Huxley's controversies gave rise to many cartoons and satires.
At sixpence for a course and a penny for a lecture by Huxley, this was some bargain; and so was the free library organised by the college, an idea which was widely copied.
In 1873 the King of Sweden made Huxley, Hooker and Tyndall Knights of the Order of the Polar Star: they could wear the insignia but not use the title in Britain.
Wilberforce had a track record against evolution as far back as the previous Oxford B.A.
The members were: Huxley, John Tyndall, J. D. Hooker, John Lubbock (banker, biologist and neighbour of Darwin), Herbert Spencer (social philosopher and sub-editor of the Economist), William Spottiswoode (mathematician and the Queen's Printer), Thomas Hirst (Professor of Physics at University College London), Edward Frankland (the new Professor of Chemistry at the Royal Institution) and George Busk, zoologist and palaeontologist (formerly surgeon for HMS ''Dreadnought'').
Use of that term has continued to the present day (see Thomas Henry Huxley and agnosticism).
Huxley had also rejected Lamarck's theory of transmutation, on the basis that there was insufficient evidence to support it.
The Royal Commission is the senior investigative forum in the British constitution.
This led him directly into a clash with Richard Owen, a man widely disliked for his behaviour whilst also being admired for his capability.
:"My dear Rolleston...
It was the first pre-''sapiens'' discovery of a fossil man, and it was immediately clear to him that the brain case was surprisingly large.
Huxley's relationships with his relatives and children were genial by the standards of the day—so long as they lived their lives in an honourable manner, which some did not.
Huxley's demonstrators were picked men—all became leaders of biology in Britain in later life, spreading Huxley's ideas as well as their own.
My way so many issues are clarified and problems solved; no other theory does nearly so well".
It was seen as one of Owen's greatest blunders, revealing Huxley as not only dangerous in debate, but also a better anatomist.
Later, he worked on vertebrates, especially on the relationship between apes and humans.
Huxley, on the other hand, was an empiricist who trusted what he could see, and some things are not easily seen.
With this in mind, one can appreciate the debate between them, Darwin writing his letters, Huxley never going quite so far as to say he thought Darwin was right.
For most of his adult life he wrote for periodicals—the ''Westminster Review'', the ''Saturday Review'', the ''Reader'', the ''Pall Mall Gazette'', ''Macmillan's Magazine'', the ''Contemporary Review''.
Huxley recuperated on a farm, looking thin and ill.
All this scepticism was brought together in a lecture to the Royal Institution, which made Darwin anxious enough to set about an effort to change young Huxley's mind.
There were also some quite significant X-Club satellites such as William Flower and George Rolleston, (Huxley protegés), and liberal clergyman Arthur Stanley, the Dean of Westminster.
E.W MacBride said "Huxley... would persist in looking at animals as material structures and not as living, active beings; in a word... he was a necrologist.
In the following year, at the age of twenty-six, he not only received the Royal Society Medal but was also elected to the Council.
Catch me discussing the Afghan question with you, you little pepper-pot!
In this he did better than Darwin, who got no award of any kind from the state.
His famous jibe at Huxley (as to whether Huxley was descended from an ape on his mother's side or his father's side) was probably unplanned, and certainly unwise.
Huxley's presence there had been encouraged on the previous evening when he met Robert Chambers, the Scottish publisher and author of "Vestiges",  who was walking the streets of Oxford in a dispirited state, and begged for assistance.
Tyndall and Huxley later joined The Club (founded by Dr. Johnson) when they could be sure that Owen would not turn up.
Kingsley had been among first to give a favourable review to Darwin's ''On the Origin of Species'', having "long since... learnt to disbelieve the dogma of the permanence of species", and the story includes a satire on the reaction to Darwin's theory, with the main scientific participants appearing, including Richard Owen and Huxley.
* ''Monkeyana'' (Punch vol 40, 18 May 1861).
He had, directly or indirectly, guided the careers and appointments of the next generation, but none were of his stature.
Famously, Huxley responded to Wilberforce in the debate at the British Association meeting, on Saturday 30 June 1860 at the Oxford University Museum.
The ''Reader'' also failed, despite its broader appeal which included art and literature as well as science.
Ethel Huxley (1866–1941) married artist John Collier (widower of sister) in 1889.
Ecological investigation of life in its environment was virtually non-existent, and theory, evolutionary or otherwise, was at a discount.
All this time Huxley continued his programme of reading, which more than made up for his lack of formal schooling.
The loss of Francis Balfour in 1882, climbing the Alps just after he was appointed to a chair at Cambridge, was a tragedy.
Afterwards he sank into a 'deep lethargy' and though Huxley ascribed this to dissection poisoning, Bibby and others may be right to suspect that emotional shock precipitated the depression.
Apart from his interest in persuading the world that man was a primate, and had descended from the same stock as the apes, Huxley did little work on mammals, with one exception.
In matters of the intellect, follow your reason as far as it will take you, without regard to any other consideration...
For Darwin, natural selection was the best way to explain evolution because it explained a huge range of natural history facts and observations: it solved problems.
Other significant descendants of Huxley, such as Sir Crispin Tickell, are treated in the Huxley family.
In the main, the method was based on the use of carefully chosen types, and depended on the dissection of anatomy, supplemented by microscopy, museum specimens and some elementary physiology at the hands of Foster.
They kept correspondence until he was able to send for her.
* Noel Huxley (1856–60), died aged 4.
He remained on good terms with his children, more than can be said of many Victorian fathers.
In primary schooling, he advocated a wide range of disciplines, similar to what is taught today: reading, writing, arithmetic, art, science, music, etc.
:"Of moral purpose I see not a trace in nature.
* Marian Huxley (1859–87), married artist John Collier in 1879.
This small family plot had been purchased upon the death of his beloved youngest son Noel, who died of scarlet fever in 1860; Huxley's wife Henrietta Anne née Heathorn and son Noel are also buried there.
Finally, in 1895, he died of a heart attack (after contracting influenza and pneumonia), and was buried in North London at St Marylebone.
This was the weekly ''Reader'', which they bought, revamped and redirected.
I shall be obliged if you will read this letter to the Section" Yours faithfully, Thos.
Both before and after the voyage Forbes was something of a mentor to Huxley.
