Addition of small amounts of thorium improves the mechanical strength of magnesium, and thorium-aluminium alloys have been considered as a way to store thorium in proposed future thorium nuclear reactors.
Thorium becomes superconductive below 1.4&nbsp;K.
In the universe, thorium is among the rarest of the primordial elements: it achieves this position because not only because it is one of the two elements that can be produced only in the r-process (with the other one being uranium), but also because it has slowly been decaying away from the moment it formed.
However, thorium only occurs as a minor constituent of most minerals.
Different isotopes of thorium behave identically chemically, but do have slightly differing physical properties: for example, the densities of isotopically pure 228Th, 229Th, 230Th, and 232Th in g/cm3 are respectively expected to be 11.524, 11.575, 11.626, and 11.727.
It can take as much as thirty years after the ingestion of thorium for symptoms to manifest themselves.
Thorium is predicted to be able to replace uranium as nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors, but only a few thorium reactors have yet been completed.
Out of the thorium that does remain in the body, three quarters of it accumulates in the skeleton.
Most investigators, however, considered on the basis of their chemical properties that these elements were analogous to the 5d transition elements hafnium, tantalum, and tungsten, and considered the existence of the lanthanides in the sixth row to be a one-off fluke.
Sometimes thorium nitrate is used instead, because it will thermally decompose to thoria at high temperatures.
Thorium and uranium are the most investigated of the radioactive elements because their radioactivity is slight enough to not pose major problems of handling and accessibility.
Half-sandwich compounds are also known, such as (''η''8-C8H8)ThCl2(THF)2, which has a piano-stool structure and is made by reacting thorocene with thorium tetrachloride in tetrahydrofuran.
Most of the radiation dose by a normal user arises from inhaling the radium, resulting in a radiation dose of up to 0.2&nbsp;millisieverts per use, about a third of the dose sustained during a mammogram.
With chromium and uranium, it forms eutectic mixtures, and thorium is completely miscible in both solid and liquid states with its lighter congener cerium.
When heated, it emits intense blue light through incandescence, which becomes white when mixed with its lighter homologue cerium dioxide (CeO2, ceria): this is the basis for its previously common application in gas mantles.
In nature, thorium occurs in the +4 oxidation state, together with uranium(IV), zirconium(IV), hafnium(IV), and cerium(IV), but also with scandium, yttrium, and the trivalent lanthanides which have similar ionic radii.
At standard temperature and pressure, thorium is slowly attacked by water, but does not readily dissolve in most common acids, with the exception of hydrochloric acid, where it dissolves leaving behind a black insoluble residue, probably ThO(OH,Cl)H. It dissolves in concentrated nitric acid containing a small amount of catalytic fluoride or fluorosilicate ions; if these are not present, passivation can occur, similarly to uranium and plutonium.
Present knowledge of the distribution of thorium resources is poor because of the relatively low-key exploration efforts arising out of insignificant demand.
Nevertheless, some thorium compounds are chemically moderately toxic.
Berzelius determined that it contained a new element.
He was a Norwegian priest and amateur mineralogist who studied the minerals in Telemark, where he served as vicar.
As thorium occurs naturally, it exists in very small quantities almost everywhere on Earth: the average human contains about 100&nbsp;micrograms of thorium and typically consumes three micrograms per day of thorium.
They obtained 99% pure thorium metal by reducing thorium chloride with sodium metal.
The chemical toxicity of thorium is low because thorium and its most common compounds (mostly the dioxide) are poorly soluble in water.
The letter "r" stands for "rapid neutron capture", and occurs in core-collapse supernovae, where heavy seed nuclei such as 56Fe rapidly capture neutrons, running up against the neutron drip line, as neutrons are captured much faster than the resulting nuclides can beta decay back toward stability.
98–99% of thorium-cycle fuel nuclei would fission at either 233U or 235U, so fewer long-lived transuranics are produced.
In Dmitri Mendeleev's 1869 periodic table, thorium and the rare earth elements were placed outside the main body of the table, at the end of each vertical period after the alkaline earth metals.
Efforts have been applied to initiate usage of thorium and its radioactivity as a power source; the earliest thorium-based reactor was made in India: the first core at the Indian Point Energy Center in 1962.
Thorium borides, carbides, silicides, and nitrides are refractory materials, as are those of uranium and plutonium, and have thus received attention as possible nuclear fuels.
Thoria, a refractory material, has the highest melting point (3390&nbsp;°C) of all known oxides.
It is quite acidic due to its high charge, slightly stronger than sulfurous acid: thus it tends to undergo hydrolysis and polymerisation (though to a lesser extent than Fe3+), predominantly to Th2(OH)26+ in solutions with pH 3 or below, but in more alkaline solution polymerisation continues until the gelatinous hydroxide Th(OH)4 is formed and precipitates out (though equilibrium may take weeks to be reached, because the polymerisation usually slows down significantly just before the precipitation).
It is isotypic with the better-known analogous uranium compound, uranocene.
Thorium was once commonly used as the light source in gas mantles and as an alloying material, but these applications have declined due to concerns about its radioactivity.
The heaviest three confirmed primordial nuclides, 232Th, 235U, and 238U, are the only isotopes beyond bismuth that have half-lives measured in billions of years.
Metallic thorium is separated from the anhydrous oxide or chloride by reacting it with calcium in an inert atmosphere:
There are concerns about the safety of thorium mantles, as the dangerous daughters of thorium have much lower melting points than thoria (except of course 228Th, which is chemically identical to its parent 232Th), and they would be volatilised every time the mantle is heated for use.
The other tetrahalides instead have dodecahedral geometry.
In acidic aqueous solution, thorium occurs as the tetrapositive aqua ion Th(H2O)94+, which has tricapped trigonal prismatic molecular geometry: at pH&nbsp;&lt;&nbsp;3, the solutions of thorium salts are dominated by this cation.
In bulk, the reaction of pure thorium with air is slow, although corrosion may eventually occur after several months; most thorium samples are however contaminated with varying degrees of the dioxide, which greatly accelerates corrosion.
A thorium atom has 90 electrons, of which four are valence electrons.
Berzelius reused the name of the previous supposed element discovery.
They are important in thorium purification and the disposal of nuclear waste, but most of them have not yet been fully characterised, especially regarding their structural properties.
These values lie intermediate between those of its neighbours actinium (10.07&nbsp;g/cm3) and protactinium (15.37&nbsp;g/cm3), showing the continuity of trends across the early actinides.
Because 232Th is so long-lived, its daughters still exist in nature as radiogenic nuclides despite their much shorter half-lives, the longest among them being the 5.7-year half-life of 228Ra, the immediate alpha daughter of 232Th.
Therefore, thorium is much more similar to the transition metals zirconium and hafnium than to its true lanthanide congener cerium in its properties such as ionisation energies and redox potentials, and hence also in its chemistry.
People who work with thorium compounds are at a risk of dermatitis.
Yellowed lenses may be restored to their original colourless state with lengthy exposure to intense ultraviolet radiation.
The distinctive ability of thorium salts is their high solubility, not only in water, but also in polar organic solvents.
With the later recognition that the rare earths were mostly trivalent and thorium was tetravalent, Mendeleev moved cerium and thorium to group IV in 1871, which contained the modern carbon group (group 14), titanium group (group 4), cerium, and thorium, because their maximum oxidation state was +4.
:Th(OH)4 + 4 HNO3 → Th(NO3)4 + 4 H2O
This means that when heated to high temperatures, it does not melt, but merely glows with an intense blue light; addition of cerium dioxide gives a bright white light.
Because of thorium's radioactivity, minerals containing significant quantities of thorium are often metamict, their crystal structure having been partially or totally destroyed by the alpha radiation produced in the radioactive decay of thorium.
Thorium and uranium are thus the most well-studied of all the radioactive elements.
He determined that thorium was a very electropositive metal, that he placed ahead of cerium and behind zirconium in electropositivity.
232Th is a primordial nuclide, having existed in its current form for over ten billion years; it was forged in the cores of dying stars through the r-process and scattered across the galaxy by supernovae.
As recently as 2007, some companies continued to manufacture and sell thorium mantles without giving adequate information about their radioactivity, with some even fraudulently claiming them to be non-radioactive while in reality using large quantities of thorium, up to 259&nbsp;milligrams per mantle.
Thorium fuels also result in a safer and better-performing reactor core because thoria has a higher melting point, higher thermal conductivity, and lower coefficient of thermal expansion than the now-common fuel uranium dioxide (UO2): thoria is also more chemically stable as, unlike uranium dioxide, it does not further oxidise to triuranium octoxide (U3O8).
Such unusual behaviour is due to relativistic effects, which are increasingly stronger near the bottom of the periodic table, specifically the relativistic spin–orbit interaction.
As a hard Lewis acid, Th4+ favours hard ligands with oxygen atoms as donors: complexes with sulfur atoms as donors are less stable and are more prone to hydrolysis.
Monazite is a chemically unreactive phosphate mineral that is found as yellow or brown sand; its low reactivity makes it difficult to extract thorium from it.
232Th is the longest-lived isotope in the 4''n'' decay chain which includes isotopes with a mass number divisible by 4 (hence the name: it is also called the thorium series after its progenitor).
(By that time, Berzelius had already discovered two elements, cerium and selenium, but he had made a public mistake once, announcing a new element, ''gahnium'', that turned out to be simply zinc oxide.)
Like many of the early and middle actinides (up to americium, and also expected for curium), thorium forms the yellow cyclooctatetraenide complex Th(C8H8)2, thorocene.
All of the remaining thorium isotopes have half-lives that are less than thirty days and the majority of these have half-lives that are less than ten minutes.
Furthermore, 232Th absorbs neutrons more readily than 238U, and not only does 233U have a higher probability of fission upon neutron capture (92.0%) than 235U (85.5%) or 239Pu (73.5%), it also releases more neutrons upon fission on average.
Despite thorium's radioactivity, the element has remained in use for a long time for applications not exploiting the effect as no suitable alternatives could be found.
Thorium dioxide occurs as the rare mineral thorianite, which usually contains up to 12% ThO2.
However, due to its being isotypic with uranium dioxide, these two common actinide dioxides can form solid-state solutions and the name of the mineral changes according to the ThO2 content.
After 1885, many applications were found for thorium and its compounds, such as in ceramics, carbon arc lamps, heat-resistant crucibles, and as catalysts for industrial chemical reactions such as the oxidation of ammonia to nitric acid..
Other manufacturers continue to make thorium mantles, but moved their factories to developing countries.
In fact, uranium ores with low thorium concentrations can be purified to produce gram-sized thorium samples of which over a quarter is the 230Th isotope, since 230Th is one of the daughters of 238U.
Thorium tetrafluoride was also used in manufacturing carbon arc lamps, which provided high-intensity illumination for movie projectors and search lights.
Such glass finds application in high-quality lenses for cameras and scientific instruments.
Nevertheless, production could easily be increased, and probably would be if thorium became used in large quantities as nuclear fuel.
Finely divided thorium metal presents a fire hazard due to its pyrophoricity and must therefore be handled carefully.
In the periodic table, it is located to the right of the actinide actinium, to the left of the actinide protactinium, and below the lanthanide cerium.
In the 21st century, thorium's potential for improving proliferation resistance and waste characteristics led to renewed interest in the thorium fuel cycle.
Thorium is odourless and tasteless.
Uranium-thorium dating is a relatively short-range process because of the short half-lives of 234U and 230Th relative to the age of the Earth: it is also accompanied by a sister process involving the alpha decay of 235U into 231Th, which very quickly becomes the longer-lived 231Pa, and this process is often used to check the results of uranium-thorium dating.
On Earth, thorium is not a rare element as was previously thought, having a crustal abundance comparable to that of lead and molybdenum, twice that of arsenic, and thrice that of tin.
Both of these dating methods assume that the proportion of 230Th to 232Th is a constant during the time period when the sediment layer was formed, that the sediment did not already contain thorium before contributions from the decay of uranium, and that the thorium cannot shift within the sediment layer.
:ThO2 + 2 Ca → 2 CaO + Th
However, exposure to an aerosol of thorium, such as in the form of contaminated dust, can lead to increased risk of cancers of the lung, pancreas, and blood, as lungs and other internal organs can be penetrated by alpha radiation.
Thorium reacts with hydrogen to form the thorium hydrides ThH2 and Th4H15, the latter of which is superconducting below the transition temperature of 7.5–8&nbsp;K; at standard temperature and pressure, it conducts electricity like a metal.
Two radiometric dating methods involve thorium isotopes: uranium-thorium dating, involving the decay of 234U to 230Th (ionium), and ionium-thorium dating, which measures the ratio of 232Th to 230Th.
Additionally, all 233U production methods other than mercury fluourescence always result in significant impurities of the very dangerous gamma emitter 232U, either from parasitic (n,2n) reactions on 232Th, 233Pa, or 233U that result in the loss of a neutron, or from double neutron capture of 230Th, an impurity in natural 232Th:
Thus it was not until 1945, after Glenn T. Seaborg and his team had discovered the transuranic elements americium and curium, that Seaborg realised that thorium was the second member of the actinide series and was filling an f-block row, instead of being the heavier congener of hafnium and filling a fourth d-block row.
As the yttrium in this mineral was initially mistaken as being a new element, the mineral was named kenotime by the French mineralogist François Sulpice Beudant as a rebuke of Berzelius, from the Greek words κενός (vain) and τιμή (honour).
The elder Esmark determined that it was not any known mineral and sent a sample to Berzelius for examination.
Next, the acidic solution is neutralised with hydroxides to pH = 5.8 that results in precipitation of thorium hydroxide (Th(OH)4) contaminated with ~3% of rare-earth hydroxides; the remaining rare-earth hydroxides remain in solution.
A radioactive actinide metal, thorium is one of only two significantly radioactive elements that still occur naturally in large quantities as a primordial element (the other being uranium).
In air, thorium burns to form the simple dioxide, ThO2, also called thoria or thorina: this has the fluorite structure.
Another common criticism centres around the low commercial viability of the thorium fuel cycle: some entities like the Nuclear Energy Agency go further and predict that the thorium cycle will never be commercially viable while uranium is available in abundance—a situation which Trevor Findlay predicts will persist "in the coming decades".
Several binary thorium chalcogenides and oxychalcogenides are also known with sulfur, selenium, and tellurium.
In thorium silicate minerals, the Th4+ and  ions are often replaced with M3+ (M = Sc, Y, Ln) and phosphate () ions respectively.
As such, 232Th still occurs naturally today: four-fifths of the thorium present at Earth's formation has survived to the present.
As a result, owning and handling small amounts of thorium, such as those in a gas mantle, is considered safe, although usage of such items may pose some risks.
The properties of thorium vary widely depending on the amount of impurities in the sample used: the major impurity is usually thorium dioxide (ThO2).
The other natural thorium isotopes are much shorter-lived; of them, only 230Th is usually detectable, occurring in secular equilibrium with its parent 238U, and making up at most 0.04% of natural thorium.
Although every element up to bismuth (element 83) has an isotope that is practically stable for all purposes ("classically stable"), with the exceptions of technetium and promethium (elements 43 and 61), all elements from polonium (element 84) onward are noticeably radioactive.
Any sample of thorium or its compounds contain traces of these daughters, which are isotopes of thallium, lead, bismuth, polonium, radon, radium, and actinium.
Because of the great insolubility of thorium dioxide, thorium does not usually spread quickly through the environment when released in significant quantities: however, the Th4+ ion is soluble, especially in acidic soils, and in such conditions the thorium concentration can reach 40&nbsp;ppm.
Nuclear scientist Alvin Radkowsky of Tel Aviv University in Israel, the head designer of the American first civilian nuclear power plant at Shippingport, Pennsylvania whose third core bred thorium, founded a consortium to develop thorium reactors, which included other companies: Raytheon Nuclear Inc. and Brookhaven National Laboratory in the U.S. and the Kurchatov Institute in Russia.
232Th is the only isotope of thorium occurring in significant quantities in nature today, and thus thorium is usually considered to be a mononuclidic element.
The reason for this is that while its parent 238U is soluble in water, 230Th is insoluble and thus precipitates to form part of the sediment, and may be observed doing so.
Many polynary halides with the alkali metals, barium, thallium, and ammonium are known for thorium fluorides, chlorides, and bromides.
Experimental measurements of its density give values between 11.5&nbsp;and&nbsp;11.66&nbsp;g/cm3: these are slightly lower than the theoretically expected value of 11.724&nbsp;g/cm3 calculated from thorium's lattice parameters, perhaps due to microscopic voids forming in the metal when it is cast.
However, on Earth, thorium is much more abundant: with an abundance of 8.1&nbsp;ppm in the Earth's crust, it is one of the most abundant of the heavy elements, almost as abundant as lead (13&nbsp;ppm) and significantly more abundant than tin (2.1&nbsp;ppm).
Such samples slowly tarnish in air, becoming grey and finally black at the surface.
It remains popular as a material in high-end optics and scientific instrumentation; thorium and uranium are the only significantly radioactive elements with major commercial applications that do not rely on their radioactivity.
Since thorium has few applications today, only a few hundred tonnes of it are produced each year, mostly as a by-product of the production of uranium and the lanthanides, and even these meagre quantities exceed the current demand for thorium.
Nevertheless, while thorium is nearly half as dense as uranium and plutonium, it is harder than either of them.
In this scheme, 227Th was named radioactinium (RdAc), 228Th radiothorium (RdTh), 230Th ionium (Io), 231Th uranium Y (UY), 232Th thorium (Th), and 234Th uranium X1 (UX1).
Thorium metal is silvery and tarnishes black when exposed to air, forming the dioxide.
Furthermore, thorium compounds are also poorly soluble in water.
The existence of a second inner transition series, in the form of the actinides, was not accepted until similarities with the electron structures of the lanthanides had been established.
The former (which has two forms, one purple and one green) is a rare example of thorium in the formal +3 oxidation state; a formal +2 oxidation state even occurs in a derivative.
These impurities of 232U make 233U very easy to detect and very dangerous to work on, and the impracticality of their separation limits the possibilities of nuclear proliferation using 233U as the fissile material.
All four thorium tetrahalides are known, as are some low-valent bromides and iodides: the tetrahalides are all 8-coordinated hygroscopic compounds that dissolve easily in polar solvents such as water.
It is an unstable compound in air and outright decomposes in water or at 190&nbsp;°C.
Thorium's melting point of 1750&nbsp;°C is above both that of actinium (1227&nbsp;°C) and that of protactinium (approximately 1560&nbsp;°C).
Because 232Th is only mildly radioactive, but decays to more dangerous radionuclides such as radium and radon, emitting alpha and gamma radiation, a proper assessment of the radiological toxicity of 232Th must include the contribution of its daughters such as 228Ra, which are dangerous gamma emitters.
Thorium is still widely used as an alloying element in TIG welding electrodes (at a rate of 1–2% mix with tungsten).
229mTh has the lowest known excitation energy of any isomer, measured to be (7.6&nbsp;±&nbsp;0.5)&nbsp;eV.
In 1828, Morten Thrane Esmark found a black mineral on Løvøya island, Telemark county, Norway.
While a 1981 study estimated that a dose from using a thorium mantle every weekend would be safe for a person,  this was not the case for people manufacturing the mantles (and thus contacting many) as well as soils around some factory sites.
Because of this, thorium is a potentially attractive alternative to uranium in mixed oxide (MOX) fuels to minimise the generation of transuranics and maximise the destruction of plutonium.
Sometimes thorium is extracted by electrolysis of a fluoride in a mixture of sodium and potassium chloride at 700–800&nbsp;°C in a graphite crucible.
While absorption through the skin is possible, it is not a likely means of thorium exposure.
However, the main disadvantage is that it is difficult and dangerous to reprocess the used fuel because many of the daughters of 232Th and 233U are strong gamma emitters.
On the other hand, the heavy platinum group metals have no affinity for oxygen and their oxides may even be thermodynamically unstable with respect to the elements.
The alkyl and aryl derivatives are prepared from the chloride derivative and have received attention due to the insight they give regarding the nature of the Th–C sigma bond.
Additionally, 233Pa has a relatively long half-life of 27&nbsp;days and a high cross section for neutron capture.
All four heavier pnictogens (phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth) also form binary thorium compounds.
He published his findings in 1829, having isolated an impure sample for the first time by reducing KThF5 with potassium metal.
The remaining natural thorium isotope, 229Th, occurs in minute traces as part of the decay chain of 237Np, the neptunium series, which is much less abundant than the other decay chains in nature and was hence discovered much later: therefore it does not have a historical name.
Its radioactive decay produces a significant amount of the Earth's internal heat; the other major contributors are the shorter-lived primordial nuclides, 235U, 238U, and 40K.
Such a second extra-long periodic table row, to accommodate known and undiscovered elements with an atomic weight greater than bismuth (thorium, protactinium, and uranium, for example), had been postulated as far back as 1892 by Henry Bassett, who considered thorium and uranium to be members of a second series of rare earths, and predicted that more elements would be found within this series.
Thus, they are the only such heavy isotopes to have survived since their production around ten billion years ago.
This reflected the belief at that time that thorium and the rare earth metals were divalent.
(232Th very occasionally undergoes spontaneous fission rather than alpha decay, and has left evidence in doing so in its minerals, but the partial half-life of this process is very large at over 1021&nbsp;years and hence alpha decay predominates.)
Ionium-thorium dating is a related process, which exploits the insolubility of thorium (both 232Th and 230Th) and thus its presence in ocean sediments to date these sediments by measuring the ratio of 232Th to 230Th.
When thorium is ingested, 99.98% does not remain in the body.
Thorium tetrafluoride is used as an antireflection material in multilayered optical coatings.
Thorium is especially common in the Tamil Nadu coastal areas of India, where residents may be exposed to a naturally occurring radiation dose ten times higher than the worldwide average.
The only primordial elements rarer than thorium are thulium, lutetium, tantalum, and rhenium, the odd-numbered elements just before the third peak of r-process abundances around the heavy platinum group metals.
Instead, readily dissolve in iron and sink down with it into the core.
It was discovered in 1829 by the Norwegian priest and amateur mineralogist Morten Thrane Esmark and identified by the Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius, who named it after Thor, the Norse god of thunder.
Although thorium was discovered in 1828, it had no applications until 1885, when Carl Auer von Welsbach invented the gas mantle, a portable source of light which produces light from the incandescence of very hot thorium oxide, heated to extremely high temperatures by burning gaseous fuels.
Allanite can have 0.1–2% thorium and zircon up to 0.4% thorium.
Soil normally contains about 6 parts per million (ppm) of thorium.
On the other hand, in most countries, the progress staggered because uranium was relatively abundant and the progress of thorium-based reactors was therefore slow (in the 20th century, 3 reactors were opened in India and 12 elsewhere).
However, this became "xenotime" as a misprint from the beginning, blunting the criticism.
Berzelius, however, did not isolate the element in its metallic state; for the first time, thorium was isolated in 1914 by D. Lely Jr. and L. Hamburger.
Tetramethylthorium, Th(CH3)4, is not known, but its adducts are stabilised by phosphine ligands.
Thorium has the longest half-life of all the significantly radioactive elements, 14.05&nbsp;billion&nbsp;years; it decays very slowly through alpha decay to radium-228 (228Ra), starting a decay chain named the thorium series that ends at stable lead-208 (208Pb).
When it was realised that all of these are isotopes of thorium, many of these names fell out of use, and "thorium" came to refer to all isotopes, not just 232Th.
Furthermore, though the isotopes produced in the thorium fuel cycle are not transuranic, some of them are still very dangerous, such as 231Pa, which has a long half-life of 32760&nbsp;years and is a major contributor to the long term radiotoxicity of spent nuclear fuel.
Thorium complexes with organic ligands, such as oxalate, citrate, and EDTA, are much stronger and tend to occur naturally in natural thorium-containing waters in concentrations orders of magnitude higher than the inorganic complexes.
An added advantage 233U and 239Pu enjoy over all other fissile nuclei (except the naturally occurring 235U) is that they can be bred from neutron capture by the naturally-occurring quantity isotopes 232Th and 238U.
The isotope 229Th is expected to be fissionable with a bare critical mass of 2839&nbsp;kg, although with steel reflectors this value could drop to 994&nbsp;kg.
An efficient method is the dissolution of thorium hydroxide in nitric acid, because the resulting solution can be purified by extraction with organic solvents:
The reason for the existence of this "island of relative stability" at thorium and uranium, where the longest-lived isotopes have half-lives of millions or billions of years, is because the most stable isotopes of these elements have closed nuclear shells; nevertheless, since thorium and uranium have more protons than bismuth, their nuclei are thus still susceptible to alpha decay because the strong nuclear force is not strong enough to overcome the electromagnetic repulsion between their protons.
The purest thorium specimens usually contain about a tenth of a percent of the dioxide.
Thorium is a soft, paramagnetic, bright silvery radioactive actinide metal.
A major shift occurred as late as in the 1990s, when most of these applications that do not depend on thorium's radioactivity declined quickly due to safety and environmental concerns as suitable safer replacements have been found.
It contains around 2.5% thorium on average, although some deposits may contain up to 20% thorium.
Large-scale research was begun in 1996 by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to study the use of thorium reactors; a year later, the U.S. Energy Department began their research on the matter.
Highly pure thorium can be extracted from its iodide with the crystal bar process.
It has an optical transparency in the range of 0.35–12&nbsp;µm, and its radiation is primarily due to alpha particles, which can be easily stopped by a thin cover layer of another material.
Natural thorium is essentially isotopically pure 232Th, which is the longest-lived and most stable isotope of thorium, having a half-life comparable to the age of the universe.
When 233U undergoes nuclear fission, the neutrons emitted can strike further 232Th nuclei, restarting the cycle.
Most binary compounds of thorium with nonmetals may simply be prepared by heating the elements together.
Lower iodides ThI3 (black) and ThI2 (gold) can also be prepared by reducing the tetraiodide with thorium metal: These do not contain Th(III) and Th(II), but instead contain Th4+ and could be more clearly formulated as electride compounds.
This is different from the behaviour of Zr4+ and Hf4+, which do not hydrolyse appreciably in aqueous solution.
The hardness of thorium is similar to that of soft steel, so heated pure thorium can be rolled in sheets and pulled into wire.
Thorite, or tetragonal thorium silicate (ThSiO4), also has a high thorium content and is the mineral in which thorium was first discovered.
While 232Th is not fissionable, it is fertile as it can be converted to fissile 233U using neutron capture.
The melting point of thoria is 3300&nbsp;°C – the highest of all known oxides; only few substances have higher melting points.
This behaviour is quite distinct from that of its lanthanide congener cerium, for whom +4 is the highest possible state but +3 also plays an important role and is in fact more stable.
This is because thorium, being a lithophile, is likely to form oxide minerals that do not sink into the core.
Thorium tetrafluoride has a monoclinic crystal structure and is isotypic with zirconium tetrafluoride and hafnium tetrafluoride, where the Th4+ ions are coordinated with F− ions in somewhat distorted square antiprisms.
Hence, thorium and uranium are the only important primordial radioactive elements.
Powdered thorium metal is pyrophoric and often ignites spontaneously in air.
Mixed metal hydroxides are extracted first, filtered at 80&nbsp;°C, washed with water and dissolved with concentrated hydrochloric acid.
Most of the work on organothorium compounds has focused on the cyclopentadienyls and cyclooctatetraenyls.
Thorium is weakly radioactive: all its known isotopes are unstable.
Many other inorganic thorium compounds with polyatomic anions are known, such as the perchlorates, sulfates, sulfites, nitrates, carbonates, phosphates, vanadates, molybdates, and chromates, and their hydrated forms.
Berzelius also made some initial characterisation of the new metal and its chemical compounds: he correctly determined that the thorium–oxygen mass ratio was 7.5 (its actual value is close to that, ~7.3), but he assumed the new element was divalent rather than tetravalent, and as such assumed that the atomic mass was 7.5 times that of oxygen (120 amu), while it is actually 15 times as large.
Thorium thus has a characteristic terrestrial isotopic composition, and so an atomic mass can be given, which is 232.0377(4)&nbsp;u. Thorium is one of only three significantly radioactive elements (the others being protactinium and uranium) that occur in large enough quantities on Earth for this to be possible.
Thus it is a neutron poison: instead of rapidly decaying to the useful 233U, a significant amount of 233Pa converts to 234U and consumes neutrons, degrading the reactor efficiency.
Even then, the half-life of 232Th is only a billionth that of 209Bi, the last classically stable nuclide.
Berzelius privately named the supposed tentative element "thorium" in 1817 and its supposed oxide "thorina" after Thor, the Norse god of thunder.
The scheme has a range of several hundred thousand years.
To avoid this, 233Pa is extracted from the active zone of thorium molten salt reactors during their operation, so that it only decays to 233U.
Other organothorium compounds are not well-studied.
This property of thoria is used in mantles of portable gas lights, including natural gas lamps, oil lamps and camping lights.
For example, when treated with potassium fluoride and hydrofluoric acid, Th4+ forms the complex anion , which precipitates as an insoluble salt, K2ThF6.
Cerium was soon removed from the main body of the table and placed in a separate lanthanide series, while thorium remained with group 4 as it had similar properties to its supposed lighter congeners in that group, such as titanium and zirconium.
Monazite is the most important commercial source of thorium because it occurs in large deposits worldwide, principally in India, South Africa, Brazil, Australia, and Malaysia.
