The Lakehead District School Board is the largest school board in the city, with 22 elementary schools, 4 secondary schools and a centre for adult studies.
Within city limits are some small rural communities, such as Vickers Heights and North McIntyre, which were located in the former townships of Neebing and McIntyre, respectively.
Bowater Forest Products is the largest private employer, employing over 1,500 people.
*Mount Baldy Ski Resort
As a result, an Indian reserve was set aside for them south of the Kaministiquia River.
The Province of Canada negotiated the Robinson Treaty in 1850 with the Ojibwa of Lake Superior.
Manufacturing resumed in 1937 when the Canada Car and Foundry Company plant (opened during late World War I to produce naval ships and railcars) re-opened to build aircraft for the British.
The festival is held in early October at 314 Bay Street in the historic Finnish Labour Temple.
Thunder Bay Information Radio CKSI-FM is broadcast 24/7 on 90.5 and is also the city's emergency radio station.
They have declined in recent years, but have been replaced by a "knowledge economy" based on medical research and education.
Shipping on the Saint Lawrence Seaway was superseded by trucking on highways.
People aged by 20 and 39 years accounted for 24.6%, while those between 40 and 64 made up 35.9% of the population.
Greyhound Canada provides coach service to both regional and national destinations, with the municipally owned Thunder Bay Transit providing 17 routes across the city's urban area.
*Loch Lomond Ski Resort
Passenger rail service to Thunder Bay ended on 15 January 1990, with the cancellation of Via Rail's southern transcontinental service.
Other languages spoken in Thunder Bay include Italian and Ojibwe.
Both still retain much of their distinct civic identities, reinforced by the buffering effect of the Intercity area between them.
This results in cooler summer temperatures and warmer winter temperatures for an area extending inland as far as 16&nbsp;km.
Thunder Bay has 38 elementary schools, 3 middle schools, 8 secondary schools, 2 private schools, and an adult education facility.
According to the census, Thunder Bay was home to 14,510 people of Finnish descent, the highest concentration of people of Finnish origin per capita in Canada, and the second largest Finnish population in Canada after that of Toronto (14,750).
In an effort to rejuvenate its economy, the city has been actively working to attract quaternary or "knowledge-based" industries, primarily in the fields of molecular medicine and genomics.
The city also operates six indoor ice rinks and 84 seasonal outdoor rinks, two indoor community pools and three seasonal outdoor pools as well as a portable pool and two maintained public beaches, several curling sheets, and three golf courses, among others.
Business and government relocated to new developments in the Intercity area.
Thunder Bay has one daily newspaper, ''The Chronicle-Journal'', which has a circulation of approximately 28,000 and has coverage of all of Northwestern Ontario.
The boom came to an end in 1913–14, aggravated by the outbreak of the First World War.
Another settlement developed a few miles to the north of Fort William after construction by the federal Department of Public Works of a road connecting Lake Superior with the Red River Colony.
*Strathcona Golf Course (18 holes)(Municipal)
Thunder Bay's main tourist attraction is Fort William Historical Park, a reconstruction of the North West Company's Fort William fur trade post as it was in 1815, which attracts 100,000 visitors annually.
The Thunder Bay Port Authority manages Keefer Terminal, built on a 320,000 square metre site on Lake Superior.
The average age of a Thunder Bayer in May 2006 was 41.7, compared to the average of 39.5 for Canada as a whole.
There are two weekly news papers—''Thunder Bay's Source'', a weekly newspaper operated by Dougall Media, and ''Canadan Sanomat'', a Finnish language weekly newspaper.
Seven councillors are elected for the seven wards: Current River Ward, McIntyre Ward, McKellar Ward, Neebing Ward, Northwood Ward, Red River Ward, and Westfort Ward.
There was much discussion over whether there was any other city in the world that uses the word "The" in its name, which there is, as The Pas, Manitoba has "The" in its name, for example.
Many of the city's largest single employers are in the public sector.
The city held a contest, which was won by Cliff Redden.
The highest temperature ever recorded in Thunder Bay was  on 7 August 1983.
Now run by Bombardier Transportation, the plant has remained a mainstay of the post-war economy.
Thunder Bay has become the regional services centre for Northwestern Ontario with most provincial departments represented.
Another upper level institution is Confederation College.
The 2001 census states that 82.0 per cent of Thunder Bay residents belonged to a Christian denomination: 39.8% of the total population was Roman Catholic, 39.5% were Protestant, and 2.6% followed other Christian denominations, mostly Eastern Orthodox.
A vocal majority of the population preferred the "Lakehead".
The city also has several other private for-profit colleges and tutoring programmes.
Grain shipping on the Great Lakes to the East has declined substantially in favour of transport to Pacific Coast ports.
The French Première Chaîne is available as a repeater of Sudbury-based CBON-FM on 89.3 FM.
Three English-language stations supply Thunder Bay with free digital over-the-air television.
Thunder Bay is served by the Thunder Bay Public Library, which has four branches.
Thunder Bay's proximity to the wilderness of the Boreal Forest and the rolling hills and mountains of the Canadian Shield allow its residents to enjoy very active lifestyles.
* Fort William Gardens
The total population has been stagnant or declining since amalgamation in 1970.
Thunder Bay is composed of two formerly separate cities, Port Arthur and Fort William.
The population density of the city of Thunder Bay averaged 332.3 people per square kilometre, compared with an average of 13.4 for Ontario.
Other major employers in the forestry sector include AbitibiBowater and  Buchanan Forest Products.
It was seen as the "head" of shipping on the Great Lakes and the "rail head".
CBC Television and Ici Radio-Canada Télé are available only on cable and satellite in the area.
As a result, it holds Ontario's record for coldest day with wind chill.
Sibley peninsula partially encloses the waters of Thunder Bay, and dominates the view of the lake from the northern section of the city (formerly Port Arthur).
Between the censuses of 2001 and 2006, Thunder Bay's population increased by 0.1%, compared to the average of 6.6% for Ontario and 5.4% for Canada.
The Chronicle Journal publishes a free weekly called ''Spot'' every Thursday, focusing on entertainment.
*Thunder Bay Country Club (9 holes)
The Port of Thunder Bay is the largest outbound port on the St. Lawrence Seaway System, and the sixth largest port in Canada.
* Whitewater Golf Club
Post secondary institutions in Thunder Bay include Confederation College and Lakehead University.
* Mission Island Marsh
*Fort William Country Club (18 Holes)
In 1849, French-speaking Jesuits established the ''Mission de l'Immaculée-Conception'' (Mission of the Immaculate Conception) on the Kaministiquia to evangelize the Ojibwe.
A large formation of mesas on the Sibley Peninsula in Lake Superior which resembles a reclining giant has become a symbol of the city.
In 2014, the per-capita rate of homicides in Thunder Bay was more than double the 2012 rate, and was over 2.5 times higher than the city with the next highest rate.
The main highway through the city is Highway 11/17, a four-lane highway designated as the Thunder Bay Expressway.
By 1929, the population of the two cities had recovered to pre-war levels.
Thunder Bay is represented in the Canadian Parliament by Don Rusnak, and Patty Hajdu, both members of the Liberal Party of Canada, and in the Ontario Legislature by Ontario Liberal Party members Michael Gravelle and Bill Mauro.
*Kamview Nordic Centre
Thunder Bay's flag was created in 1972, when mayor Saul Laskin wanted to promote the city by having a distinctive flag.
'''Thunder Bay''' is a city in, and the seat of, Thunder Bay District, Ontario, Canada.
European settlement in the region began in the late 17th century with a French fur trading outpost on the banks of the Kaministiquia River.
Agriculture and resource-based
According to the 2006 Census, there were 109,140 people residing in Thunder Bay on 16 May 2006, of whom 48.4% were male and 51.6% were female.
The Thunder Bay Catholic District School Board is the second largest with 16 elementary schools, 3 middle schools and 2 high schools.
* Bluffs Scenic Lookout
The city of Thunder Bay was declared a "Cultural Capital of Canada" in 2003.
Thunder Bay 10 Mile Road Race
*The Fort William Gardens
* Thunder Bay Restaurant
*Port Arthur Stadium
The area was often referred to as the "Lakehead" before and after amalgamation based on its geographic location.
The city operates fifteen neighbourhood community centres, which offer various sporting and fitness facilities as well as seasonal activities such as dances.
* Canadian Lakehead Exhibition
There has also been substantial residential growth in adjacent areas of the former Neebing and McIntyre townships.
*Chapples Memorial Golf Course (18 Holes)(Municipal)
The marina also includes a lake walk, playground, harbour cruises, a children's museum, and a Chinese/Canadian restaurant.
It is the most populous municipality in Northwestern Ontario with a population of 108,359 as of the Canada 2011 Census, and the second most populous in Northern Ontario after Greater Sudbury.
In the era of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, Thunder Bay began a period of extraordinary growth, based on improved access to markets via the transcontinental railway and development of the western wheat boom.
Both Fort William and Port Arthur were proponents of municipal ownership.
*Emerald Greens Golf Course (9 holes)
As a result, many grain elevators have been closed and demolished.
The city logo depicts a stylized thunderbird, called Animikii, a statue of which is located on the city's  Kaministiquia River Heritage Park.
*Thunder Bay Sports Dome
The Grand Trunk Pacific Railway began construction of its facilities at the Fort William Mission in 1905, and the federal government began construction of the National Transcontinental Railway.
The Sleeping Giant also figures on the city's coat of arms and the city flag.
Men from the cities joined the 52nd, 94th, and 141st Battalions of the Canadian Expeditionary Force.
Employment by industry, 2006
Thunder Bay has more of a continental climate in comparison.
The city is also home to a variety of smaller medical and dental clinics.
As early as 1892, Port Arthur built Canada's first municipally-owned electric street railway.
Founded in 1971, it offers six stage plays each season and is located in the renovated Port Arthur Public School on Red River Road.
* Prince Arthur's Landing waterfront district
On 10 January 1982, the local temperature in Thunder Bay dropped to , with a wind speed of  for a wind chill temperature that dipped to .
* Fort William Stadium
*Thunder Bay Tournament Centre (2 ice surfaces)
The community channel on Shaw Cable is branded as Shaw TV, and airs on cable channel 10.
Predictably, the vote split between the two, and "Thunder Bay" was the victor.
Until the 1880s, Port Arthur was a much larger and dynamic community.
Health care and social services
In 1917, the first pulp and paper mill was established in Port Arthur.
WBKP TV channel 5, the CW affiliate in Calumet, Michigan can be received in Thunder Bay with an outdoor roof antenna and a digital-capable television or receiver.
Residents 19 years of age or younger accounted for approximately 22.9% of the population.
Programming from the Global and CTV networks is provided by a locally owned twinstick operation branded as Thunder Bay Television, and the city receives TVOntario on channel 9.
In 1859–60, the Department of Crown Lands surveyed two townships (Neebing and Paipoonge) and the Town Plot of Fort William for European-Canadian settlement.
The land adjoining the lower Kaministiquia River became the residential and central business district of the town and city of Fort William.
In 2012, Thunder Bay was the city with the highest per-capita rate of homicides in Canada.
Eventually there were four mills operating.
Thunder Bay has been a port since the days of the North West Company which maintained a schooner on Lake Superior.
This public works depot or construction headquarters acquired its first name in May 1870 when Colonel Garnet Wolseley named it Prince Arthur's Landing.
Lakehead University, established through the lobbying of local businessmen and professionals, has proved to be a major asset.
Port Arthur and Fort William each has its own central business districts and suburban areas.
Thunder Bay is home to a variety of music and performance arts  venues.
These were amalgamated with other government-owned railways in 1923 to form the Canadian National Railways.
* Intercity Shopping Centre
It had an economic depression, while Fort William thrived.
*Royal Canadian Legion Sports Complex
It is the home of the Thunder Bay Symphony Orchestra, which has 30 full-time and up to 20 extra musicians presenting a full range of classical music.
Discovery of copper in the Keweenaw Peninsula of Michigan had prompted a national demand for mining locations on the Canadian shores of Lake Superior.
The city is an important railway hub, served by both the Canadian National and Canadian Pacific Railway.
Bombardier Transportation operates a  plant in Thunder Bay which manufactures mass transit vehicles and equipment, employing approximately 800 people.
Winters are comparatively dry with the snowfall being very limited and temperatures much colder than in Houghton, Michigan on the U.S. side of the lake, where the climate is marked by heavy lake-effect snow.
Logs and lumber were shipped primarily to the United States.
The CNR closed many of the Canadian Northern Railway facilities in Port Arthur.
A further 13,767 people lived in Thunder Bay's Census Metropolitan Area, which apart from Thunder Bay includes the municipalities of Neebing and Oliver Paipoonge, the townships of Conmee, Gillies, O'Connor and Shuniah, and the aboriginal community of Fort William First Nation.
Since 1970, the central business districts of Fort William and Port Arthur have suffered a serious decline.
A large uninhabited area adjoining the Neebing and McIntyre rivers, which became known as Intercity, separated Fort William from the residential and central business district of Port Arthur.
Both are part of HMCS Griffin.
Thunder Bay has one of the largest established communities of Finnish speaking people outside of Finland.
There was more controversy over the selection of a name for the amalgamated city than over whether to amalgamate.
'''Multi-use facilities'''
*Current River Arena
By 1914, the twin cities had modern infrastructures (sewers, safe water supply, street lighting, electric light, etc.)
Thunder Bay has one major hospital, the Thunder Bay Regional Health Sciences Centre.
The sun is represented by a red maple leaf, a symbol of Canada.
The city publishes a bi-monthly newsletter to citizens titled ''yourCity'', which is also available online in a PDF format, by electronic subscription and RSS feed.
Lack of innovation by traditional industries, such as forest products, combined with high labour costs have reduced the industrial base of Thunder Bay by close to 60%.
However, in recent years shipments through the port of Thunder Bay have stabilized, and remains an important part of the Saint Lawrence Seaway.
The city receives CBC Radio One as CBQT-FM and CBC Radio 2 as CBQ-FM, at 88.3 FM and 101.7 FM respectively.
It was followed by a mill at Fort William, in 1920.
Established in 1992, the NOSFA features monthly screenings of international and Canadian films at the Cumberland Cinema Centre, with a spring film festival that attracts several thousand patrons.
Throughout the city are cultural centres representing the diverse population, such as the Finnish Labour Temple, Scandinavia House, the Italian Cultural Centre, the Polish Legion, and a wide variety of others.
*Whitewater Golf Club (18 holes)
It opened the Neebing yards in Neebing Township in 1922.
The CPR, in collaboration with the Hudson's Bay Company, preferred east Fort William, located on the lower Kaministiquia River where the fur trade posts were.
The mayor and five of the councillors are elected at large by the whole city.
* Thunder Bay Art Gallery
It grew into an important transportation hub with its port forming an important link in the shipping of grain and other products from western Canada, through the Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence Seaway, to the east coast.
Forestry and manufacturing played important roles in the city's economy.
The grain trade has declined because of the loss of grain transportation subsidies and the loss of European markets.
The same businessmen and professionals who helped attract the university and college were the driving force(s) behind the political amalgamation of Fort William and Port Arthur in 1970.
Thunder Bay is also home to the North of Superior Film Association (NOSFA).
Railway employment was hurt when the federal government took over the National Transcontinental Railway and Lake Superior Division from the Grand Trunk in 1915, and the Canadian Northern Railway in 1918.
The cable provider in Thunder Bay is Shaw, although locally owned TBayTel, has been granted a license by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) to compete in the cable TV market.
Thunder Bay enjoys many recreational facilities.
A war-time economy emerged with the making of munitions and shipbuilding.
Officials debated over the names to be put on the ballot, taking suggestions from residents including "Lakehead" and "The Lakehead".
Finance and real estate
*Volunteer Community Pool
Provoked by a prolonged tax dispute with Port Arthur and its seizure of a locomotive in 1889, the CPR relocated all its employees and facilities to Fort William.
The flag has a 1:2 ratio, and depicts a golden sky from the rising sun behind the Sleeping Giant, which sits in the blue waters of Lake Superior.
The Coat of arms of Thunder Bay, Ontario is a combination of the coats of arms of both Port Arthur and Fort William, with a unifying symbol—the Sleeping Giant—at the base of the arms.
The largest professional theatre is Magnus Theatre.
* Canada Games Complex
* Cascades Conservation Area
* Mount McKay Lookout
The city is home to the western campus of the Northern Ontario School of Medicine, the first medical school to open in Canada in a generation.
* Thunder Bay Marina
The expansion of highways, beginning with the Trans-Canada Highway, and culminating with the opening of Highway 17 (linking Sault Ste Marie to Thunder Bay in 1960), has significantly diminished railway and shipping activity since the 1970s and 80s.
Winnipeg had previously held the distinction of having the highest rate from the years 2007 to 2011.
The coldest temperature ever recorded was  on 31 January 1996.
The city also has a law school.
*Centennial Golf Course (9 holes)
''New Music North'' is vital to the contemporary classical music scene in the city by offering intriguing and novel contemporary chamber music concerts.
* Finnish Labour Temple
The Thunder Bay Community Auditorium, which seats 1500, is the primary venue for various types of entertainment.
The gradual transition from shipping by train and boat to shipping by truck, and the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement have ended Thunder Bay's privileged position as a linchpin in Canadian east-west freight-handling trade.
Its name was the result of a referendum held previously on 23 June 1969, to determine the new name of the amalgamated Fort William and Port Arthur.
*The Canada Games Complex
* Port Arthur Stadium
Lakehead University operates a campus radio station, CILU-FM, at 102.7 FM, and CJOA-FM 95.1 broadcasts Christian-oriented programming and is run by a local non-profit group.
* International Friendship Gardens
The city reflects the settlement patterns of the 19th Century and sprawls.
European settlement at Thunder Bay began with two French fur trading posts (1683, 1717) which were subsequently abandoned (see Fort William, Ontario).
Anchoring the west end of the city, the Fort William Town Plot, surveyed in 1859–60, was named West Fort William (or Westfort) in 1888 by the CPR.
Those who followed other religions made up less than 1% of the population, while the remaining 17.0% were non-religious or did not respond.
Some of the more well-known neighbourhoods include: the Bay and Algoma area, which has a large northern European population centred around the Finnish Labour Temple and the Italian Cultural Centre; Simpson-Ogden and the East End, two of the oldest neighbourhoods in Fort William located north of Downtown Fort William; Intercity, a large business district located between Fort William and Port Arthur; Current River, the northernmost neighbourhood of Port Arthur; and Westfort, the oldest settlement in Thunder Bay.
The Canadian Northern Railway established facilities at Port Arthur.
