In Germany, the educational system is part of the sovereignty of the Lands; therefore each Land has its own school and college system.
The Thuringian population has a significant sex ratio gap, caused by the emigration of young women, especially in rural areas.
Between 1950 and 2000 most of the branch lines were abandoned, reducing Thuringia's network by half compared to 1940.
In July 2013, there were 41,000 non-Germans by citizenship living in Thuringia (1.9% of the population − among the smallest proportions of any state in Germany).
Trout and carp are traditionally bred in aquaculture in many villages.
Since then, it has decreased to 7% in 2013, which is only slightly above the national average.
To the south-west, the Forest is followed up by Werra river valley, dividing it from the Rhön Mountains in the west and the Grabfeld plain in the south.
The most important airports for scheduled flights are Frankfurt Airport, Berlin Brandenburg Airport and Munich Airport, all located in adjacent states.
With the division of the house of Wettin in 1485, Thuringia went to the senior Ernestine branch of the family, which subsequently subdivided the area into a number of smaller states, according to the Saxon tradition of dividing inheritance amongst male heirs.
Since 2000, the importance of environmentally unfriendly lignite combustion has declined in favour of renewable energies, which reached an amount of 40% (in 2013), and more clean gas combustion, often carried out as Cogeneration in the municipal power stations.
Today over two thirds of the population is non-religious.
Both ICE routes will then use the Erfurt–Leipzig/Halle high-speed railway, and the Berlin-Munich route will continue via the Nuremberg–Erfurt high-speed railway.
South of the Thuringian Basin is the Land's largest mountain range, marked by the Thuringian Forest in the north-west, the Thuringian Highland in the middle and the Franconian Forest in the south-east.
Thuringia generally accepted the Protestant Reformation, and Roman Catholicism was suppressed as early as 1520; priests who remained loyal to it were driven away and churches and monasteries were largely destroyed, especially during the German Peasants' War of 1525.
The Prussian territories around Erfurt, Mühlhausen and Nordhausen joined Thuringia in 1945.
Eastern Thuringia, commonly described as the area east of Saale and Loquitz valley, is marked by a hilly landscape, rising slowly from the flat north to the mountainous south.
Especially the small and mid-sized towns in central and southwestern Thuringia (e.g.
The Thuringian primary school takes four years and most primary schools are all-day schools offering optional extracurricular activities in the afternoon.
The flag of Thuringia is a white-red bicolor, derived from the white and red stripes of the Ludowingian lion.
Furthermore, some small parts on the southern border are drained by tributaries of the Main (a tributary of the Rhine).
File:Evangelisch Thüringen.png|Protestant membership in 2011 (municipalities)
In 1930 Thuringia was one of the free states where the Nazis gained real political power.
There are a few small airports in Thuringia but the only one with public aviation is Erfurt–Weimar Airport.
Since 1990, Thuringia's forests have been managed aiming for a more natural and tough vegetation more resilient to climate change as well as diseases and vermin.
There are no large natural lakes in Thuringia, but it does have some of Germany's biggest dams including the Bleiloch Dam and the Hohenwarte Dam at Saale river same as the Leibis-Lichte Dam and the Goldisthal Pumped Storage Station within the Highland.
The central and northern part of Thuringia is defined by the 3000&nbsp;km² wide Thuringian Basin, a very fertile and flat area around the Unstrut river and completely surrounded by the following hill chains (clockwise from the north-west): Dün, Hainleite, Windleite, Kyffhäuser, Hohe Schrecke, Schmücke, Finne, Ettersberg, Steigerwald, Thuringian Forest, Hörselberge and Hainich.
In 2009, the balance was +700, in 2010 +1,800, in 2011 +2,700 and in 2012 +4,800.
The amount of foreigners varies between regions: the college towns Erfurt, Jena, Weimar and Ilmenau have the highest rates, whereas there are almost no migrants living in the most rural smaller municipalities.
Between them lies the flat and forested Holzland in the north, the flat and fertile Orlasenke in the middle and the Vogtland, a hilly but in most parts non-forested region in the south.
Since the Protestant Reformation, the most prominent Christian denomination in Thuringia has been Lutheranism.
Other historians argue that the Thuringians were allies of the Huns, came to central Europe together with them, and lived before in what is Galicia today.
The water supply is granted by the big dams, like the Leibis-Lichte Dam, within the Thuringian Forest and the Thuringian Highland, making a drinking water exporter of Thuringia.
Following the industrial revolution, the old iron, copper and silver mines declined because the competition from imported metal was too strong.
The 1815 Congress of Vienna confirmed these changes and the Thuringian states' inclusion in the German Confederation; the Kingdom of Prussia also acquired some Thuringian territory and administered it within the Province of Saxony.
Their various lands formed the Free State of Thuringia, founded in 1920, together with some other small principalities.
The University of Erfurt, founded in 1392, has 5,000 students today and an emphasis on humanities and teacher training.
Thuringia is Germany's only Land without a connection to waterways because its rivers are too small to be navigable.
Large areas, especially within the forested mountains, are protected as natural reserves, including Thuringia's first national park within the Hainich mountains, founded in 1997, the Rhön Biosphere Reserve, the Thuringian Forest Nature Park and the South Harz Nature Park.
In addition, there is a civil service college in Gotha with 500 students, the College of Music "Franz Liszt" in Weimar (800 students) as well as two private colleges, the Adam-Ries-Fachhochschule in Erfurt (500 students) and the SRH College for nursing and allied medical subjects (''SRH Fachhochschule für Gesundheit Gera'') in Gera (500 students).
Arnstadt, Schmalkalden and Ohrdruf) are highly industrialised, whereas there are fewer industrial companies in the northern and eastern parts of the Land.
Environment and nature protection has been of growing importance and attention since 1990.
There are only a few thousand Muslims (largely migrants) and about 750 Jews (mostly migrants from Russia) living in Thuringia.
The three districts that shared the former territory of Thuringia were Erfurt, Gera and Suhl.
By 1920, many branch lines had been built, giving Thuringia one of the densest rail networks in the world before World War II with about 2,500&nbsp;km of track.
Thuringia has been known by the nickname of "the green heart of Germany" ('''') from the late 19th century, due to the dense forest covering the land.
The most important regional railway lines in Thuringia are the Neudietendorf–Ritschenhausen railway from Erfurt to Würzburg and Meiningen, the Weimar–Gera railway from Erfurt to Chemnitz, the Sangerhausen–Erfurt railway from Erfurt to Magdeburg, the Gotha–Leinefelde railway from Erfurt to Göttingen, the Halle–Kassel railway from Halle via Nordhausen to Kassel and the Leipzig–Hof railway from Leipzig via Altenburg to Zwickau and Hof.
At Hermsdorf junction it is connected with the A9.
The coat of arms of this new state was simpler than those of its predecessors.
Increasing from the north-west to the south-east the Land's climate shows continental features; winters can be cold for long periods, and summers can become warm.
There are many wood and pulp-paper factories near the forested areas.
An older theory claimed that they were successors of the Hermunduri, but later research rejected the idea.
The Thuringian Realm existed until 531 and later, the Landgraviate of Thuringia was the largest state in the region, persisting between 1131 and 1247.
Together, they accounted for a significant part of the world's potash production in the mid-20th century.
The traditional energy supply of Thuringia is lignite, mined in the bordering Leipzig region.
Thuringia's climate is temperate with humid westerly winds predominate.
Only the segment west of Erfurt of the Frankfurt-Dresden line will continue to be used by ICE trains after 2017, with an increased line speed of 200&nbsp;km/h (currently 160&nbsp;km/h).
Due to many centuries of intensive settlement, most of the area is shaped by human influence.
Nevertheless, they are more important than in the most other areas of Germany, especially within rural regions.
Other religions play no significant role in Thuringia.
After the reunification, the ''Südharzrevier'' was abandoned, whereas K+S took over the mines in the ''Werrarevier''.
The north-west includes the Eichsfeld, a hilly and sometimes forested region, where the Leine river emanates.
At the age of ten, pupils are separated according to aptitude and proceed to either the Gymnasium or the ''Regelschule.
On the other hand, the late 19th century brought new types of mines to Thuringia: the lignite surface mining around Meuselwitz near Altenburg in the east of the Land started in the 1870s, and two potash mining districts were established around 1900.
The economic transition after the German reunification in 1990 led to the closure of most large-scale factories and companies, leaving small and medium-sized ones to dominate the manufacturing sector.
After being controlled briefly by the US, from July 1945, the state of Thuringia came under the Soviet occupation zone, and was expanded to include parts of Prussian Saxony, such as the areas around Erfurt, Mühlhausen, and Nordhausen.
It is used for charter flights to the Mediterranean and other holiday destinations.
The original natural vegetation of Thuringia is forest with beech as its predominant species, as can still be found in the Hainich mountains today.
Altenburg Kreis was part of Leipzig Bezirk.
Furthermore, three new motorways were built during the 1990s and 2000s.
Most agricultural enterprises are large cooperatives, founded as Landwirtschaftliche Produktionsgenossenschaft during the GDR period, and meat producers are part of multinational companies.
These are the ''Südharzrevier'' in the north of the state, between Bischofferode in the west and Roßleben in the east with Sondershausen at its centre, and the ''Werrarevier'' on the Hessian border around Vacha and Bad Salzungen in the west.
In comparison to the forest, agriculture is still quite conventional and dominated by large structures and monocultures.
The big cities along the A4 motorway such as Erfurt, Jena and Eisenach and their surroundings are booming, whereas nearly all the rural regions, especially in the north and east, have little economic impetus and employment, which is a big issue in regional planning.
Furthermore, the population is getting older and older with some rural municipalities recording more than 30% of over-65s (pensioners).
Its production is marketed as Saale-Unstrut wines.
In 2017, a new high speed line will be opened, diverting long-distance services from these mid-19th century lines.
Catholic regions are the Eichsfeld in the northwest and parts of the Rhön Mountains around Geisa in the southwest.
Dry periods are often recorded, especially within the Thuringian Basin, situated leeward to mountains in all directions.
Furthermore, there is a dense network of federal highways complementing the motorway network.
Members of the Catholic Church formed 7.8% of the population, while 68.2% of Thuringians were non-religious or adhere to other faiths.
Thuringia became a landgraviate in 1130 AD.
Most of this range is forested and the Großer Beerberg (983 m) is Thuringia's highest mountain.
Traditional industries like production of glass, porcelain and toys collapsed during the economic crises between 1930 and 1990.
Since that year, the economy has seen an upturn and the general economic situation has improved.
The far eastern region (east of Weiße Elster) is the Osterland or Altenburger Land along Pleiße river, a flat, fertile and densely settled agricultural area.
Afterwards there was no state named Thuringia, nevertheless the term commonly described the region between the Harz mountains in the north, the Weiße Elster river in the east, the Franconian Forest in the south and the Werra river in the west.
He also ensured that whenever an important position came up within Thuringia, he used his power to ensure that a Nazi was given that post.
The wages in Thuringia are low compared to rich bordering Lands like Hesse and Bavaria.
Thuringia is known in Germany for nature and winter sports.
Therefore, many Thuringians are working in other German Lands and even in Austria and Switzerland as weekly commuters.
Within Thuringia are relatively big climate differences with a range from an average temperature of 8.5&nbsp;°C and precipitation of 450&nbsp;mm in Artern up to an average temperature of 4.4&nbsp;°C ?
Many smaller hospitals in the rural towns are closing, whereas the bigger ones in centres like Jena and Erfurt get enlarged.
Since the 1950s, nearly all children have been using the service, whereas early-years education is less developed in western Germany.
The Thuringian duchies which became part of the German Empire in 1871 during the Prussian-led unification of Germany were Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, Saxe-Meiningen, Saxe-Altenburg, Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, Schwarzburg-Sondershausen, Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt and the two principalities of Reuss Elder Line and Reuss Younger Line.
The University of Jena is the biggest amongst Thuringia's four universities and offers nearly every discipline.
Erfurt's central station, which was completely rebuilt for this purpose in the 2000s (decade), will be the new connection between both ICE lines.
The first railways in Thuringia had been built in the 1840s and the network of main lines was finished around 1880.
Problems here are caused especially by increasingly prolonged dry periods during the summer months.
About 4% of the population are migrants (including persons that already received the German citizenship).
The German higher education system comprises two forms of academic institutions: universities and polytechnics (Fachhochschule).
Today's environmental problems are the salination of the Werra river, caused by discharges of K+S salt mines around Unterbreizbach and overfertilisation in agriculture, damaging the soil and small rivers.
However, most of the plains have been cleared and are in intensive agricultural use while most of the forests are planted with spruce and pine.
The transportation infrastructure was in very poor condition after the GDR period.
Its inventor Friedrich Fröbel lived in Thuringia and founded the world's first Kindergartens there in the 19th century.
Other Universities of this federal state are the Ilmenau University of Technology, the University of Erfurt, and the Bauhaus University of Weimar.
Nevertheless, there are only 17,000 births compared to 27,000 deaths per year, so that the annual natural change of the Thuringian population is about −0.45%.
Mining was important in Thuringia since the later Middle Ages, especially within the mining towns of the Thuringian Forest such as Schmalkalden, Suhl and Ilmenau.
During the GDR period, church membership was discouraged and has continued shrinking since the reunification in 1990.
Thuringia is Germany's only state without connection to navigable waterways.
The GDP of Thuringia is below the national average, in line with the other former East German Lands.
The A71 crosses the Land in southwest-northeast direction, connecting Würzburg in Bavaria via Meiningen, Suhl, Ilmenau, Arnstadt, Erfurt and Sömmerda with Sangerhausen and Halle in Saxony-Anhalt.
The Protestant parishes of Thuringia belong to the Evangelical Church in Central Germany or to the Evangelical Church of Hesse Electorate-Waldeck (Schmalkalden region).
File:Katholisch Thüringen.png|Catholic membership in 2011 (municipalities)
Most of Thuringia is within the watershed of the Saale, a left tributary of the Elbe.
Catholic dioceses are Erfurt (most of Thuringia), Dresden-Meissen (eastern parts) and Fulda (Rhön around Geisa in the very west).
Finally, there are colleges for those studying for a technical qualification while working in a related field (''Berufsakademie'') at Eisenach (600 students) and Gera (700 students).
In the uplands, a mixture of beech and spruce would be natural.
The unemployment rate reached a peak around 2005.
Life expectancy rose, nevertheless it is still a bit lower than the German average.
In Mühlhausen and elsewhere, the Anabaptists found many adherents.
The centre was Ronneburg near Gera in eastern Thuringia and the operating company Wismut was under direct Soviet control.
Publius Flavius Vegetius Renatus first mentioned the Thuringii around 400; during that period, the Thuringii were famous for their excellent horses.
It was founded in 1860 and came to prominence as Germany's leading art school during the inter-war period, the Bauhaus.
Symbols of Thuringia in popular culture are the ''Bratwurst'' and the Forest, because a large amount of the territory is forested.
The internal migration shows a strong tendency from rural areas towards the big cities.
The most important countries of origin of the Thuringia migrants from 2008 to 2012 were Poland (+1,700), Romania (+1,200), Afghanistan (+1,100) and Serbia/Montenegro/Kosovo (+1,000), whereas the balance was negative with Switzerland (−2,800) and Austria (−900).
Most of the research in Thuringia is publicly funded basic research due to the lack of large companies able to invest significant amounts in applied research, with the notable exception of the optics sector at Jena.
Health care provision in Thuringia improved after 1990, as did the level of general health.
54% of Thuringia's territory is in agricultural use.
The most common trees are spruce, pine and beech.
Furthermore, there are eight stars around it, representing the eight former states, which formed Thuringia.
Most regional and local lines have hourly service, but some run only every other hour.
The decrease is caused on the one hand by the emergence of new jobs and on the other by a marked decrease in the working-age population, caused by emigration and low birth rates for decades.
Only with Saxony-Anhalt and Brandenburg the balance is positive.
''The former leads to the Abitur exam after a further eight years and prepares for higher education, while the latter has a more vocational focus and finishes with exams after five or six years, comparable to the Hauptschule and Realschule found elsewhere in Germany.
The biggest cities keep growing, whereas many villages will downright die out.
Both focus on technology, in particular life sciences and optics at Jena and information technology at Ilmenau.
The most important industrial branches today are engineering and metalworking, vehicle production and food industries.
From 2008 to 2012, there was a net migration from Thuringia to Erfurt of +6,700 persons (33 per 1000 inhabitants), +1,800 to Gera (19 per 1000), +1,400 to Jena (14 per 1000), +1,400 to Eisenach (33 per 1000) and +1,300 to Weimar (21 per 1000).
On the other hand, most of the main lines were refurbished after 1990, resulting in improved speed of travel.
Nevertheless, the demographic transition in Thuringia leads to a lack of workers in some sectors.
This is caused by a relatively unhealthy lifestyle of the Thuringians, especially in high consumption of meat, fat and alcohol, which led to significant higher rates of obesity compared to the German average.
The landscapes of Thuringia are quite diverse.
Both worked also in the famous University of Jena nearby, which now hosts the most important centre of science in Thuringia.
After the extinction of the reigning Ludowingian line of counts and landgraves in 1247 and the War of the Thuringian Succession (1247–1264), the western half became independent under the name of "Hesse", never to become a part of Thuringia again.
Furthermore, Thuringia hosts two big pumped storage stations: the Goldisthal Pumped Storage Station and the Hohenwarte Dam.
In the classical period, Goethe and Schiller lived at Weimar.
The second-largest is the Technische Universität Ilmenau with 7,000 students, founded in 1894, which offers many technical disciplines such as engineering and mathematics.
The name ''Thuringia'' or ''Thüringen'' derives from the Germanic tribe Thuringii, who emerged during the Migration Period.
It was founded in 1558, and today has 21,000 students.
Young people in these areas often have to commute long distances, and many emigrate soon after finishing school.
The most important forms of renewable energies are Wind power and Biomass, followed by Solar energy and Hydroelectricity.
It has an area of  and 2.29 million inhabitants, making it the sixth smallest by area  and the fifth smallest by population  of Germany's sixteen states.
During the 1930s, the first two motorways were built across the Land, the A4 motorway as an important east-west connection in central Germany and the main link between Berlin and south-west Germany, and the A9 motorway as the main north-south route in eastern Germany, connecting Berlin with Munich.
The governmental population projection predicts a further shrinkage of the Thuringian population down to 2.12 millions in 2015 and 2.04 millions in 2020.
The Protestant Evangelical Church in Germany has had the largest number of members in the state, adhered to by 24.0% of the population in 2009.
Furthermore, there are some Orthodox communities of Eastern European migrants and some traditional Protestant Free churches in Thuringia without any societal influence.
The accession of several new countries, the crisis in southern Europe and the sustained economic growth in Germany since 2005 has brought the Thuringian GDP close to the EU average since then.
Their origin is not completely known.
Meat production and processing is also an important activity, with swine, cattle, chickens and turkeys in focus.
As Germany's most central Land, Thuringia is an important hub of transit traffic.
Like most other regions of central and southern Germany, Thuringia has a significant industrial sector reaching back to the mid-19th-century industrialisation.
Well-known industrial centres are Jena (a world centre for optical instruments with companies like Carl Zeiss, Schott and Jenoptik) and Eisenach, where BMW started its car production in the 1920s and an Opel factory is based today.
The high economic subsidies granted by the federal government and the EU after 1990 are being reduced gradually and will end around 2020.
Most of the remaining Thuringia came under the rule of the Wettin dynasty of the nearby Margraviate of Meissen, the nucleus of the later Electorate and Kingdom of Saxony.
The fertile basins such as the large Thuringian Basin or the smaller Goldene Aue, Orlasenke and Osterland are in intensive use for growing cereals, vegetables, fruits and energy crops.
Erfurt is a centre of Germany's horticultural research, whereas Weimar and Gotha with their various archives and libraries are centres of historic and cultural research.
Ostheim, an exclave of ''Landkreis'' (roughly equivalent to a county in the English-speaking world) Eisenach, was ceded to Bavaria.
Thuringia's leading research centre is Jena, followed by Ilmenau.
Some reordering of the Thuringian states occurred during the German Mediatisation from 1795 to 1814, and the territory was included within the Napoleonic Confederation of the Rhine organized in 1806.
Since 1990, many billions of Euros have been invested to improve the condition of roads and railways within Thuringia.
Agriculture and forestry have declined in importance over the decades.
Until 2004, Thuringia was one of the weakest regions within the European Union.
Between Thuringia and the other German states, the balance is negative: In 2012, Thuringia lost 6,500 persons to other federal states, the most to Bavaria, Saxony, Hesse and Berlin.
Overall, there is an oversupply of hospital beds, caused by rationalisation processes in the German health care system, so that many smaller hospitals generate losses.
The geographic center of the Federal Republic is located in Thuringia, within the municipality of Vogtei next to Mühlhausen.
Nevertheless, the number rose from 33,000 in July 2011, an increase of 24% in only two years.
The State of Thuringia was recreated with slightly altered borders during German reunification in 1990.
The polytechnics of Thuringia are based in Erfurt (4,500 students), Jena (5,000 students), Nordhausen (2,500 students) and Schmalkalden (3,000 students).
Thuringia's only wine-growing district is situated around Bad Sulza north of Weimar and Jena along the Ilm and Saale valley.
Wilhelm Frick was appointed Minister of the Interior for the state of Thuringia after the Nazi Party won six delegates to the Thuringia Diet.
The far north is occupied by the Harz mountains, followed by the Goldene Aue, a fertile floodplain around Nordhausen with the Helme as most important river.
Migration plays an important role in Thuringia.
The biggest groups of foreigners by citizenship are (as of 2012): Russians (3,100), Poles (3,000), Vietnamese (2,800), Turks (2,100) and Ukrainians (2,000).
The birth rate was about 1.8 children per women in the 1970s and 1980s, shrinking to 0.8 in 1994 during the economic crisis after the reunification and rose again to more than 1.4 children in 2010, which is a higher level than in West Germany.
Important products are apples, strawberries, cherries and plums in the fruit sector, cabbage, potatoes, cauliflower, tomatoes (grown in greenhouses), onions, cucumbers and asparagus in the vegetable sector, as well as maize, rapeseed, wheat, barley and sugar beets in the crop sector.
In 1952, the German Democratic Republic dissolved its states, and created districts () instead.
Leipzig–Altenburg Airport was served by Ryanair from 2003 to 2011.
Protestant church membership is shrinking rapidly, whereas the Catholic Church is somewhat more stable because of Catholic migration from Poland, Southern Europe and West Germany.
Thomas Müntzer, a leader of some non-peaceful groups of this sect, was active in this city.
In 1920, after World War I, these small states merged into one state, called Thuringia; only Saxe-Coburg voted to join Bavaria instead.
In this position he removed from the Thuringia police force anyone he suspected of being a republican and replaced them with men who were favourable towards the Nazi Party.
and precipitation of 1300&nbsp;mm at Schmücke station next to Oberhof within the Thuringian Forest.
These were the "Saxon duchies", consisting, among others, of the states of Saxe-Weimar, Saxe-Eisenach, Saxe-Jena, Saxe-Meiningen, Saxe-Altenburg, Saxe-Coburg, and Saxe-Gotha; Thuringia became merely a geographical concept.
The A73 starts at the A71 south of Erfurt in Suhl and runs south towards Nuremberg in Bavaria.
The A38 is another west-east connection in the north of Thuringia running from Göttingen in Lower Saxony via Heiligenstadt and Nordhausen to Leipzig in Saxony.
The Bauhaus University Weimar with 4,000 students is Thuringia's smallest university, specialising in creative subjects such as architecture and arts.
The Saale in the west and the Weiße Elster in the east are the two big rivers running from south to north and forming densely settled valleys in this area.
Erfurt became the new capital of Thuringia.
Envisaged projects include upgrades of the B247 from Gotha to Leinefelde to improve Mühlhausen's connection to the national road network, the B19 from Eisenach to Meiningen to improve access to Bad Salzungen and Schmalkalden, and the B88 and B281 for strengthening the Saalfeld/Rudolstadt region.
