Numerous examples of thylacine engravings and rock art have been found dating back to at least 1000 BC.
Research published in ''Genome Research'' in January 2009 suggests the numbat may be more basal than the devil.
Native to continental Australia, Tasmania and New Guinea, it is believed to have become extinct in the 20th century.
In the film footage, the thylacine is seen seated, walking around the perimeter of its enclosure, yawning (exposing its impressive gape), sniffing the air, scratching itself (in the same manner as a dog), and lying down.
This paper notes that Australia lost 90% or more of its larger terrestrial vertebrates during this time, with the notable exceptions of the kangaroo and the thylacine.
Mike Archer spoke about the possibilities of resurrecting the thylacine and the gastric-brooding frog at TED2013.
Adults stood about  at the shoulder and weighed .
After leaving the pouch, and until they were developed enough to assist, the juveniles would remain in the lair while their mother hunted.
The Australian Museum in Sydney began a cloning project in 1999.
Animals usually take prey close to their own body size, but an adult thylacine of around  was found to be incapable of handling prey much larger than .
Recognition that the Australian marsupials were fundamentally different from the known mammal genera led to the establishment of the modern classification scheme, and in 1796, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire created the genus ''Dasyurus'' where he placed the thylacine in 1810.
Its stomach was muscular, and could distend to allow the animal to eat large amounts of food at one time, probably an adaptation to compensate for long periods when hunting was unsuccessful and food scarce.
The thylacine is the mascot for the Tasmanian cricket team, and has appeared in postage stamps from Australia, Equatorial Guinea, and Micronesia.
It appears to have kept to its home range without being territorial; groups too large to be a family unit were sometimes observed together.
The thylacine was exclusively carnivorous.
Thylacine footprints could be distinguished from other native or introduced animals; unlike foxes, cats, dogs, wombats or Tasmanian devils, thylacines had a very large rear pad and four obvious front pads, arranged in almost a straight line.
This led to the establishment of bounty schemes in an attempt to control their numbers.
There was slight sexual dimorphism with the males being larger than females on average.
Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne, arriving with the ''Mascarin'' in 1772, reported seeing a "tiger cat".
Both dingoes and foxes have been noted to hunt the emu on the mainland.
The thylacine was also much less versatile in diet than the omnivorous dingo.
Johnson and Wroe (2003) observed the relationship between the dingo and the extinctions of the Tasmanian devil, the thylacine, and the Tasmanian native hen and the arrival of humans.
One of the stripes extended down the outside of the rear thigh.
In 2011, detailed examination of a single frame from the motion film footage confirmed that the thylacine was male.
To resolve the mixture of Greek and Latin nomenclature, the species name was altered to ''cynocephalus''.
Characters in the early 1990s cartoon ''Taz-Mania'' included the neurotic Wendell T. Wolf, the last surviving Tasmanian wolf.
Despite the fact that the thylacine was believed by many to be responsible for attacks on sheep, in 1928 the Tasmanian Advisory Committee for Native Fauna recommended a reserve similar to the Savage River National Park to protect any remaining thylacines, with potential sites of suitable habitat including the Arthur-Pieman area of western Tasmania.
The jaws were muscular but weak and had 46 teeth.
The cast shows the planter pad in more detail and shows that the planter pad is tri-lobal in that it exhibits three distinctive lobes.
The thylacine held the title of Australia's largest predator until about 3500 years ago.
In all they paid out 2,184 bounties, but it is thought that many more thylacines were killed than were claimed for.
The thylacine was an apex predator, like the tigers and wolves of the Northern Hemisphere from which it obtained two of its common names.
In May 2005, Archer, the University of New South Wales Dean of Science at the time, former director of the Australian Museum and evolutionary biologist, announced that the project was being restarted by a group of interested universities and a research institute.
It is commonly known as the '''Tasmanian tiger''' (because of its striped lower back) or the '''Tasmanian wolf'''.
Several studies support the thylacine as being a basal member of the Dasyuromorphia and the Tasmanian devil as its closest living relative.
Doubts exist over the impact of the dingo since the two species would not have been in direct competition with one another as the dingo hunts primarily during the day, whereas it is thought that the thylacine hunted mostly at night.
Early pouch young were hairless and blind, but they had their eyes open and were fully furred by the time they left the pouch.
Males had a scrotal pouch, unique amongst the Australian marsupials, into which they could withdraw their scrotal sac.
There is evidence for at least some year-round breeding (cull records show joeys discovered in the pouch at all times of the year), although the peak breeding season was in winter and spring.
Many European settlers drew direct comparisons with the hyena, because of its unusual stance and general demeanour.
Surviving evidence suggests that it was a relatively shy, nocturnal creature with the general appearance of a medium-to-large-size dog, except for its stiff tail and abdominal pouch (reminiscent of a kangaroo) and dark transverse stripes that radiated from the top of its back, similar to those of a tiger.
The first definitive encounter was by French explorers on 13 May 1792, as noted by the naturalist Jacques Labillardière, in his journal from the expedition led by D'Entrecasteaux.
Their results were published in the journal ''Genome Research'' in 2009.
The results of subsequent searches indicated a strong possibility of the survival of the species in Tasmania into the 1960s.
The first detailed scientific description was made by Tasmania's Deputy Surveyor-General, George Harris in 1808, five years after first settlement of the island.
It also had a long whining cry, probably for identification at distance, and a low snuffling noise used for communication between family members.
Later searches revealed no trace of the animal.
The common name derives directly from the genus name, originally from the Greek θύλακος (''thýlakos''), meaning "pouch" or "sack".
Some behavioural characteristics have been extrapolated from the behaviour of its close relative, the Tasmanian devil.
Its body hair was dense and soft, up to  in length; in juveniles the tip of the tail had a crest.
In 2008, researchers Andrew J. Pask and Marilyn B. Renfree from the University of Melbourne and Richard R. Behringer from the University of Texas at Austin reported that they managed to restore functionality of a gene ''Col2A1 enhancer'' obtained from 100-year-old ethanol-fixed thylacine tissues from museum collections.
The female thylacine had a pouch with four teats, but unlike many other marsupials, the pouch opened to the rear of its body.
The results of their investigation indicated that the last of the thylacines in Australia, on top of the threats from dingoes, had limited genetic diversity, due to their complete geographic isolation from mainland Australia.
No documentation exists to suggest that it ever had a pet name, and Alison Reid (''de facto'' curator at the zoo) and Michael Sharland (publicist for the zoo) denied that Frank Darby had ever worked at the zoo or that the name "Benjamin" was ever used for the animal.
In late 2002, the researchers had some success as they were able to extract replicable DNA from the specimens.
Analysis of the skeletal frame and observations of it in captivity suggest that it preferred to single out a target animal and pursue that animal until it was exhausted.
The male thylacine had a pouch that acted as a protective sheath, covering his external reproductive organs while he ran through thick brush.
It was the last extant member of its family, Thylacinidae; specimens of other members of the family have been found in the fossil record dating back to the late Oligocene.
Although there had been a conservation movement pressing for the thylacine's protection since 1901, driven in part by the increasing difficulty in obtaining specimens for overseas collections, political difficulties prevented any form of protection coming into force until 1936.
Some sightings have generated a large amount of publicity.
The stripes were more pronounced in younger specimens, fading as the animal got older.
Between 1967 and 1973, zoologist Jeremy Griffith and dairy farmer James Malley conducted what is regarded as the most intensive search ever carried out, including exhaustive surveys along Tasmania's west coast, installation of automatic camera stations, prompt investigations of claimed sightings, and in 1972 the creation of the Thylacine Expeditionary Research Team with Dr. Bob Brown, which concluded without finding any evidence of the thylacine's existence.
''The Hunter'' is a novel by Julia Leigh about an Australian hunter who sets out to find the last thylacine.
In 1982 a researcher with the Tasmania Parks and Wildlife Service, Hans Naarding, observed what he believed to be a thylacine for three minutes during the night at a site near Arthur River in northwestern Tasmania.
His shore party reported seeing the footprints of "wild beasts having claws like a ''Tyger''".
Stewart Brand spoke at TED2013 about the ethics and possibilities of de-extinction, and made reference to thylacine in his talk.
Since no definitive proof of the thylacine's existence in the wild had been obtained for more than 50 years, it met that official criterion and was declared extinct by the International Union for Conservation of Nature in 1982 and by the Tasmanian government in 1986.
Its rounded, erect ears were about  long and covered with short fur.
Those observations, made in the twentieth century, may have been atypical as they were of a species already under the stresses that would soon lead to its extinction.
The Australian Rare Fauna Research Association reports having 3,800 sightings on file from mainland Australia since the 1936 extinction date, while the Mystery Animal Research Centre of Australia recorded 138 up to 1998, and the Department of Conservation and Land Management recorded 65 in Western Australia over the same period.
The early scientific studies suggested it possessed an acute sense of smell which enabled it to track prey, but analysis of its brain structure revealed that its olfactory bulbs were not well developed.
This capability can be seen in part in David Fleay's short black-and-white film sequence of a captive thylacine from 1933.
It is likely to have relied on sight and sound when hunting instead.
Although the thylacine was extinct on mainland Australia, it survived into the 1930s on the island state of Tasmania.
Their claws were non-retractable.
Colouration varied from light fawn to a dark brown; the belly was cream-coloured.
Thylacines only once bred successfully in captivity, in Melbourne Zoo in 1899.
Prideaux ''et al.''
By enhancing the frame (increasing exposure to 20% and contrast to 45%), the outline of the individual testes is discernable.
Tasmania's leading naturalist Michael Sharland published an article in 1957 stating that a captive thylacine refused to eat dead wallaby flesh or to kill and eat a live wallaby offered to it, but "ultimately it was persuaded to eat by having the smell of blood from a freshly killed wallaby put before its nose."
The thylacine is likely to have become near-extinct in mainland Australia about 2,000 years ago, and possibly earlier in New Guinea.
Another study brings disease into the debate as a major factor in thylacine's extinction: "Casually collected anecdotal records and early bounty analyses have, at times, prompted the suggestion that disease was a major factor in the extinction of the species, that occurred when the last known specimen died in Hobart Zoo during the night of 7th September, 1936."
Darby also appears to be the source for the claim that the last thylacine was a male; photographic evidence suggests it was female.
Independent thylacine researchers Buck and Joan Emburg of Tasmania report 360 Tasmanian and 269 mainland post-extinction 20th century sightings, figures compiled from several sources.
Despite the searches, no conclusive evidence was found to point to its continued existence in the wild.
One prey animal may have been the once common Tasmanian emu.
The thylacine was able to open its jaws to an unusual extent: up to 80 degrees.
In March 2005, Australian news magazine ''The Bulletin'', as part of its 125th anniversary celebrations, offered a $1.25&nbsp;million reward for the safe capture of a live thylacine.
The species was removed from Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) in 2013.
In January 1995, a Parks and Wildlife officer reported observing a thylacine in the Pyengana region of northeastern Tasmania in the early hours of the morning.
The animal, believed to have been a male, had been seen around Batty's house for several weeks.
It tended to retreat to the hills and forest for shelter during the day and hunted in the open heath at night.
The adoption of the dingo as a hunting companion by the indigenous peoples would have put the thylacine under increased pressure.
In fact, the predatory behaviour of the thylacine was probably closer to ambushing felids than to large pursuit canids.
Attempts to positively identify the creature as a thylacine have been impossible due to the poor quality of the film.
In late Pleistocene and early Holocene times, the modern thylacine was widespread (although never numerous) throughout Australia and New Guinea.
Indigenous Australian rock paintings indicate that the thylacine lived throughout mainland Australia and New Guinea.
Some studies conclude that the animal may have hunted in small family groups, with the main group herding prey in the general direction of an individual waiting in ambush.
Species of the family Thylacinidae date back to the beginning of the Miocene; since the early 1990s, at least seven fossil species have been uncovered at Riversleigh, part of Lawn Hill National Park in northwest Queensland.
The photographs, which showed only the back of the animal, were said by those who studied them to be inconclusive as evidence of the thylacine's continued existence.
In 1805 William Paterson, the Lieutenant Governor of Tasmania, sent a detailed description for publication in the ''Sydney Gazette''.
The last captive thylacine, later referred to as "Benjamin", was trapped in the Florentine Valley by Elias Churchill in 1933, and sent to the Hobart Zoo where it lived for three years.
Dickson's thylacine (''Nimbacinus dicksoni'') is the oldest of the seven discovered fossil species, dating back to 23&nbsp;million years ago.
Early observers noted that the animal was typically shy and secretive, with awareness of the presence of humans and generally avoiding contact, though it occasionally showed inquisitive traits.
The animal had a typical home range of between .
It could also perform a bipedal hop, in a fashion similar to a kangaroo—demonstrated at various times by captive specimens.
The thylacine was a nocturnal and crepuscular hunter, spending the daylight hours in small caves or hollow tree trunks in a nest of twigs, bark or fern fronds.
Its closest living relative is thought to be either the Tasmanian devil or the numbat.
This cast dates back to the early 1930s and is part of the Museum of Victoria's thylacine collection.
The goal was to use genetic material from specimens taken and preserved in the early 20th century to clone new individuals and restore the species from extinction.
They were rarely sighted during this time but slowly began to be credited with numerous attacks on sheep.
Its extinction is popularly attributed to these relentless efforts by farmers and bounty hunters.
The mature thylacine ranged from  long, plus a tail of around .
The distinctive planter pad shape along with the asymmetrical nature of the foot makes it quite different from animals such as dogs or foxes.
The research enhanced hopes of eventually restoring the population of thylacines.
The emu was a large, flightless bird which shared the habitat of the thylacine and was hunted to extinction around 1850, possibly coinciding with the decline in thylacine numbers.
The sighting led to an extensive year-long government-funded search.
(2010) examined the issue of extinction in the late Quaternary period in southwestern Australia.
Europeans may have encountered it as far back as 1642 when Abel Tasman first arrived in Tasmania.
(2012) examined the relationship of the genetic diversity of the thylacines before their extinction.
Such specialisation probably made the thylacine susceptible to small disturbances to the ecosystem.
The plight of the thylacine was featured in a campaign for The Wilderness Society entitled ''We used to hunt thylacines''.
Harris originally placed the thylacine in the genus ''Didelphis'', which had been created by Linnaeus for the American opossums, describing it as ''Didelphis cynocephala'', the "dog-headed opossum".
Paddle was unable to uncover any records of any Frank Darby having been employed by Beaumaris/Hobart Zoo during the time that Reid or her father was in charge and noted several inconsistencies in the story Darby told during his interview in 1968.
Petroglyph images of the thylacine can be found at the Dampier Rock Art Precinct on the Burrup Peninsula in Western Australia.
"The chance of saving the species, through changing public opinion, and the re-establishment of captive breeding, could have been possible.
When the offer closed at the end of June 2005 no one had produced any evidence of the animal's existence.
Positive identification of the thylacine as the animal encountered cannot be made from this report since the tiger quoll (''Dasyurus maculatus'') is similarly described.
A few observations were made of the animal in captivity, but only limited, anecdotal evidence exists of the animal's behaviour in the wild.
In captivity, thylacines were fed a wide variety of foods, including dead rabbits and wallabies as well as beef, mutton, horse, and occasionally poultry.
Researchers believe thylacines only ate small animals such as bandicoots and possums, putting them into direct competition with the Tasmanian devil and the tiger quoll.
Prey is believed to have included kangaroos, wallabies and wombats, birds and small animals such as potoroos and possums.
A letter sent in response to an inquiry by a thylacine-searcher, Murray McAllister in 2000, indicated that the reward had been withdrawn.
By the time the first European explorers arrived, the animal was already extinct in mainland Australia and rare in Tasmania.
Trapping is illegal under the terms of the thylacine's protection, so any reward made for its capture is invalid, since a trapping licence would not be issued.
Despite this, it is unrelated to any of the Northern Hemisphere predators.
The thylacine character Rolf is featured in the extinction musical ''Rockford's Rock Opera''.
European settlers believed the thylacine to prey upon farmers' sheep and poultry.
Yet, the paper concludes, people ignore the emergence of humans on the continent among all of this.
In the end, the competitiveness of the dingo and thylacine populations led to the extinctions of the thylacine but the arrival of the humans only further exacerbated this.
Several molecular biologists have dismissed the project as a public relations stunt and its chief proponent, Mike Archer, received a 2002 nomination for the Australian Skeptics Bent Spoon Award for "the perpetrator of the most preposterous piece of paranormal or pseudo-scientific piffle."
Most observations were made during the day whereas the thylacine was naturally nocturnal.
An example of convergent evolution, the thylacine showed many similarities to the members of the dog family, Canidae, of the Northern Hemisphere: sharp teeth, powerful jaws, raised heels and the same general body form.
It is likely that multiple factors led to its decline and eventual extinction, including competition with wild dogs introduced by European settlers, erosion of its habitat, the concurrent extinction of prey species, and a distemper-like disease that also affected many captive specimens at the time.
Recent morphological examinations of dingo and thylacine skulls show that although the dingo had a weaker bite, its skull could resist greater stresses, allowing it to pull down larger prey than the thylacine could.
The resulting cladogram follows below:
At the time of the first European settlement, the heaviest distributions were in the northeast, northwest and north-midland regions of the state.
Thylacines, uniquely for marsupials, have largely cartilaginous epipubic bones with a highly reduced osseous element.
The last known thylacine to be killed in the wild was shot in 1930 by Wilf Batty, a farmer from Mawbanna, in the northeast of the state.
A 2011 study by the University of New South Wales using advanced computer modelling indicated that the thylacine had surprisingly feeble jaws.
Although the living grey wolf is widely seen as the thylacine's counterpart, a recent study proposes that thylacine was more of an ambush predator as opposed to a pursuit predator.
This study also suggests that were it not for an epidemiological influence, the extinction of thylacine would have been at best prevented, at worst postponed.
In 1997, it was reported that locals and missionaries near Mount Carstensz in Western New Guinea had sighted thylacines.
The photos were published in April 2006, fourteen months after the sighting.
In 2008, a group of thylacines was purportedly captured on video in Victoria, but the veracity of the footage remains unconfirmed.
As a marsupial, it was not closely related to these placental mammals, but because of convergent evolution it displayed the same general form and adaptations.
The thylacine features in the last known motion picture footage of a living specimen: 62 seconds of black-and-white footage showing the thylacine in its enclosure in a clip taken in 1933, by naturalist David Fleay.
This has been once considered a synapomorphy with sparassodonts, though its now thought that both groups reduced their epipubics independently.
The Van Diemen's Land Company introduced bounties on the thylacine from as early as 1830, and between 1888 and 1909 the Tasmanian government paid £1 per head.
The master records are held by the Zoological Society of London.
Little is known about the behaviour or habitat of the thylacine.
Little is known of the thylacine's diet and feeding behaviour.
The striped pattern may have provided camouflage in woodland conditions, but it may have also served for identification purposes.
Intensive hunting encouraged by bounties is generally blamed for its extinction, but other contributing factors may have been disease, the introduction of dogs, and human encroachment into its habitat.
The thylacine had become extremely rare or extinct on the Australian mainland before British settlement of the continent, but it survived on the island of Tasmania along with several other endemic species, including the Tasmanian devil.
International standards at the time stated that an animal could not be declared extinct until 50 years had passed without a confirmed record.
The thylacine resembled a large, short-haired dog with a stiff tail which smoothly extended from the body in a way similar to that of a kangaroo.
It is possible that the thylacine, like its relative, the Tasmanian devil, gave off an odour when agitated.
Guiler speculates that this was used as an accelerated form of motion when the animal became alarmed.
This thylacinid was much smaller than its more recent relatives.
On the mainland, sightings are most frequently reported in Southern Victoria.
The animal is featured on the official Tasmanian coat of arms.
Official protection of the species by the Tasmanian government was introduced on 10 July 1936, 59 days before the last known specimen died in captivity.
The genetic material was found working in transgenic mice.
The novel has been adapted into a 2011 film by the same name directed by Daniel Nettheim, and starring Willem Dafoe.
Their success suggests that it may be feasible to sequence the complete thylacine nuclear genome from museum specimens.
At the time, much stigma existed in regard to its "fierce" nature; this is likely to be due to its perceived threat to agriculture.
More detail can been seen in a cast taken (below and to the left) from a freshly dead thylacine.
Proof of the animal's existence in mainland Australia came from a desiccated carcass that was discovered in a cave in the Nullarbor Plain in Western Australia in 1990; carbon dating revealed it to be around 3,300 years old.
They would produce up to four cubs per litter (typically two or three), carrying the young in a pouch for up to three months and protecting them until they were at least half adult size.
It is also used on the University of Tasmania's ceremonial mace and the badge of the submarine .
Their life expectancy in the wild is estimated to have been 5 to 7 years, although captive specimens survived up to 9 years.
Throughout the 20th century, the thylacine was often characterised as primarily a blood drinker; according to Robert Paddle, the story's popularity seems to have originated from a single second-hand account heard by Geoffrey Smith (1881–1916) in a shepherd's hut.
That same year, another group of researchers successfully sequenced the complete thylacine mitochondrial genome from two museum specimens.
An offer of $1.75&nbsp;million has subsequently been offered by a Tasmanian tour operator, Stewart Malcolm.
During hunting it would emit a series of rapidly repeated guttural cough-like barks (described as "yip-yap", "cay-yip" or "hop-hop-hop"), probably for communication between the family pack members.
The locals had apparently known about them for many years but had not made an official report.
Trappers reported it as an ambush predator.
Consequently, at least in terms of the postcranial anatomy, the vernacular name of "Tasmanian tiger" may be more apt than "marsupial wolf".
The thylacine died on 7 September 1936.
In video games, boomerang-wielding ''Ty the Tasmanian Tiger'' is the star of his own trilogy.
Whatever the reason, the animal had become extremely rare in the wild by the late 1920s.
The absolute extinction is attributed to competition from indigenous humans and invasive dingoes.
Due to the uncertainty of whether the species is still extant or not, the thylacine is sometimes regarded as a cryptid.
The thylacine probably preferred the dry eucalyptus forests, wetlands, and grasslands in continental Australia.
It is believed to have died as the result of neglect—locked out of its sheltered sleeping quarters, it was exposed to a rare occurrence of extreme Tasmanian weather: extreme heat during the day and freezing temperatures at night.
In 1973, Gary and Liz Doyle shot ten seconds of 8&nbsp;mm film showing an unidentified animal running across and alongside a South Australian road.
In 1824, it was separated out into its own genus, ''Thylacinus'', by Temminck.
Frank Darby, who claimed to have been a keeper at Hobart Zoo, suggested "Benjamin" as having been the animal's pet name in a newspaper article of May 1968.
But in reality, it was not until the humans had an adverse effect on the environment and brought disease to Australia that their arrival drove the thylacine to extinction.
