Also more common in individuals with Hashimoto's thyroiditis are type 1 diabetes and celiac disease.
Regulation of actin polymerization by T4 is critical to cell migration in neurons and glial cells and is important to brain development.
It has eliminated endemic cretinism in most developed countries, and some governments have made the iodination of flour, cooking oil, and salt mandatory.
The underlying cause of the goiter may be treated, however many goiters with no associated symptoms are simply monitored.
Iodine (and T4) trigger the amphibian metamorphosis that transforms the vegetarian aquatic tadpole into a carnivorous terrestrial adult frog, with better neurological, visuospatial, olfactory and cognitive abilities for hunting, as seen in other predatory animals.
Sometimes there is a third lobe present called the '''pyramidal lobe''' of the thyroid gland.
Thyroid hormones are important for development, and hypothyroidism secondary to iodine deficiency remains the leading cause of preventable intellectual disability.
In 1909, Theodor Kocher from Switzerland won the Nobel Prize in Medicine "for his work on the physiology, pathology and surgery of the thyroid gland".
One consequence of the Chernobyl disaster was an increase in thyroid cancers in children in the years following the accident.
In addition to these actions on DNA, the thyroid hormones also act within the cell membrane or within cytoplasm.
The thyroid gland also produces the hormone calcitonin, which helps regulate blood calcium levels.
However, calcitonin seems far less essential than PTH, as calcium metabolism remains clinically normal after removal of the thyroid (thyroidectomy), but not the parathyroid glands.
There are, however, many variations in its situation and size.
Surgery does however carry a risk of damage to the parathyroid glands and the nerves controlling the vocal cords.
It was not until 1475 that Wang Hei anatomically described the thyroid gland and recommended that the treatment of goitre should be dried thyroid.
Thomas Wharton named the gland the thyroid, meaning shield, as its shape resembled the shields commonly used in Ancient Greece.
Radiation of the head and neck presents a risk factor for thyroid cancer, and cancer is more common in women than men, occurring at a rate of about 2:1.
The thyroid may be affected by several diseases.
Iodine, via iodolipids, has favored the evolution of terrestrial animal species and has likely played a crucial role in the evolution of the human brain.
However, there is only ever a single thyroid gland in most mammals, and the shape found in humans is common to many other species.
The thyroid hormones increase the basal metabolic rate and have effects on almost all body tissues.
When the thyroid function tests are normal, an ultrasound is often used to investigate the nodule, and provide information such as whether the nodule is fluid-filled or a solid mass, and whether the appearance is suggestive of a benign or malignant cancer.
''Glandula'' means ''gland'' in Latin, and ''thyreoidea'' can be traced back to the Ancient Greek word θυρεοειδής, meaning ''shield-like''/''shield-shaped''.
In tetrapods, the thyroid is always found somewhere in the neck region.
They increase the growth rate of young people, and cells of the developing brain are a major target for the thyroid hormones T3 and T4.
In the follicular space, the iodide is then oxidized to iodine, following which it is attached to thyroglobulin by the enzyme thyroid peroxidase.
In some cases, the gland may recover with time and resume its functions.
Fetal triiodothyronine (T3) remains low, less than 15&nbsp;ng/dL (nanograms per decilitre) until 30 weeks, and increases to 50&nbsp;ng/dL at full-term.
This is usually given daily as an oral supplement, and may take a few weeks to become effective.
In amphibian metamorphosis, thyroxine and iodine also exert a well-studied experimental model of apoptosis on the cells of gills, tail, and fins of tadpoles.
The inferior thyroid veins originate in a network of veins and drain into the left and right brachiocephalic veins.
Inflammation of the thyroid is called thyroiditis.
Despite increasing free fatty acids, thyroid hormones decrease cholesterol levels, perhaps by increasing the rate of secretion of cholesterol in bile.
Around this time Pliny referred to epidemics of goitre in the Alps and also mentioned the use of burnt seaweed in their treatment, in the same way as the Chinese had done 1600 years earlier.
The thyroid isthmus is variable in its situation and size and can also change in shape.
Two parathyroid glands usually lie on each side between the two layers of the capsule, at the back of the thyroid lobes.
In the adult lamprey, the gland separates from the gut, and becomes endocrine, but this path of development may reflect the evolutionary origin of the thyroid.
This is an ion channel on the cell membrane which transports two sodium ions and an iodide ion into the cell.
When stimulated by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), these secrete the thyroid hormones T3 and T4.
Some patients may experience these "swings" over a longer period of time, over days or weeks or even months.Hashimoto's is more common in females than males, usually appearing after the age of 30, and tends to run in families, meaning it can be seen as a genetic disease.
Follicular cells vary in shape from flat to cuboid to columnar, depending on how active they are.
On the posterior side, the gland is fixed to the cricoid and tracheal cartilages and cricopharyngeus muscle by a thickening of the fascia to form the posterior suspensory ligament of thyroid gland also known as Berry's ligament.
Lymphatic drainage passes frequently the deep lateral cervical lymph nodes, and the pretracheal and paratracheal lymph nodes.
The disorders that occur in the lower neck more proximal to the thyroid gland are lined by epithelium resembling the thyroidal acinar epithelium.
These occur at any age and might not become evident until adult life.
These are present in the midline of the neck anterior to the trachea.
T4 also acts on the mitochondrial genome via imported isoforms of nuclear thyroid receptors to affect several mitochondrial transcription factors.
TSH release in turn is stimulated by thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus.
Hashimoto's thyroiditis or Hashimoto's disease is an autoimmune disorder whereby the body's own immune system reacts with the thyroid tissues in an attempt to destroy it.
If the entire thyroid gland is removed, hypothyroidism will naturally result, and hormone therapy will be needed.
Some forms of goiter are associated with pain, whereas many do not cause any symptoms.
The thyroid gland is found in all vertebrates.
Thyroxine is critical to the regulation of metabolism and growth throughout the animal kingdom.
The venous blood is drained via superior and middle thyroid veins, which drain to the internal jugular vein, and via the inferior thyroid veins.
There are two types of thyroiditis where initially hyperthyroidism presents which is followed by a period of hypothyroidism; (the overproduction of T3 and T4 followed by the underproduction of T3 and T4).
These can be asymptomatic.
The thyroid gland's firm attachment to the underlying trachea is the reason behind its movement with swallowing.
These cells secrete calcitonin.
An enlarged thyroid gland is called a goiter.
Thyroid cancers are treated by removing the whole thyroid gland with the cancer in it.
Superimposed infection may convert these lesions into abscess cavities, and rarely, give rise to cancers.
Hormonal output from the thyroid is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) secreted from the anterior pituitary, which itself is regulated by thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) produced by the hypothalamus.
In contrast, hypothyroidism is a state of insufficient thyroid hormone production.
The etiology is not always known, but can sometimes be attributed to an autoimmune disorder, such as Hashimoto's thyroiditis or Graves' disease.
The thyroid then descends in front of the pharyngeal gut as a bilobed diverticulum through the thyroglossal duct.
Other causes include drug-induced excess of iodine, particularly from amiodarone an antiarrhythmic medication; an excess caused by the preferential uptake of iodine by the thyroid following iodinated contrast imaging, or from pituitary adenomas which may cause an overproduction of thyroid stimulating hormone.
In others it may not.
As with most substances, either too much or too little can cause problems.
Because the cytoplasm of these cells is clear, they are also called "C cells".
Goiters may be associated with causes or hyperthyoidism, hypothyroidism, relating to the underlying cause.
For instance, the closest living relatives of vertebrates, the tunicates and ''Amphioxus'', have a structure very similar to that of larval lampreys (the endostyle), and this also secretes iodine-containing compounds (albeit not thyroxine).
In variable extent, the pyramidal lobe is present at the most anterior side of the lobe.
Some forms of hypothyroidism can result in myxedema and severe cases can result in myxedema coma.
Thyroid hormones play a particularly crucial role in brain maturation during fetal development.
The thyroid hormones T3 and T4 are synthesized from iodine and tyrosine.
Iodide from the circulation is taken up by follicular cells through the sodium-iodide symporter.
The thyroid gland is covered by a thin fibrous sheath, the capsule of the thyroid.
Examination of the thyroid gland includes the search for abnormal masses and the assessment of overall thyroid size.
The external layer is anteriorly continuous with the pretracheal fascia and posterolaterally continuous with the carotid sheath.
In this region, the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the inferior thyroid artery pass next to or in the ligament, and where present Zuckerkandl's tubercle.
TRH is secreted at an increased rate in situations such as cold exposure (to stimulate thermogenesis) which is prominent in case of infants.
The pyramidal lobe is also known as Lalouette's pyramid.
Surgery to remove the thyroid can sometimes be performed as a transoral thyroidectomy, a minimally-invasive procedure.
The most common neoplasm affecting the thyroid gland is a benign adenoma, usually presenting as a painless mass in the neck.
At the beginning, the gland may be overactive, and then becomes underactive as the gland is damaged resulting in too little thyroid hormone production or hypothyroidism.
This part of the thyroid then first forms as the ultimopharyngeal body, which begins in the ventral fourth pharyngeal pouch and joins the primordial thyroid gland during its descent to its final location in the anterior neck.
Cancers from other sites also rarely lodge in the thyroid.
Scattered among follicular cells and in spaces between the spherical follicles are another type of thyroid cell, parafollicular cells.
Aberrations in prenatal development can result in various forms of thyroid dysgenesis which can cause congenital hypothyroidism, and if untreated this can lead to cretinism.
;Parafollicular cells
Thyroid function tests will help reveal whether the nodule produces excess thyroid hormones.
Because of the prominence of the thyroid gland, cancer is often detected earlier in the course of disease as the cause of a nodule, which may undergo fine needle aspiration.
Combined, these factors increase blood flow and the body's temperature.
These integrins are concentrated on cells of the vasculature and on some types of tumor cells, which in part explains the proangiogenic effects of iodothyronines and proliferative actions of thyroid hormone on some cancers including gliomas.
Segments of the duct and cysts that occur high in the neck are lined by stratified squamous epithelium, which is essentially identical to that covering the posterior portion of the tongue in the region of the foramen cecum.
In a healthy person the gland is not visible yet is palpable as a soft mass.
The thyroid also produces calcitonin, which plays a role in calcium homeostasis.
Preterm neonates are at risk of these disorders as their thyroid glands are insufficiently developed to meet their postnatal needs.
In Ayurvedic medicine, the book Sushruta Samhita written about 1500 BC mentions the disease goitre as 'Galaganda' along with its treatment.
Some causes of hypothyroidism, such as Postpartum thyroiditis and Subacute thyroiditis may be transient and pass over time, and other causes such as iodine deficiency may be able to be rectified with dietary supplementation.
Each lobe is about 5&nbsp;cm long, 3&nbsp;cm wide and 2&nbsp;cm thick.
Sexual function, including libido and the maintenance of a normal menstrual cycle, are influenced by thyroid hormones.
Mucinous, clear secretions may collect within these cysts to form either spherical masses or fusiform swellings, rarely larger than 2 to 3&nbsp;cm in diameter.
Another study showed a presence of 44.6%.
Parts of this tube may be obliterated, leaving small segments to form thyroglossal cysts.
In many developed countries, newborns are routinely tested for congenital hypothyroidism as part of newborn screening.
They do this by transporting and metabolising the thyroglobulin contained in the colloid.
This binding culminates in local membrane actions on ion transport systems such as the Na+/H+ exchanger or complex cellular events including cell proliferation.
Another disorder is that of thyroid dysgenesis which can result in various presentations of one or more ectopic ''accessory thyroid glands''.
T3 can activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase by a mechanism that may be cytoplasmic in origin or may begin at integrin alpha-V beta-3.
Thyroid hormones act by crossing the cell membrane and binding to intracellular nuclear thyroid hormone receptors TR-α1,TR-α2,TR-β1 and TR-β2, which act alone, in pairs or together with the retinoid X-receptor as transcription factors to modulate DNA transcription.
After secretion, only a very small proportion of the thyroid hormones travel freely in the blood.
Potassium iodide and sodium iodide are typically used forms of supplemental iodine.
In 1600 BC the Chinese were using burnt sponge and seaweed for the treatment of goitres.
The hormones increase the rate and strength of the heartbeat.
In addition, up to 85% of the T3 in blood is produced following conversion from T4 by iodothyronine deiodinases in organs around the body.
When the follicular cells are stimulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), the follicular cells reabsorb thyroglobulin and cleave the iodinated tyrosines, forming free T4, (fT4), DIT, MIT, T3 and traces of reverse triiodothyronine (rT3), and releasing T3 and T4 into the blood.
Across its upper border runs an anastomotic branch uniting the two superior thyroid arteries; at its lower border are the inferior thyroid veins.
The thyroid is supplied with arterial blood from the superior thyroid artery, a branch of the external carotid artery, and the inferior thyroid artery, a branch of the thyrocervical trunk, and sometimes by an anatomical variant the thyroid ima artery, branching directly from the subclavian artery.
Celsus first described a bronchoceole (a tumour of the neck) in 15 AD.
The gland is covered anteriorly with infrahyoid muscles and laterally with the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
From within the cell iodide is then transported to the follicular space from the cell via the iodide-chloride antiporter pendrin.
There are several findings that evidence a great interest for thyroid disorders just in the Medieval Medical School of Salerno (12th century).
It was shown to more often arise from the left side and also to be mostly attached to the main gland with 9.2% shown to be separated.
Sometimes no cause can be found, a state called "simple goiter".
Malignant thyroid cancers are most often carcinomas, although cancer can occur in any tissue that the thyroid consists of, including C-cells, lymphomas.
Hyperthyroidism often causes a variety of non-specific symptoms including weight loss, increased appetite, insomnia, decreased tolerance of heat, tremor, palpitations, anxiety and nervousness.
As of early 2015, in the United States, new guidelines for TSH levels have been implemented as endorsed by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists.
Children with congenital hypothyroidism are treated supplementally with levothyroxine, which facilitates normal growth and development.
During migration, the thyroid remains connected to the tongue by a narrow canal, the thyroglossal duct.
It is found at the front of the neck, below the laryngeal prominence (Adam's apple).
* '''Developmental.'''
The new range is a TSH of 0.45 to 4.12.
A large amount of radioactive Iodine 131 is given to radioablate the thyroid.
When a nodule is present, thyroid function tests are performed and reveal whether a person has a normal amount of thyroid hormones ("euthyroid") or an excess of hormones, usually secreted by the nodule, causing hyperthyroidism.
Thyroxine is given to replace the hormones lost and to suppress TSH production, which may stimulate recurrence.With the exception of the rare Anaplastic thyroid cancer, which carries a very poor prognosis, most thyroid cancers carry an excellent prognosis and can even be considered curable.
Excessive production of the thyroid hormone due to an overactive thyroid is called hyperthyroidism, which is most commonly a result of Graves' disease, a toxic multinodular goitre, a solitary thyroid adenoma, and inflammation.
The neuroendocrine parafollicular cells, also known as C cells, responsible for the production of calcitonin, are derived from neural crest cells, which migrate to the pharyngeal arches.
He also suggested (incorrectly, as it turns out) that the role of the thyroid was to lubricate the larynx.
Disorders of the thyroid are functional–caused by dysfunction in the production of hormones, and nodes and tumors either benign or malignant.
It is very unusual for thyroid cancers to present with other symptoms, although in some cases cancer may cause hyperthyroidism.
T3 is so named beceause it contains three atoms of iodine per molecule and T4 contains four atoms of iodine per molecule.
Because the thyroid concentrates iodine, it also concentrates the various radioactive isotopes of iodine produced by nuclear fission.
Most are bound to thyroxine-binding globulin, transthyretin, and albumin.
The English name ''thyroid gland'' is derived from Latin ''glandula thyreoidea''.
A persistent sinus tract may remain as a vestigial remnant of the tubular development of the thyroid gland.
The thyroid was so named by the anatomist Thomas Wharton.
Radioactive iodine is selectively taken up by the thyroid, which over time destroys the cells involved in its uptake.
Paracelsus, some fifty years later, attributed goitre to mineral impurities in the water.
A radioactive iodine uptake test can help reveal the activity and location of the cancer and metastases.
However it usually spans from C5 to C7.
A needle aspiration biopsy may then be performed, and the sample undergoes cytology, in which the appearance of cells is viewed to determine whether they resemble normal or cancerous cells.
In fish, it is usually located below the gills and is not always divided into distinct lobes.
The production of thyroxine and triiodothyronine is primarily regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), released by the anterior pituitary gland.
The primary function of the thyroid is the production of iodine-containing hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) and peptide hormone calcitonin.
The thyroid sits near the front of the neck, lying against and around the front of the larynx and trachea.
An important sign in the diagnosis of Graves' disease is that of the collected symptoms of hyperthyroidism.
The fetus needs to be self-sufficient in thyroid hormones in order to guard against neurodevelopmental disorders that would arise from maternal hypothyroidism.
Thyroid function tests may be done to investigate the cause and effects of the goiter.
* The thyroid hormones also play a role in maintaining normal sexual function, sleep, and thought patterns.
Such symptoms may be managed temporarily with drugs such as beta blockers.
Calcitonin decreases the release of calcium from bone, by decreasing the activity of osteoclasts, cells which break bone down.
There can be many nodules, which is termed a multinodular goiter, and this can sometimes be a toxic multinodular goiter.
The effects of calcitonin are opposite those of the parathyroid hormone, produced in the parathyroid glands.
It can encompass the pyramidal lobe (''lobus'' or ''processus pyramidalis''.
The gland itself is usually larger in women.
Parafollicular cells produce calcitonin in response to high blood calcium.
Thyrogobulin is a protein within the follicular space that has 123 tyrosine residues, only 4-6 of which are active.
Cell membrane-initiated actions begin at a receptor on the alpha-v beta-3 integrin that activates MAPK3 and MAPK1.
The capsule extrudes into the gland itself and forms the septae that divides the thyroid tissue into microscopic lobules.
Over the next few weeks, it migrates to the base of the neck, passing in front of the hyoid bone.
Investigations of a malignant nodule, or when hyperthyroidism is present, is discussed in the "Cancer" section below.
The chosen first-line treatment will depend on the individual and on the country where being treated.
Enlarged goiters may extend beyond the normal position of the thyroid gland to below the sternum, around the airway or esophagus.
The pyramidal lobe grows upwards from the isthmus to the hyoid bone.
Historical references to what we now know as the thyroid gland arise early in medical history.
Recent studies on some populations are showing that excess iodine intake could cause an increased prevalence of autoimmune thyroid disease, resulting in permanent hypothyroidism.
Hyperthyroidism occurs when the gland produces excessive amounts of thyroid hormones, the most common cause being Graves' disease—an autoimmune disorder.
It is difficult to demarcate the gland's upper and lower border with vertebral levels because it moves position in relation to these during swallowing.
The isthmus lies at the front of the neck and is covered by the skin and fascia, and close to the middle line, on either side, by the sternothyroid muscles.
Only the 0.03% of T4 and 0.3% of T3 traveling freely has hormonal activity.
Thyroid hormone secreted from the gland is about 80-90% T4 and about 10-20% T3.
The gland is supplied by parasympathetic nerve input from the superior laryngeal nerve and the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
However, in some teleosts, patches of thyroid tissue are found elsewhere in the body, associated with the kidneys, spleen, heart, or eyes.
* '''Cardiovascular.'''
In some cases it can cause chest pain, diarrhoea, hair loss and muscle weakness.
The superior thyroid artery splits into anterior and posterior branches supplying the thyroid, and the inferior thyroid artery splits into superior and inferior branches.
Worldwide, the most common cause is iodine deficiency.
Bone is constantly reabsorbed by osteoclasts and created by osteoblasts, so calcitonin effectively stimulates movement of calcium into bone.
Increased levels are associated with increased speed of thought generation but decreased focus.
These are Hashimoto's thyroiditis and postpartum thyroiditis.
Most malignant thyroid cancers are papillary, followed by follicular, medullary, and thyroid lymphoma.
In the event of large accidental releases of such material into the environment, the uptake of radioactive iodine isotopes by the thyroid can, in theory, be blocked by saturating the uptake mechanism with a large surplus of non-radioactive iodine, taken in the form of potassium iodide tablets.
They increase the absorption in the gut, creation, uptake by cells and breakdown of glucose.
Rogerius Salernitanus, the Salernitan surgeon and author of "Post mundi fabricam" (around 1180) was considered at that time the surgical text par excellence all over Europe.
In the chapter "De bocio" of his magnum opus, he describes several pharmacological and surgical cures, some of which nowadays are reappraised as scientifically effective.
The thyroid gland secretes thyroid hormones, which influence the metabolic rate, protein synthesis, and have a wide range of other effects, including on development.
Thyroid hormones are important for normal development.
The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped organ and is composed of two lobes, one on the right and the left as the wings, and the narrow connecting isthmus as the body.
Functional disorders can cause inflammation as can some other forms of thyroiditis.
