The metro service was suspended on October 9, 2001 for reconstruction.
Note: Institutions without full-time bachelor programs are not listed.
Tianjin Municipality also has deposits of about 1&nbsp;billion tonnes of petroleum, with Dagang District containing important oilfields.
Ma Sanli (马三立) (1914–2003), an ethnic Hui and longtime resident of Tianjin, is renowned for his ''xiangsheng'' (相声), a hugely popular form of Chinese entertainment similar to comedy.
Broadcasting in nine channels, it serves most of North China, part of East and Northeast China, reaching an audience of over 100 million.
Later, a fort was established in Tianjin, known as "Tianjin Wei" (), the Fort of Tianjin.
The Tianjin Military Academy in 1886 adopted as part of its curriculum the Romance of the Three Kingdoms.
It has a grade 4E airstrip, which all kinds of large aircraft can take off from and land safely on.
It covers an area of approximately
It was built in 1888.
The terms ''lu'' ().
The station was initially located at Wangdaozhuang ().
More and more China's leading Internet Information Providers (usually located in Beijing), including social network Sina Weibo, Douban and the online video website Sohu, tend to relocate their censorship departments to Tianjin, where labor costs are cheaper than Beijing, as censorship is a kind of labour-intensive work.In fact, Tianjin has become the Censorship capital of Chinese Internet.
* Jinji Railway, from Tianjin urban area to Ji County, Tianjin
As a treaty port since 1860, Tianjin has been a major seaport and gateway to the nation's capital.
Tianjin World Financial Center
This alliance soon established the Tianjin Provisional Government, composed of representatives from each of the occupying forces (Russian, British, Japanese, German, French, American, Austro-Hungarian, and Italian).
The instruction for Tianjin Military Academy was copied at the Weihaiwei and Shanhaiguan military schools.
* China National Highway 102, through Ji County, Tianjin on its way from Beijing to Harbin
Supported by the strong actual goods exchange, Tianjin takes futures industry development as a key part of its financial reform and innovation.
On June 21, the magistrate of Tianjin County initiated a showdown at the church that developed into violent clashes between the church's Christian supporters and non-Christian Tianjin residents.
There are substantial projects under way to extend the metro system and improve road and rail links with the nearby national capital, Beijing.
General George C. Marshall, the "architect of victory" in World War II when he was the United States Army Chief of Staff, served at Tianjin in the 1920s as Executive Officer of the 15th Infantry.
Yujiapu Administrative Services Center
Major local newspapers include the Tianjin Daily and Jin Wan Bao (literally, tonight newspaper), which are the flagship papers of Tianjin Daily Newspaper Group and Jinwan Mass Media Group, respectively.
Japanese occupation of the city lasted until August 15, 1945, with the surrender of Japan marking the end of World War II.
In addition, Tianjin has a Buddhist Temple of Great Compassion, a Catholic St. Joseph’s Cathedral (Laoxikai Church), a Catholic Our Lady of Victory Church (Wanghailou Church).
Construction work on the Tianjin Metro started on July 4, 1970.
On July 30, 1937, Tianjin fell to Japan, as part of the Second Sino-Japanese War, but was not entirely occupied, as the Japanese for the most part respected foreign concessions until 1941, when the American and British concessions were occupied.
France and six other Western nations complained to the Qing government, which was forced to pay compensation for the incident.
On June 26, European defense forces heading towards Beijing were stopped by Boxers at nearby Langfang, and were defeated and forced to turn back to Tianjin.
It is located inside the airfreight area of Tianjin Binhai International Airport.
The area developed in the first phase is 1 m2.
Tianjin Airport International Logistics Zone
Between 1895 and 1900, Britain and France were joined by Japan, Germany and Russia, and even by countries without Chinese concessions such as Austria-Hungary, Italy and Belgium, in establishing self-contained concessions in Tianjin, each with its own prisons, schools, barracks and hospitals.
On November 14, 1941 the American Marine unit stationed in Tianjin was ordered to leave, but before this could be accomplished, the Japanese attacked the United States.
Both the radio and television stations are now branches of the Tianjin Film, Radio and Television Group, established in October 2002.
The new coastal area, consisting of Tianjin Port, Tianjin Economic and Technology Development Area and Tianjin Bonded area, has attracted numerous world-famous businesses like Motorola, Toyota and Samsung.
* China National Highway 103, from Beijing, through Tianjin's urban area, to Tanggu District
The districts most famous for martial arts in the city are Hong Qiao and Nankai, and martial artists abound in public green spaces such as Xigu Park and the Tianjin Water Park.
Also, Tianjin is unlike Beijing, in that very few roads run parallel to the major four cardinal directions.
Chinese state media reported that at least the initial blast was from unknown hazardous materials in shipping containers at a plant warehouse owned by Ruihai Logistics, a firm specializing in handling hazardous materials.
The total output value per capita in Tianjin was US$7,800, nearing the level of middle developed countries.
Several new metro lines are planned.
Although the international financial crisis spread rapidly and the speed of world economy growth is slowing down, Tianjin economy still maintains at a steady and fast growing speed.
* China National Highway 104, from Beijing, through Tianjin Municipality, to Fuzhou
The four delicacies of Tianjin include Goubuli baozi, Guifaxiang Shibajie Mahua (), Erduoyan Zhagao () and Maobuwen Jiaozi ().
It was said that the Yongle Emperor, who was one of the sons of the Hongwu Emperor of the Ming dynasty, before his enthronement for getting the crown of the Emperor, launched a war against the Jianwen Emperor, the grandson and successor of the Hongwu Emperor, in Nanjing.
From 1930 to 1935, Tientsin was the provincial capital of Hopeh, after that re-established as a municipality.
According to the Chinese General Social Survey of 2009, Christians constitute 1.51% of the city's population.
Tianjin Tanggu National Marine High-Tech Development Area
In July 2008, the Yide Futures Broker Co. moved its headquarters to Tianjin.
''Tageblatt für Nordchina'', '''L'Echo de Tientsin'', ''China Tribune'', ''Ta Kung Pao'' (L'Impartial), ''Min Hsing Pao'', and ''Jih Jih Shin Wen Pao'' (Tsientsin Daily News).
During the Qing dynasty (16441911) Tianjin was promoted to a prefecture or ''Zhou'' (州) in 1725 with Tianjin County established under the prefecture in 1731.
The foreign concessions were also under siege for several weeks.
Tianjin Finance Town Project, North Jiefang Road as its axle, has been initiated.
Tianjin Tanggu Marine High-Tech Development Area was established in 1992, and was upgraded to the national-level high-tech development area by the State Council in 1995, it is the only national-level high-tech development area specializing in developing the marine Hi-Tech industry.
In the period of late Qing dynasty and the Republic of China, Tianjin became one of the largest cities in China.
Major industries include petrochemical industries, textiles, car manufacturing, mechanical industries, and metalworking.
The China Bohai Bank, the first national commercial bank limited by shares with headquarters in Tianjin, had set up six branches and 14 offices open to the public by the end of 2008.
On September 28, 2015, the Juilliard School in New York City announced a major expansion into Tianjin during a visit by China's first lady, Peng Liyuan, the institution's first such full-scale foray outside the United States, with plans to offer a master's degree program.
The newly expanded area-the Western Zone of TEDA is located in the western part of TEDA between Tianjin Port and Tianjin International Airport.
Tianjin's roads often finish in ''dao'' (), ''xian'' ().
Tianjin Export Processing Zone
It is in the process of constructing the largest airfreight base in northern China.
Nowadays Tianjin is a dual-core city, with its main urban area (including the old city) located along the Hai River, which connects to the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers via the Grand Canal; and Binhai, a New Area urban core located east of the old city, on the coast of Bohai Sea.
The station was rebuilt from scratch in 1988.
In 1930 the newspaper ''Deutsch-Mandschurische Nachrichten'' moved from Harbin to Tianjin and changed its name to the ''Deutsch-Chinesische Nachrichten''.
The central government granted this special economic zone special preferential policies to attract enterprises in the business of processing and trade to invest in the zone.
As of the end of 2010, around 285 Fortune 500 companies have set up base in Binhai, which is a new growth pole in China and is a hub of advanced industry and financial activity.
These districts and counties are further subdivided, , into 240 township-level divisions, including 120 towns, 18 townships, 2 ethnic townships and 100 subdistricts.
In that year, the Yongle Emperor renamed the city ''Tianjin'' meaning "the Heavenly Ford" to indicate that the Emperor (the Son of Heaven) forded the river at that point.
Tianjin also hit the news in 2010, as the current fastest supercomputer in the world, Tianhe-1A, is located at the National Supercomputing Center in Tianjin.
The western part of the line is scheduled to be completed in 2006.
In the short term, infrastructure spending will buoy Tianjin's economy.
In terms of urban population, Tianjin is the fourth largest in China, after Shanghai, Beijing, and Guangzhou.
* Middle Ring Road ''(zhonghuan)''
EADS Airbus is an important manufacturer, and has opened an assembly plant for its Airbus A320 series airliners, operational since 2009.
It lies at the northern end of the Grand Canal of China, which connects with the Yellow River and Yangtze River.
* Jinba Railway, from Tianjin to Bazhou, Hebei
The treaties were ratified by the Emperor of China in 1860, and Tianjin was formally opened to Great Britain and France, and thus to the outside world.
In July 1900, the Eight-Nation Alliance recaptured Tianjin.
The move was supported by Anhui Army commander Zhou Shengchuan.
There are diverse viewpoints for the origin of the name, "Tianjin".
The British maintained a brigade of two battalions in Tianjin, and the Italians, French, Japanese, Germans, Russians, and Austro-Hungarians maintained understrength regiments; the United States did not initially participate.
The total length of track is .
* Jinbin Expressway, from Zhangguizhuang Bridge to Hujiayuan Bridge, both within Tianjin
Well-known foods include Caoji donkey meat, Bazhen sheep-leg mutton of Guanshengyuan, Luji Tangmian Zhagao, Baiji Shuijiao, Gaogan of Zhilanzhai, Guobacai of Dafulai, Kansubao of Shitoumen and Xiaobao chestnut.
It is  from Tianjin city proper, less than  away from the wharf and only  away from Tianjin Binhai International Airport.
This is a special enclosed zone where the Customs conduct 24-hour administration on commodities transported into and out of the zone and relevant places.
The following six China National Highways pass through Tianjin:
Tianjin means literally The Ferry Site of Emperor (The Son of Heaven).
At that time,  numerous western-style buildings and mansions were constructed in concessions, many of which are well-preserved today.
Presently operating with 63 stations and three lines.
The inter-city trains between Beijing and Tianjin will adopt a new numbering system: Cxxxx (C stands for interCity.).
Some roads and bridges have retained names that hark back to the Republic of China era (1912-1949) such as Minquan Gate and Beiyang Road.
Land expansion is being carried out in Tianjin Economic-Technological Development Area.
The station was later moved to Laolongtou () on the banks of the Hai He River in 1892, so the station was renamed Laolongtou Railway Station.
500 investment companies and private fund institutions as well as about 2,000 growing enterprises involving in global capital circulation through this Capital Connection in Tianjin.
Farmland takes up about 40% of Tianjin Municipality's total area.
It can be further classified into several varieties, including the rough (), smooth (), and high ().
It is governed as one of the four direct-controlled municipalities of the PRC and is thus under direct administration of the central government.
Among its staff was Yinchang.
The opening of the Grand Canal during the Sui dynasty prompted the development of Tianjin into a trading center.
Western nations were permitted to garrison the area to ensure open access to Beijing.
They are currently under heavy expansion from three to nine lines.
Foreign-born professional sportsmen have made statements regarding Tianjin's air quality, citing it as an impediment to athletic activity and being thick enough to "taste".
'''Tianjin''' (; ; Tianjin Mandarin: ; postal: '''Tientsin'''; literally "Heaven's Ferry") is a metropolis in northern coastal China and one of the five national central cities of China, with a total municipal population of 15,469,500.
Nominal GDP of Tianjin has swelled by 2.8 times from 184 RMB billion in 2001 to 505 RMB billion in 2007.
Having a low annual total precipitation of , and nearly three-fifths of it occurring in July and August alone, the city lies within the semi-arid zone, with parts of the municipality being humid continental (Köppen ''Dwa''/''BSk'', respectively).
Airline companies like Japan Airlines, All Nippon Airways, Korean Air, Asiana Airlines, Singapore Airlines Cargo and Martinair Holland all have flights to Tianjin Binhai International Airport.
This is because he had indeed forded the river in Tianjin when in contention with his nephew for the throne.
Nangang Industrial Zone
Until 1404, Tianjin was called "Zhigu" (), or "Straight Port".
The ticket price as of Aug. 15, 08 is 69 RMB for the first-class seat and 58 RMB for the second-class seat.
Tianjin Television, the local television station, broadcasts in nine channels.
On June 14, 1939, the Imperial Japanese Army surrounded and blockaded the British concession over the refusal of the British authorities to hand over to the Japanese six Chinese who had assassinated a locally prominent Japanese collaborator, and had taken refuge in the British concession.
Extreme temperatures have ranged from  to .
Micro-Electronic Industry Park (Jinnan)
Currently, Tianjin is developing itself into an eco-city, thus, bringing multiple prospects for investments in fixed assets in the subsequent time periods.
Newspapers from Beijing published in Tianjin included ''Pei Ching Jih Pao'', ''Peking Daily News'', and ''Le Journal de Peking''.
* Binhai Mass Transit (BMT).
* C2271～C2298: From Beijing South Station to Yujiapu Railway Station of Tianjin.
Tianjin Export Processing Zone is located to the northeast of TEDA with a planned area of .
The new C trains take only 30 min between Beijing and Tianjin, cutting the previous D train time by more than a half.
It was the second metro to be built in China and commenced service in 1984.
GDP in 2009 hit ￥750.1 billion, with a per capita of RMB￥62,403.
One version states that "Tianjin" as a word initially appeared in the poems of Qu Yuan, a famous patriotic poet of Chu State in the Warring States period.
Tianjin Port Free Trade Zone
The zone was approved to be established in 1991 by State Council.
''Jie'' () are rare.
The highest point in the municipality is Jiuding Peak (九顶山) in Ji County on the northern border with Hebei, at an altitude of .
A third view states that "Tianjin" was recorded in the River Record in History of the Jin.
There is also a guided rail tram system in TEDA, called TEDA Modern Guided Rail Tram.
Other mosques include the Dahuoxiang Mosque.
Another program was started at the academy for five years in 1887 to train teenagers as new army officers.
The original line is now part of Line 1 of the new metro system.
Part of the Bohai Economic Rim, it is the largest coastal city in northern China.
In January 2007, the station began another long-term restructuring project to modernize the facility and as part of the larger Tianjin transport hub project involving Tianjin Metro lines 2, 3, and 9 as well as the Tianjin-Beijing High-speed rail.
The walled city of Tianjin was built in 1404.
Globalization and opening up of the economy to the rest of the world have brought about remarkable benefits to the economic growth of Tianjin.
Tianjin Binhai International Airport has 59 flight routes, connecting 48 cities, including 30 domestic cities and 17 foreign cities.
Four lines are currently operating both in the City and the Binhai area.
It works at investing and managing land, energy & infrastructure project construction and marketing management, setting up creative, life, culture common establishment and common business, setting up the third industry, development and management real estate.
Tianjin Economic & Technological Development Area (Also known as TEDA)
It will be built into a comprehensive, open and intellectual finance service area within ten years.
The eastern part of the line began service on March 28, 2004.
In 1920, the remaining participating nations asked the United States to join them, and the US then sent the 15th Infantry Regiment, less one battalion, to Tianjin from the Philippines.
* Outer Ring Road ''(waihuan)''
The line runs between downtown Tianjin and TEDA (Tianjin Economic Development Area) in the seaside region.
Only the Italian and French concessions (the local French officials were loyal to Vichy) were allowed by the Japanese to remain.
The Outer Ring Road is the closest thing to a highway-level ring road, although traffic is often chaotic.
Prominent menus include the Eight Great Bowls (), a combination of eight mainly meat dishes, and the Four Great Stews (), actually referring to a very large number of stews, including chicken, duck, seafood, beef, and mutton.
Of the foreign language newspapers, three were in English and one each was in French and German.
As of October 2009, the entire network of Tianjin Metro and Binhai Mass Transit has 50 stations and 4 lines.
* Jinji Expressway, from central Tianjin to Jixian County
* C2201～C2268: From Beijing South Station to Tianjin, with stops at Wuqing Station (武清站);
There were over 900 bus lines in the city .
As one of the first state-level economic and technological development zones, TEDA was founded on December 6, 1984, with the approval of the State Council.
The following seven expressways of China run in or through Tianjin:
The Mayor of Tianjin is the highest-ranking official in the People's Government of Tianjin.
Tianjin has three ring roads.
The municipality recorded a 16.5% increase in GDP in 2009, second only to the 16.9% rate in resource-rich Inner Mongolia, and nearly double the national growth rate.
It has domestic and foreign excellent airfreight logistics enterprises engaged in sorting, warehousing, distribution, processing, exhibition.
Tianjin is transforming into a hub city for international shipping and logistics, modern manufacturing and research and development.
Tianjin's harbor area of Binhai/TEDA has an ultramodern, high speed rubber tired tram system, which is the first of its kind in China & Asia.
Skyscrapers in Tianjin
The China National Private Equity Forum was held in Tianjin again, with approx.
The presence of foreign influence in Tianjin was not always peaceful; one of the most serious violent incidents to take place was the Tianjin Church Incident.
* China National Highway 105, from Beijing, through Tianjin Municipality, to Macau
Since Tianjin is a municipality, the Communist Party of China Municipal Committee Secretary is colloquially termed the "Tianjin CPC Party chief".
Tianjin Baodi Economic and Technological Development Area
The city was governed by this council until August 15, 1902 when the city was returned to Qing control.
The total planned area of Nangang Industrial Zone is , of which the terrestrial area is .
For a time, the 1939 crisis appeared likely to cause an Anglo-Japanese war, especially when reports of the maltreatment by the Japanese Army of British subjects wishing to leave or enter the concession appeared in the British press.
Located in Binhai Economic Zone, a national new economic zone of China, Tianjin harbor is the port of call of international cruises visiting the wider area, including Beijing.
Government finance revenue of Tianjin increased by more than threefold from 16 RMB billion in 2001 to 54 RMB billion in 2007.
Tianjin West Railway Station and Tianjin North Railway Station are also major railway stations in Tianjin.
Construction work on Line 2 and Line 3 was completed in 2012 and the two lines are now in operation.
Industrial complexes in Tianjin
The 'maritime defense fund' supplied the budget for the Tianjin Military Academy, which was shared with the Tianjin Naval Academy.
Later it was to upgraded to an urban prefecture or ''Fu'' (府) before becoming a relay station (驻地) under the command of the Viceroy of Zhili.
The instructors were German officers.
Unmistakable are the châteaux of the French concession, which now make up the downtown district just south of the river, and the haughty mansions the British built east of here.
Tianjin Binhai International Airport now has a terminal building which covers an area of , a merchandise warehouse which covers an area of  and runways measuring  in total.
Tianjin total investments in fixed assets have increased from 62 RMB billion in 2001 to 239 RMB billion in 2007, representing a 3.9 times surge over a period of six years.
Yangliuqing (Green Willows), a town about  west of Tianjin's urban area and the seat of Xiqing District, is famous for its popular Chinese New Year-themed, traditional-style, colourful wash paintings ().
Garrison duty was highly regarded by the troops.
The Hai River forms within Tianjin Municipality at the confluence of the Ziya River (子牙河), Daqing River (大清河), Yongding River, North Grand Canal, and South Grand Canal, and enters the Pacific Ocean within the municipality as well, in Tanggu District.
Because of the rapid development of industry, commerce and finance, Tientsin was established as a municipality of China in 1927.
There are two rapid transit operators in Tianjin:
Tianjin TEDA Scientific Technology Industrial Park Development & Construction Co. Ltd (TTSTIPDC) was established in October, 2003, supported by Tianjin TEDA Investment & Holding Co. Ltd and Tianjin Jinnan District Town Construction Integrative Investment Co. Ltd.
At the end of the first part of the Second Opium War in June of the same year, the British and French prevailed, and the Treaties of Tianjin were signed, which opened Tianjin to foreign trade.
They captured 12 men and imprisoned them.
By the end of 2004, more than 118 countries and regions invested in Tianjin, setting up approximately 16,000 enterprises.
There are several other railway stations in the city that do not handle passenger traffic.
Farther east, also south of the river, the architecture of an otherwise unremarkable district has a sprinkling of stern German constructions.
Tianjin port is the world's top-level and China’s largest artificial deep water harbor, and the throughput capacity ranks fifth in the world.
Geothermal energy is another resource of Tianjin.
In his masterpiece ''Li Sao'', there is a verse, ”At dawn, departing from the Port of the Heaven” ().
