By 1627, there were about a hundred local converts in the Guge kingdom.
Drogön Chögyal Phagpa, Sakya Pandita's nephew became Imperial Preceptor of Kublai Khan, founder of the Yuan dynasty.
The economy of Tibet is dominated by subsistence agriculture, though tourism has become a growing industry in recent decades.
This existed as a "diarchic structure" under the Yuan emperor, with power primarily in favor of the Mongols.
However, in the 19th century the situation of foreigners in Tibet grew more tenuous.
The best-known medieval Chinese name for Tibet is ''Tubo'' ( also written as  or ;  or ).
He also brought in many reforms, and Tibetan power spread rapidly, creating a large and powerful empire.
Qing military garrisons staffed with Qing troops were now also established near the Nepalese border.
In recent years, due to increased interest in Tibetan Buddhism, tourism has become an increasingly important sector, and is actively promoted by the authorities.
Successive Dalai Lamas ruled Tibet from the mid-17th to mid-20th centuries.
The Kingdom of Nanzhao (in Yunnan and neighbouring regions) remained under Tibetan control from 750 to 794, when they turned on their Tibetan overlords and helped the Chinese inflict a serious defeat on the Tibetans.
Sakya Pandita 1182–1251 CE was the great grandson of Khon Konchog Gyalpo.
As the Qing dynasty weakened, its authority over Tibet also gradually declined, and by the mid-19th century its influence was minuscule.
More controversial is the theory that the Tibeto-Burman family is itself part of a larger language family, called Sino-Tibetan, and that through it Tibetan and Burmese are distant cousins of Chinese.
At the same time the Qing took steps to counterbalance the power of the aristocracy by adding officials recruited from the clergy to key posts.
In 1750 the Ambans and the majority of the Han Chinese and Manchus living in Lhasa were killed in a riot, and Qing troops arrived quickly and suppressed the rebels in the next year.
Yuan control over the region ended with the Ming overthrow of the Yuan and Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen's revolt against the Mongols.
It is divided between the outer White Palace, which serves as the administrative quarters, and the inner Red Quarters, which houses the assembly hall of the Lamas, chapels, 10,000 shrines, and a vast library of Buddhist scriptures.
Some scholars believe the first written reference to ''Bod'' "Tibet" was the ancient ''Bautai'' people recorded in the Egyptian Greek works ''Periplus of the Erythraean Sea'' (1st century CE) and ''Geographia'' (Ptolemy, 2nd century CE), itself from the Sanskrit form ''Bhauṭṭa'' of the Indian geographical tradition.
During China's Cultural Revolution, nearly all Tibet's monasteries were ransacked and destroyed by the Red Guards.
The Central People's Government exempts Tibet from all taxation and provides 90% of Tibet's government expenditures.
Roman Catholic Jesuits and Capuchins arrived from Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries.
His efforts were successful in part because of aid from Güshi Khan, the Oirat leader of the Khoshut Khanate.
* '''Gelug(pa)''', ''Way of Virtue'', also known casually as ''Yellow Hat'', whose spiritual head is the Ganden Tripa and whose temporal head is the Dalai Lama.
The language has numerous regional dialects which are generally not mutually intelligible.
Tibet has been called the "Water Tower" of Asia, and China is investing heavily in water projects in Tibet.
The Indian monsoon exerts some influence on eastern Tibet.
The conference was attended by General secretary Hu Jintao, Wu Bangguo, Wen Jiabao, Jia Qinglin, Li Changchun, Xi Jinping, Li Keqiang, He Guoqiang and Zhou Yongkang, all members of CPC Politburo Standing Committee signaling the commitment of senior Chinese leaders to development of Tibet and ethnic Tibetan areas.
Northern Tibet is subject to high temperatures in the summer and intense cold in the winter.
Historically, the population of Tibet consisted of primarily ethnic Tibetans and some other ethnic groups.
On the one hand, the Central Tibetan Administration of the Dalai Lama accuses China of actively swamping Tibet with migrants in order to alter Tibet's demographic makeup.
The once-obscure Shangpa Kagyu, which was famously represented by the 20th-century teacher Kalu Rinpoche, traces its history back to the Indian master Niguma, sister of Kagyu lineage holder Naropa.
The Monlam Prayer Festival follows it in the first month of the Tibetan calendar, falling between the fourth and the eleventh days of the first Tibetan month.
As a matter of convention, the Chairman has almost always been an ethnic Tibetan, while the party secretary has always been ethnically non-Tibetan.
On the other hand, according to the 2010 Chinese census ethnic Tibetans comprise 90% of a total population of 3 million in the Tibet Autonomous Region.
Yang chanting, performed without metrical timing, is accompanied by resonant drums and low, sustained syllables.
The region maintained its autonomy until 1951 when, following the Battle of Chamdo, Tibet became incorporated into the People's Republic of China, and the previous Tibetan government was abolished in 1959 after a failed uprising.
Other Muslim ethnic groups who have long inhabited Tibet include Hui, Salar, Dongxiang and Bonan.
Shigatse is the second largest city in the Tibet AR, west of Lhasa.
Nangma dance music is especially popular in the karaoke bars of the urban center of Tibet, Lhasa.
In 640 he married Princess Wencheng, the niece of the powerful Chinese emperor Taizong of Tang China.
The Tibetan name for Mt.
Seven years later a Sikh army led by General Zorawar Singh invaded western Tibet from Ladakh, starting the Sino-Sikh War.
They are powerful animals, and are said to be able to kill a tiger.
The English word ''Tibet'' or ''Thibet'' dates back to the 18th century.
This school emphasizes scholarship.
Other styles include those unique to the various schools of Tibetan Buddhism, such as the classical music of the popular Gelugpa school, and the romantic music of the Nyingmapa, Sakyapa and Kagyupa schools.
Qing authority over Tibet had become more symbolic than real by the late 19th century, although in the 1860s the Tibetans still chose for reasons of their own to emphasize the empire's symbolic authority and make it seem substantial.
Famous earlier missionaries include James O. Fraser, Alfred James Broomhall and Isobel Kuhn of the China Inland Mission, among others who were active in this area.
During the day they are kept chained up, and are let loose at night to guard their masters' house.
The war ended with the signing of the Treaty of Chushul between the Chinese and Sikh empires.
A Qing-Tibetan army repelled the invaders but was in turn defeated when it chased the Sikhs into Ladakh.
This Tibetan regime or government is also referred to as the Ganden Phodrang.
However, if the latter group of Tibetan-type languages are included in the calculation, then 'greater Tibetan' is spoken by approximately 6&nbsp;million people across the Tibetan Plateau.
The atmosphere is severely dry nine months of the year, and average annual snowfall is only , due to the rain shadow effect.
In 1913, Tibet and Mongolia concluded a treaty of mutual recognition.
Western passes receive small amounts of fresh snow each year but remain traversible all year round.
In 1877, the Protestant James Cameron from the China Inland Mission walked from Chongqing to Batang in Garzê Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan province, and "brought the Gospel to the Tibetan people."
The minister family Rinpungpa, based in Tsang (West Central Tibet), dominated politics after 1435.
Other traditional ethnic groups with significant population or with the majority of the ethnic group residing in Tibet (excluding a disputed area with India) include Bai people, Blang, Bonan, Dongxiang, Han, Hui people, Lhoba, Lisu people, Miao, Mongols, Monguor (Tu people), Menba (Monpa), Mosuo, Nakhi, Qiang, Nu people, Pumi, Salar, and Yi people.
The most distinctive feature of Tibetan architecture is that many of the houses and monasteries are built on elevated, sunny sites facing the south, and are often made out of a mixture of rocks, wood, cement and earth.
Zhao Erfeng defeated the Tibetan military conclusively and expelled the Dalai Lama's forces from the province.
Its most famous exponent was Milarepa, an 11th-century mystic.
The period that followed is known traditionally as the ''Era of Fragmentation'', when political control over Tibet became divided between regional warlords and tribes with no dominant centralized authority.
Between 1346 and 1354, Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen toppled the Sakya and founded the Phagmodrupa Dynasty.
However, after Gao Xianzhi's defeat by the Arabs and Qarluqs at the Battle of Talas (751) and the subsequent civil war known as the An Lushan Rebellion (755), Chinese influence decreased rapidly and Tibetan influence resumed.
There is also a well established Chinese Muslim community (gya kachee), which traces its ancestry back to the Hui ethnic group of China.
The current borders of Tibet were generally established in the 18th century.
Before the 1950s, between 10 and 20% of males in Tibet were monks.
On January 15, 2009, China announced the construction of Tibet’s first expressway, a  stretch of controlled-access highway in southwestern Lhasa.
It is employed throughout the Tibetan plateau and Bhutan and is also spoken in parts of Nepal and northern India, such as Sikkim.
China has invested 310 billion yuan (about 45.6 billion U.S. dollars) in Tibet since 2001.
Under the next few Tibetan kings, Buddhism became established as the state religion and Tibetan power increased even further over large areas of Central Asia, while major inroads were made into Chinese territory, even reaching the Tang's capital Chang'an (modern Xi'an) in late 763.
It involves dancing and participating in sports events, as well as sharing picnics.
Zone A developed a land area of  for construction purposes.
Prior to Songtsän Gampo, the kings of Tibet were more mythological than factual, and there is insufficient evidence of their existence.
His actions were unpopular, and there was much animosity against him for his mistreatment of civilians and disregard for local culture.
Following the Xinhai Revolution against the Qing dynasty in 1912, Qing soldiers were disarmed and escorted out of Tibet Area (Ü-Tsang).
The Yarlung Tsangpo Grand Canyon, along the Yarlung Tsangpo River, is among the deepest and longest canyons in the world.
In general, the dialects of central Tibet (including Lhasa), Kham, Amdo and some smaller nearby areas are considered Tibetan dialects.
They were also present at the imperial camp of Möngke Khan at Shira Ordo, where they debated in 1256 with Karma Pakshi (1204/6-83), head of the Karma Kagyu order.
Standing at  in height and  in width, the Potala Palace is the most important example of Tibetan architecture.
Tibetan representations of art are intrinsically bound with Tibetan Buddhism and commonly depict deities or variations of Buddha in various forms from bronze Buddhist statues and shrines, to highly colorful thangka paintings and mandalas.
Tibetan is also spoken by approximately 150,000 exile speakers who have fled from modern-day Tibet to India and other countries.
Desideri, who reached Lhasa in 1716, encountered Armenian and Russian merchants.
In 1565 they were overthrown by the Tsangpa Dynasty of Shigatse which expanded its power in different directions of Tibet in the following decades and favoured the Karma Kagyu sect.
The bulk of western and central Tibet (Ü-Tsang) was often at least nominally unified under a series of Tibetan governments in Lhasa, Shigatse, or nearby locations; these governments were at various times under Mongol and Chinese overlordship.
Qing dynasty rule in Tibet began with their 1720 expedition to the country when they expelled the invading Dzungars.
The design of the Tibetan Chörtens can vary, from roundish walls in Kham to squarish, four-sided walls in Ladakh.
It is governed by a People's Government, led by a Chairman.
Ü-Tsang (''dBus gTsang'') (Ü in the center, Tsang in the center-west, and Ngari (''mNga' ris'') in the far west) covered the central and western portion of Tibet Autonomous Region.
* '''Sakya(pa)''', ''Grey Earth'', headed by the Sakya Trizin, founded by Khon Konchog Gyalpo, a disciple of the great translator Drokmi Lotsawa.
Tibet has numerous high-altitude lakes referred to in Tibetan as ''tso'' or ''co''.
At its height in the 780's to 790's the Tibetan Empire reached its highest glory when it ruled and controlled a territory stretching from modern day Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, China, India,  Nepal, Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan.
Kham (''Khams'') in the southeast encompasses parts of western Sichuan, northern Yunnan, southern Qinghai and the eastern part of the Tibet Autonomous Region.
The Qinghai Lake (Koko Nor) is the largest lake in the People's Republic of China.
In 747, the hold of Tibet was loosened by the campaign of general Gao Xianzhi, who tried to re-open the direct communications between Central Asia and Kashmir.
Butter tea is very popular to drink.
With Güshi Khan as a largely uninvolved overlord, the 5th Dalai Lama and his intimates established a civil administration which is referred to by historians as the ''Lhasa state''.
Historical linguists generally agree that "Tibet" names in European languages are loanwords from Semitic '''' or'''' () (), itself deriving from Turkic '''', literally: "The Heights" (plural of '''').
It is located in the western suburbs of Lhasa, the capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region.
Meat dishes are likely to be yak, goat, or mutton, often dried, or cooked into a spicy stew with potatoes.
The first, the Dagpo Kagyu, encompasses those Kagyu schools that trace back to Gampopa.
Although spoken Tibetan varies according to the region, the written language, based on Classical Tibetan, is consistent throughout.
Tibetans eat ''Guthuk'' (barley noodle soup with filling) on New Year's Eve with their families.
Mount Everest, located on the border with Nepal, is, at , the highest mountain on earth.
Lu are a type of songs that feature glottal vibrations and high pitches.
In turn, the Dagpo Kagyu consists of four major sub-sects: the Karma Kagyu, headed by a Karmapa, the Tsalpa Kagyu, the Barom Kagyu, and Pagtru Kagyu.
The earliest Tibetan historical texts identify the Zhang Zhung culture as a people who migrated from the Amdo region into what is now the region of Guge in western Tibet.
If the Sakya lama ever came into conflict with the ''dpon-chen'', the ''dpon-chen'' had the authority to send Chinese troops into the region.
Tsongkhapa was renowned for both his scholasticism and his virtue.
Gyantse and Qamdo are also amongst the largest.
In 1661 another Jesuit, Johann Grueber, crossed Tibet from Sining to Lhasa (where he spent a month), before heading on to Nepal.
* '''Kagyu(pa)''', ''Oral Lineage''.
These include Qinghai Lake, Lake Manasarovar, Namtso, Pangong Tso, Yamdrok Lake, Siling Co, Lhamo La-tso, Lumajangdong Co, Lake Puma Yumco, Lake Paiku, Lake Rakshastal, Dagze Co and Dong Co.
Afterwards, the Central People's Government in Beijing renounced the agreement and began implementation of the halted social and political reforms.
The Buddhist wheel, along with two dragons, can be seen on nearly every Gompa in Tibet.
The British Empire was encroaching from northern India into the Himalayas, the Emirate of Afghanistan and the Russian Empire were expanding into Central Asia and each power became suspicious of the others' intentions in Tibet.
Zhang Zhung is considered to be the original home of the Bön religion.
Tibetan ''dbus-gtsang'', Ü-Tsang), ''Tubote'' (), and ''Tanggute'' (, cf.
There are over 800 settlements in Tibet.
Walls are usually sloped inwards at 10 degrees as a precaution against the frequent earthquakes in this mountainous area.
Mongol rule of Tibet remained separate from the main provinces of China, but the region existed under the administration of the Yuan dynasty.
The Tibetan name for their land,  ''Bod'' , means "Tibet" or "Tibetan Plateau", although it originally meant the central region around Lhasa, now known in Tibetan as Ü.
By the 1st century BCE, a neighboring kingdom arose in the Yarlung valley, and the Yarlung king, Drigum Tsenpo, attempted to remove the influence of the Zhang Zhung by expelling the Zhang's Bön priests from Yarlung.
This order was founded in the 14th to 15th centuries by Je Tsongkhapa, based on the foundations of the Kadampa tradition.
In 1834 the Sikh Empire invaded and annexed Ladakh, a culturally Tibetan region that was an independent kingdom at the time.
Staple foods in Tibet are roasted barley, yak meat, and butter tea.
Tibet retained nominal power over religious and regional political affairs, while the Mongols managed a structural and administrative rule over the region, reinforced by the rare military intervention.
The event was established in 1049 by Tsong Khapa, the founder of the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama's order.
Historically, some European sources also considered parts of Tibet to lie in Central Asia.
At the end of the decade, however, analogously to the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, monks in the Drepung and Sera monasteries started protesting for independence, and so the government halted reforms and started an anti-separatist campaign.
However, internal strife within the dynasty and the strong localism of the various fiefs and political-religious factions led to a long series of internal conflicts.
Mongolian prince Khuden gained temporal power in Tibet in the 1240s and sponsored Sakya Pandita, whose seat became the capital of Tibet.
However, the Tibetan occupation of Chang'an only lasted for fifteen days, after which they were defeated by Tang and its ally, the Turkic Uyghur Khaganate.
During this time, Tibet fought Chinese warlords for control of the ethnically Tibetan areas in Xikang and Qinghai (parts of Kham and Amdo) along the upper reaches of the Yangtze River.
Yak yogurt, butter and cheese are frequently eaten, and well-prepared yogurt is considered something of a prestige item.
Tibet was dominated by the Manchus in various stages in the 18th century, and the years immediately following the 1792 regulations were the peak of the Qing imperial commissioners' authority; but there was no attempt to make Tibet a Chinese province.
After the Xinhai Revolution (1911–12) toppled the Qing dynasty and the last Qing troops were escorted out of Tibet, the new Republic of China apologized for the actions of the Qing and offered to restore the Dalai Lama's title.
Although China won the war, Chinese troops withdrew north of the McMahon Line, effectively ceding South Tibet to India.
Tibet continued as a Central Asian empire until the mid-9th century, when a civil war over succession led to the collapse of imperial Tibet.
The Tibetan language has its own script which it shares with Ladakhi and Dzongkha, and which is derived from the ancient Indian Brāhmī script.
He was assassinated and Zhang Zhung continued its dominance of the region until it was annexed by Songtsen Gampo in the 7th century.
During the Great Leap Forward, between 200,000 and 1,000,000 Tibetans died, and approximately 6,000 monasteries were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution, thus the vast majority of historic Tibetan architecture was destroyed.
Religion is extremely important to the Tibetans and has a strong influence over all aspects of their lives.
Tibetan people, language, and culture, regardless of where they are from, are referred to as ''Zang'' () although the geographical term ''Xīzàng'' is often limited to the Tibet Autonomous Region.
This is the oldest, the original order founded by Padmasambhava.
It contains two world heritage sites&nbsp;– the Potala Palace and Norbulingka, which were the residences of the Dalai Lama.
The mountain is a holy pilgrimage site for both Hindus and Tibetans.
Later, Lhasa took control of the western part of Xikang, China.
The highest elevation in Tibet is Mount Everest, earth's highest mountain rising 8,848 m (29,029&nbsp;ft) above sea level.
This is probably due to the long-standing influence of the Tibetan empire, whose rule embraced (and extended at times far beyond) the present Tibetan linguistic area, which runs from northern Pakistan in the west to Yunnan and Sichuan in the east, and from north of Qinghai Lake south as far as Bhutan.
But , many Christian missionaries were reported to be active in Tibet with the tacit approval of Chinese authorities, who view the missionaries as a counterforce to Tibetan Buddhism or as a boon to the local economy.
The 5th Dalai Lama is known for unifying the Tibetan heartland under the control of the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism, after defeating the rival Kagyu and Jonang sects and the secular ruler, the Tsangpa prince, in a prolonged civil war.
The Hindus consider the mountain to be the abode of Lord Shiva.
Starting in 2001, the local deaf sign languages of Tibet were standardized, and Tibetan Sign Language is now being promoted across the country.
The State Council approved Tibet Lhasa Economic and Technological Development Zone as a state-level development zone in 2001.
Meanwhile, the Qing government sent resident commissioners called ''Ambans'' to Lhasa.
The central region of Tibet is an autonomous region within China, the Tibet Autonomous Region.
After 1959 a group of Tibetan Muslims made a case for Indian nationality based on their historic roots to Kashmir and the Indian government declared all Tibetan Muslims Indian citizens later on that year.
Lhasa is Tibet's traditional capital and the capital of Tibet Autonomous Region.
Tibet is west of the Central China plain, and within mainland China Tibet is regarded as part of 西部 (Xībù), a term usually translated by Chinese media as "the Western section", meaning "Western China".
In 1914 the Tibetan government signed the Simla Accord with Britain, ceding the South Tibet region to British India.
The Dalai Lama belongs to the Gelugpa school, and is regarded as the embodiment of the Bodhisattva of Compassion.
This period also saw some contacts with Jesuits and Capuchins from Europe, and in 1774 a Scottish nobleman, George Bogle, came to Shigatse to investigate prospects of trade for the British East India Company.
For the next 36 years, the 13th Dalai Lama and the regents who succeeded him governed Tibet.
After the Dalai Lama's government fled to Dharamsala, India, during the 1959 Tibetan Rebellion, it established a rival government-in-exile.
The main crops grown are barley, wheat, buckwheat, rye, potatoes, and assorted fruits and vegetables.
Other forms, particularly Dzongkha, Sikkimese, Sherpa, and Ladakhi, are considered by their speakers, largely for political reasons, to be separate languages.
Due to limited arable land, the primary occupation of the Tibetan Plateau is raising livestock, such as sheep, cattle, goats, camels, yaks, dzo, and horses.The dogs of Tibet are twice the size of those seen in India, with large heads and hairy bodies.
One of the department's purposes was to select a ''dpon-chen'' ('great administrator'), usually appointed by the lama and confirmed by the Mongol emperor in Beijing.
Kailash is Khang Rinpoche.
These include Tibetan hats, jewelry (silver and gold), wooden items, clothing, quilts, fabrics, Tibetan rugs and carpets.
The modern Standard Chinese exonym for the ethnic Tibetan region is ''Zangqu'' (), which derives by metonymy from the Tsang region around Shigatse plus the addition of a Chinese suffix, 区 ''qū'', which means "area, district, region, ward".
Tibetan Buddhism has four main traditions (the suffix ''pa'' is comparable to "er" in English):
"Tibet's GDP was expected to reach 43.7 billion yuan in 2009, up 170 percent from that in 2000 and posting an annual growth of 12.3 percent over the past nine years."
Tibetan architecture contains Chinese and Indian influences, and reflects a deeply Buddhist approach.
The dominant religion in Tibet is Tibetan Buddhism; in addition there is Bön, which is similar to Tibetan Buddhism, and there are also Tibetan Muslims and Christian minorities.
Islamic influence in Tibet also came from Persia.
Little fuel is available for heat or lighting, so flat roofs are built to conserve heat, and multiple windows are constructed to let in sunlight.
In Tibetan cities, there are small communities of Muslims, known as Kachee (Kache), who trace their origin to immigrants from three main regions: Kashmir (Kachee Yul in ancient Tibetan), Ladakh and the Central Asian Turkic countries.
The deposit has an estimated value of $128&nbsp;billion and may double Chinese reserves of zinc, copper, and lead.
This is an oral tradition which is very much concerned with the experiential dimension of meditation.
In practice, however, the Chairman is subordinate to the branch secretary of the Communist Party of China.
Losar is the Tibetan New Year Festival.
The region subsequently declared its independence in 1913 without recognition by the subsequent Chinese Republican government.
Tibetan ''dbus'', Ü, ), ''Wusizang'' (, cf.
The project will cost 1.55 billion yuan (US$227 million).
In 1904, a British expedition to Tibet, spurred in part by a fear that Russia was extending its power into Tibet as part of The Great Game, invaded the country, hoping that negotiations with the 13th Dalai Lama would be more effective than with Chinese representatives.
Muslims have been living in Tibet since as early as the 8th or 9th century.
It is traditionally considered that his first wife was the Princess of Nepal, Bhrikuti, and that she played a great role in the establishment of Buddhism in Tibet.
The Sakya lama retained a degree of autonomy, acting as the political authority of the region, while the ''dpon-chen'' held administrative and military power.
According to tradition the original ancestors of the Tibetan people, as represented by the six red bands in the Tibetan flag, are: the Se, Mu, Dong, Tong, Dru and Ra.
These include Amdo (''A mdo'') in the northeast, which is administratively part of the provinces of Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan.
Other cities and towns in cultural Tibet include Shiquanhe (Ali), Nagchu, Bamda, Rutog, Nyingchi, Nedong, Coqên, Barkam, Sakya, Gartse, Pelbar, Lhatse, and Tingri; in Sichuan, Kangding (Dartsedo); in Qinghai, Jyekundo (Yushu), Machen, and Golmud; in India, Tawang, Leh, and Gangtok.
From January 18–20, 2010 a national conference on Tibet and areas inhabited by Tibetans in Sichuan, Yunnan, Gansu and Qinghai was held in China and a substantial plan to improve development of the areas was announced.
By 750, the Tibetans had lost almost all of their central Asian possessions to the Chinese.
'''Tibet''' (; , Tibetan Pinyin: ''boew'', ;  /ɕi⁵⁵ t͡sɑŋ⁵¹/) is a region on the Tibetan Plateau in Asia.
This prompted yet another Qing reorganization of the Tibetan government, this time through a written plan called the "Twenty-Nine Regulations for Better Government in Tibet".
In 1980, General Secretary and reformist Hu Yaobang visited Tibet and ushered in a period of social, political, and economic liberalization.
