In 2014, the population in India was estimated at 2,226, 163–253 in Nepal and 103 in Bhutan as of 2015.
When 13 men simultaneously tried to drag the same carcass later, they were unable to move it.
A single maharaja or English hunter could claim to kill over a hundred tigers in their hunting career.
The photos show a male Amur tiger pass by, followed by a female and three cubs within the span of about two minutes.
The tiger also has fairly stout teeth; the somewhat curved canines are the longest among living felids with a crown height of up to .
Tigers are among the most recognisable and popular of the world's charismatic megafauna.
Jim Corbett's 1944 ''Man-Eaters of Kumaon'' tells ten true stories of his tiger-hunting exploits in what is now the northern Uttarakhand region of India.
The size of the home range mainly depends on prey abundance, and, in the case of males, on access to females.
However, while some felids do exhibit this colouration as a solid coat, there is no known genetic configuration that would result in black stripes on a blue-gray background.
These false "eyespots", called ocelli, apparently play an important role in intraspecies communication.
Is found in Cambodia, China, Laos, Burma, Thailand, and Vietnam.
More recent attempts have been made using camera trapping and studies on DNA from their scat, while radio collaring has been used to track tigers in the wild.
One, the Trinil, became extinct in prehistoric times.
In 2016, wildlife conservation group at WWF declared that world's count of wild tigers has risen for the first time in a century.
In Sumatra, prey include sambar deer, muntjac, wild boar, Malayan tapir and orangutan.
No other extant land predator routinely takes on prey this large on their own.
Gestation can range from 93 to 112 days, the average being 105 days.
When hunting larger animals, tigers prefer to bite the throat and use their powerful forelimbs to hold onto the prey, often simultaneously wrestling it to the ground.
In 1986 in the Sundarbans, since tigers almost always attack from the rear, masks with human faces were worn on the back of the head, on the theory that tigers usually do not attack if seen by their prey.
Tail length is about .
A young male acquires territory either by seeking out an area devoid of other male tigers, or by living as a transient in another male's territory until he is older and strong enough to challenge the resident male.
The tiger's full genome sequence was published in 2013.
If these are not sufficient, the conflicts may turn violent; tigers may kill competitors as leopards, dholes, striped hyenas, wolves, bears, pythons and crocodiles on occasion.
t. corbetti''), also called ''Corbett's'' tiger
Hybrids are still bred in private menageries and in zoos in China.
Historically, tigers have been hunted at a large scale so their famous striped skins could be collected.
This is considerably larger than the weight of  reached by the smallest living subspecies, the Sumatran tiger.
*Southeast Asia: Extinct in Indonesia
Tigers have muscular bodies with powerful forelimbs, large heads and long tails.
This decreased the number of attacks only temporarily.
Lions have been known to breed with tigers (most often the Amur and Bengal subspecies) to create hybrids called ligers and tigons.
The Bengal tiger is the national animal of India and Bangladesh.
A further habitat requirement is the placement of suitably secluded den locations, which may consist of caves, large hollow trees, or dense vegetation.
Tiger are also mascots for various sports teams around the world.
t. altaica''), also known as the '''Amur tiger'''
The skull of a lion has broader nasal openings.
t. virgata)'', also known as the '''Hyrcanian tiger''' or '''Turan tiger'''
George Schaller observed a male share a kill with two females and four cubs.
The USA (2011) had 2,884 tigers in 468 facilities.
They may cross rivers up to  across and can swim up to  in a day.
An adult tiger can go for up to two weeks without eating, then gorge on  of flesh at one time.
In Chinese myth and culture, the tiger is one of the 12 animals of the Chinese zodiac.
*West Asia: Extinct in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, Georgia, Russia, Syria and Turkey
In some cases, rather than being predatory, tiger attacks on human seem to be territorial in nature.
Having earlier rejected the Western-led environmentalist movement, China changed its stance in the 1980s and became a party to the CITES treaty.
There is no scientific evidence to support these beliefs.
Although almost exclusively carnivorous, tigers will occasionally eat vegetation for dietary fibre such as fruit of the slow match tree.
Occasionally tigers come to view people as prey.
Tigers once ranged widely across Asia, from Turkey in the west to the eastern coast of Russia.
With smaller prey, such as monkeys and hares, the tiger bites the nape, often breaking the spinal cord, piercing the windpipe, or severing the jugular vein or common carotid artery.
In William Blake's poem in the ''Songs of Experience'', titled "The Tyger," the tiger is a menacing and fearful animal.
The tiger is the national animal of Bangladesh, India, Malaysia and South Korea.
The father generally takes no part in rearing them.
In Yann Martel's 2001 Man Booker Prize winning novel ''Life of Pi'', the protagonist, surviving shipwreck for months in a small boat, somehow avoids being eaten by the other survivor, a large Bengal tiger.
By August 1999, the teams of the STP had evaluated 52 sites of potential tiger habitat in Lampung Province, of which only 15 these were intact enough to contain tigers.
Man-eaters have been a particular problem in recent decades in India and Bangladesh, especially in Kumaon, Garhwal and the Sundarbans mangrove swamps of Bengal, where some healthy tigers have hunted humans.
The Siberian tiger is the genetically closest living relative of the Caspian tiger.
It is sometimes called the White Tiger of the West (西方白虎), and it represents the west and the autumn season.
In Buddhism, the tiger is one of the Three Senseless Creatures, symbolising anger, with the monkey representing greed and the deer lovesickness.
The Siberian tiger is the national animal of South Korea.
In Ranthambore, a male Bengal tiger raised and defended two orphaned female cubs after their mother had died of illness.
Today, they range from the Siberian taiga to open grasslands and tropical mangrove swamps.
The disproportionate growth in numbers of white tigers points to inbreeding among homozygous recessive individuals.
The pelage is dense and heavy; colouration varies between shades of orange and brown with white ventral areas and distinctive vertical black stripes, whose patterns are unique to each individual.
The Tungusic peoples considered the Siberian tiger a near-deity and often referred to it as "Grandfather" or "Old man".
Was not considered a subspecies in its own right until a 2004 genetic analysis showed that they are distinct in mtDNA and micro-satellite sequences from the Indochinese subspecies.
The specific epithet, ''tigris'', as well as the common name, tiger, come from the Middle English ''tigre'' and the Old English ''tigras'' (a plural word), both used for the animal.
The size difference between males and females is proportionally greater in the larger tiger subspecies, with males weighing up to 1.7 times more than females.
The range of a male tends to overlap those of several females, providing him with a large field of prospective mating partners.
+ Extinct subspecies of tiger
Once dominance has been established, a male may tolerate a subordinate within his range, as long as they do not live in too close quarters.
They have a mane-like heavy growth of fur around the neck and jaws and long whiskers, especially in males.
Females are sometimes fertile and have occasionally given birth to litigons when mated to a lion.
After 1979, no more sightings were confirmed in the region of Mount Betiri.
2 needed by a single female and more for a single male).
The overlap between the female and her mother's territory reduces with time.
'''Malayan tiger''' (''P.
Sambar deer, chital, barasingha, wild boar, gaur, nilgai and both water buffalo and domestic buffalo, in descending order of preference, are the tiger's favoured prey in Tamil Nadu, India, while gaur and sambar are the preferred prey and constitute the main diet of tigers in other parts of India.
In 1994, the Indonesian Sumatran Tiger Conservation Strategy addressed the potential crisis that tigers faced in Sumatra.
By 1977, a tiger skin in an English market was considered to be worth $4,250 US dollars.
Old or wounded tigers, unable to catch wild prey, can become man-eaters; this pattern has recurred frequently across India.
In Hinduism, the god Shiva wears and sits on tiger skin.
One in 2 to 20 hunts, including stalking near potential prey, ends in a successful kill.
Nineteen states have banned private ownership of tigers, fifteen require a license, and sixteen states have no regulation.
*Southeast Asia: Malaysia; extinct in Thailand and Singapore.
They were extirpated on the island of Bali in the 1940s, around the Caspian Sea in the 1970s, and on Java in the 1980s.
In various parts of their range they inhabit or have inhabited additionally partially open grassland and savanna as well as taiga forests and rocky habitats.
White tigers are more frequently bred in captivity, where the comparatively small gene pool can lead to inbreeding.
The tiger's tail appears in stories from countries including China and Korea, it being generally inadvisable to grasp a tiger by the tail.
The remaining six tiger subspecies have been classified as endangered by IUCN.
Because the male tiger does not pass on a growth-promoting gene and the lioness passes on a growth inhibiting gene, tigons are often relatively small, only weighing up to 150&nbsp;kg (350&nbsp;lb), which is about 10–20% smaller than lions.
At least in one case, a tigress with cubs killed eight people entering her territory without consuming them at all.
By 1993 it had banned the trade in tiger parts, and this diminished the use of tiger bones in traditional Chinese medicine.
'''Sumatran tiger''' (''P.
t. amoyensis''), also known as the '''Amoy''' or '''Xiamen tiger'''
Tigers are apex predators, primarily preying on ungulates such as deer and bovids.
Since the beginning of the 20th century, tigers' historical range has shrunk by 93%.
A dominant cub emerges in most litters, usually a male.
However, in a decade later, the Siberian tiger census was estimated from 480 to 540 individuals.
In a 2004 online poll conducted by cable television channel Animal Planet, involving more than 50,000 viewers from 73 countries, the tiger was voted the world's favourite animal with 21% of the vote, narrowly beating the dog.
Several such incidents have been observed in which the subordinate tiger yielded defeat by rolling onto its back and showing its belly in a submissive posture.
Males have about a 50% chance of having a mane, but, even if they do, their manes will be only around half the size of that of a pure lion.
The story was adapted in Ang Lee's 2012 feature film of the same name.
These wholly or partially melanistic tigers, if they exist, are assumed to be intermittent mutations rather than a distinct species.
At the shoulder, tigers may variously stand  tall.
The Manchu considered the Siberian tiger as Hu Lin, the king.
It is estimated that between 5,000 and 10,000 captive-bred, semi-tame animals live in these farms today.
Further controversy broke out with the discovery that Tara was partly Siberian tiger.
The pupils are circular with yellow irises.
Tigers are thought to be mainly nocturnal predators, but in areas where humans are typically absent, they have been observed via remote-controlled, hidden cameras, hunting in daylight.
More often, it is the more vulnerable small calves that are taken.
The skull is similar to that of the lion, though the frontal region is usually not as depressed or flattened, with a slightly longer postorbital region.
Males, however, migrate further than their female counterparts and set out at a younger age to mark out their own area.
Facial expressions include the "defense threat", where an individual bares its teeth, flattens its ears and its pupils enlarge.
The cubs often become capable (and nearly adult size) hunters at eleven months old.
Major reasons for population decline include habitat destruction, habitat fragmentation and poaching.
The small, rounded ears have a prominent white spot on the back, surrounded by black.
Successful hunts usually require the tiger to almost simultaneously leap onto its quarry, knock it over, and grab the throat or nape with its teeth.
The use of tiger parts in pharmaceutical drugs in China is already banned, and the government has made some offences in connection with tiger poaching punishable by death.
Few golden tigers are kept in captivity; they are invariably at least part Bengal.
The Sumatran Tiger Project (STP) was initiated in June 1995 in and around the Way Kambas National Park in order to ensure the long-term viability of wild Sumatran tigers and to accumulate data on tiger life-history characteristics vital for the management of wild populations.
Other vocal communications include grunts, woofs, snarls, miaows, hisses and growls.
The weretiger replaces the werewolf in shapeshifting folklore in Asia; in India they were evil sorcerers, while in Indonesia and Malaysia they were somewhat more benign.
Fossils found in Japan indicate the local tigers were, like the surviving island subspecies, smaller than the mainland forms, an example of insular dwarfism.
An analysis of craniodental and pelage morphology, ecology, and molecular biology of the tiger subspecies indicates that they have many traits in common and that the genetic diversity between them is low.
In Ancient Roman times, tigers were kept in menageries and amphitheatres to be exhibited, trained and paraded, and were often provoked to fight humans and exotic beasts.
In either sex, the tail represents about  of total length.
There are 10 recognised tiger subspecies.
Unlike male lions, male tigers allow females and cubs to feed on the kill before the male is finished with it; all involved generally seem to behave amicably, in contrast to the competitive behaviour shown by a lion pride.
Though rarely observed, some tigers have been recorded to kill prey by swiping with their paws, which are powerful enough to smash the skulls of domestic cattle, and break the backs of sloth bears.
Since then there has been a change of attitude, with some Tibetans publicly burning their chubas.
The cubs are nursed for three to six months.
The remaining subspecies all survived at least into the mid-20th century; three of these are also considered extinct.
Most man-eating tigers are old, are missing teeth, and are unable to capture their preferred prey.
+ Surviving subspecies of tiger
Coat colour varies from light yellow to reddish yellow with black stripes.
Despite unconfirmed reports and some evidence of footprints, there has been no confirmed wild sighting in over 25 years, leading experts to consider it "functionally extinct", with the entire known population of roughly 65+ individuals held in captivity.
Females reach sexual maturity at three to four years, whereas males do so at four to five years.
In 2011, the total adult population was estimated at 1,520–1,909 in India, 440 in Bangladesh, 155 in Nepal and 75 in Bhutan.
The less common tigon is a cross between a lioness and a male tiger.
'''Javan tiger''' (''P.
*Central Asia: Extinct in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan
In the former Caspian tiger's range, prey included saiga antelope, camels, Caucasian wisent, yak, and wild horses.
The "true" roar can be heard at up to  away and is sometimes emitted three or four times in succession.
In the framework of the STP a community-based conservation programme was initiated to document the tiger-human dimension in the park in order to enable conservation authorities to resolve tiger-human conflicts based on a comprehensive database rather than anecdotes and opinions.
The only large island they still inhabit is Sumatra.
The White Tiger () is one of the Four Symbols of the Chinese constellations.
As of 2014 the total population is estimated at fewer than 500 individuals, though a new report from September that year estimated it at between 250 and 340 individuals.
Tigers and their superlative qualities have been a source of fascination for mankind since ancient times, and they are routinely visible as important cultural and media motifs.
The cubs become independent around eighteen months of age, but it is not until they are around two to two and a half years old that they fully separate from their mother.
In the wild, tigers mostly feed on large and medium-sized animals, preferring native ungulates weighing at least .
Had a weight of  in males and  in females.
Lives in India, Nepal, Bhutan, and Bangladesh, and is the most common subspecies.
In 1972, India's production of honey and beeswax dropped by 50% when at least 29 people who gathered these materials were devoured.
Other tiger characters aimed at children tend to be more benign, as for instance Tigger in A.
Asiatic black bears and Ussuri brown bears may also fall prey to tigers, and they constitute up to 40.7% of the diet of Siberian tigers depending on local conditions and the bear populations.
Since the 17th century, tigers, being rare and ferocious, were sought after to keep at European castles as symbols of their owners' power.
Tigers generally do not prey on fully grown adult Asian elephants and Indian rhinoceros but incidents have been reported.
These solitary jackals, known as ''kol-bahl'', will attach themselves to a particular tiger, trailing it at a safe distance to feed on the big cat's kills.
The Chinese subspecies was almost completely decimated by killing for commerce due to both the parts and skin trades in the 1950s through the 1970s.
Resident adults of either sex generally confine their movements to their home ranges, within which they satisfy their needs and those of their growing cubs.
Their preferred habitat is forests in mountainous or hilly regions.
Adult tigers lead largely solitary lives.
A 2016 global census estimated the population of wild tigers at approximately 3,890 individuals.
Their reduced size is an adaptation to the thick, dense forests and smaller prey in their native habitat.
In 2005, there were thought to be about 360 animals in Russia, though these exhibited little genetic diversity.
Because of rapid habitat loss attributed to climate change, tiger attacks have increased in the Sundarbans.
'''Siberian tiger''' (''P.
Tigers grew in size, possibly in response to adaptive radiations of prey species like deer and bovids which may have occurred in Southeast Asia during the early Pleistocene.
'''Indochinese tiger''' (''P.
Another recessive gene creates the "golden" or "golden tabby" colour variation, sometimes known as "strawberry".
However, the trading of tiger parts in Asia has become a major black market industry and governmental and conservation attempts to stop it have been ineffective to date.
This, too, can require great physical strength.
Their historical range in Bangladesh, Siberia, Iran, Afghanistan, India, China, and southeast Asia, including three Indonesian islands, is severely diminished today.
In southern India the god Ayyappan was associated with a tiger.
The genes responsible for white colouration are represented by 0.001% of the population.
The oldest remains of an extinct tiger relative, called ''Panthera zdanskyi'' or the Longdan tiger, have been found in the Gansu province of northwestern China.
The northern limit of their range is close to the Amur River in southeastern Siberia.
Distinct fossils are known from the early and middle Pleistocene deposits in China and Sumatra.
Gold coins found in Kavilayadavalli in the Nellore district of Andhra Pradesh have motifs of the tiger, bow and some indistinct marks.
Males vary in total length from  and weigh between  with skull length ranging from .
As ''Panthera zdanskyi'' lived in northwestern China, that may have been where the tiger lineage originated.
This species is considered to be a sister taxon to the extant tiger and lived about 2 million years ago, at the beginning of the Pleistocene.
They are able to carry prey through or capture it in the water.
Tiger spray has been found to be just as good, or better, as a source of DNA as scat.
Although predators typically avoid one another, if a prey item is under dispute or a serious competitor is encountered, displays of aggression are common.
She was responsible for an estimated 430 human deaths, the most attacks known to be perpetrated by a single wild animal, by the time she was shot in 1907 by Jim Corbett.
Occasionally, male tigers participate in raising cubs, usually their own, but this is extremely rare and not always well understood.
There are further unconfirmed reports of a "blue" or slate-coloured variant, the Maltese tiger.
'''Caspian tiger''' (''P.
Tony the Tiger is a famous mascot for Kellogg's breakfast cereal Frosted Flakes.
The mortality rate of tiger cubs is about 50% in the first two years.
The tiger was the emblem of the Chola Dynasty and was depicted on coins, seals and banners.
*North Asia: China and Siberia; extinct in Mongolia, North Korea and South Korea
*Southeast Asia: Extinct in Indonesia
An expedition to Mount Halimun Salak National Park in 1990 did not yield any definite, direct evidence for the continued existence of tigers.
This classification is intended to facilitate tiger conservation management, both regarding breeding programmes in zoos and future translocations in the wild.
Government officials claimed it was Tara, though Singh disputed this.
Despite being considered more "primitive", the Longdan tiger was functionally and possibly ecologically similar to its modern cousin.
Even apparently healthy white tigers generally do not live as long as their orange counterparts.
