The International Boundary Wastewater Treatment Plant (IWTP) developed, as a joint project of the USA and Mexico in the mid-1980s following substantial environmental studies, treats 25&nbsp;million gallons of water per day (mgd) from the Tijuana River; directly pumped across the border from the central collection point in Mexico.
At its peak, in 2001 Tijuana had roughly 820 of these 'maquiladoras' (today the number is closer to 550).
Many shops and stalls selling Mexican crafts and souvenirs are also located within walking distance of the border.
The high poverty level in Tijuana is attributed to the city's "magnet status" for people who have come from the poorer south of the nation and citizens from other nations seeking to escape from extreme poverty.
It is at this stage the U-17 FIBA Americas Championship 2009 was held bound for Nigeria.
At present the parties with greater presence in Tijuana are the National Action Party (PAN), Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), and Ecologist Green Party of Mexico (PVEM).
At first it was called Cerro Colorado Stadium due to its location at the foot of this hill.
Baja Californians have adopted this pronunciation as ''Tiyei''.
The master plan was a binational collaborative effort by EPA and CESPT and addressed San Diego-Tijuana's needs for the next 20&nbsp;years.
The international metropolitan region was estimated to be just over five million in 2009 and approximately 5,105,769 in 2010, making it the third largest metropolitan area in the former Californias reigon, 19th largest metropolitan area in the Americas, and the largest bi-national conurbation that is shared between US and Mexico.
Famous musicians are from Tijuana including the pop-rock singer-songwriter Lynda Thomas, the world known singer Julieta Venegas, fussion rock projects like Tijuana No and international indie punk bands like Delux & Los Kung-Fu Monkeys.
Historically the PRI had been the dominant party in regional politics, until 1989 when the PAN began to dominate the city, until yet again, in 2004, PRI began regaining prominence and won the Mayor's Office.
Mexican Federal Highway 2 runs east for  near the international border, currently as far as Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua.
These boroughs offer administrative services such as urban planning, civil registry, inspection, verification, public works and community development and are served by a ''delegado''.
In 2004, the first season of "Toros", the fans had a great response, filling the stadium in most matches.
Along with settlements separated from Tijuana proper and other communities unimproved land, big business moves in providing supermarkets and retail to marginal areas, along with paved roads.
Homicides peaked in 2010, when 844 people were killed, compared to 355 in 2004 and 349 in the first eight months of 2011.
The record low temperature recorded in the city was , while the highest was .
For a prescription to be filled in Tijuana and brought legally to the United States, any drug covered by the US Controlled Substances Act would require a prescription from the United States for re-import.
This metropolitan crossing makes the San Ysidro Port of Entry the busiest land-border crossing in the world.
Overall, the city maintains 33 completed structures with other proposed and under-construction skyscrapers.
There were 492 murders in 2013, a 48% increase in the homicide rate between 2012 and 2013.
The newly rebuilt San Ysidro trolley station is located directly next to the U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility.
In August 2009, Metropolitan UABC opened in Valle de Las Palmas, in the Tijuana metropolitan area.
From the late 19th century to the first few decades of the 20th century, the city attracted large numbers of Californians coming for trade and entertainment.
However, excessive amounts of snow fall have never been recorded in the city.
The majority of the 1,000 Hispanic families living in Alta California stayed there, though some moved south to remain inside Mexico.
This plan was required as part of Public Law 106-457, put into order November 7, 2000, which was written to allow the Bajagua project to move forward.
Tijuana today is one of the fastest growing cities in Mexico with an average of 80,000 people moving to Tijuana yearly.
The beach community of Playas de Tijuana saw a burst of construction in 2004, which yielded the Plaza Coronado complex next to the existing Comercial Mexicana-anchored ''Centro Comercial Playas''.
Many foreigners travel to Tijuana to drink and dance, buy prescription drugs, purchase bootleg brand-name clothing, timepieces, and other personal accessories found globally, as well as manufactured and hand-crafted local curiosities.
Taxi lines operating in the city include Free Taxis, those that do not maintain a specific route; Economic Taxis; Diamond Taxis - black or yellow cabs; and regular taxis maintaining a set route.
Another important culture center is La Casa de la Cultura, which comprises a school, a theater, and a public library.
Although poverty is widespread throughout the city, a very affluent and prominent society has developed in Tijuana.
Legal drinking and gambling attracted U.S nationals in the 1920s during Prohibition.
A dominant manufacturing center of the North American continent, the city maintains facilities of numerous multinational conglomerate companies.
All public libraries in Tijuana have Internet access; unfortunately, many of the available computers are not in service.
As the city has become a leading center in the country, so has the surrounding metropolitan area, a major industrial and paramount metropolis in northwestern Mexico.
Urban settlement began in 1889, when descendants of Santiago Argüello and Augustín Olvera entered an agreement to begin developing the city of Tijuana.
'''Tijuana''' ( ; ) is the largest city in Baja California and on the Baja California Peninsula and center of the Tijuana metropolitan area, part of the international San Diego–Tijuana metropolitan area.
Allied with the PRI at the state and local level under the "Alliance for Better Living" are the Ecologist Green Party of Mexico (PVEM) and Baja California State Party (PEBC).
translates to ''I Tijuanate, and you?''.
Squatter areas are home to displaced and uprooted people, among them the indigenous and poverty stricken, deported from USA migrants, considerable numbers of them without Mexican citizenship (from other countries).
About 300,000 visitors cross by foot or car from the San Ysidro point of entry in the United States every day.
Companies that have set up maquiladoras in Tijuana include Lanix, Hyundai, Sony, Vortec, BMW, Vizio, Toyota, Dell, Samsung, Kodak, Matsushita/Panasonic, Bimbo, GE, Nabisco, Ford, Microsoft, Cemex, Zonda, Philips, Pioneer, Airbus, Plantronics, Siemens Mexico, Jaguar, Pall Medical, Tara, Sanyo and Volkswagen.
Fixed-route taxis are somewhat more expensive, depending on the taxi route, reaching USD $2.00.
Yet, in December 1967, snow fell in the city and in January 2007 feather light snow fell in the east of the city.
In Playas the highrises are currently focused on the coast.
Notable primary and secondary schools include Metropolitan, Instituto México, Instituto Cumbres, President Lázaro Cárdenas School, Agua Caliente School Center High, Politécnico de Baja California(CLUB DE QUÍMICA), José Fimbres Moreno School and the State High School, and Ignacio Ramírez School located in Cerro Colorado.
* '''Sanchez Taboada''' &mdash; Like the previous borough this is mostly a residential area, but within its borders are located many "maquiladoras" specially at Pacific Industrial Park.
Tijuana is also home to a large and rapidly growing population of United States citizens, mostly from Southern California, who have moved to the city to avoid the higher cost of living in the region, while still being able to work in Southern California.
The new Corredor Tijuana 2000 s and the Tijuana-Tecate free road run through it.
The Tijuana metropolitan area occupies all of borough seats.
Interestingly, some metal bands from Europe whose members cannot perform in the United States due to prior felony convictions in their own countries will play music festivals in Tijuana so as to attract fans from both Mexico and the United States.
Frost and snow are rare phenomena in the city as temperatures are usually well above freezing.
Local public transportation in Tijuana is run by semiprivate companies, and has one of the most complex, or perhaps unorganized networks.
To lessen the strain on the border crossing, the Otay Mesa Crossing has been boosted to support more traffic and 6-lane highway 905 built in 2012, as well as rapid bus transit coming in the future.
On February 14, 2008 a winter storm caused an unusual snowfall in the upper reaches of the hills of the city.
These pharmacies sell some pharmaceutical drugs without prescriptions, and at much lower costs than pharmacies in the US.
The Tijuana campus of the Autonomous University of Baja California and the Technologico are also located here as well as many maquiladoras.
This makes Tijuana a popular city for migrant workers as well as college graduates from other parts of Mexico as well as other countries to the south.
Popular cell phone carriers in the city-region include Movistar, Telcel, Iusacell, Unefon, Nextel, in conjunction with Nextel USA, provides coverage in the city and all of Baja California for American Nextel users.
It drains an arid area along the California–Baja California border, flowing through Mexico for most of its course and then crossing the border for the last  of its course where it forms an estuary that empties into the ocean.
The Tijuana International Airport (General Abelardo L. Rodríguez IA) is the city's main airport and serves eleven airlines with destinations across Mexico and a few into Asia.
Tijuana International is also one of the busiest airports in Mexico.
P''laza Mundo Divertido'' is off of Tijuana's main east-west highway with arcades and rides for the whole family.
The Tijuanan art pieces show as much prowess and skill as those made by their more renowned U.S. counterparts, although illicit graffiti are strongly discouraged by the Tijuana government, as in other major metropolitan areas.
The population discrepancies may be explained by a few factors.
There are several issues that they are facing: no infrastructure to convey the reclaimed water to customers and inadequate groundwater recharge infrastructure.
A year later, the new Agua Caliente Racetrack joined the complex.
In 1939, it was reopened as a junior high school (now, Preparatoria Lázaro Cárdenas).
* '''San Antonio de los Buenos''' &mdash; This is mostly a residential area although it also has two industrial parks.
Tijuana is home to the world's busiest border crossing with about 300,000 people crossing the border between San Diego and Tijuana every day.
In 1848, as a result of the Mexican–American War with the United States, Mexico lost all of Alta California.
Tijuana is the western-most city in Mexico, and consequently in Latin America, and the 2nd largest city of northern Mexico.
It was a significant reason for Tijuana Club was promoted to the México Primera División; FEMEXFUT requires participating teams should have a stadium with a seating capacity of over 15,000.
External view of the sunken Estadio Caliente.
The Avenida Revolución area became the city's tourist center, with casinos and the Hotel Caesar's, birthplace of the Caesar salad.
Housing development in the Tijuana Hills has led to eradication of many seasonal mountain streams.
This lack of natural drainage makes places within the city vulnerable to landslides during the rainy season.
Tijuana is the 40th largest city in the Americas and is the westernmost city in Mexico.
Likewise for anyone calling from Tijuana to the United States.
Opened in June 2008, according to the work schedule.
Summers are by far the driest time of year since influences from the California Current and the North Pacific High suppress the formation of rainfall caused by the North American Monsoon.
The area had been populated by ranchers, but Tijuana developed a new social economic structure.
Though the daytime highs are generally around , heat waves can reach up to .
* '''Cerro Colorado''' &mdash; The ''Cerro Colorado'' ("Red Hill") is located here and it is surrounded by houses.
From Tijuana to Ensenada, most travelers take Highway 1-D (scenic road), a four-lane, limited access toll road that runs by the coast starting at Playas de Tijuana.
Often known by its initials, ''T.J.
Foreign and domestic companies employ thousands of employees in these plants, usually in assembly-related labor.
The city has a strong tradition of association football, Club Tijuana began playing in the Liga MX México Primera División on the 2011/12 season, winning the 2012 Apertura title.
* '''La Mesa''' &mdash; This is where the Morelos Park, the largest public park in the city, is located, as well as the Plaza Mundo Divertido, the new Macroplaza and the CETYS University.
Public transportation service is inexpensive, with bus tickets at maximum, USD $0.75.
These were farming and livestock grazing, plus as a transit area for prospectors.
Major transit hubs include Centro (Downtown Tijuana), Otay, Soler, and the ''Cinco'' y ''Diez'' avenues.
In early historic mission documents — primarily baptism, marriage, and death records — there are mentions of the city with the names: La Tía Juana, Tiguana, Tiuana, Teguana, Tiwana, Tijuan, Ticuan, and the present day name, Tijuana.
The municipality of Tijuana is divided into eight administrative boroughs, or ''Delegaciones''.
Assisted by the "defensores de Tijuana", they routed the revolutionaries, who fled north and were promptly arrested by the United States Army.
Three of the city's most important streets, Boulevard Bellas Artes, Boulevard Industrial and Mexican Federal Highway 2, are located here.
People filling up prescriptions for drugs classified in the US as Schedule II or Schedule III have found it more difficult to locate such medications, and the purchase of pseudoephedrine also has become restricted by Tijuana pharmacies, as it is in the United States.
Since 2001, the CECUT receives about a million visitors per year, making it Baja California's most important cultural center.
These include the Autonomous University of Baja California, Tijuana (UABC), Instituto Tecnológico de Tijuana (ITT), Universidad Iberoamericana (UIA-Tijuana), CETYS Universidad, Universidad Xochicalco, and University of the Californias.
Tijuana's importance and rise to a global city has led to its recognition among countries worldwide.
Plaza Carrousel, so named because the mall contains a children's merry-go-round, is minutes from the Cinco y Diez retail hub centered around a former five and dime store.
This delegacion contains the Otay Mesa entry to the United States and the Friendship Park (Parque de la amistad).
The central part of the city lies in a valley through which flows the channeled Tijuana River.
The Tijuana Cultural Center (CECUT for CEntro CUltural de Tijuana) is located here as well as the  Plaza Río Tijuana, until recently the largest mall in the state, within the Zona Rio.
''Plaza Río'' is the largest mall and is located just a few minutes away from the U.S. border between ''Paseo de los Heroes'' and the Tijuana River.
Such jobs are not demanding but typically offer above average (although not high paying) salaries for Mexico, with most maqiladoras jobs beginning at Mex$100 per day (about $5 in US dollars, as of September 2016), significantly above the Mexican minimum wage of Mex$57.46 (about 3 US dollars, as of September 2016).
Expect street vendors during the wait.
Also a growing cultural center, Tijuana has been recognized as an important new cultural mecca.
* '''Centro''' &mdash; "Delegación Centro" includes the old downtown (Zona Centro), new business district (Zona Río), red light district (Zona Norte), and other adjacent neighborhoods ("zonas").
These schools maintain recognition for their demands and high standards.
With the return of baseball, chain supermarkets "Calimax" bought the naming rights to the stadium.
Europeans arrived in 1542, when the explorer Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo toured the coastline of the area, which was later mapped in 1602 by Sebastián Vizcaíno.
It is estimated that the two border crossing stations between the cities proper of San Diego and Tijuana account for 300,000 daily border crossings alone.
Tecate Municipality, adjacent to Tijuana Municipality, has not yet been considered by the government as part of the metropolitan area.
Parque Teniente Guerrero is a park located downtown with a public library and weekend entertainment by clowns.
It was almost immediately destroyed by the great "Hatfield rainmaker" flood of 1916.
There is a small terminal downtown which serves a few Mexican bus lines and U.S.-based Greyhound Lines and Crucero USA.
The city is also called home by many Italian, French, Spanish and Lebanese citizens.
More settlement of the area took place near the end of the mission era when José María de Echeandía, governor of the Baja California and Alta California, awarded a large land grant to Santiago Argüello in 1829.
As funding for cities is based on the populace of the city, the Council worries about receiving adequate funds to provide for the needs of the city.
Mexico's drinking age of 18 (vs. 21 in the United States) makes it a common weekend destination for many high school and college aged Southern Californians who tend to stay within the Avenida Revolución.
So to dial a phone number from San Diego to Tijuana will require the use of an international access code and Mexico's Country Code, 52, before dialing the area code and the number.
Parque Morelos has a small zoo and park space; Parque de la Amistad has a small pond, and a running and dirt-bike track.
Tijuana traces its modern history to the arrival of Spanish explorers in the 16th century who were mapping the coast of the Californias.
The boroughs are in turn divided into colonias or ejidos.
Reportedly, the wave of violence resulted from a turf war as the administration of President Felipe Calderón weakened the local Arellano Félix cartel; violence slowed when the larger Sinaloa cartel took control.
In addition to international cultural recognition, Tijuana has received political recognition and is a developing a political center currently host to eight consulates from European, Asian, and North American countries.
Gentrification is evident throughout certain districts.
The Gasmart Stadium is a baseball stadium located in the city of Tijuana.
The city maintains a variety of transportation methods to assist in dealing with its ever-increasing population.
Zona Rio, Tijuana's new Downtown, is home to some of the city's finest restaurants and bars.
A very common slang term used for a person from Tijuana is ''Tijuanero''.
To the southwest of the city is Rosarito Beach, while to the south is unincorporated territory of Tijuana Municipality.
Many of the maquiladoras are located in the Otay Mesa and Florido sections of Tijuana.
The first professional race track opened in January 1916, just south of the border gate.
Tijuana, because of the dreams of border crossers, and its relatively higher wages compared to the rest of Mexico, naturally attracts immigrants.
Agua Caliente (the extension of Avenida Revolución), contains the majority of the higher-end office space in the city.
Economic development has its central business district at Zona Río, which together, with the corridor along Blvd.
To get a library card one must have a government issued id card plus one has to provide two special size photographs.
Many Latin Americans, notable Argentines, Cubans, and Guatemalans, have made Tijuana their home, especially people from Central America and Andean nations.
Telephonic land lines in Tijuana are provided by the company Telnor; other companies include Axtel and Alestra.
Many medications still require a Mexican doctor's prescription though several accessible doctor offices are located near the border as well.
While the metropolitan area of Tijuana (1392&nbsp;km2), composed of Tijuana Municipality and Rosarito Beach Municipality, has 1,751,302 inhabitants.
In 2009 and depending on the source, Tijuana Municipality experienced either 556 or 1,118 murders, mostly as a result of the drug war.
* '''Playas de Tijuana''' &mdash; This is the westernmost borough of the city bordered by the Pacific Ocean on the west and the United States border on the north.
Internal view of the stadium.
This term comes from a new popular local verb ''Tijuanear'' meaning ''to Tijuana'', describing the cosmopolitan aspects of living in the city and frequently crossing the border.
The land where the city of Tijuana would be built was originally inhabited by the Kumeyaay, a tribe of Yuman-speaking hunter-gatherers.
Musical nightclub productions were broadcast over the radio.
The early 21st century saw Tijuana become the medical-device manufacturing capital of North America.
They  can range from free-hand writing in spray can and marker form, often carrying social or sexual commentary in English or Spanish, pictures in wheatpaste and stencils, consisting of stenciled renderings of personalities crucial to Hispanic culture from past and present eras, such as television news announcers or stars, but also extending to images of artists like Salvador Dalí.
The area surrounding "'''La Sexta'''", the intersection at Calle Sexta and Av.
The city is nestled among hills, canyons, and gullies.
As Downtown Tijuana was built at the bottom of the river valley, the district is subject to seasonal flooding created by drain-off from the Tijuana Hills.
In 1911, during the Mexican Revolution, revolutionaries claiming loyalty to Ricardo Flores Magón took over the city for shortly over a month.
In 2006, Tijuana underwent a major overhaul of its existing system of guayines, or shared fixed-route station wagons, forcing the replacement of the guayines with new models of vans, serving as fixed-route taxis.
Tijuana maintains multiple higher education institutions.
However, after clearing customs and immigration formalities, Interstate 5 is a major 8-10 lane freeway from San Ysidro to downtown San Diego, Los Angeles, and north to the Canada–US border.
In terms of area, the city grows by approximately three hectares a day, mostly east and south as the city is mostly built out to the beach already with the exception of some canyons.
From Tijuana's skyline the San Diego skyline can also be seen.
Among noted canyons in Tijuana are Canyon K and Canyon Johnson.
Tijuana also has a very active and independent artist community whose internationally recognized work has earned Tijuana the title of "one of the most important new cultural meccas", according to Newsweek., an exhibition of Tijuana's current art scene, is being curated by the Museum of Contemporary Art San Diego and is traveling across the USA in 2006 and 2007.
''Plaza Monarca'' is on a north-south artery known as "Gato Bronco" and is anchored by the movie theater ''Cinépolis'' and grocery store chain ''Soriana'' (formerly a ''Gigante Supermarket'').
The building was constructed by the architects Pedro Ramírez Vázquez and Manuel Rosen Morrison.
Tijuana experienced a building boom that was brought to a halt by the Great Recession.
The Tijuana Country Club (Club Campestre de Tijuana) has many affluent members and a famous golf course.
Multiple regional (San Diego-US/Tijuana-MX) think-tanks exist on both sides of the border that promote such regional collaboration and innovation.
January is the coolest month, during which temperatures average .
Bus, taxi and calafia lines and routes are distinguished from one another by their vehicles colors.
Dance, painting, music, plastic arts, photography and languages are taught there.
Some of the first highrise building complexes constructed in the city were the twin towers of Grand Hotel Tijuana.
Graffiti are widespread in Tijuana.
During the rainy season, November through March, storms originate from fronts entering off of the Pacific Ocean.
In 1988 they changed their actions guiding themselves towards a comprehensive national cultural policy.
Was introduced in México Primera División during the Apertura 2011 tournament of the Mexican Football Federation.
Musical clubs along the ''Avenida Revolución'' area and others often cater to a diverse range of tastes by offering nightly variations on musical fare, such as new wave music one night, and punk rock bands on the next.
The phrase ''Yo Tijuaneo, ¿y tú?''
The California land boom of the 1880s led to the first big wave of tourists, who were called "excursionists" and came looking for echoes of the famous novel "Ramona" by Helen Hunt Jackson.
From 2007 through 2010, Tijuana experienced an unusually high level of violent crime related to gang violence, in part derived from the Mexican drug war and human trafficking.
Since 1992, the CECUT has hosted the ''Orchestra of Baja California'' (OBC) and the ''Center of Scenic Arts of the Northwest'' (CAEN), it headquarters the Hispanic-American Center for Guitar (CHG).
It is the home of the Toros de Tijuana.
In English, the name is sometimes pronounced as having four syllables:  ("Tia-wana"), a pronunciation that was common amongst California English speakers in the past; more commonly, it is pronounced truer to Spanish, with three .
The city is the most visited border city in the globe; sharing an approximate  with its sister city San Diego, over fifty million people annually cross the border between these two cities.
Nevertheless, some remote areas are drug lords plantations for narcotics, and delinquency spreads to even areas that are considered safe havens, which periodically come to light in the newspapers.
This is where the beaches of Tijuana are located (hence the name) and it is also one of the two exits to the south towards Rosarito and Ensenada.
Tijuana possesses a diversity of shopping malls including ''Plaza Río'', ''Plaza Mundo Divertido'', ''Plaza Monarca'', ''Plaza Carrousel'', ''Centro Comercial Playas/Plaza Coronado'', and ''Galerias Hipodromo''.
The PAN has been the dominant party in the city for 20 years.
Tijuana saw its future in tourism from the beginning.
According to the 2010 census, the Tijuana metropolitan area was the fifth-largest in Mexico, with a population of 1,784,034, but rankings vary, the city (locality) itself was 6th largest and the municipality (administrative) 3rd largest nationally.
The commonly accepted theory held among historians is that the modern-day ''Tijuana'' is derived from a word of the Kumeyaay language - the original aboriginal inhabitants of the San Diego-Tijuana region.
During this time, east-bound portions of the Via Rapida (east-west highway) may be blocked off by the Tijuana Police due to hazardous conditions.
The total amount of water being diverted must not exceed 25 mgd, based on a monthly average decided upon by permit conditions, although the IWTP can treat sustained flows up to 45mgd daily and peaks of 70mgd for a short period.
Tijuana has a diverse cosmopolitan population which includes migrants from other parts of Mexico, as well as immigrants from all over the globe.
In 1769, Juan Crespí documented more detailed information about the area that would be called the Valley of Tijuana.
Another bus station is located near the border with frequent services to Ensenada, and other major cities including Mazatlán, Culiacán, Hermosillo, and Guadalajara.
The nickname ''Tijuas'' is increasingly popular among residents and visitors alike.
In 1935, President Cárdenas decreed an end to gambling and casinos in Baja California, and the Agua Caliente complex faltered, then closed.
