Many professional orchestras and timpanists own more than just one set of timpani, allowing them to execute music that cannot be more accurately performed using a standard set of four or five drums and music that requires more than one set of timpani.
Throughout their education, timpanists are trained as percussionists, and they learn to play all instruments of the percussion family along with timpani.
''tympana''), which is the latinisation of the Greek word τύμπανον (''tumpanon'', pl.
As rock and roll bands started seeking to diversify their sound, timpani found their way into the studio.
Timpani evolved from military drums to become a staple of the classical orchestra by the last third of the 18th century.
For example, his Violin Concerto (1806) opens with four solo timpani strokes, and the scherzo of his Ninth Symphony (1824) sets the timpani against the orchestra in a sort of call and response.
Another known grip is known as the Amsterdam Grip, made famous by the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra, which is similar to the Hinger grip, except the stick is cradled on the lower knuckle of the index finger.
The pitch of the head can also be changed by room temperature and humidity.
Originally, the head was nailed directly to the shell of the drum.
'''Timpani''' (; ), or '''kettledrums''' (also informally called '''''timps'''''), are musical instruments in the percussion family.
One of the first composers to call for a timpani glissando was Carl Nielsen, who used two sets of timpani, both playing glissandos at the same time, in his Symphony No.
Each player carried a single drum, which was tuned by a hand crank.
Until the late 19th century, timpani were hand-tuned; that is, there was a sequence of screws with ''T''-shaped handles, called ''taps'', which altered the tension in the head when turned by players.
The reference comparing the tympanum to half a pearl is borrowed from Pliny the Elder.
For example, a 23" drum may require a 25" head.
Other core materials include compressed felt, cork, and leather, and other wrap materials include chamois.
The first pedal timpani originated in Dresden in the 1870s and are called ''Dresden'' timpani for this reason.
Gauges are especially useful when performing music that involves fast tuning changes that do not allow the player to listen to the new pitch before playing it.
A variation of this is to strike the head while two fingers of one hand lightly press and release spots near the center.
Carl Orff asks for cymbals resting on the drumhead while the drum is struck in his later works.
Like most drumheads, timpani heads can be made from two materials: animal skin (typically calfskin or goatskin) and plastic (typically PET film).
This led to the use of timpani in progressive rock.
It is typical for only one timpano to be struck at a time, but occasionally composers will ask for two notes to be struck at once.
These drums can have one of two styles of pedals.
Today, timpanists must use their ear and the score of the piece to determine the actual length the note should sound.
Some drums were tightened together by horses tugging from each side of the drum by the bolts.
Until the early 19th century the dominant (the note of the large drum) was written as G and the tonic (the note of the small drum) was written as C no matter what the actual key of the work was, and whether it was major or minor, with the actual pitches indicated at the top of the score (for example, ''Timpani in D–A'' for a work in D major or D minor).
In 1964, Elvin Jones incorporated timpani into his drum kit on John Coltrane's four-part composition ''A Love Supreme''.
When the timpani are struck directly in the center of the head, the drums have a sound that is almost completely devoid of tone and resonance.
Today, even though they're written at concert pitch, timpani parts continue to be most often but not always written with no key signature, no matter what key the work is in: accidentals are written in the staff, both in the timpanist's part and the conductor's score.
In his Overture to ''Benvenuto Cellini'', for example, Hector Berlioz realizes fully voiced chords from the timpani section by requiring three timpanists and assigning one drum to each.
Edward Elgar attempts to use the timpani to imitate the engine of an ocean liner in his "Enigma" Variations by requesting the timpanist play a soft roll with snare drum sticks.
In addition to a pedal, high-end instruments have a hand-operated fine tuner, which allows the timpanist to make minute pitch adjustments.
First attested in English in the late 19th century, the Italian word ''timpani'' derives from the Latin ''tympanum'' (pl.
It is common in timpani etudes and solos for performers to play with their hands or fingers.
A standard set of timpani (sometimes called a console) consists of four drums: roughly , , , and  in diameter.
On some occasions a composer may ask for a metal object, commonly an upside-down cymbal, to be placed upon the drumhead and then struck or rolled while executing a glissando on the drum.
A timpani ''roll'' (most commonly signaled in a score by '''''tr''''') is executed by rapidly striking the drum, alternating between left and right sticks, extending the duration of the sound as required and allowing increases or decreases in volume.
Thus, they are more commonly used than natural skin heads.
Ludwig van Beethoven revolutionized timpani music in the early 19th century.
This is done so every spot on the head is tuned to exactly the same pitch.
A more staccato sound can be produced by changing the velocity of the stroke or playing closer to the center of the head.
Timpani are typically struck with a special type of drum stick fittingly called a ''timpani stick'' or ''timpani mallet''.
Timpanists tend to be reluctant to strike the bowls at loud dynamic levels or with hard sticks, since copper can be dented easily due to its soft nature.
The Moon of Pejeng, also known as the ''Pejeng Moon'', in Bali, the largest single-cast bronze kettle drum in the world,  is more than two thousand years old.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, timpani were almost always tuned with the dominant note of the piece on the low drum and the tonic on the high drum&nbsp;&ndash; a perfect fourth apart.
Igor Stravinsky specifically writes for a ''piccolo timpano'' in ''The Rite of Spring'', tuned to the B below middle C. A piccolo drum is typically  in diameter and can reach pitches up to middle C.
In Darius Milhaud's 1923 ballet score ''La création du monde'', the timpanist must play the F sharp at the bottom of the treble clef.
Its range extends down only to the F below the bass clef.
Any timpani equipped with such a system may be considered ''machine timpani'', although this term commonly refers to drums that use a single handle connected to a spider-type tuning mechanism.
The typical method of muffling is to place the pads of the fingers against the head while holding onto the timpani stick with the thumb and index finger.
The head's tension can be adjusted by loosening or tightening the rods.
Over the next two centuries, a number of technical improvements were made to timpani.
A few concertos have been written for timpani.
According to Balinese legend, the Pejeng Moon was a wheel of the chariot that pulled the real moon through the night sky.
Today, they are used in many types of musical ensembles, including concert bands, marching bands, orchestras, and even in some rock.
The drum is in the Pura Penataran Asih temple."
Timpani heads are sized based on the size of the head, not the size of the timpani bowl.
He released an album with a rather unconventional jazz band called ''Johnny H. and the Prisoners of Swing''.
Professional players may also use exceptionally large or small chain and cable drums for special low or high notes.
A type of drum, they consist of a skin called a ''head'' stretched over a large bowl traditionally made of copper.
Jonathan Haas is one of the few timpanists who markets himself as a soloist.
In the Sachs–Hornbostel classification, the timpani are thus considered membranophones.
This could be compensated for by hand-tuning, but not easily by a pedal drum.
The moon eventually cooled and has been preserved as a sacred relic by the local villagers.
The basic timpani drum consists of a drumhead stretched across the opening of a bowl typically made of copper or, in less expensive models, fiberglass and sometimes aluminum.
Timpanists are required to develop techniques to stop all vibration of the drumhead without making any sound from the contact of their fingers.
Haas also commissioned Susman's ''Floating Falling'' for timpani and cello.
* In the ''balanced action'' system, a spring or hydraulic cylinder is used to balance the tension on the timpani head so that the pedal will stay in position and the head will stay at pitch.
However, it took Béla Bartók to more fully realize the flexibility the new mechanism had to offer.
The pedal on a balanced action drum is sometimes called a ''floating pedal'' since there is no clutch holding it in place.
Alternative spellings with ''y'' in place of either or both ''i''s&mdash;''tympani'', ''tympany'', or ''timpany''&mdash;are occasionally encountered in older English texts.
Starting in the 1960s, drummers for high-profile rock acts like The Beatles, Led Zeppelin, The Beach Boys, and Queen incorporated timpani into their music.
Prior to playing the instruments, the timpanist must clear the heads by equalizing the tension at each tuning screw.
These gauges are accurate when used correctly.
In several of his works, including ''Symphonie fantastique'' (1830), and his ''Requiem'' (1837), he demanded the use of several timpanists at once.
The head will then vibrate at a harmonic, much like the similar effect on a string instrument.
Composers of that era often specified sponge-headed sticks.
The German word for timpani is ''Pauken''; the French and Spanish is ''timbales''.
Joseph Schwantner used this technique in ''From A Dark Millennium''.
Resonance is reduced by damping or muting the drums, and in some cases composers will specify that timpani be played ''con sordino'' (''with mute'') or ''coperti'' (''covered''), both of which indicate that mutes—typically small pieces of felt or leather—should be placed on the head.
In the French grip, the palm of the hand should be close to perpendicular with drum head and the thumb should be on top of the stick.
In general, timpanists do not use multiple bounce rolls like those played on the snare drum, as the soft nature of timpani sticks causes the rebound of the stick to be reduced, causing multiple bounce rolls to sound muffled.
Haas, who began his career as a solo timpanist in 1980, is notable for performing music from many genres including jazz, rock, and classical.
Often, timpanists will muffle notes so they only sound for the length indicated by the composer.
This allowed timpani to become tunable instruments of definite pitch.
This is called a ''double stop'', a term borrowed from the string instrument vocabulary.
This effect is used by composers such as Bartók, Bernstein, and Kodály.
George Gershwin uses this effect in ''An American in Paris''.
In the early 20th century, Hans Schnellar, the timpanist of the Vienna Philharmonic, developed a tuning mechanism in which the bowl is moved via a handle that connects to the base, and the head remains stationary.
Occasionally, players use the pedals to retune a drum while playing it.
Wood sticks are used as a special effect—specifically requested by composers as early as the Romantic era—and in authentic performances of Baroque music.
(the ''German'' system).
Timpani come in a variety of sizes from about  in diameter down to ''piccoli timpani'' of  or less.
Later in the Baroque era, Johann Sebastian Bach wrote a secular cantata titled "Tönet, ihr Pauken!
In 1188, Cambro-Norman chronicler Gerald of Wales wrote, "''Ireland uses and delights in two instruments only, the harp namely, and the tympanum.''"
The ''Dresden'' pedal is attached to the drum at the side nearest the player, and is operated by ankle motion.
The shaft is typically made from hardwood or bamboo but may also be made from aluminum or carbon fiber.
Amongst other techniques used primarily in solo work, such as John Beck's ''Sonata for Timpani'', is striking the copper bowls.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, marching arts-based organizations' allowance for timpani and other percussion instruments to be permanently grounded became mainstream.
This practice continues to this day in sections of the British Army, and timpani continued to be paired with trumpets when they entered the classical orchestra.
A musician who plays the timpani is a ''timpanist''.
", which translates roughly to "Sound off, ye timpani!
This is achieved by moistening the thumb and rubbing it from the edge to the center of the drumhead.
Timpanists must normally avoid this effect, called ''sympathetic resonance'', but composers have exploited it in solo pieces such as Elliott Carter's ''Eight Pieces for Four Timpani''.
However, snare drum sticks tend to produce too loud a sound, and since this work's premiere, the passage in question has been performed by striking the timpani with coins.
Changing the pitch of a timpani by turning each tension rod individually is a laborious process.
Modern timpanists execute such passages with standard felt mallets.
The American grip is a hybrid of these two grips.
Copper bowls may have a smooth, machined surface or a rough surface with many small dents hammered into it.
However, many professional players prefer skin heads because they produce a warmer quality timbre.
Resonance can cause drums not in use to vibrate, causing a more quiet sound to be produced.
Jenco, a company better known for mallet percussion, made timpani tuned in this fashion.
Also, Michael Daugherty's "Raise The Roof" calls for this technique to be used for a certain passage.
Struck close to the edge, timpani produce a very thin, hollow sound.
In the late 19th century, mechanical systems to change the tension of the entire head at once were developed.
Plastic heads are durable, weather resistant, and relatively inexpensive.
The Moon of Pejeng is "the largest known relic from Southeast Asia's Bronze Age period.
The timpanist must first disengage the clutch before using the pedal to tune the drum.
In the 15th century, heads began to be attached and tensioned by a counterhoop that was tied directly to the shell.
These drums, which were small (with a diameter of about 20&ndash;22&nbsp;cm or 8&ndash;8½&nbsp;in) and mounted to the player's belt, were used primarily for military ceremonies.
Unwrapped sticks with heads of wood, felt, flannel, and leather are also common.
Timpani are still used by the Mounted Bands of the Household Division of the British Army.
In these systems, all the tension screws can then be tightened or loosened by one handle.
Leonard Bernstein calls for maracas on timpani in both the "Jeremiah" Symphony and Symphonic Dances from ''West Side Story''.
Another factor that affects the timbre of the drum is the quality of the bowl's surface.
In the early 20th century and before, sticks were often made with whalebone shafts, wood cores, and sponge wraps.
Most school bands and orchestras below a university level use less expensive, more durable timpani with either copper, fiberglass, or aluminum bowls.
Traditionally, North American, British, and French timpanists set their drums up with the lowest drum on the left and the highest on the right (commonly called the ''American'' system), while German, Austrian, and Greek players set them up in the reverse order, as to resemble a drum set or upright bass.
The index finger is used as a guide and to help lift the stick off of the drum.
For example, by playing closer to the edge of the head, the sound becomes thinner.
However, since vellum was used for the heads of the drums, automated solutions were difficult to implement since the tension would vary unpredictably across the drum.
Anton Bruckner's 7th Symphony requires a continuous roll on a single drum for over two-and-a-half minutes.
However, when the instrument is disturbed in some fashion (transported, for example), the overall pitch of the head can change, thus the markers on the gauges may not remain reliable unless they have been adjusted immediately preceding the performance.
By 1915, Carl Nielsen was demanding glissandos on timpani in his Fourth Symphony&mdash;impossible on the old hand-tuned drums.
Jazz musicians also experimented with timpani.
(Luigi Nono's Al gran sole carico d'amore requires as many as eleven drums, with actual melodies played on them in octaves by two players.)
There have been other timpani concertos, notably, Philip Glass, considered one of the most influential composers of the late 20th century, wrote a double concerto at the behest of soloist Jonathan Haas titled ''Concerto Fantasy for Two Timpanists and Orchestra'', which features its soloists playing nine drums apiece.
The shape of the bowl contributes to the quality of the drum.
The medieval European timpani were typically put together by hand in the southern region of France.
Tuning is often tested with a light tap from a single finger, which produces a near-silent note that nonetheless matches the tune of the drum when struck with a mallet.
One night, as the chariot was passing over Pejeng, the wheel detached and fell to earth, landing in a tree, where it glowed nearly as brightly as the real moon.
Timpani sticks are used in pairs.
However, in informal English speech a single instrument is rarely called a timpano: several are more typically referred to collectively as  ''kettledrums'', ''timpani'', ''temple drums'', ''timpano'', ''timp-toms'', or simply ''timps''.
However, contemporary composers have written for extended ranges.
On ''chain timpani'', the tension rods are connected by a roller chain much like the one found on a bicycle, though some manufacturers have used other materials, including steel cable.
These drums are referred to as ''Viennese timpani'' (''Wiener Pauken'') or ''Schnellar timpani''.
Because the ratchet engages in only a fixed set of positions, the timpanist must fine tune the drum by means of a fine tuning handle.
Many professionals also use these drums for outdoor performances due to their durability and lighter weight.
A great majority of the orchestral repertoire can be played using these four drums.
Occasionally, a player is forced to place a drum behind other items so that he cannot reach it with his foot.
Philip Glass's "Concerto Fantasy" utilizes this technique during a timpani cadenza.
The head of the stick can be constructed from a number of different materials, though felt wrapped around a wood core is the most common.
Sun Ra used it occasionally in his Arkestra (played, for example, by percussionist Jim Herndon on the songs "Reflection in Blue" and "El Viktor," both recorded in 1957).
Unlike concert timpani, marching versions had fiberglass shells to make them light enough to carry.
However, early drums did not resonate nearly as long as modern timpani, so composers often wrote a note when the timpanist was to hit the drum without concern of sustain.
Modern composers will often specify the beating spot to alter the sound of the drum.
Most timpani have six to eight tension rods.
Emerson, Lake & Palmer recorded a number of rock covers of classical pieces that utilize timpani.
Additionally, Michael Daugherty, in his concerto "Raise The Roof," utilizes this technique.
In the early 16th century, the bindings were replaced by screws.
Since timpani have a long sustain, ''muffling'' or ''dampening'' is an inherent part of playing timpani.
Later, timpani were adopted into other classical music ensembles such as concert bands.
''Pedaling'' refers to changing the pitch of the drum with the pedal; it is an alternate term for ''tuning''.
Although not usually stated in the score, timpanists will change sticks—the same piece—to suit the nature of the music.
Many schools and ensembles unable to afford purchase of this equipment regularly rely on a set of two or three timpani, sometimes referred to as "the orchestral three".
The drums are set up in an arc around the performer.
This notation style however was not universal: Bach, Mozart, and Schubert (in his early works) used it, but their respective contemporaries Handel, Haydn, and Beethoven wrote for the timpani at concert pitch.
This is commonly called a ''glissando'', though this use of the term is not strictly correct.
Naturally, the timpani are placed at the forefront: the piece starts with a timpani solo and the chorus and timpani trade the melody back and forth.
Though far less common than pedal timpani, chain and cable drums still have practical uses.
* The ''friction clutch'' or ''post and clutch'' system uses a clutch that moves along a post.
This form of timpani remained in use until the 16th century.
They have two components: a shaft and a head.
Many of his timpani parts require such a range of notes that it would be unthinkable to attempt them without pedal drums.
The weight of the stick, the size and latent surface area of the head, the materials used for the shaft, core, and wrap, and the method used to wrap the head all contribute to the timbre the stick produces.
The most effective glissandos are those from low notes to high notes and those performed during rolls.
Adams Musical Instruments developed a pedal-operated version of this tuning mechanism in the early 21st century.
Robert W. Smith's ''Songs of Sailor and Sea'' calls for a "whale sound" on the timpani.
The mechanical parts of these instruments are almost completely contained within the frame and bowl of the drum.
Rough contemporaries Georg Druschetzky and Johann Melchior Molter also wrote pieces for timpani and orchestra.
In the 1970s, marching bands and drum and bugle corps, which evolved both from traditional marching bands and concert bands, began to include marching timpani.
They are also often incorrectly termed ''timpanis''.
In the German grip, the palm of the hand should be parallel to the drum head and the thumb should be on the side of the stick.
Each individual drum typically has a range of a perfect fifth.
This light disturbed a thief who, annoyed, climbed the tree and urinated on it; the thief paid for his sacrilege with his life.
Thus, most timpanists own a great number of mallets.
The pedal is on either the left or right side of the drum depending on where it is set up.
Professional level drums use either the ratchet or friction system and have copper bowls.
In 1959 Leiber and Stoller made the innovative use of timpani in their production of the Drifters' recording, "There Goes My Baby."
* The ''ratchet clutch'' system uses a ratchet and pawl to hold the pedal in place.
Arabian nakers, the direct ancestors of most timpani, were brought to 13th-century Continental Europe by Crusaders and Saracens.
Erschallet, Trompeten!
Despite these problems, composers eagerly exploited the opportunities the new mechanism had to offer.
The drumhead is affixed to a hoop (also called a ''fleshhoop''), which in turn is held onto the bowl by a ''counterhoop'', which is then held by means of a number of tuning screws called ''tension rods'' placed regularly around the circumference.
This distinction is not strict, as many North American players use the German setup and vice versa.
It is struck with a wand stick, beating time for the symphonia.''
''tumpana''), "a hand drum", which in turn derives from the verb τύπτω (''tuptō''), meaning "to strike, to hit".
The next major innovator was Hector Berlioz.
There are many more variations in technique a timpanist uses during the course of playing to produce subtle timbral differences.
