Timur's legacy is a mixed one.
Other Europeans viewed Timur as a barbaric enemy who presented a threat to both European culture and the religion of Christianity.
Thus, while Timur still retains a positive image in Muslim Central Asia, he is vilified by many in Arabia, Iraq, Persia, and India, where some of his greatest atrocities were carried out.
He took part in campaigns in Transoxiana with the Khan of the Chagatai Khanate.
In May 1393 Timur's army invaded the Anjudan, crippling the Ismaili village only a year after his assault on the Ismailis in Mazandaran.
Timur's stated motivation for attacking Bayezid and the Ottoman Empire was the restoration of Seljuq authority.
While Timur invaded Anatolia, Qara Yusuf assaulted Baghdad and captured it in 1402.
The conquests of Timur are claimed to have caused the deaths of up to 17 million people, an assertion impossible to verify.
Ahmad ibn Arabshah wrote a much less favorable history in Arabic.
However, he died en route during an uncharacteristic winter campaign.
He ordered heavy taxation of the people, which was collected by Adil Aqa, who was also given control over Soltaniyeh.
Timur was still able to continue his approach to Delhi, arriving in 1398, to fight the armies of Sultan Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq, which had already been weakened by a succession struggle within the royal family.
It was in this period that Timur reduced the Chagatai khans to the position of figureheads while he ruled in their name.
Just before his death, Timur designated his grandson Pir Muhammad ibn Jahangir as his successor.
Muhammad Iqbal, a philosopher, poet and politician in British India who is widely regarded as having inspired the Pakistan Movement, composed a notable poem entitled ''Dream of Timur'', the poem itself was inspired by a prayer of the last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah II:
Moreover, the Islamic notion that military and political success was the result of Allah's favor had long been successfully exploited by earlier rulers.
The French archives preserve:
The next year the kingdom of Sistan, under the Mihrabanid dynasty, was ravaged, and its capital at Zaranj was destroyed.
Therefore, Timur reacted to the challenge by creating a myth and image of himself as a "supernatural personal power" ordained by God.
Also during this period, Timur and his brother-in-law Husayn, who were at first fellow fugitives and wanderers in joint adventures, became rivals and antagonists.
#Toghay Turkhan Agha, concubine and mother of Shahrukh Mirza ibn Timur.
However, Timur still supported him against the Russians and in 1382 Tokhtamysh invaded the Muscovite dominion and burned Moscow.
The relationship between them began to become strained after Husayn abandoned efforts to carry out Timur's orders to finish off Ilya Khoja (former governor of Mawarannah) close to Tishnet.
Although his designated successor was his grandson Pir Muhammad b.&nbsp;Jahangir, Timur was ultimately succeeded in power by his son Shah Rukh.
Timur's Turco-Mongolian heritage provided opportunities and challenges as he sought to rule the Mongol Empire and the Muslim world.
Gerasimov reconstructed the likeness of Timur from his skull and found that Timur's facial characteristics displayed Mongoloid features with some Caucasoid admixture.
It is written in Persian.
Tughlugh then attempted to set his son Ilyas Khoja over Transoxania, but Timur repelled this invasion with a smaller force.
"Temur, a non-Chinggisid, tried to build a double legitimacy based on his role as both guardian and restorer of the Mongol Empire."
The capture of the Delhi Sultanate was one of Timur's greatest victories, arguably surpassing the likes of Alexander the Great and Genghis Khan because of the harsh conditions of the journey and the achievement of taking down one of the richest cities at the time.
He was pulled away before reaching the Oka River by Tokhtamysh's renewed campaign in the south.
Timur became a relatively popular figure in Europe for centuries after his death, mainly because of his victory over the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid.
Between 1424 and 1428, Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi wrote a second ''Zafarnama'' drawing heavily on Shami's earlier work.
Timur ordered that every soldier should return with at least two severed human heads to show him.
The village was prepared for the attack, evidenced by its fortress and system of underground tunnels.
Relations between the court of Henry III of Castile and that of Timur played an important part in medieval Castilian diplomacy.
According to Clavijo, Timur's good treatment of the Spanish delegation contrasted with the disdain shown by his host toward the envoys of the "lord of Cathay" (i.e., the Yongle Emperor), the Chinese ruler.
After Delhi fell to Timur's army, uprisings by its citizens against the Turkic-Mongols began to occur, causing a bloody massacre within the city walls.
He suffered illness while encamped on the farther side of the Syr Daria and died at Farab on February 17, 1405, before ever reaching the Chinese border.
Arabshah's history was translated by the Dutch Orientalist Jacobus Golius in 1636.
When he arrived with his army at Isfahan in 1387, the city immediately surrendered; he treated it with relative mercy as he normally did with cities that surrendered (unlike Herat).
As a result, Timur never used the title of khan because the name khan could only be used by those who come from the same lineage as Genghis Khan himself.
As Lord Kinross reported in ''The Ottoman Centuries'', the Italians preferred the enemy they could handle to the one they could not.
It is alleged that Timur's tomb was inscribed with the words, "When I rise from the dead, the world shall tremble."
Timur began to gain a following of people in Balkh, consisting of merchants, fellow tribesmen, Muslim clergy, aristocracy and agricultural workers, because of his kindness in sharing his belongings with them.
Before the end of 1399, Timur started a war with Bayezid I, sultan of the Ottoman Empire, and the Mamluk sultan of Egypt Nasir-ad-Din Faraj.
One of the most formidable of Timur's opponents was another Mongol ruler, a descendant of Genghis Khan named Tokhtamysh.
Delhi was sacked and left in ruins.
In December 1404, Timur began military campaigns against Ming China and detained a Ming envoy.
During his travel through the north of Persia, he captured the then town of Tehran, which surrendered and was thus treated mercifully.
Timur capitalized on the subsequent disruption in the forces of Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq, securing an easy victory.
Sultan Ahmad Jalayir fled to Syria, where the Mamluk Sultan Barquq protected him and killed Timur’s envoys.
This contrasted Timur's behavior with that of Husayn, who alienated these people, took many possessions from them via his heavy tax laws and selfishly spent the tax money building elaborate structures.
Timur then began a five-year campaign to the west in 1392, attacking Persian Kurdistan.
The Golden Horde no longer held power after their losses to Timur.
Timur then returned to his capital of Samarkand, where he began planning for his Georgian campaign and Golden Horde invasion.
His right thighbone had knitted together with his kneecap, and the configuration of the knee joint suggests that he had kept his leg bent at all times and therefore would have had a pronounced limp.
In the same year Timur caught Baghdad by surprise in August by marching there in only eight days from Shiraz.
After the battle Tokhtamysh and some of his army were allowed to escape.
In 1398, Timur invaded northern India, attacking the Delhi Sultanate ruled by Sultan Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq of the Tughlaq Dynasty.
The ''Malfuzat-i Timurī'' and the appended ''Tuzūk-i Tīmūrī'', supposedly Timur's own autobiography, are almost certainly 17th century fabrications.
It was then that Tokhtamysh's army was boxed in against the east bank of the Volga River in the Orenburg region and destroyed at the Battle of the Kondurcha River, in 1391.
An eye-witness counted more than 28 towers constructed of about 1,500 heads each.
In addition, during his reign, some contributions to Turkic literature were penned, with Turkic cultural influence expanding and flourishing as a result.
After the death of Abu Sa'id, ruler of the Ilkhanate, in 1335, there was a power vacuum in Persia.
In 1394 Hongwu's ambassadors eventually presented Timur with a letter addressing him as a subject.
The examinations confirmed that Timur was lame and had a withered right arm due to his injuries.
Scholars estimate that his military campaigns caused the deaths of 17 million people, amounting to about 5% of the world population.
After crossing the Indus river on 30 September 1398, he sacked Tulamba and massacred its inhabitants.
He not only consolidated his rule at home by the subjugation of his foes, but sought extension of territory by encroachments upon the lands of foreign potentates.
Tokhtamysh was unable to restore his power or prestige, and he was killed about a decade later in the area of present-day Tyumen.
Timur then headed west to capture the Zagros Mountains, passing through Mazandaran.
After his death the Ming envoys such as Fu An and the remaining entourage were released by his grandson Khalil Sultan.
His monument in Tashkent now occupies the place where Karl Marx's statue once stood.
After having been a refugee in Timur's court, Tokhtamysh became ruler both of the eastern Kipchak and the Golden Horde.
Due to the distance between Yemen and Timur's base in Transoxiana and the lack of any other evidence of the originals, most historians consider the story highly implausible and suspect Hosayni of inventing both the text and its origin story.
Timur's injuries have given him the names of Timur the Lame and Tamerlane by Europeans.
A literary form of Chagatai Turkic came into use alongside Persian as both a cultural and an official language.
Timur left the Sarbadar prince Khwaja Mas'ud to govern Baghdad, but he was driven out when Ahmad Jalayir returned.
In the meantime Tokhtamysh, now khan of the Golden Horde, turned against his patron and in 1385 invaded Azerbaijan.
Timur's army burned Ryazan and advanced on Moscow.
Born into the Barlas confederation in Transoxiana on 9 April 1336.
In 1393, Shiraz was captured after surrendering, and the Muzaffarids became vassals to Timur, though prince Shah Mansur rebelled but was defeated, and the Muzafarids were annexed.
Timur then spent some time in Ardabil, where he gave Ali Safavi, leader of the Safaviyya, a number of captives.
A group of locals in the region was dissatisfied with this and, Khwandamir writes, these locals assembled and brought up their complaint with Timur, possibly provoking his attack on the Ismailis there.
Oshanin also concluded that Timur's cranium showed predominately the characteristics of a South Siberian Mongoloid type.
At about this time his father died and Timur became chief of the Berlas as well.
Like Timur, Nader Shah conquered most of Caucasia, Persia, and Central Asia along with also sacking Delhi.
He was opposed by Ahirs and Jats but the Sultanate at Delhi did nothing to stop him.
In 1383, Timur started his lengthy military conquest of Persia, though he already ruled over much of Persian Khorasan by 1381, after Khwaja Mas'ud, of the Sarbadar dynasty surrendered.
In his childhood, Timur and a small band of followers raided travelers for goods, especially animals such as sheep, horses, and cattle.
A mass beheading was carried out in Smyrna by Timur's soldiers.
Bayezid was captured in battle and subsequently died in captivity, initiating the twelve-year Ottoman Interregnum period.
Then Timur turned his attention to Syria, sacking Aleppo and Damascus.
Timur spent the next 35 years in various wars and expeditions.
The Ming emperors' treatment of Timur as a vassal did not sit well with the conqueror.
Later, Timur sent to the court of the Kingdom of León and Castile a Chagatai ambassador named Hajji Muhammad al-Qazi with letters and gifts.
Timur sent a General to capture rebellious Kandahar.
The Persian historian Khwandamir explains that an Ismaili presence was growing more politically powerful in Persian Iraq.
From that base, he led military campaigns across Western, South and Central Asia, Caucasus and southern Russia, and emerged as the most powerful ruler in the Muslim world after defeating the Mamluks of Egypt and Syria, the emerging Ottoman Empire and the declining Delhi Sultanate.
According to the Mongol traditions, Timur could not claim the title of ''khan'' or rule the Mongol Empire because he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan.
His most illustrious descendant Babur founded the Islamic Mughal Empire and ruled over most of Afghanistan and North India.
But Timur did take the city of Smyrna, a stronghold of the Christian Knights Hospitalers, thus he referred to himself as ''ghazi'' or "Warrior of Islam".
In around 1363, it is believed that Timur tried to steal a sheep from a shepherd but was shot by two arrows, one in his right leg and another in his right hand, where he lost two fingers.
After his accession, he quarreled with Timur over the possession of Khwarizm and Azerbaijan.
Sultan Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq and the army of Mallu Iqbal had war elephants armored with chain mail and poison on their tusks.
It was determined that Timur was a tall and broad-chested man with strong cheek bones.
Since Timur had a successful career as a conqueror, it was easy to justify his rule as ordained and favored by God since no ordinary man could be a possessor of such good fortune that resistance would be seen as opposing the will of God.
The Ottoman armies were at the time invading Eastern Europe and Timur was ironically seen as an ally.
His massacres were selective and he spared the artistic and educated.
Timur is regarded as a military genius, and as a brilliant tactician with an uncanny ability to work within a highly fluid political structure to win and maintain a loyal following of nomads during his rule in Central Asia.
In the initial stage of the war Timur won a victory at the Battle of the Kondurcha River.
Allying himself both in cause and by family connection with Kurgan, the dethroner and destroyer of Volga Bulgaria, he invaded Khorasan at the head of a thousand horsemen.
File:Turk22.jpg|Mausoleum of Khoja Ahmed Yasawi, a prime example of Timurid architecture.
To reinforce his position in the Mongol Empire, Timur managed to acquire the royal title of son-in-law when he married a princess of Chinggisid descent.
"In his formal correspondence Temur continued throughout his life to portray himself as the restorer of Chinggisid rights.
He summarily had the ambassadors Fu An, Guo Ji, and Liu Wei detained, and had the 1500 guards executed.
At the age of eight or nine, Timur and his mother and brothers were carried as prisoners to Samarkand by an invading Mongol army.
When he returned he found his generals had done well in protecting the cities and lands he had conquered in Persia.
He then rode west about 1,000 miles advancing in a front more than 10 miles wide.
Following Kurgan's murder, disputes arose among the many claimants to sovereign power.
The book begins with the praise of Genghis Khan, Timur, and particularly the first Mughal emperor, Babur.
Timur invaded Baghdad in June 1401.
Neither Hongwu's next ambassador, Chen Dewen (1397), nor the delegation announcing the accession of the Yongle Emperor fared any better.
Adil was later executed because Timur suspected him of corruption.
Of Timur's four sons, two (Jahangir and Umar Shaikh) predeceased him.
Timur gained control of the western Chagatai Khanate by 1370.
At , Timur was tall for his era.
His tomb, the Gur-e Amir, still stands in Samarkand, though it has been heavily restored in recent years.
The inevitable response by Timur resulted in the Tokhtamysh–Timur war.
The earliest known history of his reign was Nizam ad-Din Shami's ''Zafarnama'', which was written during Timur's lifetime.
Of the surviving population, more than 60,000 of the local people were captured as slaves, and many districts were depopulated.
*A May 1403 letter.
In the second phase of the conflict Timur took a different route against the enemy by invading the realm of Tokhtamysh via the Caucasus region.
Likewise, Timur could not claim the supreme title of the Islamic world, caliph, because the "office was limited to the Quraysh, the tribe of the Prophet Muhammad".
A copy has been kept of the answer of Charles VI to Timur, dated 15 June 1403.
His rise to power moved many leaders, such as Henry III of Castile, to send embassies to Samarkand to scout out Timur, learn about his people, make alliances with him, and try to convince him to convert to Christianity in order to avoid war.
Timur has now been officially recognized as a national hero in Uzbekistan.
When Timur captured the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid at Ankara, he was often praised and seen as a trusted ally by European rulers such as Charles VI of France and Henry IV of England because they believed he was saving Christianity from the Turkish Empire in the Middle East.
In 1402, the time of the Battle of Ankara, two Spanish ambassadors were already with Timur: Pelayo de Sotomayor and Fernando de Palazuelos.
Timur's reasons for attacking this village are not yet well understood.
Timur had numerous  and diplomatic exchanges with various European states, especially Spain and France.
The first of the new Ming dynasty's emperors, the Hongwu Emperor, and his son, the Yongle Emperor, demanded and received homage from many Central Asian states as the political heirs to the former House of Kublai.
Despite this, Timur was noted for attacking the Shia with Sunni apologism.
When they ran out of men to kill, many warriors killed prisoners captured earlier in the campaign, and when they ran out of prisoners to kill, many resorted to beheading their own wives.
To this end Timur made an alliance with the Northern Yuan dynasty based in Mongolia and prepared all the way to Bukhara.
Timur crossed the Indus River at Attock (now Pakistan) on 24 September 1398.
In 1400 Timur invaded Christian Armenia and Georgia.
However, it has been suggested that his religious persuasions and view of himself as an executor of divine will may have contributed to his motivations.
After three days of citizens uprising within Delhi, it was said that the city reeked of the decomposing bodies of its citizens with their heads being erected like structures and the bodies left as food for the birds.
William Jones remarked that the former presented Timur as a "liberal, benevolent and illustrious prince" while the latter painted him as "deformed and impious, of a low birth and detestable principles".
As Timurid-sponsored histories, the two ''Zafarnama''s present a dramatically different picture from Arabshah's chronicle.
In the first phase of the conflict with Tokhtamysh, Timur led an army of over 100,000 men north for more than 700 miles into the steppe.
This has been described as a "systematic use of terror against towns...an integral element of Tamerlane's strategic element", which he viewed as preventing bloodshed by discouraging resistance.
Tamerlane virtually exterminated the Church of the East, which had previously been a major branch of Christianity but afterwards became largely confined to a small area now known as the Assyrian Triangle.
Therefore, Timur set up a puppet Chaghatay khan, Suyurghatmish, as the nominal ruler of Balkh as he pretended to act as a "protector of the member of a Chinggisid line, that of Genghis Khan's eldest son, Jochi".
Timur was re-buried with full Islamic ritual in November 1942 just before the Soviet victory at the Battle of Stalingrad.
In 1386 Timur passed through Mazandaran as he had when trying to capture the Zagros.
Taking advantage of his Turco-Mongolian heritage, Timur frequently used either the Islamic religion or the law and traditions of the Mongol Empire to achieve his military goals or domestic political aims.
Therefore, Timur's assertions would not have seemed unbelievable to fellow Islamic people.
On their return, Timur affirmed that he regarded the king of Castile "as his very own son".
He converted nearly all the Borjigin leaders to Islam during his lifetime.
He married Husayn's wife Saray Mulk Khanum, a descendant of Genghis Khan, allowing him to become imperial ruler of the Chaghatay tribe.
Timur was known to hold Ali and the Ahl al-Bayt in high regard and has been noted by various scholars for his "pro-Alid" stance.
Finally, Timur invaded Anatolia and defeated Bayezid in the Battle of Ankara on 20 July 1402.
Timur then loaded his camels with as much wood and hay as they could carry.
Timur cited the killing of Hasan ibn Ali by Umayyad caliph Muawiyah I and the killing of Husayn ibn Ali by Yazid I as the reason for his massacre of the inhabitants of Damascus.
In Samarkand and his many travels, Timur, under the guidance of distinguished scholars, was able to learn the Persian, Mongolian, and Turkic languages.
Then he advanced and captured Multan by October.
Before the battle for Delhi, Timur executed 100,000 captives.
The scholar Abu Taleb Hosayni presented the texts to the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan, a distant descendant of Timur, in 1637–38, supposedly after discovering the Chagatai language originals in the library of a Yemeni ruler.
He justified his Iranian, Mamluk and Ottoman campaigns as a re-imposition of legitimate Mongol control over lands taken by usurpers To legitimize his conquests, Timur relied on Islamic symbols and language, referred to himself as the "Sword of Islam" and patronized educational and religious institutions.
Timur began his Persian campaign with Herat, capital of the Kartid dynasty.
In return, Henry III of Castile sent a famous embassy to Timur's court in Samarkand in 1403–06, led by Ruy González de Clavijo, with two other ambassadors, Alfonso Paez and Gomez de Salazar.
As Timur claimed sovereignty over the Turkmen rulers, they took refuge behind him.
Timur returned to Persia from Anatolia and sent his grandson Abu Bakr ibn Miran Shah to reconquer Baghdad, which he proceeded to do.
In the end Persia was split amongst the Muzaffarids, Kartids, Eretnids, Chobanids, Injuids, Jalayirids, and Sarbadars.
However, his chief official religious counsellor and adviser was the Hanafi scholar 'Abdu 'l-Jabbar Khwarazmi.
In the introduction to a 1723 translation of Yazdi's ''Zafarnama'', the translator wrote:
He was also considered extraordinarily intelligent&nbsp;– not only intuitively but also intellectually.
Timur's armies were inclusively multi-ethnic and were feared throughout Asia, Africa, and Europe, sizable parts of which were laid waste by his campaigns.
The battle took place on 17 December 1398.
He was the grandfather of the renowned Timurid sultan, astronomer and mathematician Ulugh Beg, who ruled Central Asia from 1411 to 1449, and the great-great-great-grandfather of Babur, founder of the Mughal Empire, which ruled parts of South Asia for over three centuries, from 1526 until 1857.
However, Ibn Khaldun praises Timur for having unified much of the Muslim world when other conquerors of the time could not.
Subsequently, he marched to Khorasan and then to Samarkhand, where he spent nine months celebrating and preparing to invade Mongolia and China.
Both injuries crippled him for life.
In the meantime, years of insulting letters had passed between Timur and Bayezid.
This would later influence the next great Persian conqueror: Nader Shah.
One day Aksak Temür spoke thusly:
This was the second military expedition that he led, and its success led to further operations, among them the subjugation of Khwarezm and Urgench.
With the capture of Herat the Kartid kingdom surrendered and became vassals of Timur, but it would later be annexed in 1389 by Timur's son Miran Shah.
As his Tatar forces were afraid of the elephants, Timur ordered his men to dig a trench in front of their positions.
During this advance Timur's army got far enough north to be in a region of very long summer days causing complaints by his Muslim soldiers about keeping a long schedule of prayers.
Timur instead used the title of amir meaning general, and acting in the name of the Chagatai ruler of Transoxania.
He went near the city of Soltaniyeh, which he had previously captured but instead turned north and captured Tabriz with little resistance, along with Maragha.
Timur preferred to fight his battles in the spring.
He laid siege to Soltaniyeh in 1384.
So he proceeded to capture the rest of Persia, specifically the two major southern cities of Isfahan and Shiraz.
Timur was also praised because it was believed that he helped restore the right of passage for Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land.
However, his other descendants did not abide by this wish, and spent the next fifteen years engaged in violent infighting.
