Defecation for a tinamou is a slightly involved task as it must move aside the dense plumage that surrounds the cloaca to avoid soiling itself.
The red-winged tinamou has been bred on farms in France, Great Britain, Belgium, and Denmark.
Forest species tend to be solitary and may only approach other birds during the breeding season.
Unlike the related ratites, tinamous can fly, though poorly and reluctantly, preferring to walk or run.
They will reuse the same locations and avoid defecating nearby to avoid advertising the roost site to predators.
The word "tinamou" comes from the Galibi term for these birds, ''tinamu''.
This may result from food shortage in their ranges and the consequent ability to care for only one or two chicks.
The International Union for Conservation of Nature classifies seven tinamou species as vulnerable and seven as near threatened.
Their similarity to other ground-dwelling birds such as partridges and megapodes is a result of convergence and symplesiomorphy rather than shared evolutionary innovations.
Associated fossils indicate that the local palaeoenvironment at the beginning of this period was characterised by a humid, subtropical climate, with forest vegetation, becoming drier and more open with time.
Further examples of such diversity are found in the Andes, where a small subspecies of Darwin's nothura, ''Nothura darwinii boliviana'', occurs in grassland at about  above sea level.
Diet may also vary seasonally; red-winged tinamous eat mostly animal food in the summer and plant matter in the winter.
Soon after hatching the eggs, the male will leave the nest and call the chicks to him with a soft contact call.
The forest dwellers tend to be darker and more uniform, whereas the steppe species are paler with more barring, speckling, or streaking.
To do this, he will hop on one leg and attempt to fly, always falling down.
The plumage of the family is cryptic, as is usual with ground birds, with typical colors ranging through dark brown, rufous, buff, yellow and grey.
The coloring is white, grey or yellow, with dark spots to aid in camouflage.
The young are precocial, and can run almost as soon as they hatch.
The greatest concentration of species is in the tropics, and in particular the Amazon Basin.
The brushland tinamou will perform a sharp 90° turn immediately before touching down.
During this period the male is typically silent; if he does call, he does so away from the nest.
They walk silently, pausing frequently in mid-stride.
In the puna is another subspecies of Darwin's nothura, ''Nothura darwinii agassizii'', which prefers tussock grassland.
This posture causes them to resemble a plant; however, if it is overdone, the eggs become visible from behind.
Forest species tend to have deep, loud calls, suitable for penetrating the vegetation.
Others feed in the company of antbirds, formicariids, and ovenbirds.
However, within a few days they are chasing insects on their own and, at 1–3 weeks, they can fly to branches a metre from the ground.
The nest of the ornate tinamou is circular and made of grass on a turf surface.
Nests are always on the ground, concealed in vegetation or among rocks.
These micro-habitats are not always easy to identify, and are highly vulnerable to environmental changes.
The females lay eggs in multiple nests throughout the nesting season.
The red-winged tinamou responds with "What me, never again".
Some, in particular ''Crypturellus'' species, use regular call sites.
The steppe birds are more popular to hunt because they can be flushed into flight, rather than the forest birds that run to cover and hide.
The major threat for the forest tinamous is deforestation.
In most tinamou species, the males practice simultaneous polygyny and the females sequential polyandry.
Both steppe and forest species are territorial, though territoriality varies between species from being characteristic only during the breeding season, to being territorial throughout the year.
Tinamous form one of the most terrestrial groups of flying birds, spending virtually all of their time on the ground.
Eventually, the USA banned the importation of the birds.
Often translocated and easily bred in captivity, they have never been successfully domesticated.
They occur in a wide range of habitats.
Their small wings give them a high wing loading.
Females are usually larger than the males.
The variegated and ornate tinamous have single-female nests, and consequently only one or two eggs per nest.
Tinamous are avid bathers.
Some calls are uniform and monotone, while others have multiple phrases.
The smaller forest species, along with the steppe tinamous, will roost on the ground, sometimes in the shelter of a bush.
When a potential threat is detected, a tinamou will typically freeze in one of two positions, either crouched or with its neck extended upwards.
Tinamou predators include cats, foxes, raccoons, weasels, tayras, and opossums.
One day they got into an argument and split up.
Frank Chapman of the American Museum of Natural History helped raised awareness about the rate of exploitation and its potential impact on the populations of the species.
Tinamous have traditionally been regarded as the sister group of the flightless ratites, but recent work places them well within the ratite radiation, implying basal ratites could fly.
France, Germany, and Hungary have all, unsuccessfully, attempted to introduce them into their countryside.
Nests are vulnerable to snakes, monkeys and opossums.
The red-winged tinamou has been reintroduced to the state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, where its wild population was hunted to extermination at the turn of the 20th century.
Tinamous always nest on the ground; in open areas, near a bush; in scrub, in a dense patch of grass; in forest, at the base of a tree trunk between the buttresses.
For example, the dwarf tinamou becomes intoxicated with the smoke and vulnerable to predators.
Their habitat extends upslope through the ''Polylepis'' woodlands into puna grassland.
Some species follow army ants, eating from the disturbance created.
Females of the largest, the grey tinamou, weigh up to  with a length of up to .
They take off with rapid and noisy wing beats, until they have gained sufficient altitude, then glide while slipping sideways, with an occasional further burst of flapping.
''Tinamus'', ''Nothocercus'' and ''Crypturellus'' focus on fleshy fruit.
The back of the tarsus is covered with scales, the color of which may aid in identification.
By 20 days, the young slaty-breasted tinamou has gained adult size, though not adult weight.
They have their nostrils positioned at the base of the bills, a feature thought to be an adaptation to their digging.
Tinamous inhabit most parts of South and Central America, as well as the tropical regions of Mexico, with the exception of aquatic, snow-covered, and true desert habitats, and the southernmost tip of Patagonia.
Panama provides examples of ecological separation.
They have also been extensively hunted by humans and sometimes persecuted as agricultural pests.
In 1971, Nebraska brought 256 elegant crested tinamou, and California introduced 217 in 1969, and 1200 between 1971 and 1977.
In most species both sexes call; some have different calls for males and females.
Granivorous species will move daily into grain fields with some, such as Darwin's nothura, remaining in the fields until there is no food left.
A bird, when flushed, will utter a sharp trill.
Their feet have three forward-facing toes; a hind toe is either higher and retrogressed, or absent.
This may lead to conflict, with feet and wings being used in attack.
Major threats are habitat fragmentation and destruction.
As far as possible, they will avoid resorting to flight by stealthy walking or running away from danger as well as by concealment in dense vegetation.
Chilean tinamous have been introduced to Easter Island.
When tinamous drink, unlike most other birds, they do so by sucking and swallowing, instead of lifting their heads and letting gravity do the work.
The former prefers long grass pastures, while the latter prefers short grass.
Forest tribes of Brazil and Colombia believe the jaguar imitates the call of the great tinamou in order to track and eat it.
While incubating, he is mainly motionless and reluctant to move, even from potential danger.
The dwarf tinamou is a resident of the open plains of eastern Brazil, though there are fewer than 15,000 birds left.
In 1966 and 1971, Florida introduced 128 spotted nothura.
The highland tinamou is unique in that it sites its nest in a cavity or under an overhanging rock on a steep slope.
Some tinamous have crests.
Females will wander through several territories mating with, and laying eggs in the nests of, the resident males.
They vary in intensity and can often be heard from afar.
Darwin's nothura may carry a malarial plasmodium.
However, the main threat to their populations is from habitat destruction through land clearing and agricultural development.
However, species that live in arid or semi-arid climates rarely need any water additional to that ingested with their diet.
They feature in the mythology of the indigenous peoples of their range.
Water is required by most tinamou species, with some needing a good source within their home territory.
One male brushland tinamou called every few minutes from dawn until dusk (over 500 calls daily).
High-altitude genera living in harsh environments, such as ''Tinamotis'', will eat most of the plant, not just the succulent parts.
Consumed plant material includes fruit (either fallen or on the tree), seeds, green shoots, tender leavers, buds, flowers, tender stems, roots, and tubers.
In ''Tinamus'' species the male will lower his chest to the ground, stretch his neck forward, and fluff up his back to appear larger than normal.
Blood parasites include louse flies, leeches, nematodes, cestodes, armadillo ticks, mites, and trematodes.
It is generally believed that tinamous are not as effective at distraction displays as other birds.
Some, in particular the ornate and Andean tinamous, will dig up tubers such as potatoes, while red-winged tinamous create similar problems in peanut plantations.
He flew away from the rainbow, the ark, and the rest of the animals, heading for the darkest part of the forest, where he has remained ever since.
Each species has its own unique call or calls.
The 1885 introduction of Chilean tinamou to Easter Island was successful, though the population has not prospered since Chimango caracaras were introduced in 1928.
Steppe or grassland species tend to live in groups, though with little obvious group interaction apart from an occasional contact call.
Here also are the red-winged tinamou which prefers open ground with some scrub, and the Andean tinamou which prefers dense vegetation beside streams.
Forest species, such as the slaty-breasted tinamou, maintain large home ranges through which they move in apparently random patterns.
Tinamous have well-developed powder down feathers; these grow continuously and disintegrate at the tips into a powder that is spread through the rest of the feathers by preening.
Tinamous are exclusively neotropical and all 47 species live in South America, Mexico, and Central America.
They also hide in burrows.
Some species will flatten themselves against the ground, stretch out their necks, and raise their backs to the air.
Gregariousness also varies by season.
They are among the most characteristic bird vocalizations of South America and Central America, often resembling sounds made by a flute or a whistle.
Tinamous form the dominant group of terrestrial birds in South America, where they largely replace the Galliformes ecologically, with no other bird family there having comparable diversity, distribution, or suite of habitat adaptations.
Legend speaks of jaguars that imitate the call to trick and catch them.
In order to minimize the effort involved in ascending to their roosts, in hilly terrain they will access them from uphill and, when threatened, will fly downhill to gain more distance from the threat.
Of Gondwanan origin, tinamous are related to the ratites.
However, methodological difficulties have hampered behavioral research, especially on the forest dwelling species, because their secretive behavior and cryptic coloration make them difficult to follow for continuous observation.
When defending their territories from conspecifics, tinamous are highly vocal, creating a cacophony of sound.
Young chicks can feed themselves within the first few days, but the male will bring the food and drop it on the ground in front of them.
Research published starting in 2010 has found that tinamous are the sister group to the extinct moa of New Zealand; moa are more distantly related to emus and cassowaries than had been thought previously.
As he incubates, he will leave the nest to feed, and he may be gone from 45 minutes to five hours, covering the eggs when he leaves.
They can also be less melodic, sometimes resembling the chirps of crickets.
These findings imply that evolution of flightlessness occurred independently multiple times in ratite evolution.
Though the eggs are bright and colorful when laid, over time they fade and become duller.
The male brushland tinamou starts to scrape out a nest once copulation has occurred; several may be constructed though only one is used.
'''Tinamous''' form an order (Tinamiformes), comprising a single family (Tinamidae) with two distinct subfamilies, containing 47 species of birds found in Mexico, Central America, and South America.
Cladogram of tinamou genera based on a combination of morphological and molecular data analysed by Bertelli & Porzecanski (2004)
The solitary tinamou is listed under Appendix I of CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora).
There may be as many as 16 eggs in a clutch, a consequence of several females laying in the same nest.
They also have relatively the smallest hearts and lungs of all birds, comprising only 1.6–3.1% of their body weight, whereas the equivalent in a domestic chicken is 12%.
The practice of burning the fields is particularly detrimental to grassland tinamous.
The use of flutes to imitate the calls during the breeding season to lure the birds into the open can result in local extermination.
Pesticides are a problem throughout the grasslands and farmlands.
Once done with the brood the male, if still within the breeding season, will seek out another female and initiate the cycle again.
Seven species are listed as vulnerable and another seven as near-threatened.
There is controversy over the vegetative history with speculation that what is now high-altitude grassland in the Andes was once elfin forest.
They also sunbathe, and will do so while resting on one leg with an outstretched wing.
Colors vary with species, ranging through green, purple, violet, turquoise, steel grey, chocolate and lemon-yellow.
The highland tinamou occupies the highlands throughout the country.
Some species will land running.
Phylogenomic studies have placed it as the sister group to Australasian and Oceanian ratites (i.e.
During the 20th century there were numerous attempts to introduce or reintroduce tinamous to various parts of the world.
The tinamou family has been shown to be monophyletic.
One day, the undulated tinamou was feeling sad and lonely, went to the forest's edge and called his old friend.
They will also use the same location repeatedly; known examples are the elegant crested and ornate tinamous.
Their varied mating systems and diverse habitats have the potential, through comparative studies, to explain how ecological differences affect mating strategies.
The chicks have a high initial mortality rate.
They are found in a variety of habitats, ranging from semi-arid alpine grasslands to tropical rainforests.
They have poor circulation, evidenced by a greenish tint to the skin.
Some live as mated pairs throughout the year.
In the cloud forests of northern South America, there are fewer than 10,000 black tinamous left.
In some species, females cooperate in assembling clutches of eggs for different males.
The benefit of laying brightly colored eggs is unknown, but is not detrimental as most tinamou predators hunt at night.
Frequency can vary between species and between individuals.
There are over 240&nbsp;species of bird lice that infest tinamous, with one individual bird recorded as hosting nine species.
The two subfamilies are broadly divided by habitat, with the Nothurinae referred to as steppe or open country tinamous, and the Tinaminae known as forest tinamous.
In Brazil, illegal hunts take place at night by torchlight.
Size difference allows the red-winged tinamou and the spotted nothura to coexist, as they both occupy the same habitat of Brazil, the tropical savanna.
Bills rather than feet are used to probe leaf litter and sift through soil  deep.
Chicks eat more insects than their parents, probably for their growth needs.
Hybridization can occur.
Due to their near lack of a tail to serve as rudder or counterweight, tinamous are notoriously poor at steering.
For example, the egg of the red-winged tinamou dulls from purple to leaden.
The main foraging technique is a slow walk with head down, pecking at the ground and looking up occasionally.
Their cryptic behavior has allowed them to survive or even thrive in areas where guans have been extirpated.
Tinamous and their eggs have many natural predators, from falcons and vampire bats to jaguars.
They may then pause to observe the cause of their alarm from cover.
Other species do construct nests and are meticulous in doing so.
Chicks hatch synchronously with a dense downy coat.
They rest or feed during this period, while during the night they will cease all activity.
The eggs are fairly deeply colored, usually in a single color, and have a hard porcelain-like gloss.
Forest species are consequently forced to adapt, relocate, or die out.
The male highland tinamou can be heard several kilometres distant through dense forest.
Tinamou genera can be roughly divided into three groups based on the vegetable component of their diets.
Giant anteaters have been seen on Marajo Island breaking tinamou eggs.
Examples of captive breeding are small-billed tinamou in Minas Gerais and red-winged tinamou in Rio Grande do Sul.
The Tinamiformes are one of the least studied orders of birds despite tinamous exhibiting rare and little understood behavioral patterns.
The solitary tinamou, limited to the Atlantic forests of Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina, is threatened by habitat destruction and hunting.
The status of the family is not easy to determine as many species live in the Amazon Basin or the far reaches of the Andes and attract little attention, even from ornithologists.
Finally, the little tinamou is found in dense secondary forest on either the Pacific or Atlantic slope above .
They are active during the day, retiring to roosts at night.
Tinamous are largely sedentary birds.
Unlike other palaeognaths, tinamous do have a keeled sternum, but like the other palaeognaths they have a distinctive palate.
Eggs are relatively large and glossy, often brightly colored when laid, and are incubated by the males for a period of 2–3 weeks.
It was not until 2003 that the first scientific symposium on tinamous was organized at the VIIth Neotropical Ornithological Congress, held at Termas de Puyehue, Chile.
Between 1890 and 1899, in Buenos Aires alone, 18 million tinamou were sold in meat markets.
A Brazilian legend explains of the separation of the red-winged tinamou and the undulated tinamou.
Members of the genera ''Tinamus'', ''Nothocercus'', and ''Crypturellus'' live in dense forests, with ''Nothocercus'' preferring high altitude, and members of most other genera in grassland, puna, montane forest, and savanna.
Together they make up Palaeognathae ("old jaws"), while all other living birds are members of Neognathae ("new jaws").
Tinamous are plump, compact birds with slender necks, small heads and, usually, short, decurved bills, though a few have long bills.
Nothurine fossils referrable to ''Eudromia'' and ''Nothura'' have been found in the Late Miocene Cerro Azul Formation from the Pampean region of central-southern Argentina.
The shells are thin enough to see the embryos within.
Most, however, are surviving well enough so far to avoid being classified as threatened.
Calls are typically heard more frequently during the breeding season.
Fossils having affinities with several extant genera have been found in Pleistocene deposits.
Tinamous, depending on the species, may be solitary or social and gather in groups.
Although some grassland species have increased in both range and numbers, they remain vulnerable to hunting with the use of dogs to flush them.
As well as the forests, most types of habitat in Middle and South America, apart from the high Andes and Patagonia, are under threat.
They, along with some of the ''Crypturellus'' species, are being bred in Rio Grande do Sul to boost numbers for hunting.
Native peoples also are involved in the killing tinamou for meat, catching them in nooses or traps after imitating their calls.
Although they are hunted throughout their range, it generally has little or only localized impact on the populations of the more widespread and common species.
