All tires sold for road use in Europe after July 1997 must carry an E-mark.
Most tires sizes are given using the ISO Metric sizing system.
Poor wheel alignment can cause excessive wear of the innermost or outermost ribs.
New automotive tires frequently have ratings for traction, treadwear, and temperature resistance (collectively known as The Uniform Tire Quality Grade (UTQG) ratings).
Wear bars (or wear indicators) are raised features located at the bottom of the tread grooves that indicate the tire has reached its wear limit.
Also, tires on seldom-used trailers are at the greatest risk of age-failure, but some tires are built to withstand idleness, usually with nylon reinforcement.
Cornering force or side force is the lateral (i.e.
Grooves run circumferentially around the tire, and are needed to channel away water.
The progressive change will harden the sidewalls to produce an immediate response to steering, which results in safer driving.
This usually takes the form of v-shaped grooves that help to disperse water from the center to the edge of the tread.
However, the sidewalls of the radial tire are so flexible that there will be a delay in the lateral reaction between the tread of the tire and the rim of its wheel as the vehicle is being steered positively.
Aircraft tires are designed to withstand extremely heavy loads for short durations.
Bias OTR tires are built with a large number of reinforcing plies to withstand severe service conditions and high loads.
Aircraft tires generally operate at high pressures, up to  for airliners, and even higher for business jets.
), but stud tires for heavy vehicles are commonplace in Scandinavia.
For a table of speed ratings, see tire code.
The elastomer, which forms the tread and encases the cords to protect them from abrasion and hold them in place, is a key component of pneumatic tire design.
Because of its superiority in handling and fuel economy, use of this technology quickly spread throughout Europe and Asia.
Several innovative designs have been introduced that permit tires to run safely with no air for a limited range at a limited speed.
Dry traction is a function of the tackiness of the rubber compound.
Pneumatic Tyre would become Dunlop Rubber and Dunlop Tyres.
In general, spring rate increases with inflation pressure.
Tires are mounted on the wheel by forcing its beads into the channel formed by the wheel's inner and outer rims.
Racing tires often are engineered to minimum weight targets, so tires for a  race may run only  before a tire change.
As it rotates through the footprint it is deformed circumferentially.
The acoustic intensity produced varies considerably depending on the tire tread design and the road surface type.
Some vehicles carry a spare tire, already mounted on a wheel, to be used in the event of flat tire or blowout.
A flat tire occurs when a tire deflates.
This sidewall ply to bead tension support was a big reason for older cross-ply cord tire construction using the materials available in the early 19th century.
As the tread lug enters the road contact area, or footprint, it is compressed.
Designing an elastomer material that can achieve both high wet traction and low rolling resistance is key in achieving safety and fuel efficiency in the transportation sector.
During the deformation and recovery cycle the tire exerts variable forces into the vehicle.
The recent shortage and increasing cost of tires for heavy equipment has made TKPH an important parameter in tire selection and equipment maintenance for the mining industry.
For passenger vehicles these ratings range from .
The UTQG regulation requires labeling of tires for tread wear, traction, and temperature.
In the reactor the rubber is softened after which the rubber polymers continuously break down into smaller molecules.
During the retreading process, retread technicians must ensure the casing is in the best condition possible to minimize the possibility of a casing failure.
The bead fit is tight to ensure the tire does not shift circumferentially as the wheel rotates.
The development of this technology hinged on myriad engineering advances, including the vulcanization of natural rubber by Charles Goodyear in the United States and independently by Thomas Hancock in Britain, and patented by each separately in 1844.
This cushioning characteristic also causes the major disadvantages of a bias tire: increased rolling resistance and less control and traction at higher speeds.
They feature a softer rubber compound for improved traction, especially on high speed cornering.
copolymer is considered key in determining the glass transition temperature of the material, which is correlated to its grip and resistance properties.
Nevertheless, traditional publishers continued using ''tire''.
Tires that are fully worn can be re-manufactured to replace the worn tread.
Tires that are hollow but are not pressurized have also been designed for automotive use, such as the Tweel (a portmanteau of tire and wheel), which is an experimental tire design being developed at Michelin.
The tread is a thick rubber, or rubber/composite compound formulated to provide an appropriate level of traction that does not wear away too quickly.
The correction of this unsafe condition is to gradually reduce speed, by merely lifting off the accelerator/gas pedal.
Tire makers seek lower rolling resistance tire constructions to improve fuel economy in cars and especially trucks, where rolling resistance accounts for a high proportion of fuel consumption.
This can occur as a result of normal wear-and-tear, a leak, or more serious damage.
Today, the majority of tires are pneumatic inflatable structures, comprising a doughnut-shaped body of cords and wires encased in rubber and generally filled with compressed air to form an inflatable cushion.
Another etymology of "tire" is provided by Online Etymology Dictionary, essentially that the word is a short form of "attire", and that a wheel with a tire is a dressed wheel.
Thus, a tire manufactured in the 17th week of 1998 would have the code 178Δ.
John Boyd Dunlop and Harvey du Cros together worked through the ensuing considerable difficulties.
The cords, which form the ply and bead and provide the tensile strength necessary to contain the inflation pressure, can be composed of steel, natural fibers such as cotton or silk, or synthetic fibers such as nylon or kevlar.
Tire designers have tried to make new tires fail-safe so that the failure of the operator to maintain the tire pressure won't cause a major safety concern, but there are limitations on this.
One group did "a study to evaluate the possibility of using scrap tires as a crash cushion system.
The code has grown in complexity over the years, as is evident from the mix of metric and English units, and ad-hoc extensions to lettering and numbering schemes.
The design was introduced by Armstrong, while Goodyear made it popular with the "Polyglas" trademark tire featuring a polyester carcass with belts of fiberglass.
With China's entrance into the WTO, these two systems were unified into the CCC certification system.
Other numbers are marketing codes used at the manufacturer's discretion.
Heavy duty tires are also referred to as Truck/Bus tires.
Lastly, the technician fills holes in the tire with rubber, applies a cement gum adhesive, and places the tire on a machine that will apply a new tread.
A tire rotating at higher speeds tends to develop a larger diameter, due to centrifugal forces that force the tread rubber away from the axis of rotation.
Aircraft tires are usually inflated with nitrogen to minimize expansion and contraction from extreme changes in ambient temperature and pressure experienced during flight.
However, there is a trade-off between rolling resistance and wet traction and grip: while low rolling resistance can be achieved by reducing the viscoelastic properties of the rubber compound (low tangent (δ)), it comes at the cost of wet traction and grip, which requires hysteresis and energy dissipation (high tangent (δ)).
Slip angle or sideslip angle is the angle between a rolling wheel's actual direction of travel and the direction towards which it is pointing (i.e., the angle of the vector sum of wheel translational velocity  and sideslip velocity ).
With no force applied to the outer tread, the bead is pulled equally in all directions, thus no additional net force is applied to the tire bead and wheel rim.
Therefore, the ratio the two polymers in the styrene-butadiene
The "test tires" are all manufacturer-dependent.
Research and tests show that as tires age, they begin to dry out and become potentially dangerous, even if unused.
Pneumatic tires are manufactured in about 450 tire factories around the world.
The shoulder is that part of the tire at the edge of the tread as it makes transition to the sidewall.
Radio Frequency IDentification tags (RFID) are passive transponders affixed to the inside of the tire for purposes of automatic identification.
They have, however, become ubiquitous as original and replacement equipment on automobiles marketed in the United States, due to their convenience and their adequate performance in most situations.
During the curing period, vulcanization takes place and the raw rubber bonds to the casing, taking the tread shape of the matrix.
In the past, millions of tires have been discarded into open fields.
Minispare, or "space-saver spare" tires are smaller than normal tires to save on trunk/boot space, gas mileage, weight, and cost.
They employed inventor Charles Kingston Welch and also acquired other rights and patents which allowed them some limited protection of their  Pneumatic Tyre business's position.
The reason for this is that stud-less winter tires rely on unevenness in the ice surface for their sipes to grab, while studs cut into even the most polished ice surface (and in the process also make it uneven).
When hydroplaning occurs, the tire effectively "floats" above the road surface on a cushion of water&nbsp;– and loses traction, braking and steering, creating a very unsafe driving condition.
Most tires are stamped with a maximum pressure rating.
A (lower case) "e" indicates that the tire is certified to comply with the dimensional, performance and marking requirements of Directive 92/23/EEC.
This area transmits forces between the tire and the road via friction.
In the U.S., the outdated bias-ply tire construction persisted, with market share of 87% as late as 1967.
Pneumatic trail of a tire is the trail-like effect generated by compliant tires rolling on a hard surface and subject to side loads, as in a turn.
They are not built for high traction in most cases, because in most cases it is not vital that trailer tires have as good a traction as that of the vehicle towing the trailer.
Inner tubes are torus-shaped balloons made from an impermeable material, such as soft, elastic synthetic rubber, to prevent air leakage.
Air pressure, via the ply cords, exerts tensile force on the entire bead surrounding the wheel rim on which the tire is mounted, pulling outward in a 360 degree pattern.
Causes of bubbles include having an impact at high speed, over inflation, or poor tire construction/manufacturing.
Some directional tires are also asymmetric, in which case there will be specific left and right-handed versions.
The tread pattern is characterized by the geometrical shape of the grooves, lugs, voids and sipes.
In tropical climates, tires degrade sooner than in temperate climates, and more care should be taken in these climates to ensure that tires do not fail.
However, over the course of the 20th century, ''tyre'' became established as the standard British spelling.
Some tires, known as "run-flat tires", have either extremely stiff sidewalls or a resilient filler to allow driving a limited distance while flat, usually at reduced speed, without permanent damage or hazard.
The all-season tire is a compromise, and is neither an excellent summer tire nor an excellent winter tire.
A '''belted bias tire''' starts with two or more bias-plies to which stabilizer belts are bonded directly beneath the tread.
It was an effort to prevent the headaches of his 10-year-old son Johnnie, while riding his tricycle on rough pavements.
Street and sport street tires have good traction even when cold, but when warmed too much, can actually lose traction as their internal temperature increases.
Following the 1968 Consumer Reports announcement of the superiority of the radial design, radials began an inexorable climb in market share, reaching 100% of the North America market in the 1980s.
This restricts tire rotation.
Self-aligning torque, also known as the aligning torque, SAT or Mz, is the torque that a tire creates as it rolls along that tends to steer it, i.e.
These sound intensities increase with higher vehicle speeds.
This type of tires is used in many cases to promote tire performance, braking performance, and turning performance, since tread contact changes according to the change in alignment during travel.
Flotation tires also help traction in swampy environments and where soil compaction is a concern, featuring large footprints at low inflation pressures to spread out the area where the rubber meets the ground.
Treadwear ratings are only useful for comparing Brand A's entire lineup against itself.
Plies are layers of relatively inextensible cords embedded in the rubber to hold its shape by preventing the rubber from stretching in response to the internal pressure.
Retreading passenger tires is less economical because the cost of retreading is high compared to the price of new cheap tires, but favorable compared to high-end brands.
Some may notice that their valve stem is all metal with a nut retaining it (as opposed to the typical rubber stem with brass threads).
Dry nitrogen expands at the same rate as other dry atmospheric gases (normal air is about 80% nitrogen), but common compressed air sources may contain moisture, which increases the expansion rate with temperature.
Racing slicks are also made of a harder rubber compound and do not provide as much traction as street tires until warmed to a higher internal temperature than street tires normally operate at.
rotate it around its vertical axis.
The circle of forces, traction circle, friction circle, or friction ellipse is a useful way to think about the dynamic interaction between a vehicle's tire and the road surface.
The All Season tire classification is a compromise between one developed for use on dry and wet roads during summer and one developed for use under winter conditions.
The upper tier classes of ice racing and rallying mandates the vehicles be equipped with studded tires.
Brand A's rating of 500 is not necessarily going to offer drivers the same mileage rating as Brand B's tire of the same rating.
A three-digit code was used for tires manufactured before 2000.
Wheel alignment is the procedure for checking and correcting this condition through adjustment of camber, caster and toe angles.
The portion that is in contact with the road at a given instant in time is the contact patch.
The outer ring served to "tie" the wheel segments together for use, providing also a wear-resistant surface to the perimeter of the wheel.
Many tires in the all-terrain category are designed primarily for on-road use, particularly all-terrain tires that are originally sold with the vehicle.
Mud tires are specialty tires with large, chunky tread patterns designed to bite into muddy surfaces.
This classification includes all forms of bicycle tires, including road racing tires, mountain bike tires, snow tires, and tubular tires, used also with other human-powered vehicles (see :Category:Human-powered vehicles).
Since the manufacturing process, raw materials, and equipment vary according to the tire type, it is common for tire factories to specialize in one or more tire types.
In 1946, Michelin developed the radial tire method of construction.
The materials of modern pneumatic tires can be divided into two groups, the cords that make up the ply and the elastomer which encases them.
They are light-weight, low-cost, puncture proof, and provide cushioning.
Some tire makers invest heavily in race tire development as part of the company's marketing strategy and a means of advertising to attract customers.
It is generally recommended to replace the tire since the probability of tire failure has increased.
Lugs are that portion of the tread design that contacts the road surface.
Zinc is concentrated (up to 2% by weight) to levels high enough to be highly toxic to aquatic life and plants.
The tire pyrolysis method for recycling used tires is a technique which heats whole or shredded tires in a reactor vessel containing an oxygen-free atmosphere and a heat source.
Flotation tires are not the same as M+S tires, as they are designed for low speeds and full-time off road use rather than muddy and snow-covered roads.
A decorative hubcap and trim ring may be placed over the wheel.
Tests of airline aircraft tires have shown that they are able to sustain pressures of maximum  before bursting.
The void ratio is the void area of the tire divided by the entire tread area.
However, some pickup trucks and SUVs use the Light Truck Numeric or Light Truck High Flotation system.
This technology was a temporary, ''not invented here'' stop-gap, introduced by U.S. manufacturers to forestall the radial tire.
High performance street tires sometimes sacrifice wet weather handling by having shallower water channels to provide more actual rubber tread surface area for dry weather performance.
Under-inflation can lead to tire overheating, premature tread wear, and tread separation in severe cases.
highly porous or hydrophilic rubber that adheres to the wet film on the ice surface.
A skilled worker, known as a wheelwright, carried out this work.
Americans generate about 285 million scrap tires per year.
Valve stems usually protrude through the wheel for easy access.
The test showed an average loss of 2.2 for the nitrogen filled tires compared to 3.5 for the air filled tires.
Mud terrain tires also tend to be wider than other tires, to spread the weight of the vehicle over a greater area to prevent the vehicle from sinking too deeply into the mud.
This has led to a stronger effort to recycle old OTR tires.
Voids are spaces between lugs that allow the lugs to flex and evacuate water.
The sidewall is that part of the tire that bridges between the tread and bead.
An '''asymmetric tire''' is a kind of specific stabilization method used in cars.
Pneumatic tires are used on many types of vehicles, including cars, bicycles, motorcycles, buses, trucks, heavy equipment, and aircraft.
Motorcycle tires are often designed with reinforcements aimed at minimizing centrifugal growth.
Vertical stiffness, or spring rate, is the ratio of vertical force to vertical deflection of the tire, and it contributes to the overall suspension performance of the vehicle.
In French, blacksmithing the word for a drawn iron rod is a ''tirer'', or "pull".
These tires are not recommended for the street by manufacturers, and are known to have a shorter life on the street.
The number of tires required for aircraft increases with the weight of the plane (because the weight of the airplane has to be distributed better).
The contact patch, or footprint, of the tire, is the area of the tread that is in contact with the road surface.
Of particular interest, they published key tire dimension standards, key rim contour dimension standards, key tire valve dimension standards, and load / inflation standards.
They have more of a triangular form, which in turn gives a larger contact patch while leaned over.
In America, studs are typically never used on heavier vehicles (except for some emergency vehicles like ambulances and fire trucks.
Used tires are employed as exercise equipment for athletic programs such as American football.
Tires are specially engineered for specific race tracks according to surface conditions, cornering loads, and track temperature.
The design allows the entire tire body to flex easily, providing the main advantage of this construction, a smooth ride on rough surfaces.
Tread patterns feature non-symmetrical (or non-uniform) lug sizes circumferentially to minimize noise levels at discrete frequencies.
The design of treads and the interaction of specific tire types with the roadway surface type produces considerable effect upon sound levels or noise pollution emanating from moving vehicles.
Although the low pressure improves traction in many types of terrain, adjustments may need to be made for hard surfaces like paved and unpaved roads.
'''CCC''' (China Compulsory Certification) is a mandatory certification system concerning product safety in China that went into effect in August 2002.
Tires designed to run  or more per day carrying heavy loads require special specifications.
This machine can find the best position for the tire on a given wheel so that the over-all assembly is as round as possible.
Each type is designed with the reinforcements, material compounds, and tread patterns that best optimize the tire performance.
Worn tires can be retreaded by two methods, the mold or hot cure method and the pre-cure or cold one.
To facilitate proper balancing, most high performance tire manufacturers place red and yellow marks on the sidewalls to enable the best possible match-mounting of the tire/wheel assembly.
The tread compound is usually softer than that used in tires for summer conditions, thus providing better grip on ice and snow, but wears more quickly at higher temperatures.
A relatively new concept is the use of "Super Singles" or Wide Singles.
For this reason, manufacturers of tires for large earth-moving and mining vehicles assign TKPH ratings to their tires based on their size, construction, tread type, and rubber compound.
As the tire diameter grows, the tire width decreases.
In Dunlop's tire patent specification dated 31 October 1888, his interest is only in its use in cycles and light vehicles.
Some ratings are for long haul, and some for stop-start multi-drop type work.
The large, open design also allows mud to clear quickly from between the lugs.
The ability to provide a high level of performance on both wet and dry pavement varies widely among manufacturers, and even among tire models of the same manufacturer.
The sidewall contains air pressure and transmits the torque applied by the drive axle to the tread to create traction but supports little of the weight of the vehicle, as is clear from the total collapse of the tire when punctured.
Not all tire-to-rim seals, valve-stem-to-rim seals, and valve seals themselves are perfect.
Second, the bead transfers that net force to the rim.
As of 2008, a new OTR tire can cost up to $50,000; retread tires are sold at half the price of new tires, and last 80% as long.
Low void areas have high contact area and therefore higher traction on clean, dry pavement.
Tires are specified by the vehicle manufacturer with a recommended inflation pressure, which permits safe operation within the specified load rating and vehicle loading.
Relaxation length is the delay between when a slip angle is introduced and when the cornering force reaches its steady-state value.
Aircraft tire tread patterns are designed to facilitate stability in high crosswind conditions, to channel water away to prevent hydroplaning, and for braking effect.
This is due to manufacturer's informing the automotive industry that the state in which the sidewall is in cannot be determined due to the compacted sidewall of rubber.
Metal tires are still used on locomotives and railcars, and solid rubber (or other polymer) tires are still used in various non-automotive applications, such as some casters, carts, lawnmowers, and wheelbarrows.
The tire contact patch is readily changed by both over-and-under inflation.
The advantages of this construction include longer tread life, better steering control, fewer blowouts, improved fuel economy, and lower rolling resistance.
The speed rating denotes the maximum speed at which a tire is designed to be operated.
Minispares have a short life expectancy and a low speed rating, often below .
Some tire fires have burned for months, since water does not adequately penetrate or cool the burning tires.
There are two aspects to how pneumatic tires support the rim of the wheel on which they are mounted.
As the tire rolls, tread enters the contact area and is deformed flat to conform to the roadway.
Other winter tires rely on factors other than studding for traction on ice, e.g.
If a manufacturer assigns a treadwear rating of 200 to a new tire, they are indicating that they expect the new tire to have a useful lifespan that is 200% of the life of a Course Monitoring Tire.
In the late 1990s, Hunter Engineering introduced the GSP9700 Road Force balancer, which is equipped with a load roller similar to the force variation machine used at the factory to grade tire uniformity.
Thus the bead must have high tensile strength.
