In the Macedonian campaign of 169 BC, the army was sent 6,000 togas and 30,000 tunics.
It was colour-fast, extremely expensive and the "most talked-about colour in Greco-Roman antiquity".
''Toga candida'' is the etymological source of the  word ''candidate''.
One in a dirty or patched toga would likely be subject to ridicule; or he might, if sufficiently dogged and persistent, secure a pittance of cash, or perhaps a dinner.
No pins or brooches were employed.
Until the Marian reforms of 107 BC, the lower ranks of Rome's military forces were "farmer-soldiers", a militia of citizen smallholders conscripted for the duration of hostilities.
A freedman or foreigner might pose as a togate citizen, or a common citizen as an equestrian; such pretenders were sometimes ferreted out in the census.
*''Toga praetexta'': a white toga with a broad purple stripe on its border, worn over a tunic with two broad, vertical purple stripes.
Formal seating arrangements in public theatres and circuses reflected the dominance of Rome's togate elect.
In classical statuary, draped togas consistently show certain features and folds, identified and named in contemporary literature.
In reality, arms rarely yielded to civilian power.
Despite often extreme disparities of wealth and rank among citizens, the toga identified them as a singular and exclusive civic body.
In oratory, the toga came into its own.
It was worn mainly by mourners, but could also be worn in times of private danger or public anxiety.
By Pliny's day (circa 70 AD) this was probably standard among the elite.
In Rome, the so-called ''ritus graecus'' (Greek rite) was used for deities believed Greek in origin or character; the officiant, even if citizen, wore Greek-style robes with wreathed or bare head, not the toga.
Towards the end of the Republic, the arch-conservative Cato the Younger favoured the shorter, ancient Republican type of toga; it was dark and "scanty" (a ''toga exigua''), and Cato wore it without tunic or shoes; all this would have been recognised as an expression of his moral probity.
Rome's abundant public and private statuary reinforced the notion that all Rome's great men wore togas, and must always have done so.
The Augustan Principate brought peace, and declared its intent as the restoration of true Republican order, morality and tradition.
Effective pleading was a calculated artistic performance, but must seem utterly natural.
This use of the toga appears unique; all others categorised as "infamous and disreputable" were explicitly forbidden to wear it.
An officiant ''capite velato'' who needed free use of both hands to perform ritual could employ a method of belting, known as the "Gabinian cincture" (''cinctus Gabinus''), which tied the toga back.
The unmarried daughters of respectable, reasonably well-off citizens sometimes wore the ''toga praetexta'' until puberty or marriage, when they adopted the ''stola'', which they wore over a full-length, usually long-sleeved tunic.
A soldier who showed the requisite "disciplined ferocity" in battle and was held in esteem by his peers and superiors could be promoted to higher rank: a plebeian could rise to equestrian status.
In the long term, the toga saw both a gradual transformation and decline, punctuated by attempts to retain it as an essential feature of true ''Romanitas''.
Its added weight and friction would have helped (though not very effectively) secure toga's fabric onto the left shoulder.
*''Toga pulla'': "Dark toga".
For a client whose patron was another's client, the potential for shame was still worse.
Higher-class female prostitutes (''meretrices'') and women divorced for adultery were denied the ''stola''.
Infuriated by the sight of a darkly clad throng of men at a public meeting, he sarcastically quoted Virgil at them, "''Romanos, rerum dominos, gentemque togatam'' " ("Romans, lords of the world and the toga-wearing people"), then ordered that in future, the aediles ban anyone not wearing the toga from the Forum and its environs - Rome's "civic heart".
Quintillian gives precise instructions on the correct use of the toga - its cut, style, and the arrangements of its folds.
Edwards (1996) describes her as "antithetical to the Roman male citizen".
it hung to the mid-calf, was heavily embroidered, and was worn over two ''pallium''-style undergarments, one of which had full length sleeves.
He employs the phrase ''cedant arma togae'' ("let arms yield to the toga"), meaning "may peace replace war", or "may military power yield to civilian power", in the context of his own uneasy alliance with Pompey.
Byzantine art and portraiture show the highest functionaries of court, church and state in magnificently wrought, extravagantly exclusive court dress and priestly robes; the underlying construction of these pictured garments is difficult to fathom, but some at least are thought to be much-mutated versions of the Imperial toga.
In Roman historical tradition, it is said to have been the favoured dress of Romulus, Rome's founder; it was also thought to have been worn by both sexes.
Landowning patrician aristocrats occupied most seats in the senate and held the most senior magistracies.
The toga was draped, rather than fastened over the body, and was held in position by the weight and friction of its fabric.
Etruscan priests also employed the Gabine cinch.
It may have been a shorter form of toga, or a cloak, wrap or sash worn over a toga.
It was considered formal wear, and was generally reserved for citizens.
Wilson (1924) achieved similar effects using a slightly irregular polygon with six softly curved sides, folded lengthwise into a double layer of 4 to 5 feet in width.
Citizens of higher status were expected to serve in more senior positions as a foundation for their progress to high civil office (see ''cursus honorum'').
As part of a peace settlement of 205 BC, two formerly rebellious Spanish tribes provided Roman troops with togas and heavy cloaks;  in 206 BC, Scipio Africanus was sent 1,200 togas and 12,000 tunics for his operations in North Africa.
Though probably appropriate for a "summer toga", it was criticised for its improper luxuriance.
Only a higher-caste Roman, a magistrate, would have had lictors to clear his way, and even then, wearing a toga was hard work.
The '''toga''', a distinctive garment of Ancient Rome, was a roughly semicircular cloth, between 12 and 20 feet in length, draped over the shoulders and around the body.
Various laws and customs restricted its use to citizens, who were required to wear it for public festivals and civic duties.
Ross (1911) employed a cloth of roughly semicircular shape with a rectangular extension to simulate the longer, more complex togas of the later  Imperial era.
Women engaged in prostitution provide the main exception to this rule.
It was sometimes used as a protest of sorts—when Cicero was exiled, the Senate resolved to wear ''togae pullae'' as a demonstration against the decision.
Hadrian's edict compelling its use in public had been aimed not at commoners, but at ''equites'' and senators, whose numbers had also soared.
It represented adult male citizenship and its attendant rights, freedoms and responsibilities.
His wife fetches it and he puts it on.
It functioned as a pouch or pocket.
To minimise waste, the smaller, old-style forms of toga may have been woven as a single, seamless, selvedged piece; the later, larger versions may have been made from several pieces sewn together; size seems to have counted for a lot.
Its end was loosely tucked into the ''balneus'', approximately halfway across the chest.
The highest status toga, the solidly purple, gold-embroidered ''toga picta'' could be worn only at particular ceremonies by the highest ranking magistrates.
Tyrian purple  was supposedly reserved for the ''toga picta'', the border of the ''toga praetexta'', and elements of the priestly dress worn by the inviolate Vestal Virgins.
The purple-red border of the ''toga praetexta'' was woven onto the toga using a process known as "tablet weaving"; such applied borders are a feature of Etruscan dress.
The traditional toga was made of wool, which was thought to possess powers to avert misfortune and the evil eye; the ''toga praetexta'' (used by magistrates, priests and freeborn youths) was always woolen.
Family, friendships and alliances, and the gainful pursuit of wealth through business and trade would have been their major preoccupations.
The orator's movements should be dignified, and to the point; he should move only as he must, to address a particular person, a particular section of the audience.
He should be well groomed - but not too well; no primping of the hair, jewellery or any other "feminine" perversions of a Roman man's proper appearance.
High status  (consular or senatorial) images from the late 4th century show a further ornate variation, known as the "Broad Eastern Toga";.
The left arm should only be raised so far as to form a right angle at the elbow, while the edge of the toga should fall in equal lengths on either side"... if, on the other hand, the "toga falls down at the beginning of our speech, or when we have only proceeded but a little way, the failure to replace it is a sign of indifference, or sloth, or sheer ignorance of the way in which clothes should be worn".
Meanwhile, the office-holding aristocracy adopted ever more elaborate, complex, costly and impractical forms of toga.
The ''sinus'' (literally, a bay or inlet) appears in the Imperial era as a loose over-fold, slung from beneath the left arm, downwards across the chest, then upwards to the right shoulder.
Modern sources broadly agree that if made from a single piece of fabric, the toga of a high status Roman in the late Republic would have required a piece approximately 12&nbsp;ft in length; in the Imperial era, around 18&nbsp;ft, a third more than its predecessor, and in the late Imperial era around 8 feet wide and up to 18 or 20 feet in length for the most complex, pleated forms.
More cloth signified greater wealth and usually, though not invariably, higher rank.
The ''umbo'' (literally "knob"), was a decorative-cum-practical pouching of the toga's fabric, draped over the left shoulder and rightwards, just above the ''sinus''.
A good client canvassed political support for his patron, or his patron's nominee; he advanced his patron's interests using his own business, family and personal connections.
Some later Roman and post-Roman sources describe it as solid purple or red, either identifying or confusing it with the dress worn by the ancient Roman kings (also used to clothe images of the gods) or reflecting changes in the ''trabea'' itself.
In the public gaze, she was aligned with the ''meretrix''.
Martial and his friend Juvenal suffered the system as clients for years, and found the whole business demeaning.
Early examples are slender, rather like the slim, tighter crosswise fold known as the ''balneus'' (sword belt) from which the ''sinus'' probably derives.
He reserved the most honourable seats, front of house, for senators and ''equites''; this was how it had always been, before the chaos of the civil wars; or rather, how it was supposed to have been.
First impressions counted; the lawyer must present himself as a Roman should: "virile and splendid" in his toga, with statuesque posture and "natural good looks".
Patrons were few, and most had to compete with their peers to attract the best, most useful clients.
Colonies of retired veterans were scattered throughout the Empire.
Roman moralists "placed an ideological premium on the simple and the frugal".
The extension of citizenship, from around 6 million citizens under Augustus to between 40 and 60 million under the "universal citizenship" of Caracalla's Constitutio Antoniniana (212 AD), probably further reduced the toga's distinctive value for citizen-commoners, and accelerated its abandonment among their class.
A ''praetexta'' was thought effective against malignant magic, as were a boy's bulla, and a girl's lunula.
Appian's history of Rome finds its strife-torn Late Republic tottering at the edge of chaos; most seem to dress as they like, not as they ought: "For now the Roman people are much mixed with foreigners, there is equal citizenship for freedmen, and slaves dress like their masters.
Then he is told that he has been appointed dictator.
A dishonourable discharge meant  ''infamia''.
Citizen-clients were expected to wear the toga appropriate to their status, and to wear it correctly and smartly or risk affront to their host.
Magistrates were elected by their peers and "the people"; in Roman constitutional theory, they ruled by consent.
Dressing in a ''toga contabulata'' would have taken some time, and specialist assistance.
Later form of sinus are much fuller; the loop hangs at knee-length, suspended there by draping over the crook of the right arm.
When worn by a woman in this later era, the toga becomes a "blatant display" of her "exclusion from the respectable Roman hierarchy".
Augustus was particularly proud that his wife and daughter had set the best possible example to other Roman women by spinning and weaving his clothing.
A traditional, high-status mater familias demonstrated her industry and frugality by placing wool-baskets, spindles and looms in the household's semi-public reception area, the ''atrium''.
He ordered that any theatre-goer in dark (or coloured or dirty) clothing be sent to the back seats, traditionally reserved for who those had no toga; ordinary or common women, freedmen, low-class foreigners and slaves.
As Roman women gradually adopted the stola, the toga was recognised as formal wear for Roman men, and marked their status as male citizens.
*''Toga picta'' ("Painted toga"): Dyed solid purple, embroidered with gold, and worn over a similarly decorated ''tunica palmata''; used by generals in their triumphs.
::*Freeborn boys, and some freeborn girls, before they came of age.
Its ''sinus'' was draped over the left arm.
In Rome, it was one of the elements in making a declaration of war.
More certainly, ''equites'' wore an angusticlavia, a tunic with narrow, vertical purple stripes, at least one of which would have been visible when worn with a toga or ''trabeia'', whatever its form.
Its fabric can be old-style rough wool, or new and smoother if preferred - but definitely not silk.
In life, most citizens would have cherished their toga as a material object, and worn it when they must, but not when in their own surroundings and among their peers.
He should employ to good effect that subtle "language of the hands" for which Roman oratory was famed; no extravagant gestures, no wiggling of the shoulders, no moving "like a dancer".
Donning the toga transforms Cincinnatus from rustic, sweaty ploughman - though a gentleman nevertheless, of impeccable stock and reputation - into Rome's leading politician, eager to serve his country; a top-quality Roman.
The most complex togas appear on high quality portrait busts and imperial reliefs of the mid-to-late Empire, probably reserved to emperors and the highest civil officials.
In literary stereotype, civilians are routinely bullied by burly soldiers, inclined to throw their weight around.
Such inconvenient features of the later toga are confirmed by Tertullian, who preferred the ''pallium''.
*''Toga candida'': "Bright toga"; a toga rubbed with chalk to a dazzling white, worn by candidates (from Latin ''candida'', "pure white") for public office.
One rises from low between the legs, and is laid over the left shoulder; another more or less follows the upper edge of the ''sinus''; yet another follows the lower edge of a more-or-less vestigial ''balteus'' then descends to the upper shin.
In Constantinople, it had already fallen out of use; in 382 the Theodosian ''Lex Vestiaria'' had officially replaced it with the more comfortable ''pallium'' and for senators, prescribed the ''paenula''.
Augustus was determined to bring back "the style of yesteryear" (the toga).
She is predatory, seductive and voluptuary; an unhealthy and degraded object of fascination, simultaneously desired and despised.
They were expected to provide their own arms and armour.
Mourners with a ''toga praetexta'' could turn it inside out, to conceal the stripe, or wear a ''toga pura''.
Vout (1966) suggests that the toga's most challenging qualities as garment fitted the Romans' view of themselves and their civilization.
*''Toga virilis'' ("toga of manhood") also known as ''toga alba'' or ''toga pura'': A plain white toga, worn on formal occasions by adult male commoners, and by Senators not having a curule magistracy.
Handwoven cloth was slow and costly to produce; and compared to simpler forms of clothing, the toga used an extravagant amount of it.
Quintilian's ''Institutio Oratoria'' (circa 95 AD) offers advice on how best to plead cases at Rome's law-courts, before the watching multitude's informed and critical eye.
Though soldiers were citizens, Cicero typifies the former as "''sagum'' wearing" and the latter as "''togati''".
*''?Laena'', a long, heavy cloak worn by Flamen priesthoods, fastened at the shoulder with a brooch.
In this respect, Wilson (1924), after experiment with various fabrics, found the rough texture of the woolen toga a practical necessity; smoother fabrics refused to stay in their proper place.
Augustus' reign saw the introduction of the ''toga rasa'', an ordinary toga whose rough fibres were teased from the woven nap, then shaved back to a smoother, more comfortable finish.
Citizenship carried specific privileges, rights and responsibilities.
The archetypical ''meretrix'' of Roman literature dresses gaudily and provocatively.
Once a boy came of age (usually at puberty) he adopted the plain white ''toga virilis''; this meant that he was free to set up his own household, marry, and vote.
It was thought to derive from the priestly practice of ancient, warlike Gabii.
The toga was an approximately semi-circular woolen cloth, usually white, worn draped over the shoulders and around the body: the word "toga" probably derives from ''tegere'', to cover.
Wool-working was thought a highly  respectable occupation for Roman women.
Late republican practice and legal reform allowed the creation of standing armies, and opened a military career to any Roman citizen or freedman of good reputation.
This was believed a distinctively Roman form, in contrast to Etruscan, Greek and other foreign practices.
Conversely, and just as usefully, it underlined their differences.
Clients seeking patronage had to attend the patron's early-morning formal ''salutatio'' ("greeting session"), held in the semi-public, grand reception room (''atrium'') of his family house (''domus'').
Rank, reputation and ''Romanitas'' were paramount, even in death, so almost invariably, a male citizen's memorial image showed him clad in his toga.
Like the ''sinus'', the ''umbo'' could be used for storage.
The Equites (sometimes loosely translated as "knights") occupied a broadly mobile, mid-position between the lower senatorial and upper commoner class.
In practise, they were a mutually competitive patriarchy, reserving the greatest power, wealth and prestige to their class.
In one, the patrician hero Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, retired from public life and clad (presumably) in tunic or loincloth, is ploughing his field when emissaries of the Senate arrive, and ask him to put on his toga.
As in other forms, the sinus itself is hung over the crook of the right arm.
Citizens attending Rome's frequent religious festivals and associated games were expected to wear the toga.
::*Some priesthoods, including the Pontifices, Tresviri Epulones, the augurs, and the Arval brothers.
The manly toga itself could signify corruption, if worn too loosely, or worn over a long-sleeved, "effeminate" tunic, or woven too fine and thin, near transparent.
Every male Roman citizen was entitled to wear some kind of toga - Martial refers to a lesser citizen's "small toga" and a poor man's "little toga" (both ''togatulus'') - but the poorest probably had to make do with a shameful, patched-up hand-me-down, if he bothered at all.
As the toga developed, the ''umbo'' grew in size.
It was white, with a red or purple stripe.
A lost work by Suetonius describes it as a toga made "duplex" (doubled by folding over upon on itself).
It was formal costume for:
The emperor Marcus Aurelius, rather than wear the "dress to which his rank entitled him" at his own ''salutationes'', chose to wear a plain white citizen's toga instead; an act of modesty for any patron, unlike Caligula, who wore a triumphal ''toga picta'' or any other garment he chose, according to whim; or Nero, who caused considerable offence when he received visiting senators while dressed in a tunic embroidered with flowers, topped off with a muslin neckerchief.
Its apparent natural simplicity and "elegant, flowing lines" were the result of diligent practice and cultivation; its wearer must walk with measured, stately gait, or risk an embarrassing disarrangement.
Aulus Gellius claimed that the earliest Romans, famously tough, virile and dignified, had worn togas with no undergarment; not even a skimpy tunic.
By the time he has presented his case, the orator is likely to be hot and sweaty; but even this can be employed to good effect.
Togas were relatively uniform in pattern and style but varied significantly in the quality and quantity of their fabric, and the marks of higher rank or office.
When not in use, it required careful storage in some form of press or hanger to keep it in shape.
Women's adoption of the Greek-style ''stola'' may have paralleled the increasing identification of the toga with citizen men, but this seems to have been a far from straightforward process.
Patronage was a cornerstone of Roman politics, business and social relationships.
Roman society was strongly hierarchic, stratified and competitive.
Pliny also describes a glossy smooth, lightweight but dense fabric woven from poppy-stem fibres and flax, in use from at least the time of the Punic Wars.
It was usually woven from white wool, and was worn over a tunic.
During the Empire, it was worn by consuls and emperors.
Martial has one patron hire a herd (''grex'') of fake clients in togas, then pawn his ring to pay for his evening meal.
In 397, the Western emperor Honorius tried, like emperors before him, to revive Rome's ancient dress codes by banning "foreign" trousers in Rome and imposing the toga.
By the later 1st century AD, Tacitus could disparage the urban plebs as a ''vulgus tunicatus'' ("tunic crowd")
It has been argued that the Roman expression of piety ''capite velato'' influenced Paul's prohibition against Christians praying with covered heads: "Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head."
Non-citizens and foreign-born auxiliaries given honourable discharge were usually granted citizenship, land or stipend, the right to wear the toga, and an obligation to the patron who had granted these honours; usually their senior officer.
An adulterous matron betrayed her family and reputation; and if found guilty, and divorced, the law forbade her remarriage to a Roman citizen.
Senatorial versions were expensively laundered to an exceptional, snowy white; those of lower ranking citizens were a duller shade, more cheaply laundered.
It was and is still considered Ancient Rome's "national costume", but it was hard to put on, uncomfortable and challenging to wear correctly, and never truly popular.
Various anecdotes in Livy's history of Rome reflect the toga's symbolic value.
Eventually, it was worn only by the highest classes for ceremonial occasions, and by the 5th century AD, it had been replaced as official costume by the more practical pallium.
Roman historians believed that Rome's legendary founder and first king, the erstwhile shepherd Romulus, had worn a toga as his clothing of choice; the purple-bordered ''toga praetexta'' was supposedly used by Etruscan magistrates, and introduced to Rome by her third king, Tullus Hostilius.
An equestrian statue, described by Pliny the Elder as "ancient",  showed the early Republican heroine Cloelia on horseback, wearing a toga.
The commoners who made up the vast majority of the Roman electorate had limited influence on politics, unless barraking or voting ''en masse'', or through representation by their tribunes.
When the patron left his house to conduct his business of the day at the law courts, forum or wherever else, escorted (if a magistrate) by his togate lictors, his clients must form his retinue.
From its probable beginnings as a simple, practical work-garment, the toga became more voluminous, complex and costly, increasingly unsuited to anything but formal and ceremonial use.
Some Romans believed that in earlier times, both genders and all classes had worn the toga.
At most times, Rome's thoroughfares would have been with crowded with citizens and non-citizens jostling about their business, in a great variety of colourful garments, with few togas in evidence.
It was best suited to stately processions, public debate and oratory, sitting in the theatre or circus, and displaying oneself before one's peers and inferiors while "ostentatiously doing nothing".
In the later Imperial era, ''trabea'' refers to elaborate forms of consular dress.
To a great extent, the toga itself determined the orator's style of delivery; "we should not cover the shoulder and the whole of the throat, otherwise our dress will be unduly narrowed and will lose the impressive effect produced by breadth at the chest.
Die-hard Roman traditionalists deplored an ever-increasing Roman appetite for ostentation, "un-Roman" comfort and luxuries, and sartorial offences such as Celtic trousers, brightly coloured Syrian robes and cloaks.
::*Curule magistrates in their official functions, and traditionally, the Kings of Rome.
Thus Persius speaks of a ''cretata ambitio'', "chalked ambition".
Even as a satirical analogy, the equation of togate client and slave would have shocked those who cherished the toga as a symbol of personal dignity and ''auctoritas'' - a meaning underlined during the Saturnalia festival, when the toga was "very consciously put aside", in a ritualised, strictly limited inversion of the master-slave relationship.
With the exception of the Senators, free citizens and slaves wear the same costume."
Senators sat at the very front, ''equites'' behind them, common citizens behind ''equites''; and so on, through the non-togate mass of freedmen, foreigners, and slaves.
The toga, being impractical in battle, seems to have been reserved for formal leisure and religious festivals; the tunic and sagum (heavy cloak) were used or preferred for active duty.
Women could also be citizens but by the mid-to-late Republican era, respectable women were ''stolata'' (stola-wearing), expected to embody and display an appropriate set of female virtues: Vout cites ''pudicitia'' and ''fides'' as examples.
If its full-length representations are accurate, it would have severely constrained its wearer's movements.
A client must be at his patron's beck and call, and even address him as "''domine''" (lord, or master); a citizen-client of the equestrian class, superior to all lesser mortals by virtue of rank and costume, might thus approach the shameful condition of dependent servitude.
It marked their protection by law from sexual predation and immoral or immodest influence.
He wore it at at his funeral, and it probably served as his shroud.
When circumstances allowed, those otherwise entitled or obliged to wear it opted for more comfortable, casual garments.
The toga was heavy, "unwieldy, excessively hot, easily stained, and hard to launder"; In the early second century AD, the satirist Juvenal claimed that "in a great part of Italy, no-one wears the toga, except in death"; in Martial's rural idyll there is "never a lawsuit, the toga is scarce, the mind at ease".
The so-called "banded" or "stacked" toga" (Latinised as ''toga contabulata'') is distinguished by its broad, smooth, slab-like panels of pleated material, more or less correspondent with ''umbo'', ''sinus'' and ''balteus'', or applied over the same.
Traditionalists idealised Rome's urban and rustic citizenry as descendants of a hardy, virtuous, toga-clad peasantry, but the toga's bulk and complex drapery made it entirely impractical for manual work or physically active leisure.
He intended it as metonym, linking his own "power to command" as consul (''imperator togatus'') with Pompey's as general (''imperator armatus''); but it was interpreted as a request to step down.
Romans categorised it as a blood-red hue, which sanctified its wearer.
In this context, modern sources understand the toga as an instrument of inversion and realignment; a respectable (thus ''stola''-clad) woman should be demure, sexually passive, modest and obedient, morally impeccable.
A good patron offered advancement, security, honour, wealth, government contracts and other business opportunities to his client, who might be further down in the social or economic scale, or more rarely, his equal or superior.
When offering sacrifice, libation and prayer, and when performing augury, the officiant priest covered his head with a fold of his toga, drawn up from the back: the ritual was thus performed ''capite velato'' (with covered head).
Imposters were sometimes detected and evicted from the equestrian seats.
