The most prominent is the Odaiba area, now a major shopping and entertainment center.
The record low temperature is , and the record high is , though there was once an unofficial reading of  at the Primary School Station.
Harajuku, a neighbourhood in Shibuya, is known internationally for its youth style, fashion and cosplay.
Tokyo was hit by powerful earthquakes in 1703, 1782, 1812, 1855, 1923, and 2011.
The wards differ from other cities in having a unique administrative relationship with the prefectural government.
Tokyo, with a diverse array of sports, is home to two professional baseball clubs, the Yomiuri Giants who play at the Tokyo Dome and Tokyo Yakult Swallows at Meiji-Jingu Stadium.
Tokyo went on to suffer two major catastrophes in the 20th century: the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake, which left 140,000 dead or missing; and World War II.
Ueno Park is well known for its museums: Tokyo National Museum, National Museum of Nature and Science, Shitamachi Museum and National Museum for Western Art, among others.
Cuisine in Tokyo is internationally acclaimed.
In 2015, Tokyo was ranked as the 11th most expensive city for expatriates, according to the Mercer consulting firm, and also the world's 11th most expensive city, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit's cost-of-living survey.
Tokyo and Tokyo Verdy 1969, both of which play at Ajinomoto Stadium in Chōfu.
Tokyo was rated by the Economist Intelligence Unit as the most expensive (highest cost-of-living) city in the world for 14 years in a row ending in 2006.
Retailers, whole-sellers, auctioneers, and public citizens alike frequent the market, creating a unique microcosm of organized chaos that still continues to fuel the city and its food supply after over four centuries.
Tokyo is in the Kantō region on the southeastern side of the main island Honshu and includes the Izu Islands and Ogasawara Islands.
* Tokyo University of the Arts
Tokyo also often sees typhoons every year, though few are strong.
The Greater Tokyo Area is the most populous metropolitan area in the world.
The city hosts 51 of the Fortune Global 500 companies, the highest number of any city in the world.
In 2015, Tokyo was named the Most Liveable City in the world by the magazine ''Monocle''.
This trend has begun to slow due to ongoing population growth in Tokyo and the high cost of living there.
Japan's flag carrier Japan Airlines, as well as All Nippon Airways, Delta Air Lines, and United Airlines all have a hub at this airport.
When he became shogun in 1603, the town became the center of his nationwide military government.
Tokyo had 8,460&nbsp;ha (20,900&nbsp;acres) of agricultural land as of 2003, according to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, placing it last among the nation's prefectures.
Football clubs in Tokyo include F.C.
However, due to Tokyo's earthquake-resistant infrastructure, damage in Tokyo was very minor compared to areas directly hit by the tsunami, although activity in the city was largely halted.
Tokyo Metropolis was formed in 1943 from the merger of the former  and the .
Tokyo also hosts modern Japanese and international pop and rock music at venues ranging in size from intimate clubs to internationally known arenas such as the Nippon Budokan.
The Tsukiji Fish Market in central Tokyo is the biggest wholesale fish and seafood market in the world and also one of the largest wholesale food markets of any kind.
Tourism in Tokyo is also a contributor to the economy.
Tokyo was already the nation's political and cultural center, and the emperor's residence made it a de facto imperial capital as well, with the former Edo Castle becoming the Imperial Palace.
According to a study conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers, the Tokyo urban area (37.8&nbsp;million people) had a total GDP of US$1.9&nbsp;trillion in 2012 (at purchasing power parity), which topped that list.
In Ueno Park, there is the Tokyo National Museum, the country's largest museum and specializing in traditional Japanese art; the National Museum of Western Art and Ueno Zoo.
The Michelin Guide has awarded Tokyo by far the most Michelin stars of any city in the world.
Symphony orchestras and other musical organisations perform modern and traditional music.
File:Takao-san HachiojiUrbanDistrict.JPG|Hachioji
Other museums include the National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation in Odaiba; the Edo-Tokyo Museum in Sumida, across the Sumida River from the center of Tokyo; the Nezu Museum in Aoyama; and the National Diet Library, National Archives, and the National Museum of Modern Art, which are near the Imperial Palace.
In 2006, Tokyo enacted the "10 Year Project for Green Tokyo" to be realised by 2016.
Collectively, these are often known as the Tama Area or Western Tokyo.
The last one to hit was Fitow in 2007, while the most rainy month since records began in 1876 has been October 2004 with  of rain, including  on the ninth of that month.
The former city of Tokyo and the majority of mainland Tokyo lie in the humid subtropical climate zone (Köppen climate classification ''Cfa''), with hot humid summers and generally mild winters with cool spells.
The Japan Sumo Association is also headquartered in Tokyo at the Ryōgoku Kokugikan sumo arena where three official sumo tournaments are held annually (in January, May, and September).
The 2016 edition of QS Best Student Cities ranked Tokyo as the 3rd-best city in the world to be a university student.
There are four national parks in Tokyo Prefecture, including the Fuji-Hakone-Izu National Park, which includes all of the Izu Islands.
Decreases in the price of timber, increases in the cost of production, and advancing old age among the forestry population have resulted in a decline in Tokyo's output.
In order to build them quickly before the 1964 Summer Olympics, most were constructed above existing roads.
* Tokyo University of Foreign Studies
Eight establishments were awarded the maximum of three stars (Paris has 10), 25 received two stars, and 117 earned one star.
* Tokyo Gakugei University
The far west is occupied by the district (''gun'') of Nishi-Tama.
Perishables such as vegetables, fruits, and flowers can be conveniently shipped to the markets in the eastern part of the prefecture.
Central Tokyo, like Osaka, has been designed since about 1900 to be centered on major railway stations in a high-density fashion, so suburban railways were built relatively cheaply at street level and with their own right-of-way.
The islands form both Ogasawara Subprefecture and the village of Ogasawara, Tokyo.
However, this prolonged period of seclusion came to an end with the arrival of American Commodore, Matthew C. Perry in 1853.
The city of Tokyo was officially established on May 1, 1889.
Tokyo hosted the 1964 Summer Olympics, the 1979 G-7 summit, the 1986 G-7 summit, and the 1993 G-7 summit, and will host the 2020 Summer Olympics and the 2020 Summer Paralympics.
Much of this area is mountainous and unsuitable for urbanization.
Meanwhile, supporters of the Meiji Emperor leveraged the disruption that these widespread rebellious demonstrations were causing to further consolidate power by overthrowing the last Tokugawa shogun, Yoshinobu, in 1867.
Tokyo's subway and commuter rail network became one of the busiest in the world as more and more people moved to the area.
The 1923 earthquake, with an estimated magnitude of 8.3, killed 142,000 people.
Tokyo's easternmost territory, the island of Minamitorishima (Marcus Island) in Ogasawara village, is in the tropical savanna climate zone (Köppen classification ''Aw'').
Lake Okutama, on the Tama River near Yamanashi Prefecture, is Tokyo's largest lake.
The Tokyo Metropolitan Government, which administers the whole metropolis, is headed by a publicly elected governor and metropolitan assembly.
Twice in recent history has the metropolis been left in ruins: first in the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake and later after extensive firebombing in World War II.
* University of Tokyo
The city was divided into Yamanote and Shitamachi.
Major events include the Sannō at Hie Shrine, the Sanja at Asakusa Shrine, and the biennial Kanda Festivals.
Its administrative structure is similar to that of Japan's other prefectures.
It set a goal of increasing roadside trees in Tokyo to 1 million (from 480,000), and adding 1,000&nbsp;ha of green space 88 of which will be a new park named "Umi no Mori" (sea forest) which will be on a reclaimed island in Tokyo Bay which used to be a landfill.
Noteworthy are the National Noh Theatre for noh and the Kabuki-za for kabuki.
In 1990 at the end of the Japanese asset price bubble, it accounted for more than 60% of the world stock market value.
Two-fifths of the city were completely burned, more than 276,000 buildings were demolished, 100,000 civilians were killed, and 110,000 more were injured.
Tokyo has many theatres for performing arts.
On July 1, 1943, Tokyo City was merged with  forming the current "metropolitan prefecture".
Tokyo is near the boundary of three plates.
The last features a parade with elaborately decorated floats and thousands of people.
Land reclamation projects in Tokyo have also been going on for centuries.
Tokyo was originally known as , which means "estuary".
These plans have been controversial within Japan and have yet to be realized.
The islands in order from closest to Tokyo are Izu Ōshima, Toshima, Nii-jima, Shikine-jima, Kōzu-shima, Miyake-jima, Mikurajima, Hachijō-jima, and Aogashima.
* Hitotsubashi University
Of the eight top-rated restaurants, three offer traditional Japanese fine dining, two are sushi houses and three serve French cuisine.
According to Around the Rings, the gymnasium has played host to the October 2011 artistic gymnastics world championships, despite the International Gymnastics Federation's initial doubt in Tokyo's ability to host the championships following the March 11 tsunami.
Tokyo features many internationally famous forms of modern architecture including Tokyo International Forum, Asahi Beer Hall, Mode Gakuen Cocoon Tower, NTT Docomo Yoyogi Building and Rainbow Bridge.
The 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami that devastated much of the northeastern coast of Honshu was felt in Tokyo.
In 2006, 4.81&nbsp;million foreigners and 420 million Japanese visits to Tokyo were made; the economic value of these visits totaled 9.4&nbsp;trillion yen according to the government of Tokyo.
Tokyo ranked first in the world in the Safe Cities Index.
The climate of Chichi-jima in Ogasawara village is on the boundary between the tropical savanna climate (Köppen classification ''Aw'') and the humid subtropical climate (Köppen classification ''Cfa'').
Tokyo was originally a small fishing village named Edo, in what was formerly part of the old Musashi Province.
Tokyo hosted the 1964 Summer Olympics, thus becoming the first Asian city to host the Summer Games.
During this time, the city enjoyed a prolonged period of peace known as the ''Pax Tokugawa'', and in the presence of such peace, Edo adopted a stringent policy of seclusion, which helped to perpetuate the lack of any serious military threat to the city.
Tokyo is often referred to as a city, but is officially known and governed as a "metropolitan prefecture", which differs from and combines elements of a city and a prefecture, a characteristic unique to Tokyo.
* Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology
Once cherry blossoms bloom in spring, many residents gather in Ueno Park, Inokashira Park, and the Shinjuku Gyoen National Garden for picnics under the blossoms.
Tokyo also contains numerous parks and gardens.
Many tourists visit the various downtowns, stores, and entertainment districts throughout the neighbourhoods of the special wards of Tokyo; particularly school children on class trips, a visit to Tokyo Tower is ''de rigueur''.
Tokyo has enacted a measure to cut greenhouse gases.
The  of Tokyo comprise the area formerly incorporated as Tokyo City.
* Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology
File:多摩ニュータウンの全景（2013年10月12日撮影）.jpg|Tama
Though expressways have been built in Tokyo, the basic design has not changed.
There are also art works and statues at several places in the park.
There is only one non-national public university: Tokyo Metropolitan University.
Governor Shintaro Ishihara created Japan's first emissions cap system, aiming to reduce greenhouse gas emission by a total of 25% by 2020 from the 2000 level.
While falling under the jurisdiction of Tokyo Metropolitan Government, each ward is also a borough with its own elected leader and council, like other cities of Japan.
* Tokyo Medical and Dental University
According to the Tokyo Metropolitan Government, the annual mean temperature has increased by about  over the past 100 years.
In the 1980s, real estate prices skyrocketed during a real estate and debt bubble.
The "three central wards" of Tokyo – Chiyoda, Chūō and Minato – are the business core of the city, with a daytime population more than seven times higher than their nighttime population.
Public Secondary schools in Tokyo are run by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education and are called "Metropolitan High Schools".
The population of the special wards is over 9 million people, with the total population of the prefecture exceeding 13&nbsp;million.
To pay for the added administrative costs, the prefecture collects municipal taxes, which would usually be levied by the city.
Tokyo was selected to host the 2020 Summer Olympics on September 7, 2013.
It is the seat of the Emperor of Japan and the Japanese government.
Architecture in Tokyo has largely been shaped by Tokyo's history.
Akihabara, known for being an otaku cultural center and a shopping district for computer goods, is also located in Chiyoda.
The western mountainous area of mainland Tokyo, Okutama also lies in the humid subtropical climate (Köppen classification ''Cfa'').
Tokyo Bay was once a major source of fish.
There is also a zoo in the park, and the park is a popular destination to view cherry blossoms.
Because of this, Tokyo's urban landscape consists mainly of modern and contemporary architecture, and older buildings are scarce.
However, this pronunciation is now obsolete.
While serving as "bed towns" for those working in central Tokyo, some of them also have a local commercial and industrial base.
Tokyo is a major international finance center, houses the headquarters of several of the world's largest investment banks and insurance companies, and serves as a hub for Japan's transportation, publishing, electronics and broadcasting industries.
JR East operates Tokyo's largest railway network, including the Yamanote Line loop that circles the center of downtown Tokyo.
The region, like much of Japan, experiences a one-month seasonal lag, with the warmest month being August, which averages , and the coolest month being January, averaging .
Cultural offerings include both omnipresent Japanese pop culture and associated districts such as Shibuya and Harajuku, subcultural attractions such as Studio Ghibli anime center, as well as museums like the Tokyo National Museum, which houses 37% of the country's artwork national treasures (87/233).
Tokyo has the largest metropolitan economy in the world.
Some Hollywood directors have turned to Tokyo as a backdrop for movies set in Japan.
Rail is the primary mode of transportation in Tokyo, which has the most extensive urban railway network in the world and an equally extensive network of surface lines.
Basketball clubs include the Hitachi SunRockers, Toyota Alvark Tokyo and Tokyo Excellence.
The name Tokyo was first suggested in 1813 in the book  (Secret Plan of Commingling), written by Satō Nobuhiro.
Various islands governed by Tokyo have their own airports.
With 36% of its area covered by forest, Tokyo has extensive growths of cryptomeria and Japanese cypress, especially in the mountainous western communities of Akiruno, Ōme, Okutama, Hachiōji, Hinode, and Hinohara.
The prefecture is part of the world's most populous metropolitan area with upwards of 37.8&nbsp;million people and the world's largest urban agglomeration economy.
Tokyo was also a founding member of the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group.
The deadliest night of the war came on March 9–10, 1945, as nearly 700,000 incendiary bombs rained on the eastern half of the city, mainly in heavily residential wards.
The metropolitan government and private carriers operate bus routes and one tram route.
Tokyo will be the first Asian city to host the Olympic Games twice.
Well-known postwar examples include ''Tokyo Joe'', ''My Geisha'', ''Tokyo Story'' and the James Bond film ''You Only Live Twice''; well-known recent examples include ''Kill Bill'', ''The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift'', ''Lost in Translation'', ''Babel'', and ''Inception''.
Between 1940 and 1945, the population of Japan's capital city dwindled from 6,700,000 to less than 2,800,000, with the majority of those who lost their lives living in "ramshackle, makeshift huts".
The highest mountain in Tokyo, Mount Kumotori, is  high; other mountains in Tokyo include Takasu (), Odake (), and Mitake ().
It officially became the capital after Emperor Meiji moved his seat to the city from the old capital of Kyoto in 1868; at that time Edo was renamed Tokyo.
* Globis University Graduate School of Management
Izu Ōshima and Hachijojima are towns.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange is Japan's largest stock exchange, and third largest in the world by market capitalization and fourth largest by share turnover.
Within Ōta, one of the 23 special wards, Haneda Airport offers domestic and international flights.
Ogasawara also administers two tiny outlying islands: Minami Torishima, the easternmost point in Japan and at  the most distant island from central Tokyo, and Okinotorishima, the southernmost point in Japan.
Edo became the ''de facto'' capital of Japan even while the emperor lived in Kyoto, the imperial capital.
Tokyo ranked third in the International Financial Centres Development IndexEdit.
Expressways link the capital to other points in the Greater Tokyo area, the Kantō region, and the islands of Kyushu and Shikoku.
A major recession followed, making the 1990s Japan's "Lost Decade" from which it is now slowly recovering.
Some surviving official English documents use the spelling "Tokei".
51 of the companies listed on the Fortune Global 500 are based in Tokyo, almost twice that of the second-placed city (Paris).
With a number of world-class sports venues, Tokyo often hosts national and international sporting events such as tennis tournaments, swim meets, marathons, rugby union and sevens rugby games, football, American football exhibition games, judo, and karate.
As a result, unlike other city wards in Japan, these wards are not conterminous with a larger incorporated city.
After the war, Tokyo was completely rebuilt, and was showcased to the world during the 1964 Summer Olympics.
Tokyo still sees new urban developments on large lots of less profitable land.
Publicly run kindergartens, elementary schools (years 1 through 6), and Primary schools (7 through 9) are operated by local wards or municipal offices.
The Iwo chain and the outlying islands have no permanent population, but host Japanese Self-Defense Forces personnel.
Tokyo is the founder member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21 and is a member of the Council of Local Authorities for International Relations.
Tokyo has been described as one of the three "command centers" for the world economy, along with New York City and London.
Local, regional, and national services are available, with major terminals at the giant railroad stations, including Tokyo, Shinagawa, and Shinjuku.
The city is also home to various television networks like Fuji TV, Tokyo MX, TV Tokyo, TV Asahi, Nippon Television, NHK and the Tokyo Broadcasting System.
* University of Electro-Communications
Tokyo ranked first in the Global Economic Power Index and fourth in the Global Cities Index.
For an extensive list, see List of universities in Tokyo.
* International Christian University
Also long-distance ferries serve the islands of Tokyo and carry passengers and cargo to domestic and foreign ports.
During the centralised growth of Japan's economy following World War II, many large firms moved their headquarters from cities such as Osaka (the historical commercial capital) to Tokyo, in an attempt to take advantage of better access to the government.
Tokyo also has many private schools from kindergarten through high school.
In addition to these 23 special wards, Tokyo also includes 26 more cities (市 -shi), five towns ( -chō or machi), and eight villages ( -son or -mura), each of which has a local government.
Chiyoda Ward is unique in that it is in the very heart of the former Tokyo City, yet is one of the least populated wards.
The Izu Islands are grouped into three subprefectures.
The subsequent nuclear crisis caused by the tsunami has also largely left Tokyo unaffected, despite occasional spikes in radiation levels.
Hachijō-jima (Hachijojima Airport), Miyakejima (Miyakejima Airport), and Izu Ōshima (Oshima Airport) have services to Tokyo International and other airports.
Local populations are only found on Chichi-jima and Haha-jima.
In 1869, the 17-year-old Emperor Meiji moved to Edo, and in accordance the city was renamed Tokyo (meaning Eastern Capital).
Social unrest mounted in the wake of these higher prices and culminated in widespread rebellions and demonstrations, especially in the form of the "smashing" of rice establishments.
During the early Meiji period, the city was also called "Tōkei", an alternative pronunciation for the same Chinese characters representing "Tokyo", making it a kanji homograph.
The bombing of Tokyo in 1944 and 1945 is estimated to have killed between 75,000 and 200,000 civilians and left more than half of the city destroyed.
'''Tokyo''' (, ), officially '''Tokyo Metropolis''', is one of the 47 prefectures of Japan, and is both the capital and most populous city of Japan.
Other transportation includes taxis operating in the special wards and the cities and towns.
Tokyo Metropolitan Gymnasium, in Sendagaya, Shibuya, is a large sports complex that includes swimming pools, training rooms, and a large indoor arena.
The special wards of Tokyo are:
The metropolitan government also administers 39  municipalities in the western part of the prefecture and the two outlying island chains.
The city is considered an alpha+ world city – as listed by the GaWC's 2008 inventory – and in 2014, Tokyo was ranked first in the "Best overall experience" category of ''TripAdvisor'''s World City Survey (the city also ranked first in the following categories: "helpfulness of locals", "nightlife", "shopping", "local public transportation" and "cleanliness of streets").
The Ogasawara Islands include, from north to south, Chichi-jima, Nishinoshima, Haha-jima, Kita Iwo Jima, Iwo Jima, and Minami Iwo Jima.
After about 263 years, the ''Pax Tokugawa'' came to an end.
Certain municipal functions, such as waterworks, sewerage, and fire-fighting, are handled by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government.
Many of Japan's most prestigious universities are in Tokyo, including University of Tokyo, Hitotsubashi University, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Waseda University, and Keio University.
The absence of war-inflicted devastation allowed Edo to devote the majority of its resources to rebuilding in the wake of the consistent fires, earthquakes, and other devastating natural disasters that plagued the city.
Many different festivals occur throughout Tokyo.
Tokyo is also the headquarters of the United Nations University.
Annually on the last Saturday of July, an enormous fireworks display over the Sumida River attracts over a million viewers.
Annual rainfall averages nearly , with a wetter summer and a drier winter.
The Izu Islands are a group of volcanic islands and form part of the Fuji-Hakone-Izu National Park.
In 1590, Tokugawa Ieyasu made Edo his base.
The 1970s brought new high-rise developments such as Sunshine 60, a new and controversial airport at Narita in 1978 (some distance outside city limits), and a population increase to about 11 million (in the metropolitan area).
* National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies
In 1457, Ōta Dōkan built Edo Castle.
Recent projects include Ebisu Garden Place, Tennozu Isle, Shiodome, Roppongi Hills, Shinagawa (now also a Shinkansen station), and the Marunouchi side of Tokyo Station.
