He now runs a consultancy business and has set up various foundations in his own name, including the Tony Blair Faith Foundation.
He inherited the Labour leadership at a time when the party was ascendant over the Tories in the opinion polls since the Tory government's reputation for monetary excellence was left in tatters by the Black Wednesday economic disaster of September 1992.
However, the scale of the Labour victory meant that there was ultimately never any need for a coalition.
Hazel Corscadden was the daughter of George Corscadden, a butcher and Orangeman who moved to Glasgow in 1916 but returned to (and later died in) Ballyshannon, County Donegal in 1923, where his wife, Sarah Margaret (née Lipsett), gave birth to Blair's mother, Hazel, above the family's grocery shop.
I will take full responsibility for any mistakes without exception or excuse.
Like Tony Benn, Blair believed that "Labour right" was bankrupt: "Socialism ultimately must appeal to the better minds of the people.
A few months after becoming Prime Minister Blair gave a tribute to Diana, Princess of Wales, on the morning of her death in August 1997, in which he famously described her as "the People's Princess".
''The Observer'' newspaper claimed that at a cabinet meeting before Blair left for a summit with Bush on 28 July 2006, a significant number of ministers pressured Blair to publicly criticise Israel over the scale of deaths and destruction in Lebanon.
The alliance between Bush and Blair seriously damaged Blair's standing in the eyes of Britons angry at American influence.
Calling on the slogan, "One member, one vote" Blair (with some help from Smith) defeated the union element and ended the block voting by which leaders of labour unions cast hundreds of thousands of votes on behalf of their members, and had an outsize voice in the party.
His salary for this work is unknown, although it has been claimed it may be in excess of £500,000 per year.
In Northern Ireland, Blair was involved in the 1998 Good Friday Agreement.
During his time as prime minister, Blair raised taxes; introduced a National Minimum Wage and some new employment rights (while keeping Margaret Thatcher's trade union reforms); introduced significant constitutional reforms; promoted new rights for gay people in the Civil Partnership Act 2004; and signed treaties integrating Britain more closely with the EU.
In November 2009, Belgian PM Herman Van Rompuy was named President of the European Council.
In addition to PMQs, Blair held monthly press conferences at which he fielded questions from journalists and – from 2002 – broke precedent by agreeing to give evidence twice yearly before the most senior Commons select committee, the Liaison Committee.
Even after the Libyan Civil War in 2011, he said he had no regrets about his close relationship with the late Libyan leader.
In the film, he is wrongly implicated in the deaths of Robin Cook and John Smith and on the run from Inspector Hutton.
In July 2010 it was reported that his personal security guards claimed £250,000 a year in expenses from the tax payer, Foreign Secretary William Hague said; "we have to make sure that Blair's security is as cost-effective as possible, that it doesn't cost any more to the taxpayer than is absolutely necessary".
Cherie Blair's friend and "spiritual guru" Carole Caplin is credited with introducing her and her husband to various New Age symbols and beliefs, including "magic pendants" known as "BioElectric Shields".
As a result, he faced criticism over the policy itself and the circumstances of the decision.
On 14 November 2007, Blair launched the Tony Blair Sports Foundation, which aims to "increase childhood participation in sports activities, especially in the North East of England, where a larger proportion of children are socially excluded, and to promote overall health and prevent childhood obesity."
During Blair's premiership, MI6 rendered Abdelhakim Belhadj to the Gaddafi regime in 2004, though Blair later claimed he had "no recollection" of the incident.
On 10 May 2007, during a speech at the Trimdon Labour Club, Blair announced his intention to resign as Labour Party leader and Prime Minister.
During this period, his father worked as a junior tax inspector whilst also studying for a law degree from the University of Edinburgh.
At the 1996 Labour Party conference, Blair stated that his three top priorities on coming to office were "education, education, and education".
I will at the same time say why, nonetheless, I believe that it was better to remove Saddam Hussein and why I do not believe this is the cause of the terrorism we see today whether in the Middle East or elsewhere in the world".
Anthony Charles Lynton Blair was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, on 6 May 1953, the second son of Leo and Hazel ( Corscadden) Blair.
The couple, wearing only bathing costumes, took part in a rebirthing procedure, which involved smearing mud and fruit over each other's bodies while sitting in a steam bath.
That was achieved in 1995.
On 27 June 2007, Blair officially resigned as Prime Minister after ten years in office, and he was officially confirmed as Middle East envoy for the United Nations, European Union, United States, and Russia.
He is the first British Prime Minister to have been formally questioned by police, though not under caution, while still in office.
Blair's initial inquiries discovered that the left was trying to arrange the selection for Les Huckfield, sitting MP for Nuneaton who was trying elsewhere; several sitting MPs displaced by boundary changes were also interested in it.
Michael Sheen has portrayed Blair three times, in the films ''The Deal'' (2003), ''The Queen'' (2006), and ''The Special Relationship'' (2009).
Historian Andrew Marr has argued that the success of ground attacks, real and threatened, over air strikes alone was influential on how Blair planned the Iraq War, and that the success of the first three wars Blair fought "played to his sense of himself as a moral war leader".
Between January 2003 and February 2004, Blair had three meetings with Richard Desmond; on 29 January and 3 September 2003 and 23 February 2004.
The mock tribunal's finding received mixed responses, being labelled a "circus" by former UN Special Rapporteur Param Cumaraswamy.
The information was disclosed after a three and a half-year battle by the Liberal Democrats' Lord Avebury.
He said he believed the world was safer as a result of the invasion.
Blair resigned his seat in the House of Commons in the traditional form of accepting the Stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds, to which he was appointed by Gordon Brown in one of the latter's last acts as Chancellor of the Exchequer.
He spent the remainder of his childhood in Durham, England, where his father Leo lectured at Durham University.
Blair's financial assets are structured in a complicated manner, and as such estimates of their extent vary widely.
After attending the Chorister School in Durham from 1961 to 1966, Blair boarded at Fettes College, a prestigious independent school in Edinburgh, during which time he met Charlie Falconer (a pupil at the rival Edinburgh Academy), whom he later appointed Lord Chancellor.
In 2016 the Iraq Inquiry strongly criticised his actions and described the invasion of Iraq as unjustified and unnecessary.
On 16 August 2010 it was announced that Blair would give the £4.6&nbsp;million advance and all royalties from his memoirs to a sports centre for badly injured soldiers – the charity's largest ever single donation.
Blair's government also carried out the devolution, the establishing of the Scottish Parliament, the National Assembly for Wales, and the Northern Ireland Assembly, thus fulfilling four of the promises in its 1997 manifesto.
He did not reverse the privatisation of the railways enacted by his predecessor John Major and instead strengthened regulation (by creating the Office of Rail Regulation) and limited fare rises to inflation +1%.
In 2010, ''The Tablet'' named him as one of Britain's most influential Roman Catholics.
It was the last candidate selection made by Labour before the election, and was made after the Labour Party had issued biographies of all its candidates ("Labour's Election Who's Who").
Blair had close relationships with the Clinton family.
Blair declared support for a new conception that he referred to as "social-ism", involving politics that recognised individuals as socially interdependent, and advocated social justice, cohesion, equal worth of each citizen, and equal opportunity.
Palliser had been intended as an evacuation mission but Brigadier David Richards was able to convince Blair to allow him to expand the role; at the time, Richards' action was not known and Blair was assumed to be behind it.
Blair became the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on 2 May 1997, serving concurrently as First Lord of the Treasury, Minister for the Civil Service and Leader of the Labour Party.
It stands for cooperation, not confrontation; for fellowship, not fear.
From the start of the War on Terror in 2001, Blair strongly supported the foreign policy of George W. Bush, participating in the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan and 2003 invasion of Iraq.
They agreed not to stand against each other, it is said, as part of a supposed Blair–Brown pact.
John Smith died suddenly in 1994 of a heart attack.
In September 2012, Desmond Tutu suggested that Blair should follow the path of former African leaders who had been brought before the International Criminal Court in The Hague.
He has also appeared as himself at the end of the first episode of ''The Amazing Mrs Pritchard'', a British television series about an unknown housewife becoming Prime Minister.
Labour was seen by the ''The Guardian'' to be "definitely socialistic" since its first constitution was published in 1918, saying that support for the "common ownership of the means of production and exchange" in Clause IV of the party's constitution, was "decisive" in making Labour a socialist party.
On 27 May 2015, Tony Blair wrote to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon to confirm his resignation as Middle East envoy.
On 22 December 2007, it was disclosed that Blair had joined the Roman Catholic Church.
In a sense, it was a rediscovery of religion as something living, that was about the world around me rather than some sort of special one-to-one relationship with a remote Being on high.
In July 2009, this accomplishment was followed by the launching of the Faith and Globalisation Initiative with Yale University in the US, Durham University in the UK, and the National University of Singapore in Asia, to deliver a postgraduate programme in partnership with the Foundation.
On 4 September Blair was confronted by 200 anti-war and hardline Irish nationalist demonstrators before the first book signing of his memoirs at Eason's bookstore on O'Connell Street in Dublin, with angry activists chanting "war criminal" and that he had "blood on his hands", and clashing with Irish Police (Garda Síochána) as they tried to break through a security cordon outside the Eason's store.
The 43-year-old Blair became the youngest person to become Prime Minister since Lord Liverpool became Prime Minister at the age of 42 in 1812.
He was also portrayed by James Larkin in ''The Government Inspector'' (2005), and by Ioan Gruffudd in ''W.''
In February 2009, he applied to set up a charity called the Tony Blair Africa Governance Initiative: the application was approved in November 2009.
A letter obtained by ''The Daily Telegraph'' in August 2014 revealed Blair had given damage-limitation advice to Nazarbayev after the December 2011 Zhanaozen massacre.
The novel was filmed as ''The Ghost Writer'' with Pierce Brosnan portraying the Blair character, Adam Lang.
There he says that "I was brought up as a Christian, but I was not in any real sense a practising one until I went to Oxford.
The Labour Party went on to win two more elections under his leadership: in 2001, in which it won another landslide victory, and in 2005, with a reduced majority.
After Fettes, Blair spent a year in London, where he attempted to find fame as a rock music promoter before reading Jurisprudence at St John's College, at the University of Oxford.
Critics of Blair denounced him for having the Labour Party abandon genuine socialism and accepting capitalism.
In 1987, he stood for election to the Shadow Cabinet, receiving 71 votes.
Media analysis of the sudden announcement was wide-ranging, describing it as an act of "desperation" to obtain a better launch reception of a humiliating "publishing flop" that had languished in the ratings, "blood money" for the lives lost in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, an act with a "hidden motive" or an expression of "guilt", a "genius move" to address the problem that "Tony Blair had one of the most toxic brands around" from a PR perspective, and a "cynical stunt to wipe the slate", but also as an attempt to make amends.
in Jurisprudence, Blair became a member of Lincoln's Inn, enrolled as a pupil barrister, and met his future wife, Cherie Booth (daughter of the actor Tony Booth) at the law chambers founded by Derry Irvine (who was to be Blair's first Lord Chancellor), 11 King's Bench Walk Chambers.
In the UK, the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats both said they would oppose Blair.
It has been reported that a number of cabinet ministers believed that Blair's timely departure from office would be required to be able to win a fourth election.
During the 2010 election campaign Blair publicly endorsed Gordon Brown's leadership, praising the way he had handled the financial crisis.
Blair was forced to back down on these proposals because John Prescott and Gordon Brown opposed the PR system, and many members of the shadow cabinet were worried about concessions being made towards the Lib Dems.
Lord Avebury said: "The public can now scrutinise the timing of his (Murdoch's) contacts with the former Prime Minister, to see whether they can be linked to events in the outside world."
Film and theatre director Richard Eyre opined that "Blair had a very considerable skill as a performer".
You cannot do that if you are tainted overmuch with a pragmatic period in power."
In October 2007, there was speculation in the media that Blair was open to the idea of becoming the first President of the European Council, a post created in the Treaty of Lisbon that would come into force in 2009, if successfully ratified.
Blair was elected as MP for Sedgefield despite the party's landslide defeat in the general election.
"The Foundation will use its profile and resources to encourage people of faith to work together more closely to tackle global poverty and conflict," says its mission statement.
However, a perception of one-sided compromising personal and political closeness led to discussion of the term "Poodle-ism" in the UK media, to describe the "Special Relationship" of the UK government and Prime Minister with the US White House and President.
He acknowledged that the report made "real and material criticisms of preparation, planning, process and of the relationship with the United States" but cited sections of the report that he said "should lay to rest allegations of bad faith, lies or deceit".
With victories in 1997, 2001, and 2005, Blair was the Labour Party's longest-serving prime minister, the only person to date to lead the party to three consecutive general election victories.
He stated: "whether people agree or disagree with my decision to take military action against Saddam Hussein; I took it in good faith and in what I believed to be the best interests of the country.&nbsp;...
In 1994, Blair forged close ties with Michael Levy, a leader of the Jewish Leadership Council.
Leo, delivered by the Royal Surgeon/Gynaecologist Marcus Setchell, was the first legitimate child born to a serving Prime Minister in over 150 years – since Francis Russell was born to Lord John Russell on 11 July 1849.
Blair was sometimes perceived as paying insufficient attention both to the views of his own Cabinet colleagues and to those of the House of Commons.
The mock trial, which lasted four days, consisting of five judges of judicial and academic backgrounds, a court-appointed defence team in lieu of the defendants or representatives, and a prosecution team including international law professor Francis Boyle.
Blair was reprimanded by Cardinal Basil Hume in 1996 for receiving Holy Communion at Mass, while still an Anglican, in contravention of canon law.
Following the Omagh bombing on 15 August 1998, by members of the Real IRA opposed to the peace process, which killed 29 people and wounded hundreds, Blair visited the County Tyrone town and met with victims at Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast.
However, the move away from nationalisation in the old Clause IV made many on the left of the Labour Party feel that Labour was moving away from traditional socialist principles of nationalisation set out in 1918, and was seen by them as part of a shift of the party towards "New Labour".
Over the summer of 2006 many MPs, including usually supportive MPs, criticised Blair for his failure to call for a ceasefire in the 2006 Israel–Lebanon conflict.
Blair, the leader of the modernising faction, argued that the long-term trends had to be reversed.
In 2011, Blair became Godfather to one of Rupert Murdoch's children with Wendi Deng, but he and Murdoch later ended their friendship, in 2014, after Murdoch suspected him of having an affair with Deng while they were still married, according to The Economist magazine.
Blair had been a major advocate for a ground offensive, which Bill Clinton was reluctant to do, and ordered that 50,000 soldiers – most of the available British Army – should be made ready for action.
As a student, he played guitar and sang in a rock band called Ugly Rumours, and performed some stand-up comedy, including parodying James T. Kirk as a character named ''Captain Kink''.
Blair was criticised for his solid stance alongside US President George W. Bush on Middle East policy.
The CIA-influenced British Prime Minister in the book is said to be a thinly disguised version of Blair.
He had informed Pope Benedict XVI on 23 June 2007 that he wanted to become a Catholic.
Blair originally indicated that he would retain his parliamentary seat after his resignation as Prime Minister came into effect; however, on being confirmed for the Middle East role he resigned from the Commons by taking up an office of profit.
A following complaint was rejected, with Downing Street claiming the information compromised free and frank discussions, while Cabinet Office claimed releasing the timing of the PM's contacts with individuals is undesirable, as it might lead to the content of the discussions being disclosed.
On 8 July 2010, Blair was awarded the Order of Freedom by the President of Kosovo, Fatmir Limaj.
However, at least one left-wing commentator has said that Blair is to the right of centre.
Blair made an animated cameo appearance as himself in ''The Simpsons'' episode, "The Regina Monologues" (2003).
However, after Blair became leader, these talks continued  – despite virtually every opinion poll since late 1992 having shown Labour with enough support to form a majority.
Blair has been noted as a charismatic, articulate speaker with an informal style.
During the sketch, Blair used Lauren's catchphrase "Am I bovvered?"
From 1983 to 2007, Blair was the Member of Parliament for Sedgefield and was elected Labour Party leader in July 1994, following the sudden death of his predecessor, John Smith.
Blair categorically denied the allegations.
When the legal challenge failed, the party had to rerun all selections on the new boundaries; most were based on existing seats, but unusually in County Durham a new Sedgefield constituency had been created out of Labour-voting areas which had no obvious predecessor seat.
No details were given of the subjects discussed.
Blair responded to such criticism by saying his choice to advise the country is an example of how he can "nudge controversial figures on a progressive path of reform", and has stated that he receives no personal profit from this advisory role.
Under Blair's government the amount of new legislation increased which attracted criticism.
Some left-wing critics have argued that Blair has overseen the final stage of a long term shift of the Labour Party to the right, and that very little now remains of a Labour Left.
Blair decided not to issue a list of Resignation Honours, making him the first Prime Minister of the modern era not to do so.
In Germany, the leader of the Free Democrats, Guido Westerwelle, said that he preferred a candidate from a smaller European country.
On 14 March 2007, Blair appeared as a celebrity judge on ''Masterchef Goes Large'' after contestants had to prepare a three-course meal in the Downing Street kitchens for Blair and Bertie Ahern.
The human rights lawyer Geoffrey Bindman, interviewed on BBC radio, concurred with Tutu's suggestion that there should be a war crimes trial.
A Freedom of Information request by ''The Sunday Times'' in 2012 revealed that Blair's government considered knighting Syria's President Bashar al-Assad.
Under Blair's leadership, the party used the phrase "New Labour", to distance it from previous Labour policies and the traditional conception of socialism.
In order to present a fresh face and new policies to the elect, New Labour needed more than fresh leaders; it had to jettison outdated policies.
Blair argued it was in Britain's interest to "protect and strengthen the bond" with the United States regardless of who is in the White House.
In the period between September 2002 and April 2005, Blair and Murdoch are documented speaking 6 times; three times in the 9 days before the Iraq War, including the eve of 20 March US and UK invasion, and on 29 January 25 April and 3 October 2004.
As a combined result of the Blair–Brown pact, Iraq war and low approval ratings, pressure built up within the Labour party for Blair to resign.
The Kazakhstan foreign minister said that the country was "honoured and privileged" to be receiving advice from Blair.
The ''Financial Times'' on the other hand has argued that Blair is not conservative, but instead a populist.
While awaiting a following appeal from Lord Avebury, the cabinet office announced that it would release the information.
Afterwards, Blair issued a statement and held a two-hour press conference to apologize and to justify the decisions he had made in 2003 "in good faith" and denying allegations that the war had led to a significant increase in terrorism.
Labour's overall majority in the 2005 general election was reduced to 66.
In March 2010, it was reported that Blair's memoirs, titled ''The Journey'', would be published in September 2010.
On the day that Blair resigned as Prime Minister, he was appointed the official Special Envoy of the Quartet on the Middle East, an office which he held until 27 May 2015.
The Labour Party also claimed that by 2010 10% of the energy would come from renewable resources; however, it only reached 7% by that point.
He was influenced by fellow student and Anglican priest Peter Thomson, who awakened his religious faith and left-wing politics.
The family's primary residence is in Connaught Square; the Blairs own eight residences in total.
In September 1997, Blair attained early personal popularity, receiving a 93% public approval rating, after his public response to the death of Diana, Princess of Wales.
Blair had been on friendly terms with Colonel Gaddafi, the leader of Libya, when sanctions imposed on the country were lifted by the USA and the UK.
In May 2008, Blair announced a new plan for peace and for Palestinian rights, based heavily on the ideas of the Peace Valley plan.
In the 2006 Channel 4 comedy drama documentary, ''Tony Blair: Rock Star'', he was portrayed by Christian Brassington.
In addition to Ashdown, Liberal Democrat MPs Menzies Campbell and Alan Beith were earmarked for places in the cabinet if the coalition was formed.
White House sources stated that "both Israel and the Palestinians had signed up to the proposal".
Although Blair lost the Beaconsfield by-election and Labour's share of the vote fell 10 percentage points, he acquired a profile within the party.
It stands for equality."
In 1982, Blair was selected as the Labour candidate in the safe Conservative seat of Beaconsfield, where there was a forthcoming by-election.
Meanwhile, the breakaway SDP faction had merged with the Liberal Party; the resulting Liberal Democrats seemed to pose a major threat to the Labour base.
Aided by the unpopularity of John Major's Conservative government (itself deeply divided over the European Union), "New Labour" won a landslide victory in the 1997 general election, ending 18 years of Conservative Party government, with the heaviest Conservative defeat since 1906.
Blair also gives lectures, earning up to US$250,000 for a 90-minute speech, and in 2008 he was said to be the highest paid speaker in the world.
As Blair is credited as being instrumental in ending the conflict in Kosovo, some boys born in that country following the war have been given the name Toni or Tonibler.
At one point Alastair Campbell intervened in an interview, preventing the Prime Minister from answering a question about his Christianity, explaining, "We don't do God."
Friends had said that the act was partly motivated by the wish to "repair his reputation".
Blair and the modernizers called for radical adjustment of Party goals by repealing "Clause IV," the historic commitment to nationalisation of industry.
The response includes contacts "clearly of an official nature" in the specified period, but excludes contacts "not clearly of an official nature."
Suddenly I began to see its social relevance.
The invasion of Iraq was particularly controversial, as it attracted widespread public opposition and 139 of Blair's MPs opposed it.
Blair has one elder brother, Sir William Blair, a High Court judge, and a younger sister, Sarah.
In 2007, the scenario of a possible war crimes trial for the former British Prime Minister was satirised by the British broadcaster Channel 4, in a "mockumentary", ''The Trial of Tony Blair'', with concluded with the fictional Blair being dispatched to the Hague.
After the election in 1999 of Ehud Barak, with whom Blair forged a close relationship, he became much more sympathetic to Israel.
For his part, Bush lauded Blair and the UK.
Blair, on coming to office, had been "cool towards the right-wing Netanyahu government".
Blair has faced strong criticism for his role in the invasion of Iraq, including calls for having him tried for war crimes and waging a war of aggression.
There was an Australian priest at the same college as me who got me interested again.
While Blair was at Oxford, his mother Hazel died of cancer, which greatly affected him.
Leading Conservatives of the post-New Labour era hold Blair in high regard: George Osborne describes him as "the master"; Michael Gove once exclaimed, "I can't hold it back any more—I love Tony"; while David Cameron reportedly maintains Blair as an informal adviser.
Blair was criticised when it was discovered that one child had received private tuition from staff at Westminster School.
Blair appeared before the Leveson Inquiry on Monday 28 May 2012.
He introduced substantial market-based reforms in the education and health sectors; introduced student tuition fees; sought to reduce certain categories of welfare payments, and introduced tough anti-terrorism and identity card legislation.
In 2009, Blair stated that he would have supported removing Saddam Hussein from power even in the face of proof that he had no such weapons.
In a 1997 visit to the United States, he made a comment on "great industrialised nations" that fail to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Again in 2003, Blair went before the United States Congress and said that climate change "cannot be ignored", insisting "we need to go beyond even Kyoto."
Blair's links with, and receipt of an undisclosed sum from, UI Energy Corporation, have also been subject to media comment in the UK.
He received his first front-bench appointment in 1984 as assistant Treasury spokesman.
Blair married Cherie Booth, a Roman Catholic, who would later be named Queen's Counsel, on 29 March 1980.
He was invited to stand again in Beaconsfield, and was initially inclined to agree but was advised by his head of chambers Derry Irvine to find somewhere else which might be winnable.
Lord Avebury's initial October 2003 information request was dismissed by then leader of the Lords, Baroness Amos.
In July 2010 it was announced the memoirs would be retitled ''A Journey''.
Along with enjoying a close relationship with Bill Clinton, Blair formed a strong political alliance with George W. Bush, particularly in the area of foreign policy.
After taking office in 1997, Blair gave particular prominence to his press secretary, who became known as the Prime Minister's Official Spokesman (the two roles have since been separated).
In contrast to his later centrism, Blair made it clear in a letter he wrote to Labour leader Michael Foot in July 1982 (published in  2006) that he had "come to Socialism through Marxism" and considered himself on the left.
In October 2012 Blair's foundation hit controversy when it emerged they were taking on unpaid interns.
The Party was too locked into a base that was shrinking, since it was based on the working-class, on trade unions, and on residents of subsidised council housing.
When Blair resigned as Prime Minister, Robert Harris, a former Fleet Street political editor, dropped his other work to write ''The Ghost''.
After the death of John Smith in 1994, Blair and his close colleague Gordon Brown (they shared an office at the House of Commons) were both seen as possible candidates for the party leadership.
Campbell later explained that he had intervened only to end the interview because the journalist had been taking an excessive time, and that the comment had just been a throwaway line.
Some ministers viewed Blair's announcement of policy initiatives in September 2006 as an attempt to draw attention away from these issues.
Blair ardently supported the foreign policy of the Bush administration, and ensured that British Armed Forces participated in the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan and, more controversially, the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
The Chilcot Inquiry report of 2016 gave a damning assessment of Blair's role in the Iraq War, though the former prime minister again refused to apologise for his decision to back the US-led invasion.
By this time, Blair was aligned with the reforming tendencies in the party (headed by leader Neil Kinnock) and was promoted after the 1987 election to the shadow Trade and Industry team as spokesman on the City of London.
According to diaries released by Paddy Ashdown, during Smith's leadership of the Labour Party, there were discussions with Ashdown about forming a coalition government if the next general election resulted in a hung parliament.
The move was described as "a private matter".
Tam Dalyell, while Father of the House of Commons, suggested in 2003 that Blair's foreign policy decisions were unduly influenced by a "cabal" of Jewish advisers, including Levy, Peter Mandelson and Jack Straw (the last two are not Jewish but have some Jewish ancestry).
A revealing conversation between Bush and Blair, with the former addressing the latter as "Yo, Blair|Yo or Yeah, Blair" was recorded when they did not know a microphone was live at the G8 summit in Saint Petersburg in 2006.
In his post-9/11 speech, for example, he stated that "America has no truer friend than Great Britain".
In the first years of the New Labour government, Blair's government introduced the National Minimum Wage Act, Human Rights Act, and Freedom of Information Act.
The strong partnership with Bill Clinton was made into the film "The Special Relationship" in 2010.
He said there was "no real difference between wanting regime change and wanting Iraq to disarm: regime change was US policy because Iraq was in breach of its UN obligations."
