Sperm whales usually dive between , and sometimes , in search of food.
Almost all have a layer of fat, or blubber, under the skin to keep warm in the cold water, with the exception of river dolphins.
The most circulated footage is probably that of the drive and subsequent capture and slaughter process taken in Futo, Japan, in October 1999, shot by the Japanese animal welfare organization Elsa Nature Conservancy.
In February 2010, an experienced female trainer at SeaWorld Orlando, Dawn Brancheau, was killed by killer whale Tilikum shortly after a show in Shamu Stadium.
In 1995, Marten and Psarakos used television to test dolphin self-awareness.
At the other extreme are the narwhals with their single long tusks and the almost toothless beaked whales with tusk-like teeth only in males.Not all species are believed to use their teeth for feeding.
Odontocetes feed largely on fish and squid, but a few, like the killer whale, feed on mammals, such as pinnipeds.
When out at sea, whales dive out of the reach of surface-hunting killer whales.
This happened around 34 mya.
The healing process is rapid and even very deep wounds do not cause dolphins to hemorrhage to death.
It can be seen as the dolphin equivalent of a name for humans.
Some species log out of the water, which may allow then to travel faster.
Their skeletal anatomy allows them to be fast swimmers.
Most toothed whales are adapted for diving to great depths, porpoises are one exception.
For most of the smaller species of dolphins, only a few of the larger sharks, such as the bull shark, dusky shark, tiger shark, and great white shark, are a potential risk, especially for calves.
One example is the false killer whale.
The following day, the dolphins are caught one by one and killed.
Except for the sperm whale, most toothed whales are smaller than the baleen whales.
Killer whales are well known for their performances in shows, but the number kept in captivity is very small, especially when compared to the number of bottlenose dolphins, with only 44 captives being held in aquaria as of 2012.
Odontocetes send out high-frequency clicks from an organ known as a melon.
Dolphin echolocation clicks are amongst the loudest sounds made by marine animals.
They showed dolphins real-time footage of themselves, recorded footage, and another dolphin.
Pollution of the Yangtze river has led to the extinction of the Baiji.
Instead of sound passing through the outer ear to the middle ear, whales receive sound through the throat, from which it passes through a low-impedance, fat-filled cavity to the inner ear.
Roughly three categories of sounds can be identified: frequency modulated whistles, burst-pulsed sounds and clicks.
In water, a whale can see around  ahead of itself, but they have a smaller range above water.
Small odontocetes, mainly dolphins, are kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks.
Because dolphins are generally associated in groups, communication is necessary.
Ambergris, a solid, waxy, flammable substance produced in the digestive system of sperm whales, was also sought as a fixative in perfumery.
While this particular study has not been repeated since then, dolphins have since "passed" the mirror test.
Groups even attack larger cetaceans such as minke whales, gray whales, and rarely sperm whales or blue whales.
Although a properly harpooned sperm whale generally exhibited a fairly consistent pattern of attempting to flee underwater to the point of exhaustion (at which point it would surface and offer no further resistance), it was not uncommon for bull whales to become enraged and turn to attack pursuing whaleboats on the surface, particularly if it had already been wounded by repeated harpooning attempts.
Individual members then take turns plowing through the ball, feeding on the stunned fish.
In species that live near the poles, the blubber can be as thick as .
Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths.
Kandu V broke her jaw, which severed an artery, and then bled to death.
Since they are unable to go onto land to calve, they deliver their young with the  fetus positioned for tail-first delivery.
All species are generalist and opportunistic feeders.
However, the recovery from the whaling years is a slow process, particularly in the South Pacific, where the toll on males of breeding age was severe.
When the dolphins are in the bay, it is quickly closed off with nets so the dolphins cannot escape.
For instance, the sperm whale likely uses its teeth for aggression and showmanship.
These substances found a variety of commercial applications, such as candles, soap, cosmetics, machine oil, other specialized lubricants, lamp oil, pencils, crayons, leather waterproofing, rustproofing materials, and many pharmaceutical compounds.
Duration of click  (ms)
Bears are known to use sit-and-wait tactics, as well as active stalking and pursuit of prey on ice or water.
The killing of the animals used to be done by slitting their throats, but the Japanese government banned this method, and now dolphins may officially only be killed by driving a metal pin into the neck of the dolphin, which causes them to die within seconds according to a memo from Senzo Uchida, the executive secretary of the Japan Cetacean Conference on Zoological Gardens and Aquariums.
It nevertheless referred to the porpoise as a fish.
Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world.
Unlike human teeth, which are composed mostly of enamel on the portion of the tooth outside of the gum, whale teeth have cementum outside the gum.
Research done on signature whistle usage by other dolphin species is relatively limited.
Toothed whales are fast swimmers in comparison to seals, which typically cruise at 5–15 knots, or ; the sperm whale, in comparison, can travel at speeds of up to .
Toothed whales are capable of making a broad range of sounds using nasal airsacs located just below the blowhole.
The click rate increases when approaching an object of interest.
The brain to body mass ratio in some odontocetes, such as belugas and narwhals, is second only to humans.
Dolphins are known to engage in complex play behaviour, which includes such things as producing stable underwater toroidal air-core vortex rings or "bubble rings".
In the aftermath of the release of the film, Martina McBride, 38 Special, REO Speedwagon, Cheap Trick,  Heart, Trisha Yearwood, and Willie Nelson cancelled scheduled concerts at SeaWorld parks.
These flippers contain four digits.
Flipper movement is continuous.
Breathing involves expelling stale air from their one blowhole, forming an upward, steamy spout, followed by inhaling fresh air into the lungs.
Overall, they tend to be dwarfed by their relatives, the baleen whales (Mysticeti).
The clicks are directional and are used for echolocation, often occurring in a short series called a click train.
Self-awareness is seen, by some, to be a sign of highly developed, abstract thinking.
Their skulls have small eye orbits, long beaks (with the exception sperm whales), and eyes placed on the sides of their heads.
The spout only forms when warm air from the lungs meets cold air, so it does not form in warmer climates, as with river dolphins.
Whales are also affected by marine pollution.
This prevents the calf from drowning either upon or during delivery.
The baiji, for example, is considered functionally extinct by the IUCN, with the last sighting in 2004, due to heavy pollution to the Yangtze River.
Sound pulses are emitted through their melon-shaped foreheads, reflected off objects, and retrieved through the lower jaw.
ACCOBAMS protects all whales in the Mediterranean and Black Seas.
Other times, they corral their prey before striking.
Hundreds if not thousands of Bottlenose Dolphins live in captivity across the world, though exact numbers are hard to determine.
Toothed whales (Odontocetes) echolocate by creating a series of clicks emitted at various frequencies.
They may be numerous, with some dolphins bearing over 100 teeth in their jaws.
However, it is thought unlikely that squalodontids are direct ancestors of living dolphins.
The narwhal, with its blunt snout and reduced dentition, relies on suction feeding.
The harbor porpoise is one of the most accessible species for early cetologists, because it could be seen very close to land, inhabiting shallow coastal areas of Europe.
The shape of the snout may correlate with tooth number and thus feeding mechanisms.
''Squalodon'' featured several commonalities with modern Odontocetes.
Toothed whale eyes are relatively small for their size, yet they do retain a good degree of eyesight.
When swimming, toothed whales rely on their tail fins to propel them through the water.
Odontocetes, as a whole, mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, and then followed by crustaceans and bivalves.
Since much of the criticism is the result of photos and videos taken during the hunt and slaughter, it is now common for the final capture and slaughter to take place on site inside a tent or under a plastic cover, out of sight from the public.
Roughly three categories of sounds can be identified: frequency-modulated whistles, burst-pulsed sounds, and clicks.
One of the first anatomical descriptions of the airways of the whales on the basis of a harbor porpoise dates from 1671 by John Ray.
These were much sought after by 18th-, 19th-, and 20th-century whalers.
Dolphins are known to use this method during hunting.
It is typically used when homing in on prey.
Inter-click interval  (s)
To feed the newborn, toothed whales, being aquatic, must squirt the milk into the mouth of the calf.
Females deliver a single calf, with gestation lasting about a year, dependency until one to two years, and maturity around seven to 10 years, all varying between the species.
The head of the sperm whale is filled with a waxy liquid called spermaceti.
Dolphin spindle neurons are found in areas of the brain homologous to where they are found in humans, suggesting they perform a similar function.
In the 19th century, between 184,000 and 236,000 sperm whales were estimated to have been killed by the various whaling nations,  while in the modern era, at least 770,000 were taken, the majority between 1946 and 1980.
They have well-developed hearing, that is well adapted for both air and water, so much so that some can survive even if they are blind.
Lactating mothers can pass the toxins on to their young.
In August 1989, a dominant female killer whale, Kandu V, attempted to rake a newcomer whale, Corky II, with her mouth during a live show, and smashed her head into a wall.
The olfactory lobes are absent in toothed whales, and unlike baleen whales, they lack the vomeronasal organ, suggesting they have no sense of smell.
Although toothed whales do not possess fully developed hind limbs, some, such as the sperm whale, possess discrete rudimentary appendages, which may contain feet and digits.
Sperm whales can produce three specific vocalisations: creaks, codas, and slow clicks.
Spout shapes differ among species, which facilitates identification.
In Aristotle's time, the fourth century BCE, whales were regarded as fish due to their superficial similarity.
Seventy-three species of toothed whales are described.
Numerous organisation are dedicated to protecting certain species that do not fall under any international treaty, such as the Committee for the Recovery of the Vaquita, and the Wuhan Institute of Hydrobiology (for the Yangtze finless porpoise).
By 1880, it had declined an estimated 29%.
In 2009, a critical documentary on the hunts in Japan titled ''The Cove'' was released and shown amongst others at the Sundance Film Festival.
''Squalodon'' lived from the early to middle Oligocene to the middle Miocene, around 33-14 mya.
Dolphins tend to travel in pods, in which the groups of dolphins range from two to 1000.
This behaviour is passed on from mother to daughter, and it is only observed in 54 female individuals.
This blubber can help with buoyancy, protection to some extent as predators would have a hard time getting through a thick layer of fat, energy for fasting during leaner times, and insulation from the harsh climates.
Dolphins have also been known to use tools.
Also, fewer than ten pilot whales, Amazon river dolphins, Risso's dolphins, spinner dolphins, or tucuxi are in captivity.
Toothed whales have a two-chambered stomach similar in structure to terrestrial carnivores.
These small cetaceans are more often than not kept in theme parks, such as SeaWorld, commonly known as a dolphinarium.
These whistles are used in order for dolphins to communicate with one another by identifying an individual.
Hunting for sperm whales during this period was a notoriously dangerous affair for the crews of the 19th-century whaleboats.
Dolphins are capable of making a broad range of sounds using nasal airsacs located just below the blowhole.
They also have glands on the eyelids and outer corneal layer that act as protection for the cornea.
Being mammals, they have mammary glands used for nursing calves; they are weaned around 11 months of age.
Males make a lot of slow clicks in breeding grounds (74% of the time), both near the surface and at depth, which suggests they are primarily mating signals.
The most widely used test for self-awareness in animals is the mirror test, in which a temporary dye is placed on an animal's body, and the animal is then presented with a mirror; then whether the animal shows signs of self-recognition is determined.
The clicks are directional and are for echolocation, often occurring in a short series called a click train.
They have large reserves of blubber, more so for toothed whales, as they are higher up the food chain than baleen whales.
Bottlenose dolphins have a strong memory when it comes to these signature whistles, as they are able to relate to a signature whistle of an individual they have not encountered for over twenty years.
Bottlenose dolphins are the most common species kept in dolphinariums, as they are relatively easy to train, have a long lifespan in captivity, and have a friendly appearance.
Toothed whales range in size from the  and  vaquita to the  and  sperm whale.
As the scope and size of the fleet increased, so did the rig of the vessels change, as brigs, schooners, and finally ships and barks were introduced.
One exception is with the sperm whale, which has males larger than the females.
In humans, these cells are involved in social conduct, emotions, judgement, and theory of mind.
Toothed whales have torpedo-shaped bodies with inflexible necks, limbs modified into flippers, nonexistent external ear flaps, a large tail fin, and bulbous heads (with the exception of sperm whales).
This liquid can be refined into spermaceti wax and sperm oil.
Dolphins and porpoises are hunted in an activity known as dolphin drive hunting.
In Shark Bay, a population of Indo-Pacific bottlenose dolphins put sponges on their beak to protect them from abrasions and sting ray barbs while foraging in the seafloor.
Toothed whale biosonar clicks are amongst the loudest sounds made by marine animals.
Various species of toothed whales, mainly dolphins, are kept in captivity, as well as several other species of porpoise such as harbour porpoises and finless porpoises.
They do, however, lack short wavelength-sensitive visual pigments in their cone cells, indicating a more limited capacity for colour vision than most mammals.
ASCOBANS was negotiated to protect all small whales in the North and Baltic Seas and in the northeast Atlantic.
In April 2014, the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia denied an appeal by SeaWorld.
Calves are more commonly taken by killer whales, but adults can be targeted, as well.
In the 19th-century stubby, square-rigged ships (and later barks) dominated the fleet, being sent to the Pacific (the first being the British whaleship ''Emilia'', in 1788), the Indian Ocean (1780s), and as far away as the Japan grounds (1820) and the coast of Arabia (1820s), as well as Australia (1790s) and New Zealand (1790s).
In humans, the middle ear works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air's low impedance and the cochlear fluid's high impedance.
One common feeding method is herding, where a pod squeezes a school of fish into a small volume, known as a bait ball.
Aggression among captive killer whales is common.
Sperm whaling in the 18th century began with small sloops carrying only a pair of whaleboats (sometimes only one).
They feed on several species, notably the giant squid, but also the colossal squid, octopuses, and fish like demersal rays, but their diet is mainly medium-sized squid.
The ear is acoustically isolated from the skull by air-filled sinus pockets, which allow for greater directional hearing underwater.
This consists of an experience with other dolphins that modifies the signal structure of an existing whistle sound.
Some scientists suggest that sonar may trigger whale beachings, and they point to signs that such whales have experienced decompression sickness.
They concluded that their evidence suggested self-awareness rather than social behavior.
Most species have a dorsal fin.
High levels of organic chemicals accumulate in these animals since they are high in the food chain.
This melon consists of fat, and the skull of any such creature containing a melon will have a large depression.
Many of the findings that apply to all cetaceans were therefore first discovered in the porpoises.
At the 2012 meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, support was reiterated for a cetacean bill of rights, listing cetaceans as nonhuman persons.
Some can travel at up to 20 knots.
A coda is a short pattern of 3 to 20 clicks that is used in social situations to identify one another (like a signature whistle), but it is still unknown whether sperm whales possess individually specific coda repertoires or whether individuals make codas at different rates.
Dolphins can tolerate and recover from extreme injuries (including shark bites) although the exact methods used to achieve this are not known.
Dolphins are able to communicate to one another by addressing another dolphin through mimicking their whistle.
An auditory experience influences the whistle development of each dolphin.
Toothed whales consist of some of the most widespread mammals, but some, as with the vaquita, are restricted to certain areas.
Several species of odontocetes exhibit sexual dimorphism, in that the females are larger than males.
They also appear to enjoy biting the vortex rings, so that they burst into many separate bubbles and then rise quickly to the surface.
Aristotle, however, could already see many physiological and anatomical similarities with the terrestrial vertebrates, such as blood (circulation), lungs, uterus, and fin anatomy.
In the art of this and subsequent periods, dolphins are portrayed with a high-arched head (typical of porpoises) and a long snout.
As the name suggests, the parvorder is characterized by the presence of teeth rather than the baleen of other whales.
SeaWorld disputes the accuracy of the film, and in December 2013 released an ad countering the allegations and emphasizing its contributions to the study of cetaceans and their conservation.
The '''toothed whales''' (systematic name '''Odontoceti''') form a parvorder of the infraorder Cetacea, including sperm whales, beaked whales, dolphins, and porpoises.
The dolphins are usually not caught and killed immediately, but instead left to calm down over night.
Males typically mate with multiple females every year, but females only mate every two to three years, making them polygynous.
Whales and dolphins, the paraphyletic groups of Cetacea, as well as porpoises, belong to the clade Cetartiodactyla with even-toed ungulates; their closest living relatives are the hippopotamuses which diverged about 40 mya.
These signature whistles are developed during a dolphin's first year; it continues to maintain the same sound throughout its lifetime.
They have streamlined bodies and two limbs that are modified into flippers.
By numbers, dolphins are mostly hunted for their meat, though some end up in dolphinariums.
His detailed descriptions were assimilated by the Romans, but mixed with a more accurate knowledge of the dolphins, as mentioned by Pliny the Elder in his ''Natural history''.
Toothed whales range in size from the  and  vaquita to the  and  sperm whale.
Such dives can last more than an hour.
Comparison of a particular animal's brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an encephalisation quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence.
Besides whaling and drive hunting, they also face threats from bycatch and marine pollution.
The research on other species done so far has yielded varied outcomes and inconclusive results.
The global UNEP Convention on Migratory Species currently covers seven toothed whale species or populations on its Appendix I, and 37 species or populations on Appendix II.
This mode of reproduction produces few offspring, but increases the survival probability of each one.
Allometric analysis indicates that mammalian brain size scales around the two-thirds or three-quarters exponent of the body mass.
Toothed whales can also be threatened by humans more indirectly.
Remaining sperm whale populations are large enough so that the species' conservation status is vulnerable, rather than endangered.
social communication
Apparent source level  (dB re 1µPa Rms)
Many species, mainly dolphins, are highly sociable, with some pods reaching over a thousand individuals.
Range audible to sperm whale  (km)
Once hunted for their products, cetaceans are now protected by international law.
Dolphins communicate with whistle-like sounds produced by vibrating connective tissue, similar to the way human vocal cords function, and through burst-pulsed sounds, though the nature and extent of that ability is not known.
In addition to their streamlined bodies, they can slow their heart rate to conserve oxygen; blood is rerouted from tissue tolerant of water pressure to the heart and brain among other organs; haemoglobin and myoglobin store oxygen in body tissue; and they have twice the concentration of myoglobin than haemoglobin.
Brain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal.
When a pod of dolphins has been spotted, they are driven into a bay by the fishermen while banging on metal rods in the water to scare and confuse the dolphins.
It can be seen as the dolphin equivalent of a name for humans.
Two unusual and very rare hybrid dolphins, known as wolphins, are kept at the Sea Life Park in Hawaii, which is a cross between a bottlenose dolphin and a false killer whale.
They have fundic and pyloric chambers.
Duration of pulse  (ms)
Research in this field has suggested that cetaceans, among others, possess self-awareness.
A commonly reported tactic was for the whale to invert itself and violently thrash the surface of the water with its fluke, flipping and crushing nearby boats.
The estimated historic worldwide sperm whale population numbered 1,100,000 before commercial sperm whaling began in the early 18th century.
Before going on long dives, many toothed whales exhibit a behaviour known as sounding; they stay close to the surface for a series of short, shallow dives while building their oxygen reserves, and then make a sounding dive.
Only in larger whales, where the cementum is worn away on the tip of the tooth, does enamel show.
