Consequently, the teeth look unsightly, although the incidence of dental decay in those teeth is very small.
For example, in terms of oral health, it is better to eat a single dessert at dinner time than to snack on a bag of candy throughout the day.
Measuring 4–8&nbsp;μm in diameter, an enamel rod, formally called an enamel prism, is a tightly packed mass of hydroxyapatite crystals in an organized pattern.
Type 1 is a pattern where predominantly the enamel rods are dissolved; type 2 is a pattern where predominantly the area around the enamel rods are dissolved; and type 3 is a pattern where there is no evidence left of any enamel rods.
At some point before the tooth erupts into the mouth, but after the maturation stage, the ameloblasts are broken down.
9 months after birth
Primarymaxillarytooth
Enamel-like substances also coat the jaws of some crustacea.
Fluorosis leads to mottled enamel and occurs from overexposure to fluoride.
The matrix within the pit will eventually become an enamel rod, and the walls will eventually become interrod enamel.
Enamel formation is first seen in the crown stage.
During this process, amelogenins and ameloblastins are removed after use, leaving enamelins and tuftelin in the enamel.
9 months after birth
As in all human processes, the creation of enamel is complex, but can generally be divided into two stages.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease can also lead to enamel loss, as acid refluxes up the esophagus and into the mouth, occurring most during overnight sleep.
Oxygen radicals from the peroxide in the whitening agents contact the stains in the interprismatic spaces within the enamel layer.
In spite of this it can withstand bite forces as high as 1,000 N many times a day during chewing.
Thus, each band on the enamel rod demonstrates the work/rest pattern of the ameloblasts that generally occurs over a span of a week.
3 months after birth
Tooth enamel ranks 5 on Mohs hardness scale and has a Young's modulus of 83 GPa.
The enamel on primary teeth has a more opaque crystalline form and thus appears whiter than on permanent teeth.
The missing enamel could be localized, forming a small pit, or it could be completely absent.
The most important bacterium involved with tooth decay is ''Streptococcus mutans'', but the number and type of bacteria varies with the progress of tooth destruction.
The area around the enamel rod is known as interrod enamel.
In spite of this, there are still cases where deep fissures and grooves in enamel are removed in order to prevent decay, and a sealant may or may not be placed depending on the situation.
Furthermore, tooth morphology dictates that the most common site for the initiation of dental caries is in the deep grooves, pits, and fissures of enamel.
By the end of this stage, the enamel has completed its mineralization.
11 months after birth
The maintenance and repair of human tooth enamel is one of the primary concerns of dentistry.
Where fluoride is found naturally in high concentrations, filters are often used to decrease the amount of fluoride in water.
The border where the crystals of enamel rods and crystals of interrod enamel meet is called the rod sheath.
When the tissues of the developing tooth are seen under a microscope, different cellular aggregations can be identified, including structures known as the enamel organ, dental lamina, and dental papilla.
Working chemically, a bleaching agent is used to carry out an oxidation reaction in the enamel and dentin.
Cusps united; occlusalcompletely calcified
They have mild abrasives which aid in the removal of stains on enamel.
Similarly, eating a lesser quantity of sugar in one sitting does not decrease the time of demineralization.
'''Tooth enamel''' is one of the four major tissues that make up the tooth in humans and many other animals, including some species of fish.
Its twisted appearance results from the orientation of enamel rods and the rows in which they lie.
Enamel hypoplasia may also occur in dogs.
Enamel formation is part of the overall process of tooth development.
Consequently, care should be taken and risk evaluated when choosing a product which is very acidic.
For the most part, research has shown that the formation of tooth enamel in animals is almost identical to formation in humans.
Fluoride catalyzes the diffusion of calcium and phosphate into the tooth surface, which in turn remineralizes the crystalline structures in a dental cavity.
The combination of fluoride ion and QAS was found stronger antimicrobial effect on many oral bacteria associated with dental decay, including ''S.
Enamel is the hardest substance in the human body and contains the highest percentage of minerals, 96%, with water and organic material composing the rest.
The arrangement of the crystals within each enamel rod is highly complex.
When dentin, which normally supports enamel, is destroyed by a physiologic condition or by decay, enamel is unable to compensate for its brittleness and breaks away from the tooth easily.
Enamel does not contain collagen, as found in other hard tissues such as dentin and bone, but it does contain two unique classes of proteins: amelogenins and enamelins.
Thus, eating a great quantity of sugar at one time in the day is less detrimental than is a very small quantity ingested in many intervals throughout the day.
However, a tooth whitening product with an overall low pH can put enamel at risk for decay or destruction by demineralization.
Some researchers hypothesize that the lines are a result of the diurnal (circadian), or 24-hour, metabolic rhythm of the ameloblasts producing the enamel matrix, which consists of an active secretory work period followed by an inactive rest period during tooth development.
Invented in 1955, acid-etching employs dental etchants and is used frequently when bonding dental restoration to teeth.
Consequently, enamel, unlike many other tissues of the body, has no way to regenerate itself.
The noteworthy proteins involved are amelogenins, ameloblastins, enamelins, and tuftelins.
The variations of enamel that are present are infrequent but sometimes important.
Other nonbacterial processes of enamel destruction include abrasion (involving foreign elements, such as toothbrushes), erosion (involving chemical processes, such as dissolving by soft drinks  or lemon and other juices), and possibly abfraction (involving compressive and tensile forces).
In both of these instances, when unsupported by underlying dentin, that portion of the enamel is more vulnerable to fracture.
In the past, the process of placing dental sealants involved removing enamel in the deep fissures and grooves of a tooth, followed by replacing it with a restorative material.
Tooth whitening or tooth bleaching procedures attempt to lighten a tooth's color in either of two ways: by chemical or mechanical action.
In between two adjacent teeth, floss is used to wipe the enamel surfaces free of plaque and food particles to discourage bacterial growth.
Enamel is avascular and has no nerve supply within it and is not renewed, however, it is not a static tissue as it can undergo mineralization changes.
The recommended dosage of fluoride in drinking water depends on air temperature.
On radiographs, the differences in the mineralization of different portions of the tooth and surrounding periodontium can be noted; enamel appears lighter than dentin or pulp since it is denser than both and more radiopaque.
6 months after birth
The discoloration of teeth over time can result from exposure to substances such as tobacco, coffee, and tea.
Teeth not only appear whiter but also reflect light in increased amounts, which makes the teeth appear brighter as well.
Then, the hydroxyapatite crystals of enamel demineralize, allowing for greater bacterial invasion deeper into the tooth.
The basic unit of enamel is called an enamel rod.
The second stage, called the maturation stage, completes enamel mineralization.
In isolated societies that do not have access to toothbrushes, it is common for those people to use other objects, such as sticks, to clean their teeth.
The mineral distribution in rodent enamel is different from that of monkeys, dogs, pigs, and humans.
Though enamel is described as tough, it has a similar brittleness to glass,  making it, unlike other natural crack-resistant laminate structures such as shell and nacre, potentially vulnerable to fracture.
The truly destructive forces are the parafunctional movements, as found in bruxism, which can cause irreversible damage to the enamel.
Similar to human teeth, the enamel of dogs is vulnerable to tetracycline staining.
For this reason, codes have been developed by dental professionals to limit the amount of fluoride a person should take.
Once fully formed, it does not contain blood vessels or nerves.
A common misconception is that enamel wears away mostly from chewing, but actually teeth rarely touch during chewing.
Removing enamel is necessary when placing crowns and veneers to enhance the appearance of teeth.
When demineralization of enamel occurs, a dentist can use a sharp instrument, such as a dental explorer, and "feel a stick" at the location of the decay.
Studies show that patients who have whitened their teeth take better care of them.
In the rough endoplasmic reticulum of these cells, enamel proteins are released into the surrounding area and contribute to what is known as the enamel matrix, which is then partially mineralized by the enzyme alkaline phosphatase.
As a result, tetracycline is contraindicated in pregnant women.
Many groups of people have spoken out against fluoridated drinking water, for reasons such as the neurotoxicity of fluoride or the damage fluoride can do as fluorosis.
The most popular example is the dental sealant.
Interrod enamel has the same composition as enamel rod, however a histologic distinction is made between the two because crystal orientation is different in each.
Most countries have wide use of toothbrushes, which can reduce the number of dental biofilm and food particles on enamel.
Sugars from candies, soft drinks, and fruit juices play a significant role in tooth decay, and consequently in enamel destruction.
These deposits also occur in enamel and leave an appearance described as red in color and fluorescent.
Aesthetics is another reason for the removal of enamel.
The remineralized tooth surfaces contain fluoridated hydroxyapatite and fluorapatite, which resist acid attack much better than the original tooth did .
By dissolving minerals in enamel, etchants remove the outer 10&nbsp;micrometers on the enamel surface and make a porous layer 5&ndash;50 micrometers deep.
Tetracycline staining leads to brown bands on the areas of developing enamel.
Dentin, less mineralized and less brittle, 3–4 in hardness, compensates for enamel and is necessary as a support.
Important variables are the amount of time the etchant is applied, the type of etchant used, and the current condition of the enamel.
Enamel is formed on the tooth while the tooth is developing within the gum, before it erupts into the mouth.
Darker than the other incremental lines, the neonatal line is an incremental line that separates enamel formed before and after birth.
In the secretory stage, ameloblasts are polarized columnar cells.
5.5 months after birth
Gnarled enamel is found at the cusps of teeth.
Proteins used for the final mineralization process compose most of the transported material.
Remineralisation of teeth can repair damage to the tooth to a certain degree but damage beyond that cannot be repaired by the body.
In cross section, it is best compared to a keyhole, with the top, or head, oriented toward the crown of the tooth, and the bottom, or tail, oriented toward the root of the tooth.
Primarymandibulartooth
Studies show that whitening does not produce any ultrastructural or microhardness changes in the dental tissues.
Furthermore, whereas topical fluoride, found in toothpaste and mouthwashes, does not cause fluorosis, its effects are now considered more important than those of systemic fluoride, such as when drinking fluorinated water.
Bruxism, also known as clenching of or grinding on teeth, destroys enamel very quickly.
The generally recognized stages of tooth development are the bud stage, cap stage, bell stage, and crown, or calcification, stage.
The normal color of enamel varies from light yellow to grayish (bluish) white.
Once it is mature, enamel is almost totally without the softer organic matter.
A  peptide hydrogel is applied to the tooth.
Eating a greater quantity of sugar in one sitting does not increase the time of demineralization.
The staining occurs in the interprismatic region internally on the enamel, which causes the tooth to appear darker or more yellow overall.
Histologically, the most notable aspect of this phase is that these cells become striated, or have a ruffled border.
This allows for removal of superficial stains in the enamel.
At the edges of teeth where there is no dentin underlying the enamel, the color sometimes has a slightly blue or translucent off-white tone, easily observable on the upper incisors.
Nonetheless, enamel can sometimes be removed before there is any decay present.
Human enamel forms at a rate of around 4&nbsp;μm per day, beginning at the future location of cusps, around the third or fourth month of pregnancy.
This is expected because these locations are impossible to reach with a toothbrush and allow for bacteria to reside there.
This is typically the case in amalgam restorations and endodontic treatment.
Tooth enamel is found in the dermal denticles of sharks.
Perikymata are usually lost through tooth wear, except on the protected cervical regions of some teeth, especially the permanent maxillary central incisors, canines, and first premolars, and may be confused as dental calculus.
&nbsp;Enamel mineralization completed&nbsp;
This roughens the enamel microscopically and results in a greater surface area on which to bond.
Enamel rods are found in rows along the tooth, and within each row, the long axis of the enamel rod is generally perpendicular to the underlying dentin.
Fluoride ion, as an antimicrobial, may activate bacteria fluoride-induced genes associated with fluoride riboswitches.
Amelogenesis, or enamel formation, occurs after the first establishment of dentin, via cells known as ameloblasts.
Children up to age 8 can develop mottled enamel from taking tetracycline.
Perikymata which are associated with the Striae are shallow grooves noted clinically on the nonmasticatory surfaces of some teeth in the oral cavity.
The hypocalcification type, which is the most common, is an autosomal dominant condition that results in enamel that is not completely mineralized.
2.5 months after birth
Cusps united; occlusal incompletely calcified;calcified tissue covers 1/5 to 1⁄4 crown height
Lately, dental professionals are looking for other ways to present fluoride (such as in varnish) or other mineralizing products such as Amorphous calcium phosphate to the community in the form of topical procedures,either done by professionals or self-administered.
When the pH in the mouth initially decreases from the ingestion of sugars, the enamel is demineralized and left vulnerable for about 30 minutes.
It makes up the normally visible part of the tooth, covering the crown.
In horse teeth, the enamel and dentin layers are intertwined with each other, which increases the strength and wear resistance of those teeth.
The configuration of the tooth also acts to reduce the tensile stresses that cause fractures during biting.
Furthermore, normal tooth contact is compensated physiologically by the periodontal ligaments (pdl) and the arrangement of dental occlusion.
When this occurs, stains will be bleached and the teeth now appear lighter in color.
Microabrasion techniques employ both methods.
When this first layer is formed, the ameloblasts move away from the dentin, allowing for the development of Tomes’ processes at the apical pole of the cell.
:* Nasmyth membrane or enamel cuticle, structure of embryological origin is composed of keratin which gives rise to the enamel organ.
'''Progress of enamel formation for primary teeth'''
Frequently, the purpose of removal is to gain access to the underlying decay in the dentin or inflammation in the pulp.
There are 14 different types of amelogenesis imperfecta.
The other major tissues are dentin, cementum, and dental pulp.
An acid is used first to weaken the outer 22&ndash;27 micrometers of enamel in order to weaken it enough for the subsequent abrasive force.
Sealants are unique in that they are preventative restorations for protection from future decay, and have shown to reduce the risk of decay by 55% over 7 years.
These codes are supported by the American Dental Association and the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry;
Striae of Retzius are incremental lines that appear brown in a stained section of mature enamel.
These signs demonstrate that the ameloblasts have changed their function from production, as in the secretory stage, to transportation.
As one would expect, the neonatal line is found in all primary teeth and in the larger cusps of the permanent first molars.
In humans, enamel varies in thickness over the surface of the tooth, often thickest at the cusp, up to 2.5&nbsp;mm, and thinnest at its border with the cementum at the cementoenamel junction (CEJ).
Celiac disease, a disorder characterized by an auto-immune response to gluten, also commonly results in demineralization of the enamel.
Enamel is covered by various structures in relation to the development of tooth:
Contrary to common belief, it is not the amount of sugar ingested but the frequency of sugar ingestion that is the most important factor in the causation of tooth decay.
UK scientists at Bristol University and the University of Leeds Dental Institute have developed gels which can regenerate decayed or damaged tooth enamel.
In the maturation stage, the ameloblasts transport substances used in the formation of enamel.
Dogs are less likely than humans to have tooth decay due to the high pH of dog saliva, which prevents an acidic environment from forming and the subsequent demineralization of enamel which would occur.
As enamel continues to become less mineralized and is unable to prevent the encroachment of bacteria, the underlying dentin becomes affected as well.
Enamel formation continues around the adjoining ameloblasts, resulting in a walled area, or pit, that houses a Tomes’ process, and also around the end of each Tomes’ process, resulting in a deposition of enamel matrix inside of each pit.
In the event that tooth decay does occur (usually from trauma), dogs can receive dental fillings just as humans do.
Since enamel is semitranslucent, the color of dentin and any material underneath the enamel strongly affects the appearance of a tooth.
Mineralization of the incipient lesion instead of restoration later is a prime goal of most dental professionals.
Amount of enamel formed at birth
Because enamel is vulnerable to demineralization, prevention of tooth decay is the best way to maintain the health of teeth.
Understanding enamel orientation is very important in restorative dentistry, because enamel unsupported by underlying dentin is prone to fracture.
In permanent teeth, the enamel rods near the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) tilt slightly toward the root of the tooth.
Tooth whiteners in toothpastes work through a mechanical action.
This is important for long-term use of some materials, such as composites and sealants.
There are three types of patterns formed by acid-etching.
Enamel crystals in the head of the enamel rod are oriented parallel to the long axis of the rod.
The first stage, called the secretory stage, involves proteins and an organic matrix forming a partially mineralized enamel.
The arrangement of enamel rods is understood more clearly than their internal structure.
In addition to bacterial invasion, enamel is also susceptible to other destructive forces.
Fluoride therapy is used to help prevent dental decay.
Enamel can be affected further by non-pathologic processes.
The scientists claim to have seen "highly significant" levels of repair in which signs of decay have been reversed months after a single application of the compound.
This forms into a protein scaffold onto which new enamel-forming calcium is deposited from the saliva.
Differences exist, certainly, in the morphology, number, and types of teeth among animals.
Formed from changes in diameter of Tomes’ processes, these incremental lines demonstrate the growth of enamel, similar to the annual rings on a tree on transverse sections of enamel.
Enamel hypoplasia is broadly defined to encompass all deviations from normal enamel in its various degrees of absence.
The wear rate of enamel, called attrition, is 8&nbsp;micrometers a year from normal factors.
Although this can be an effective method, it does not alter the intrinsic color of teeth.
10 months after birth
Both ameloblasts (the cells which initiate enamel formation) and Tomes' processes affect the crystals' pattern.
The mouth contains a great number and variety of bacteria, and when sucrose, the most common of sugars, coats the surface of the mouth, some intraoral bacteria interact with it and form lactic acid, which decreases the pH in the mouth.
Enameloid covers some fish scales.
The primary mineral is hydroxyapatite, which is a crystalline calcium phosphate.
The hypoplastic type is X-linked and results in normal enamel that appears in too little quantity, having the same effect as the most common type.
They contain irregular structures of enamel prisms with disordered crystal arrangements basically formed by the abrupt bending of the prisms towards the root; usually, the prisms gradually bent back again to regain their previous orientation.
Besides concluding that type 1 is the most favorable pattern and type 3 the least, the explanation for these different patterns is not known for certain but is most commonly attributed to different crystal orientation in the enamel.
Cusps united; occlusalincompletely calcified
The effects of acid-etching on enamel can vary.
2.5 months after birth
Most dental restorations involve the removal of enamel.
Erythropoietic porphyria is a genetic disease resulting in the deposition of porphyrins throughout the body.
Fluoride can be found in many locations naturally, such as the ocean and other water sources.
It is a very hard, white to off white, highly mineralised substance that acts as a barrier to protect the tooth but can become susceptible to degradation, especially by acids from food and drink.
The agents most commonly used to intrinsically change the color of teeth are hydrogen peroxide and carbamide peroxide.
Fluorosis is a condition resulting from the overexposure to fluoride, especially between the ages of 6&nbsp;months and 5&nbsp;years, and appears as mottled enamel.
