The Ebers papyrus (1500 BC) details a recipe to treat "gnawing of the blood in the tooth", which included fruit of the gebu plant, onion, cake, and dough, to be chewed for four days.
The majority of pulpal toothache falls into one of the following types; however, other rare causes (which do not always fit neatly into these categories) include galvanic pain and barodontalgia.
The gingiva covers the alveolar processes, the tooth-bearing arches of the jaws.
In effect, the character is rebuking his friend for trying to make him feel better with philosophical platitudes.
A periodontal abscess can occur as the result of tooth fracture, food packing into a periodontal pocket (with poorly shaped fillings), calculus build-up, and lowered immune responses (such as in diabetes).
In Act V, scene 1, another character remarks: ''"For there was never yet philosopher That could endure the toothache patiently."''
If neither of those measures succeeds, or they are impossible, incision and drainage may be required, in which a small incision is made in the soft tissues directly over the abscess at the most dependent point.
The medieval surgeon Guy de Chauliac used a camphor, sulfur, myrrh, and asafetida mixture to fill teeth and cure toothworm and toothache.
The oral mucosa covering an early periodontal abscess appears erythematous (red), swollen, shiny, and painful to touch.
The physical component of pain is processed in the medullary spinal cord and perceived in the frontal cortex.
The key difference between the two is that the pulp of the tooth tends to be alive, and will respond normally to pulp tests.
Correct diagnosis can sometimes be challenging.
Irreversible pulpitis and pulp necrosis are treated with either root canal therapy or extraction.
This leaves the tooth partially erupted into the mouth, and there frequently is a flap of gum (an operculum), overlying the tooth.
The pain is moderate to severe, and dull, aching, and throbbing in character.
Pliny advises toothache sufferers to ask a frog to take away the pain by moonlight.
The pain pathway is mostly transmitted via myelinated Aδ (sharp or stabbing pain) and unmyelinated C nerve fibers (slow, dull, aching, or burning pain) of the trigeminal nerve, which supplies sensation to the teeth and gums via many divisions and branches.
Decay can lead to collapse of part of the tooth, or a dental restoration may not accurately reproduce the contact point.
Caustic toothache remedies require careful application to the tooth only, without coming into excessive contact with the soft tissues of the mouth.
Healing is delayed, and it is treated with local anesthetic dressings, which are typically required for five to seven days.
On the other hand, diets were frequently coarser, leading to more tooth wear.
Enamel is not a vital tissue, as it lacks blood vessels, nerves, and living cells.
The treatment depends on the cause of the toothache, and frequently a clinical decision regarding the current state and long-term prognosis of the affected tooth, as well as the individual's wishes and ability to cope with dental treatment, will influence the treatment choice.
The periodontal ligament connects the roots to the bony socket.
For instance, cardiac pain (which can make the bottom teeth hurt) usually radiates up from the chest and neck, and sinusitis (which can make the back top teeth hurt) is worsened by bending over.
Larger pockets also have a greater likelihood of collecting food debris, creating additional sources of infection.
Pulpitis is classified as reversible when the pain is mild to moderate and lasts for a short time after a stimulus (for instance, cold or sweet); or irreversible when the pain is severe, spontaneous, and lasts a long time after a stimulus.
The occurrence of a periodontal abscess usually indicates advanced periodontal disease, which requires correct management to prevent recurrent abscesses, including daily cleaning below the gumline to prevent the buildup of subgingival plaque and calculus.
Vertical fractures can be very difficult to identify because the crack can rarely be probed or seen on radiographs, as the fracture runs in the plane of conventional films (similar to how the split between two adjacent panes of glass is invisible when facing them).
Dental pain can simulate virtually any facial pain syndrome.
Toothache caused by a periodontal abscess is generally deep and throbbing.
Generally, NSAIDs are as effective as aspirin alone or in combination with codeine.
That is, reduction in the number times that refined sugars are consumed per day and brushing the teeth twice a day with fluoride toothpaste and flossing.
Reversible pulpitis can be stopped by removal of the cavity and the placement of a sedative dressing of any part of the cavity that is near the pulp chamber.
The usual cause of food impaction is disruption of the normal interproximal contour or drifting of teeth so that a gap is created (an open contact).
In Kathmandu, Nepal, there is a shrine to Vaishya Dev, the Newar god of toothache.
Albucasis (Abu al-Qasim Khalaf ibn al-Abbas Al-Zahrawi) used cautery for toothache, inserting a red-hot needle into the pulp of the tooth.
Lateral periodontitis (which is usually without any thermal sensitivity and sensitive to biting) can cause pulpitis and the tooth becomes sensitive to cold.
The periodontal ligament becomes inflamed and there may be pain when biting or tapping on the tooth.
However, an acute form of gingivitis/periodontitis, termed acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG), can develop, often suddenly.
A hallmark is that there is no obvious dental cause, and signs and symptoms elsewhere in the body may be present.
As migraines are typically present for many years, the diagnosis is easier to make.
Such lesions are termed periodontic-endodontic lesions, and they may be acutely painful, sharing similar signs and symptoms with a periodontal abscess, or they may cause mild pain or no pain at all if they are chronic and free-draining.
Because pain perception involves overlapping sensory systems and an emotional component, individual responses to identical stimuli are variable.
Toothache also appears in a number of William Shakespeare's plays, such as ''Othello'' and ''Cymbeline''.
Over time, the pulp usually adapts by producing new layers of dentin inside the pulp chamber called tertiary dentin, increasing the thickness between the pulp and the exposed dentin surface and lessening the hypersensitivity.
As samples for microbiologic culture and sensitivity are hardly ever carried out in general dental practice, broad-spectrum antibiotics such as amoxicillin are typically used for a short course of about three to seven days.
Pericoronitis is inflammation of the soft tissues surrounding the crown of a partially erupted tooth.
Irreversible pulpitis is thought to be the most common reason that people seek emergency dental treatment.
Clinical examination moves from the outside to the inside, and from the general to the specific.
From the history, indicators of pulpal, periodontal, a combination of both, or non-dental causes can be observed.
As the pocket deepens, the balance is disrupted, and an acute inflammatory response results, forming pus.
However, antibiotics typically only temporarily suppress a developmental infection, and the need for definitive treatment is only postponed for an unpredictable length of time.
Severe infections tend to be managed in hospital.
However, the reality is that antibiotics are rarely needed, and they should be used restrictively in dentistry.
Inflammation therefore increases pressure in the pulp system, potentially compressing the blood vessels which supply the pulp.
The tooth may be raised in the socket and feel more prominent than the adjacent teeth.
In the Elizabethan era, toothache was an ailment associated with lovers, as in Massinger and Fletcher's play ''The False One''.
In general, chronic periodontal conditions do not cause any pain.
Consequently, pathologic processes involving only enamel, such as shallow cavities or cracks, tend to be painless.
If abscess drainage has been achieved, antibiotics are not usually necessary.
Hypersensitivity is most commonly caused by a lack of insulation from the triggers in the mouth due to gingival recession (receding gums) exposing the roots of the teeth, although it can occur after scaling and root planing or dental bleaching, or as a result of erosion.
a tooth may only have reversible pulpitis, but has been structurally weakened by decay or trauma to the point that it is impossible to restore the tooth in the long term.
Treatment of reversible pulpitis is by removing or correcting the causative factor.
The pain is localized to the socket, and may radiate.
Local and distant structures (such as ear, brain, carotid artery, or heart) can also refer pain to the teeth.
Antibiotics tend to be extensively used for emergency dental problems.
Very rarely, a brain tumor might cause toothache.
Finally, the teeth are examined.
Abscesses usually cause throbbing pain.
Atypical odontalgia may give very unusual symptoms, such as pain which migrates from one tooth to another and which crosses anatomical boundaries (such as from the left teeth to the right teeth).
The gingival papilla is swollen, tender and bleeds when touched.
A periodontal abscess (lateral abscess) is a collection of pus that forms in the gingival crevices, usually as a result of chronic periodontitis where the pockets are pathologically deepened greater than 3mm.
The debris and swelling then disrupt the normal flow of fluids into and out of the pocket, rapidly accelerating the inflammatory cycle.
In a toothache, nerves are stimulated by either exogenous sources (for instance, bacterial toxins, metabolic byproducts, chemicals, or trauma) or endogenous factors (such as inflammatory mediators).
Dentin contains many microscopic tubes containing fluid and the processes of odontoblast cells, which communicate with the pulp.
In a survey of Australian schoolchildren, 12% had experienced toothache before the age of five, and 32% by the age of 12.
Accordingly, there is no single test or combination of symptoms that accurately diagnose a fracture or crack, although when pain can be stimulated by causing separation of the cusps of the tooth, it's highly suggestive of the disorder.
The bone between the floor of the maxillary sinus and the roots of the upper back teeth is very thin, and frequently the apices of these teeth disrupt the contour of the sinus floor.
Disorders of the maxillary sinus can be referred to the upper back teeth.
Antibiotics are seen as a "quick fix" by both dentists, who generally only have a very short time to manage dental emergencies, and by patients, who tend to want to avoid treatments (such as tooth extraction) which are perceived negatively.
Since many cases of toothache are inflammatory in nature, over the counter non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may help (unless contraindicated, such as  with a peptic ulcer).
Pellitory (Anacyclus pyrethrum) was traditionally used to relieve toothache.
Alveolar osteitis is a complication of tooth extraction (especially lower wisdom teeth) in which the blood clot is not formed or is lost, leaving the socket where the tooth used to be empty, and bare bone is exposed to the mouth.
History is also important in recent filling or other dental treatment, and trauma to the teeth.
The posterior, middle and anterior superior alveolar nerves are all closely associated with the lining of the sinus.
Infection of the periapical tissue will generally resolve with the treatment of the pulp, unless it has expanded to cellulitis or a radicular cyst.
The shrine consists of part of an old tree to which sufferers of toothache nail a rupee coin in order to ask the god to relieve their pain.
Various conditions may involve the alveolar bone, and cause non-odontogenic toothache, such as Burkitt's lymphoma, infarcts in the jaws caused by sickle cell disease, and osteomyelitis.
In 2013, 223 million cases of tooth pain occurred as a result of dental caries in permanent teeth and 53 million cases occurred in baby teeth.
The pain occurs during and after eating, and may slowly disappear before being evoked again at the next meal, or relieved immediately by using a tooth pick or dental floss in the involved area.
In pulpitis, an important distinction in regard to treatment is whether the inflammation is reversible or irreversible.
Spontaneous pain may occur if the firing threshold is decreased so it can fire without stimulus (hyperalgesia).
She was an early Christian martyr who was persecuted for her beliefs in Alexandria during the Imperial Roman age.
Bacteria and food debris accumulate beneath the operculum, which is an area that is difficult to keep clean because it is hidden and far back in the mouth.
A tooth is composed of an outer shell of calcified hard tissues (from hardest to softest: enamel, dentin, and cementum), and an inner soft tissue core (the pulp system), which contains nerves and blood vessels.
The treatment of a periodontal abscess is similar to the management of dental abscesses in general (see: Treatment).
Non-dental causes of toothache are much less common as compared with dental causes.
It is one of the most common reasons for emergency dental appointments.
There are no specific treatments for nondental pain (each treatment is directed at the cause of the pain, rather than the toothache itself), but a dentist can assist in offering potential sources of the pain and direct the patient to appropriate care.
All this information is then collated and used to build a clinical picture, and a differential diagnosis can be carried out.
The diagnostic approach for toothache is generally carried out in the following sequence: history, followed by examination, and investigations.
Pain is an unpleasant sensation caused by intense or damaging events.
It was written in cuneiform, recovered from the Euphrates valley, and dates from around 5000 BC.
The teeth and gums exhibit normal sensations in health.
Another chronic facial pain syndrome which can mimic toothache is temporomandibular disorder (temporomandibular joint pain-dysfunction syndrome), which is very common.
An estimated 10% of all antibiotic prescriptions are made by dentists, a major factor in antibiotic resistance.
It does not occur because of pulp necrosis, meaning that a tooth that tests as if it's alive (vital) may cause apical periodontitis, and a pulp which has become non-vital due to a sterile, non-infectious processes (such as trauma) may not cause any apical periodontitis.
Such a treatment is sometimes termed open drainage.
Generally, the long-term prognosis of perio-endo lesions is poor.
Evidence of systemic involvement (such as a fever higher than 38.5&nbsp;°C, cervical lymphadenopathy, or malaise) also indicates antibiotic therapy, as do rapidly spreading infections, cellulitis, or severe pericoronitis.
dental decay) is the effect of an acute and acrid humour.
They are often used inappropriately, in conditions for which they are ineffective, or their risks outweigh the benefits, such as irreversible pulpitis, apical abscess, dry socket, or mild pericoronitis.
Severe trismus may occur in when the muscles of mastication are involved in an odontogenic infection, making any surgical treatment impossible.
However, simple analgesics may have little effect on some causes of toothache, and the severe pain can drive individuals to exceed the maximum dose.
In the mouth, the soft tissues of the gingiva, mucosa, tongue, and pharynx are examined for redness, swelling or deformity.
The lump of wood is called the "toothache tree" and is said to have been cut from the legendary tree, Bangemudha.
Irritation, localized discomfort or mild pain and a feeling of pressure from between the two teeth results.
Drainage can also be performed via the tooth socket, once the causative tooth is extracted.
Ludwig's angina and cavernous sinus thrombosis are rare but serious complications of odontogenic infections.
This leads to a sensation of throbbing (often in time with the pulse) and constant pain.
If the pus drains into the mouth, there is usually a bad or offensive taste.
The pulp of the tooth remains normal and healthy in dentin hypersensitivity.
The success rate of restorative treatment and sedative dressings in reversible pulpitis, depends on the extent of the disease, as well as several technical factors, such as the sedative agent used and whether a rubber dam was used.
This condition is not contagious, but multiple cases may simultaneously occur in populations who share the same risk factors (such as students in a dormitory during a period of examination).
A healthy gingival pocket will contain bacteria and some calculus kept in check by the immune system.
More than one factor may be involved in the toothache.
Irreversible pulpitis causes spontaneous or lingering pain in response to cold.
Another example is decay of the tooth root which is hidden from view below the gumline, giving the casual appearance of a sound tooth if careful periodontal examination is not carried out.
As irreversible pulpitis generates an apical abscess, the character of the toothache may simply change without any pain-free period.
There is reference to "toothworm" as the cause of toothache and to tooth extraction as a cure ("draw it").
or air), sweet or spicy foods, and beverages.
Various conditions of the trigeminal nerve can masquerade as toothache, including trigeminal zoster (maxillary or mandibular division), trigeminal neuralgia, cluster headache, and trigeminal neuropathies.
Should the fracture extend though the pulp chamber and into the root, the prognosis of the tooth is hopeless.
Consequently, the saying "horses, not zebras"  has been applied to the differential diagnosis of orofacial pain.
For example, a pulpal abscess (which is typically severe, spontaneous and localized) can cause periapical periodontitis (which results in pain on biting).
Based on the most common causes of toothache (dentin hypersensitivity, periodontitis, and pulpitis), the key indicators become localization of the pain (whether the pain is perceived as originating in a specific tooth), thermal sensitivity, pain on biting, spontaneity of the pain, and factors that make the pain worse.The various qualities of the toothache, such as the effect of biting and chewing on the pain, the effect of thermal stimuli, and the effect of the pain on sleep, are verbally established by the clinician, usually in a systematic fashion, such as using the Socrates pain assessment method (see table).
Teeth will normally have some sensation to these triggers, but what separates hypersensitivity from regular tooth sensation is the intensity of the pain.
In the United States, an estimated 12% of the general population reported that they suffered from toothache at some point in the six months before questioning.
Common marginal gingivitis in response to subgingival plaque is usually a painless condition.
Often, administration of an intra-oral local anesthetic such as lidocaine and epinephrine is indicated in order to carry out pain-free treatment.
For example, when acetaminophen (paracetamol) is taken for toothache, an accidental overdose is more likely to occur when compared to people who are taking acetaminophen for other reasons.
Typical signs and symptoms of a pericoronal abscess include severe, throbbing pain, which may radiate to adjacent areas in the head and neck, redness, swelling and tenderness of the gum over the tooth.
ANUG is treated over several visits, first with debridement of the necrotic gingiva, homecare with hydrogen peroxide mouthwash, analgesics and, when the pain has subsided sufficiently, cleaning below the gumline, both professionally and at home.
The symptoms of reversible pulpitis may disappear, either because the noxious stimulus is removed, such as when dental decay is removed and a filling placed, or because new layers of dentin (tertiary dentin) have been produced inside the pulp chamber, insulating against the stimulus.
Chronic pericoronitis may not cause any pain, but an acute pericoronitis episode is often associated with pericoronal abscess formation.
The field of regenerative endodontics is now developing ways to clean the pulp chamber and regenerate the soft and hard tissues to either regrow or simulate pulp structure.
The belief that tooth decay and dental pain is caused by tooth worms is found in ancient India, Egypt, Japan, and China, and persists until the Age of Enlightenment.
The ancient Egyptians also wore amulets to prevent toothache.
Acute apical periodontitis is characterized by well-localized, spontaneous, persistent, moderate to severe pain.
Occlusal trauma results from excessive biting forces exerted on teeth, which overloads the peridontal ligament, causing periodontal pain and a reversible increase in tooth mobility.
However, since the tooth is typically alive, there is no difficulty in accessing the source of infection and, therefore, antibiotics are more routinely used in conjunction with scaling and root planing.
Local measures such as incision and drainage, and removal of the cause of the infection (such as a necrotic tooth pulp) have a greater therapeutic benefit and are much more important.
In the wider context of orofacial pain, all cases of orofacial pain may be considered as having a dental origin until proven otherwise.
Antibiotics tend to be used when local measures cannot be carried out immediately.
Supposedly, toothache sufferers who invoke her name will find relief.
Rather, it is acute inflammation which is responsible for the pain.
The clinical examination narrows the source down to a specific tooth, teeth, or a non-dental cause.
Antibiotics are not indicated in ANUG management unless there is underlying systemic disease.
A surgical instrument such as a pair of tweezers is gently inserted into the incision and opened, while the abscess is massaged to encourage the pus to drain out.
On an X-ray, bone resporption appears as a radiolucent area around the end of the root, although this does not manifest immediately.
Dental trauma could also be significantly reduced by routine use of mouthguards in contact sports.
The term is falling into disfavor and has given way to the more generalized description of fractures and cracks of the tooth, which allows for the wide variations in signs, symptoms, and prognosis for traumatized teeth.
Underneath the cementum and enamel layers, dentin forms the bulk of the tooth and surrounds the pulp system.
Although toothache is an ancient problem, it is thought that ancient people suffered less dental decay due to a lack of refined sugars in their diet.
Periodontitis and dental caries may develop on either the third or second molars, and chronic inflammation develops in the soft tissues.
Toothache is the most common type of orofacial pain and, when severe, it is considered a dental emergency, since there may be a significant impact on sleep, eating, and other daily activities.
The part of the pulp inside the crown is the pulp chamber, and the central soft tissue nutrient canals within each root are root canals, exiting through one or more holes at the root end (apical foramen/foramina).
Periodontal pain is frequently localized to a particular tooth, which is made much worse by biting on the tooth, sudden in onset, and associated with bleeding and pain when brushing.
Treatment may range from simple advice, removal of dental decay with a dental drill and subsequent placement of a filling, to root canal treatment, tooth extraction, or debridement.
Successful root canal therapy is required before periodonal treatment is attempted.
Although the logic of placing a tablet against the painful tooth is understandable, an aspirin tablet needs to be swallowed to have any pain-killing effect.
Individuals aged 18–34 reported much higher experience of toothache than those aged 75 or over.
Prickly ash (Zanthoxylum americanum) is sometimes termed "toothache tree", and its bark, "toothache bark"; whilst Ctenium Americanum is sometimes termed "toothache grass", and Acmella oleracea is called "toothache plant".
For instance, the periodontal ligament can detect the pressure exerted when biting on something smaller than a grain of sand (10-30&nbsp;µm).
Claudius' physician Scribonius Largus recommends ''"fumigations made with the seeds of the hyoscyamus scattered on burning charcoal&nbsp; ... followed by rinsings of the mouth with hot water, in this way&nbsp; ... small worms are expelled."''
Treatment for acute conditions includes cleaning the area under the operculum with an antiseptic solution, painkillers, and antibiotics if indicated.
Toothache which has no identifiable dental or medical cause is often termed atypical odontalgia, which, in turn, is usually considered a type of atypical facial pain (or persistent idiopathic facial pain).
Classically, sinusitis pain increases upon Valsalva maneuvers or tilting the head forward.
In this role, antibiotics suppress the infection until local measures can be carried out.
The lower wisdom tooth is the last tooth to erupt into the mouth, and is, therefore, more frequently impacted, or stuck, against the other teeth.
Other non-dental causes of toothache include myofascial pain (muscle pain) and angina pectoris (which classically refers pain to the lower jaw).
Cracked tooth syndrome may also cause a combination of symptoms.
French anatomist Ambroise Paré recommended: ''"Toothache is, of all others, the most atrocious pain that can torment a man, being followed by death.
Drooling and difficulty swallowing are signs that the airway may be threatened, and may precede difficulty in breathing.
Pus may be evacuated via the tooth by drilling into the pulp chamber (an endodontic access cavity).
First it causes reversible pulpitis, which transitions to irreversible pulpitis, then to necrosis, then to necrosis with periapical periodontitis and, finally, to necrosis with periapical abscess.
Diagnosing and relieving toothache is considered one of the main responsibilities of dentists.
The relief of toothache is considered one of the main responsibilities of dentists.
The treatment of a toothache depends upon the exact cause, and may involve a filling, root canal treatment, extraction, drainage of pus, or other remedial action.
When toothache results from dental trauma (regardless of the exact pulpal or periodontal diagnosis), the treatment and prognosis is dependent on the extent of damage to the tooth, the stage of development of the tooth, the degree of displacement or, when the tooth is avulsed, the time out of the socket and the starting health of the tooth and bone.
The poem elaborates on the severity of toothache, describing it as the "hell o' a' diseases" (hell of all diseases).
Outside of the mouth, the sinuses, muscles of the face and neck, the temporomandibular joints, and cervical lymph nodes are palpated for pain or swelling.
The diagnosis of toothache can be challenging, not only because the list of potential causes is extensive, but also because dental pain may be extremely variable, and pain can be referred to and from the teeth.
Generally, there is no difference in outcomes between whether the root canal treatment is completed in one or multiple appointments.
Because of the high variation in treatment and prognosis, dentists often use trauma guides to help determine prognosis and direct treatment decisions.
Archigenes of Apamea describes use of a mouthwash made by boiling gallnuts and hallicacabum in vinegar, and a mixture of roasted earthworms, spikenard ointment, and crushed spider eggs.
Left untreated, pulpitis may become irreversible, then progress to pulp necrosis (death of the pulp) and apical periodontitis.
Reversible/irreversible pulpitis is a distinct concept from whether the tooth is restorable or unrestorable, e.g.
A number of plants and trees include "toothache" in their common name.
