Rotating wall clouds may be a visual manifestation of a low-level mesocyclone.
Since many tornadoes are audible only when very near, sound is not reliable warning of a tornado.
Gulf of Mexico and Mediterranean Sea) increases atmospheric moisture content.
A ''multiple-vortex tornado'' is a type of tornado in which two or more columns of spinning air rotate about their own axis and at the same time around a common center.
In official tornado statistics, waterspouts are generally not counted unless they affect land, though some European weather agencies count waterspouts and tornadoes together.
Tornadoes occurring in these conditions are especially dangerous, since only weather radar observations, or possibly the sound of an approaching tornado, serve as any warning to those in the storm's path.
The program was called Skywarn, and the spotters were local sheriff's deputies, state troopers, firefighters, ambulance drivers, amateur radio operators, civil defense (now emergency management) spotters, storm chasers, and ordinary citizens.
Various sounds of tornadoes have been reported, mostly related to familiar sounds for the witness and generally some variation of a whooshing roar.
Reasons for this include the region's high population density, poor construction quality, and lack of tornado safety knowledge.
File:NorthSeaTornadoEF0.jpg| A rare F0 Tornado in its final stages over the North Sea near Vrångö, Sweden on July 17, 2011
The similar TORRO scale ranges from a T0 for extremely weak tornadoes to T11 for the most powerful known tornadoes.
They are formed when fast moving cold, dry outflow air from a thunderstorm is blown through a mass of stationary, warm, moist air near the outflow boundary, resulting in a "rolling" effect (often exemplified through a roll cloud).
This is mostly due to the unique geography of the continent.
A multi-vortex structure can occur in almost any circulation, but is very often observed in intense tornadoes.
This downdraft accelerates as it approaches the ground, and drags the supercell's rotating mesocyclone towards the ground with it.
In 1953 it was confirmed that hook echoes are associated with tornadoes.
If there is no break in activity, this is considered a tornado outbreak (although the term "tornado outbreak" has various definitions).
As a general rule, no area is safe from tornadoes, though some areas are more susceptible than others.
Even experienced storm observers may not be able to tell the difference between a low-hanging cloud and a wedge tornado from a distance.
They are often referred to as '''twisters''' or '''cyclones''', although the word cyclone is used in meteorology to name any closed low pressure circulation.
Research has found that fewer tornadoes and hailstorms occur in winter and spring in the U.S. central and southern plains during El Niño, and more occur during La Niña, than in years when temperatures in the Pacific are relatively stable.
Supercells contain mesocyclones, an area of organized rotation a few miles up in the atmosphere, usually 1–6&nbsp;miles (2–10&nbsp;km) across.
A tornado that affected Hallam, Nebraska on May 22, 2004, was up to  wide at the ground, and a tornado in El Reno, Oklahoma on May 31, 2013 was approximately  wide, the widest on record.
Funnel clouds and small tornadoes are reported as whistling, whining, humming, or the buzzing of innumerable bees or electricity, or more or less harmonic, whereas many tornadoes are reported as a continuous, deep rumbling, or an irregular sound of "noise".
Waterspouts and tornadoes have been advanced as an explanation for instances of raining fish and other animals.
They also occasionally occur in south-central and eastern Asia, northern and east-central South America, Southern Africa, northwestern and southeast Europe, western and southeastern Australia, and New Zealand.
The highest wind speed ever measured in a tornado, which is also the highest wind speed ever recorded on the planet, is 301&nbsp;±&nbsp;20&nbsp;mph (484&nbsp;±&nbsp;32&nbsp;km/h) in the F5 Bridge Creek-Moore, Oklahoma, tornado which killed 36 people.
If there is enough low level wind shear, the column of hot, rising air can develop a small cyclonic motion that can be seen near the ground.
In addition to tornadoes, very heavy rain, frequent lightning, strong wind gusts, and hail are common in such storms.
Also under study are the low-level mesocyclone and the stretching of low-level vorticity which tightens into a tornado, in particular, what are the processes and what is the relationship of the environment and the convective storm.
The phenomenon can occur over water, when cold arctic air passes over relatively warm water.
Increased westerly flow off the Rockies force the formation of a dry line when the flow aloft is strong, while the Gulf of Mexico fuels abundant low-level moisture in the southerly flow to its east.
The EF Scale was designed so that a tornado rated on the Fujita scale would receive the same numerical rating, and was implemented starting in the United States in 2007.
Tornadoes often begin as funnel clouds with no associated strong winds at the surface, and not all funnel clouds evolve into tornadoes.
A wedge can be so wide that it appears to be a block of dark clouds, wider than the distance from the cloud base to the ground.
The previous record was the 1974 Super Outbreak which spawned 148 tornadoes.
Tornadoes come in many shapes and sizes, but they are typically in the form of a visible condensation funnel, whose narrow end touches the earth and is often encircled by a cloud of debris and dust.
Other tornado-like phenomena that exist in nature include the gustnado, dust devil, fire whirls, and steam devil; downbursts are frequently confused with tornadoes, though their action is dissimilar.
The storm is contracting into a rope-like tube and, due to conservation of angular momentum, winds can increase at this point.
The safest place is the side or corner of an underground room opposite the tornado's direction of approach (usually the northeast corner), or the central-most room on the lowest floor.
Before the 1950s, the only method of detecting a tornado was by someone seeing it on the ground.
Because they are not connected with a cloud base, there is some debate as to whether or not gustnadoes are tornadoes.
Tornadoes vary in intensity regardless of shape, size, and location, though strong tornadoes are typically larger than weak tornadoes.
Lightning is said to be the source of illumination for those who claim to have seen the interior of a tornado.
Under the storm and closer to where most tornadoes are found, evidence of a supercell and likelihood of a tornado includes inflow bands (particularly when curved) such as a "beaver tail", and other clues such as strength of inflow, warmth and moistness of inflow air, how outflow- or inflow-dominant a storm appears, and how far is the front flank precipitation core from the wall cloud.
Electromagnetics and lightning have little or nothing to do directly with what drives tornadoes (tornadoes are basically a thermodynamic phenomenon), although there are likely connections with the storm and environment affecting both phenomena.
Hot springs and deserts may also be suitable locations for a tighter, faster-rotating steam devil to form.
They most often form from smoke issuing from a power plant's smokestack.
Tornadoes also produce identifiable inaudible infrasonic signatures.
When a warning is issued, going to a basement or an interior first-floor room of a sturdy building greatly increases chances of survival.
Taking shelter in a basement, under a staircase, or under a sturdy piece of furniture such as a workbench further increases chances of survival.
Due to the Venturi effect, tornadic winds are accelerated in the confined space of an overpass.
Fair weather waterspouts are less severe but far more common, and are similar to dust devils and landspouts.
They are generally classified as non-supercellular tornadoes that develop over bodies of water, but there is disagreement over whether to classify them as true tornadoes.
According to the ''Glossary of Meteorology'', a funnel cloud is any rotating cloud pendant from a cumulus or cumulonimbus, and thus most tornadoes are included under this definition.
The word ''tornado'' is an altered form of the Spanish word ''tronada'', which means "thunderstorm".
Low-level mesocyclones and tornadoes owe their rotation to complex processes within the supercell and ambient environment.
While traveling over a body of water (as a waterspout), tornadoes can turn very white or even blue.
Large single-vortex tornadoes can look like large wedges stuck into the ground, and so are known as "wedge tornadoes" or "wedges".
In particular, the role of downdrafts, particularly the rear-flank downdraft, and the role of baroclinic boundaries, are intense areas of study.
Most tornadoes take on the appearance of a narrow funnel, a few hundred yards (meters) across, with a small cloud of debris near the ground.
If no sturdy shelter is nearby, getting low in a ditch is the next best option.
Tornadoes can be detected before or as they occur through the use of Pulse-Doppler radar by recognizing patterns in velocity and reflectivity data, such as hook echoes or debris balls, as well as through the efforts of storm spotters.
Bangladesh has had at least 19 tornadoes in its history kill more than 100 people, almost half of the total in the rest of the world.
The Gainesville Tornado of 1936, one of the deadliest tornadoes in history, occurred at 8:30&nbsp;am local time.
Most tornadoes have wind speeds less than , are about  across, and travel a few miles (several kilometers) before dissipating.
They occur most commonly in the Florida Keys and in the northern Adriatic Sea.
Storm spotters are needed because radar systems such as NEXRAD do not detect a tornado; merely signatures which hint at the presence of tornadoes.
Tornadoes can also be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices, which persist until landfall.
In addition to winds, tornadoes also exhibit changes in atmospheric variables such as temperature, moisture, and pressure.
Radar may give a warning before there is any visual evidence of a tornado or imminent tornado, but ground truth from an observer can either verify the threat or determine that a tornado is not imminent.
A ''gustnado'', or ''gust front tornado'', is a small, vertical swirl associated with a gust front or downburst.
An F0 or EF0 tornado, the weakest category, damages trees, but not substantial structures.
Tornadoes also produce a detectable seismic signature, and research continues on isolating it and understanding the process.
Today, most developed countries have a network of weather radars, which remains the main method of detecting signatures probably associated with tornadoes.
They can, however, produce significant damage.
Tornadoes have been known to cross major rivers, climb mountains, affect valleys, and have damaged several city centers.
Debris from a tornado can be lofted into the parent storm and carried a very long distance.
Though tornadoes can strike in an instant, there are precautions and preventative measures that people can take to increase the chances of surviving a tornado.
By comparison, during the same tornado outbreak, more than 2000 homes were completely destroyed, with another 7000 damaged, and yet only a few dozen people died in their homes.
They form at the bases of cumulus congestus clouds over tropical and subtropical waters.
By recognizing these radar signatures, meteorologists could detect thunderstorms probably producing tornadoes from dozens of miles away.
Waterspouts and landspouts share many defining characteristics, including relative weakness, short lifespan, and a small, smooth condensation funnel which often does not reach the surface.
This in turn was taken from the Latin ''tonare'', meaning "to thunder".
Weak tornadoes, or strong yet dissipating tornadoes, can be exceedingly narrow, sometimes only a few feet or couple meters across.
Associations with various climate and environmental trends exist.
There are observed correlations between tornadoes and patterns of lightning.
Tornadoes which occur near the time of sunset can be many different colors, appearing in hues of yellow, orange, and pink.
Most intense tornadoes (EF3 to EF5 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale) develop from supercells.
These tornadoes are especially dangerous, as even experienced meteorologists might not see them.
Also, most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, when the bright sun can penetrate even the thickest clouds.
In addition, it is the deadliest single tornado in United States history (695 dead).
In Europe, several nations are organizing spotter networks under the auspices of Skywarn Europe and the Tornado and Storm Research Organisation (TORRO) has maintained a network of spotters in the United Kingdom since 1974.
One tornado was reported to have a damage path only 7&nbsp;feet (2&nbsp;m) long.
They are not considered tornadoes because they form during fair weather and are not associated with any clouds.
If a new mesocyclone develops, the cycle may start again, producing one or more new tornadoes.
In the middle latitudes, where most tornadoes of the world occur, the Rocky Mountains block moisture and buckle the atmospheric flow, forcing drier air at mid-levels of the troposphere due to downsloped winds, and causing the formation of a low pressure area downwind to the east of the mountains.
Rigorous attempts to warn of tornadoes began in the United States in the mid-20th century.
authorlink= Roger Edwards (meteorologist)}}
However, the step from supercell, or other respective formative processes, to tornadogenesis and the prediction of tornadic vs. non-tornadic mesocyclones is not yet well known and is the focus of much research.
This pulls the focused mesocyclone down, in the form of a visible condensation funnel.
Meanwhile, the RFD, now an area of cool surface winds, begins to wrap around the tornado, cutting off the inflow of warm air which previously fed the tornado.
While large-scale storms always rotate cyclonically due to the Coriolis effect, thunderstorms and tornadoes are so small that the direct influence of the Coriolis effect is unimportant, as indicated by their large Rossby numbers.
This unique topography allows for frequent collisions of warm and cold air, the conditions that breed strong, long-lived storms throughout the year.
A ''waterspout'' is defined by the National Weather Service as a tornado over water.
A ''steam devil'' is a rotating updraft between 50 and 200 meters wide that involves steam or smoke.
Analysis of observations including both stationary and mobile (surface and aerial) in-situ and remote sensing (passive and active) instruments generates new ideas and refines existing notions.
They have relatively weak winds, smooth laminar walls, and typically travel very slowly.
A tornado which affected Great Bend, Kansas, in November 1915, was an extreme case, where a "rain of debris" occurred  from the town, a sack of flour was found  away, and a cancelled check from the Great Bend bank was found in a field outside of Palmyra, Nebraska,  to the northeast.
Ocean conditions could be used to forecast extreme spring storm events several months in advance.
Scientists have not yet created a complete definition of the word; for example, there is disagreement as to whether separate touchdowns of the same funnel constitute separate tornadoes.
Other areas of the world that have frequent tornadoes include South Africa, the La Plata Basin area, portions of Europe, Australia and New Zealand, and far eastern Asia.
The convergence of warm air in the updraft and cool air causes a rotating wall cloud to form.
Tornadoes in the Great Plains can turn red because of the reddish tint of the soil, and tornadoes in mountainous areas can travel over snow-covered ground, turning white.
As the funnel descends, the RFD also reaches the ground, fanning outward and creating a gust front that can cause severe damage a considerable distance from the tornado.
Sometimes, in intense supercells, tornadoes can develop cyclically.
This is apparently mostly due to the lesser number of tornadoes overall, as research shows that tornado intensity distributions are fairly similar worldwide.
This is the "dissipating stage", often lasting no more than a few minutes, after which the tornado ends.
Also, most populated areas on Earth are now visible from the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES), which aid in the nowcasting of tornadic storms.
Several tornadoes are sometimes spawned from the same large-scale storm system.
The Enhanced Fujita (EF) Scale was an update to the older Fujita scale, by expert elicitation, using engineered wind estimates and better damage descriptions.
Worldwide, most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, between 3&nbsp;pm and 7&nbsp;pm local time, with a peak near 5&nbsp;pm.
An EF0 tornado will probably damage trees but not substantial structures, whereas an EF5 tornado can rip buildings off their foundations leaving them bare and even deform large skyscrapers.
While there is a large drop in atmospheric pressure inside a strong tornado, it is unlikely that the pressure drop would be enough to cause the house to explode.
Steam devils are very rare.
A violent tornado can destroy a house whether its windows are open or closed.
When costs are normalized for wealth and inflation, it ranks third today.
The tornado was also the costliest tornado in history at the time (unadjusted for inflation), but in the years since has been surpassed by several others if population changes over time are not considered.
Although this is a widely accepted theory for how most tornadoes form, live, and die, it does not explain the formation of smaller tornadoes, such as landspouts, long-lived tornadoes, or tornadoes with multiple vortices.
They typically look to its rear, the main region of updraft and inflow.
These devices measure the velocity and radial direction (towards or away from the radar) of the winds in a storm, and so can spot evidence of rotation in storms from more than a hundred miles (160&nbsp;km) away.
Small, relatively weak landspouts may be visible only as a small swirl of dust on the ground.
Lighting conditions are a major factor in the appearance of a tornado.
Another commonly held misconception is that highway overpasses provide adequate shelter from tornadoes.
Usually, the funnel cloud begins causing damage on the ground (becoming a tornado) within a few minutes of the RFD reaching the ground.
Tornadoes emit on the electromagnetic spectrum, with sferics and E-field effects detected.
Supercells and tornadoes rotate cyclonically in numerical simulations even when the Coriolis effect is neglected.
Reliably predicting tornado intensity and longevity remains a problem, as do details affecting characteristics of a tornado during its life cycle and tornadolysis.
Under the updraft is a rain-free base, and the next step of tornadogenesis is the formation of a rotating wall cloud.
On the other end of the spectrum, wedge tornadoes can have a damage path a mile (1.6&nbsp;km) wide or more.
Evidence of a supercell comes from the storm's shape and structure, and cloud tower features such as a hard and vigorous updraft tower, a persistent, large overshooting top, a hard anvil (especially when backsheared against strong upper level winds), and a corkscrew look or striations.
The most record-breaking tornado in recorded history was the Tri-State Tornado, which roared through parts of Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana on March 18, 1925.
The climate-tornado link is confounded by the forces affecting larger patterns and by the local, nuanced nature of tornadoes.
There is mounting evidence, including Doppler On Wheels mobile radar images and eyewitness accounts, that most tornadoes have a clear, calm center with extremely low pressure, akin to the eye of tropical cyclones.
A ''landspout'', or ''dust-tube tornado'', is a tornado not associated with a mesocyclone.
However, with the advent of weather radar, areas near a local office could get advance warning of severe weather.
Authorities such as the Storm Prediction Center advise having a pre-determined plan should a tornado warning be issued.
Luminosity has been reported in the past and is probably due to misidentification of external light sources such as lightning, city lights, and power flashes from broken lines, as internal sources are now uncommonly reported and are not known to ever have been recorded.
Universities, government agencies such as the National Severe Storms Laboratory, private-sector meteorologists, and the National Center for Atmospheric Research are some of the organizations very active in research; with various sources of funding, both private and public, a chief entity being the National Science Foundation.
Tornadoes are focused in the right front quadrant of landfalling tropical cyclones, which tend to occur in the late summer and autumn.
A period of several successive days with tornado outbreaks in the same general area (spawned by multiple weather systems) is a tornado outbreak sequence, occasionally called an extended tornado outbreak.
A tornado often occurs as this happens or shortly after; first, a funnel cloud dips and in nearly all cases by the time it reaches halfway down, a surface swirl has already developed, signifying a tornado is on the ground before condensation connects the surface circulation to the storm.
In the United States, tornadoes are around 500&nbsp;feet (150&nbsp;m) across on average and travel on the ground for .
The winds of the tornado vortex and of constituent turbulent eddies, as well as airflow interaction with the surface and debris, contribute to the sounds.
However, they form under clear skies and are no stronger than the weakest tornadoes.
The most extreme tornadoes can attain wind speeds of more than , are more than  in diameter, and stay on the ground for dozens of miles (more than 100&nbsp;km).
Fire whirls usually are not as strong as tornadoes associated with thunderstorms.
''Tornado'' refers to the vortex of wind, not the condensation cloud.
When storms are distant from a radar, only areas high within the storm are observed and the important areas below are not sampled.
This can last anywhere from a few minutes to more than an hour, and during that time a tornado often causes the most damage, and in rare cases can be more than one&nbsp;mile (1.6&nbsp;km) across.
Most significant tornadoes form under the storm's ''updraft base'', which is rain-free, making them visible.
Tornadic storms do not contain more lightning than other storms and some tornadic cells never produce lightning.
For example, on June 24, 2003 near Manchester, South Dakota, a probe measured a 100 mbar (hPa) (2.95&nbsp;inHg) pressure decrease.
Dust kicked up by the winds of the parent thunderstorm, heavy rain and hail, and the darkness of night are all factors which can reduce the visibility of tornadoes.
Even though the tornado is dissipating, it is still capable of causing damage.
Any effect would vary by region.
The pace of research is partly constrained by the number of observations that can be taken; gaps in information about the wind, pressure, and moisture content throughout the local atmosphere; and the computing power available for simulation.
Waterspouts are characterized by a spiraling funnel-shaped wind current, connecting to a large cumulus or cumulonimbus cloud.
Tornadoes also occur across northeastern Mexico.
A tornado with a nearly cylindrical profile and relative low height is sometimes referred to as a "stovepipe" tornado.
The term "cyclone" is used as a synonym for "tornado" in the often-aired 1939 film ''The Wizard of Oz''.
Storms that produce tornadoes can feature intense updrafts, sometimes exceeding .
Meteorology is a relatively young science and the study of tornadoes is newer still.
These underground refuges have saved thousands of lives.
The first public tornado warnings were issued in 1950 and the first tornado watches and convective outlooks in 1952.
Tornadoes normally rotate cyclonically (when viewed from above, this is counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere and clockwise in the southern).
Those that occur near intense wildfires are called ''fire whirls''.
Among many meteorologists, the funnel cloud term is strictly defined as a rotating cloud which is not associated with strong winds at the surface, and condensation funnel is a broad term for any rotating cloud below a cumuliform cloud.
An old belief is that the southwest corner of a basement provides the most protection during a tornado.
The Fujita scale rates tornadoes by damage caused and has been replaced in some countries by the updated Enhanced Fujita Scale.
As the RFD completely wraps around and chokes off the tornado's air supply, the vortex begins to weaken, and become thin and rope-like.
For example, an increase in the sea surface temperature of a source region (e.g.
As the mesocyclone lowers below the cloud base, it begins to take in cool, moist air from the downdraft region of the storm.
Tornadoes often develop from a class of thunderstorms known as supercells.
The Netherlands has the highest average number of recorded tornadoes per area of any country (more than 20, or 0.0013 per sq&nbsp;mi (0.00048 per km2), annually), followed by the UK (around 33, or 0.00035 per sq&nbsp;mi (0.00013 per km2), per year), although those are of lower intensity, briefer and cause minor damage.
North America is a large continent that extends from the tropics north into arctic areas, and has no major east-west mountain range to block air flow between these two areas.
These spiraling columns of air frequently develop in tropical areas close to the equator, and are less common at high latitudes.
Doppler radar data, photogrammetry, and ground swirl patterns (cycloidal marks) may also be analyzed to determine intensity and assign a rating.
It is often thought that opening windows will lessen the damage caused by the tornado.
In the United States, 80% of tornadoes are EF0 and EF1 (T0 through T3) tornadoes.
Tornadoes have been observed and documented on every continent except Antarctica.
However, a highway overpass is a dangerous place during a tornado: the subjects of the video remained safe due to an unlikely combination of events: the storm in question was a weak tornado, did not directly strike the overpass, and the overpass itself was of a unique design.
Landspouts also create a distinctively laminar cloud of dust when they make contact with the ground, due to their differing mechanics from true mesoform tornadoes.
The vast majority of intense tornadoes occur with a wall cloud on the backside of a supercell.
Those that form in dry environments can be nearly invisible, marked only by swirling debris at the base of the funnel.
The Fujita scale and the Enhanced Fujita Scale rate tornadoes by damage caused.
Unlike audible signatures, tornadic signatures have been isolated; due to the long distance propagation of low-frequency sound, efforts are ongoing to develop tornado prediction and detection devices with additional value in understanding tornado morphology, dynamics, and creation.
In the United States and a few other countries, Doppler weather radar stations are used.
Some meteorological situations leading to tornadogenesis are not readily detectable by radar and on occasion tornado development may occur more quickly than radar can complete a scan and send the batch of data.
In terms of path length, the Tri-State Tornado, which affected parts of Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana on March 18, 1925, was on the ground continuously for .
