When Europeans first arrived at the site of present-day Toronto, the vicinity was inhabited by the Iroquois, who by then had displaced the Wyandot people who had occupied the region for centuries before c. 1500.
Some parts of the north and east of the city such as Scarborough, have a climate classified as humid continental climate (Köppen: Dfb).
The University of Toronto, established in 1827, is Canada's largest university and has two satellite campuses, one of which is located in the city's eastern district of Scarborough while the other is located in the neighbouring city of Mississauga.
Tyndale University College and Seminary is a Christian post-secondary institution and Canada's largest seminary.
East and west of Downtown, neighbourhoods such as Kensington Market, Chinatown, Leslieville, Cabbagetown and Riverdale are home to bustling commercial and cultural areas as well as communities of artists with studio lofts, with many middle- and upper-class professionals.
Although production of spirits has declined over the decades, Toronto has a growing microbrewery industry.
The city's 9-1-1 emergency services are equipped to respond in over 150 languages.
Although much of the region's manufacturing activities take place outside the city limits, Toronto continues to be a wholesale and distribution point for the industrial sector.
Defining the Toronto skyline is the CN Tower, a telecommunications and tourism hub.
Of these, 451 are elementary and 102 are secondary (high) schools.
With the city's significant number of Methodist Christians, Toronto was historically referred to as the Methodist Rome.
The historic Distillery District, located on the eastern edge of downtown has been redeveloped into a pedestrian-oriented arts, culture and entertainment neighbourhood.
During the last ice age, the lower part of Toronto was beneath Glacial Lake Iroquois.
Toronto is represented in Major League Soccer by the Toronto FC, who have won four Canadian Championship titles.
These hospitals include Baycrest for geriatric care and Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital for children with disabilities.
In 2011, Toronto's murder rate plummeted to 45 murders—nearly a 26% drop from the previous year.
Occasionally, they can drop below .
The Toronto Public Library consists of 100 branches with more than 11&nbsp;million items in its collection.
The city is mostly flat or gentle hills and the land gently slopes upward away from the lake.
One of the largest events in the city, Pride Week takes place in late June, and is one of the largest LGBT festivals in the world.
'''Toronto''' (, ) is the most populous city in Canada, the provincial capital of Ontario, and the centre of the Greater Toronto Area, the most populous metropolitan area in Canada.
While Miami's foreign-born population has traditionally consisted primarily of Cubans and other Latin Americans, no single nationality or culture dominates Toronto's immigrant population, placing it among the most diverse cities in the world.
The race was revived in 2009 as the Honda Indy Toronto, part of the IndyCar Series schedule.
Several magazines and local newspapers cover Toronto, including ''Now'' and ''Toronto Life'', while numerous magazines are produced in Toronto, such as ''Canadian Business'', ''Chatelaine'', ''Flare'' and ''Maclean's''.
The Toronto Stock Exchange is the world's seventh-largest stock exchange by market capitalization.
Ted Rogers leased the Buffalo Bills from Ralph Wilson for the purposes of having the Bills play eight home games in the city between 2008 and 2013.
As well, most engage in fundraising to promote research, services, and public awareness.
Toronto is well known for its skyscrapers and high-rise buildings, in particular the tallest free-standing structure in the Western Hemisphere, the CN Tower.
Through the 1960s and 1970s, significant pieces of Toronto's architectural heritage were demolished to make way for redevelopment or parking.
Approximately , or 12.5% of Toronto's land base is maintained parkland.
Other squares include Harbourfront Square, on the Toronto waterfront, and the civic squares at the former city halls of the defunct Metropolitan Toronto, most notably Mel Lastman Square in North York.
These are mature and traditionally working-class areas, consisting primarily of post–World War I small, single-family homes and small apartment blocks.
The winner, "Tree City", was announced in May 2000.
The varieties of Chinese and Italian are the second and third most widely spoken languages at work.
The city's borders are formed by Lake Ontario to the south, Etobicoke Creek and Highway 427 to the west, Steeles Avenue to the north and the Rouge River and the Scarborough-Pickering Townline to the east.
This arrangement is sometimes broken by geographical accidents, most notably the Don River ravines.
Torontonians integrated people of colour into their society.
However, by 1934, the Toronto Stock Exchange had become the largest in the country.
Until then, the lakefront docks (then known as wharves) were set back farther inland than today.
Toronto is home to the Toronto Maple Leafs, one of the National Hockey League's Original Six clubs, and has also served as home to the Hockey Hall of Fame since 1958.
The fire caused more than $10&nbsp;million in damage, and resulted in more stringent fire safety laws and expansion of the city's fire department.
The public transit system passed into public ownership in 1921 as the Toronto Transportation Commission, later renamed the Toronto Transit Commission.
The shoreline from the harbour west to the Humber River has been extended into the lake.
Established by Militia General Order in 1864, the school enabled officers of militia or candidates for commission or promotion in the Militia to learn military duties, drill and discipline, to command a company at Battalion Drill, to drill a company at Company Drill, the internal economy of a company, and the duties of a company's officer.
The city had a rich history of hockey championships.
Further west, landfill has created extensions of land such as Humber Bay Park.
Toronto's Scotiabank Caribbean Carnival (also known as Caribana) takes place from mid-July to early August of every summer.
Slavery was banned outright in Upper Canada in 1834.
The "brownfield" industrial area of the Port Lands, on the east side of the harbour, is one area planned for redevelopment.
Toronto/Buttonville Municipal Airport (IATA: YKZ) in Markham provides general aviation facilities.
Once an alcohol processing centre, related structures along the Harbour include the Canada Malting Co. grain processing towers and the Redpath Sugar Refinery.
Industry dominated the waterfront for the next 100 years.
The city of Toronto has a humid continental climate (Köppen: Dfa), with warm, humid summers and cold winters.
During the 2000s, many neighbourhoods have become ethnically diverse and have undergone gentrification as a result of increasing population, and a housing boom during the late 1990s and first two decades of the 21st century.
South of downtown are two large parks on the waterfront: Tommy Thompson Park on the Leslie Street Spit, which has a nature preserve, is open on weekends; and the Toronto Islands, accessible from downtown by ferry.
Toronto hospitals at the time employed a system of triage to ensure life-threatening injuries receive rapid treatment.
Limited commercial and passenger service is also offered from the Billy Bishop Toronto City Airport (IATA: YTZ) on the Toronto Islands, southwest of downtown.
It includes the historic core of Toronto and remains the most densely populated part of the city.
Smaller numbers of Protestant Irish immigrants were welcomed by the existing Scottish and English population, giving the Orange Order significant and long-lasting influence over Toronto society.
Toronto's grid north is approximately 18.5° to the west of true north.
The Don Valley Brick Works is a former industrial site that opened in 1889, and was partly restored as a park and heritage site in 1996, with further restoration and reuse being completed in stages since then.
The Toronto City Council is a unicameral legislative body, comprising 44 councillors representing geographical wards throughout the city.
In that year, a half-century after the Great Fire of 1904, disaster struck the city again when Hurricane Hazel brought intense winds and flash flooding.
This trend continues to this day, the largest factories and distribution warehouses have moved mostly to the suburban environs of Peel and York Regions; but also within the current city: Etobicoke (concentrated around Pearson Airport), North York, and Scarborough.
There are plans to revitalise Ontario Place.
The ''Toronto Star'' and the ''Toronto Sun'' are the prominent daily city newspapers, while national dailies, ''The Globe and Mail'' and the ''National Post'' are also headquartered in the city.
However, it can be noticeably cooler on many spring and early summer afternoons under the influence of a lake breeze since Lake Ontario is cool, relative to the air during these seasons.
City Council has delegated final decision-making authority on local, routine matters, while others—like planning and zoning issues—are recommended to the city council.
Simcoe chose the town to replace Newark (Niagara-on-the-Lake) as the capital of Upper Canada, believing that the new site would be less vulnerable to attack by the United States.
These bodies are made up of city councillors and private citizen volunteers.
The summer months are characterized by very warm temperatures.
* 7.0% Southeast Asian; ''5.1% Filipino ''
They were soon followed by Chinese, Russians, Poles, and immigrants from other Eastern European nations.
French traders founded Fort Rouillé on the current Exhibition grounds in 1750, but abandoned it in 1759.
Those with no religious affiliation made up 24.2% of Toronto's population.
An executive committee is formed by the chairs of each of standing committee, along with the mayor, the deputy mayor and four other councillors.
The other major geographical feature of Toronto is its escarpments.
During this time, in part owing to the political uncertainty raised by the resurgence of the Quebec sovereignty movement, many national and multinational corporations moved their head offices from Montreal to Toronto and Western Canadian cities.
The Old City of Toronto covers the area generally known as downtown, but also older neighbourhoods to the east, west, and north of downtown.
It was formerly represented in a seventh, the W-League, until that announced on November 6, 2015 that it would cease operation ahead of 2016 season.
Gang-related incidents have also been on the rise; between the years of 1997 and 2005, over 300 gang-related homicides have occurred.
The harbour and the channel of the Don River have been dredged numerous times for shipping.
In 1954, the City of Toronto and 12 surrounding municipalities were federated into a regional government known as Metropolitan Toronto.
In 1787, the British negotiated the Toronto Purchase with the Mississaugas of the New Credit First Nation, thereby securing more than a quarter of a million acres (1000&nbsp;km2) of land in the Toronto area.
The former mouth drained into a wetland; today the Don drains into the harbour through a concrete waterway, the Keating Channel.
Toronto has a number of post-secondary academic institutions.
Long before the Royal Military College of Canada was established in 1876, there were proposals for military colleges in Canada.
Other prominent Canadian corporations in the Greater Toronto Area include Magna International, Celestica, Manulife Financial, Sun Life Financial, the Hudson's Bay Company, and major hotel companies and operators, such as Four Seasons Hotels and Fairmont Hotels and Resorts.
The Royal Conservatory of Music, which includes the Glenn Gould School, is a school of music located downtown.
The Financial District contains the First Canadian Place, Toronto-Dominion Centre, Scotia Plaza, Royal Bank Plaza, Commerce Court and Brookfield Place.
The flat land is interrupted by numerous ravines cut by numerous creeks and the valleys of the three rivers in Toronto: the Humber River in the west end and the Don River east of downtown at opposite ends of the Toronto Harbour, and the Rouge River at the city's eastern limits.
The escarpments are most prominent from Victoria Park Avenue to the mouth of Highland Creek where they form the Scarborough Bluffs.
The city experiences four distinct seasons, with considerable variance in length.
Toronto recorded its largest number of homicides in 1991 with 89, a rate of 3.9 per 100,000.
Nathan Phillips Square is the city's main square in downtown, and forms the entrance to City Hall.
The Distillery District contains the largest and best-preserved collection of Victorian industrial architecture in North America.
Over the late 20th century and early 21st century, North York City Centre, Etobicoke City Centre and Scarborough City Centre have emerged as secondary business districts outside Downtown Toronto.
Toronto Maple Leafs
Toronto is home to the Toronto Rush, a semi-professional ultimate team that competes in the American Ultimate Disc League (AUDL).
Greektown on the Danforth is home to the annual "Taste of the Danforth" festival which attracts over one million people in 2½ days.
Canada's busiest airport, Toronto Pearson International Airport (IATA: YYZ), straddles the city's western boundary with the suburban city of Mississauga.
There can be periods of dry weather, but drought-like conditions are rare.
Despite its deep ravines, Toronto is not remarkably hilly, but its elevation does increase steadily away from the lake.
Completed in 1976 at a height of , it was the world's tallest freestanding structure until 2007 when it was surpassed by Burj Khalifa.
Toronto became the capital of the province of Ontario after its official creation in 1867, the seat of government located at the Ontario Legislature located at Queen's Park.
This area includes, among others, the neighbourhoods of St. James Town, Garden District, St. Lawrence, Corktown, and Church and Wellesley.
These municipalities have each developed a distinct history and identity over the years, and their names remain in common use among Torontonians.
The width and depth of several of the ravines and valleys are such that several grid streets such as Finch Avenue, Leslie Street, Lawrence Avenue, and St. Clair Avenue, terminate on one side of a ravine or valley and continue on the other side.
Generally considered the financial capital of Canada, Toronto has a high concentration of banks and brokerage firms on Bay Street, in the Financial District.
Toronto still has some active older industrial areas, such as Brockton Village, Mimico and New Toronto.
Toronto's robbery rate also ranks low, with 207.1 robberies per 100,000 people, compared with Los Angeles (348.5), Vancouver (266.2), New York City (265.9), and Montreal (235.3).
The production of domestic and foreign film and television is a major local industry.
Toronto, along with Montreal, hosts an annual Tennis Tournament called the Rogers Cup between the months of July and August.
In the 2011 Canadian census, the most common ethnic origins in the city of Toronto were as follows:
The Toronto Zoo, is home to over 5,000 animals representing over 460 distinct species.
Toronto has many bridges spanning the ravines.
''Metro'' and ''24 Hours'' are distributed as free commuter newspapers.
Notable performance venues include the Four Seasons Centre for the Performing Arts, Roy Thomson Hall, the Princess of Wales Theatre, the Royal Alexandra Theatre, Massey Hall, the Toronto Centre for the Arts, the Elgin and Winter Garden Theatres and the Sony Centre for the Performing Arts (originally the "O'Keefe Centre" and formerly the "Hummingbird Centre").
These are Seneca College, Humber College, Centennial College and George Brown College.
Bay-and-gable houses, mainly found in Old Toronto, are a distinct architectural feature of the city.
The inner suburbs are contained within the former municipalities of York and East York.
Ultimate (disc), in Canada, has its beginning roots in Toronto, with 3300 players competing annually in the Toronto Ultimate Club (League).
Ontario Place features the world's first permanent IMAX movie theatre, the Cinesphere, as well as the Molson Amphitheatre, an open-air venue for music concerts.
During the American Revolutionary War, the region saw an influx of British settlers as United Empire Loyalists fled for the unsettled lands north of Lake Ontario.
Centennial Park Stadium
Examples include the Pedestrian Committee, Waste Diversion Task Force 2010, and the Task Force to Bring Back the Don.
Each summer, the Canadian Stage Company presents an outdoor Shakespeare production in Toronto's High Park called "Dream in High Park".
The games were the largest multi-sport event ever to be held in Canada (in terms of athletes competing), double the size of the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver.
In particular, Highway 401 bisects the city from west to east, bypassing the downtown core.
Each city councillor serves as a member on a community council.
Since then, the capital of Canada has remained Ottawa.
However, mild stretches also occur in most winters, melting accumulated snow.
The Wychwood Park  neighbourhood, historically significant for the architecture of its homes, and for being one of Toronto's earliest planned communities, was designated as an Ontario Heritage Conservation district in 1985.
Toronto is a central transportation hub for road, rail and air networks in Southern Ontario.
The Toronto Raptors entered the National Basketball Association in 1995, and have since earned seven playoff spots and three Atlantic Division titles in 20 seasons.
The school was retained at Confederation, in 1867.
Other notable neighbourhoods and attractions include The Beaches, the Toronto Islands, Kensington Market, Fort York, and the Hockey Hall of Fame.
The metropolitan government began to manage services that crossed municipal boundaries, including highways, police services, water and public transit.
It is also home to the Medical and Related Sciences Centre (MaRS), which was created in 2000 to capitalize on the research and innovation strength of the Province of Ontario.
The average yearly precipitation is about , with an average annual snowfall of about .
Councillors are also appointed to oversee the Toronto Transit Commission and the Toronto Police Services Board.
The denser urban scape makes for warmer nights year around; the average nighttime temperature is about  warmer in the city than in rural areas in all months.
The Toronto Wolfpack will be Canada's first professional rugby league team and the first transatlantic professional sports team competing in the British Rugby Football League's League One competition from 2017.
Toronto/Downsview Airport (IATA: YZD), near the city's north end, is owned by de Havilland Canada and serves the Bombardier Aerospace aircraft factory.
+ Professional and amateur sports teams in Toronto
Much of the adjacent Port Lands on the east side of the harbour was a wetland filled in early in the 20th century.
Toronto is also host to a wide variety of health-focused non-profit organizations that work to address specific illnesses for Toronto, Ontario and Canadian residents.
The name ''Toronto'' is likely derived from the Iroquois word ''tkaronto'', meaning "place where trees stand in the water".
A portage route from Lake Ontario to Lake Huron running through this point, the Toronto Carrying-Place Trail, led to widespread use of the name.
Toronto is an international centre for business and finance.
Daniel Libeskind's Royal Ontario Museum addition, Frank Gehry's remake of the Art Gallery of Ontario, and Will Alsop's distinctive Ontario College of Art & Design expansion are among the city's new showpieces.
In 2011, the most commonly reported religion in Toronto was Christianity, adhered to by 54.1% of the population.
Toronto also operates several public golf courses.
The other source of sediment for the Port Lands wetland and the peninsula was the deposition of the Don River, which carved a wide valley through the sedimentary land of Toronto and deposited it in the harbour, which is quite shallow.
The original town was laid out in a grid plan on the flat plain north of the harbour, and this plan was extended outwards as the city grew.
Elevation differences range from  above sea level at the Lake Ontario shore to  ASL near the York University grounds in the city's north end at the intersection of Keele Street and Steeles Avenue.
The city's strategic position along the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor and its road and rail connections help support the nearby production of motor vehicles, iron, steel, food, machinery, chemicals and paper.
The TTC also operates an extensive network of buses and streetcars.
Some of the area's housing is in the process of being replaced or remodelled.
The peninsula was formed by longshore drift taking the sediments deposited along the Scarborough Bluffs shore and transporting them to the Islands area.
The Mayor of Toronto is elected by direct popular vote to serve as the chief executive of the city.
Canada's Walk of Fame acknowledges the achievements of successful Canadians, with a series of stars on designated blocks of sidewalks along King Street and Simcoe Street.
The Union Pearson Express is a train service that provides a direct link between Pearson International and Union Station.
While subsequent years did see a return to higher rates, the nearly flat line of 56 homicides in 2012 and 57 in both 2013 and 2014 continued to be a significant improvement over the previous decade; and the year-to-date figure of 47 murders at November 23, 2015 continued that overall trend of improvement.
In the 2011 census, Toronto had a population of 2,615,060, making it the fifth largest city in North America.
The Eaton Centre is Toronto's most popular tourist attraction with over 52&nbsp;million visitors annually.
Several parks have marked cross-country skiing trails.
Large parks in the outer areas include High Park, Humber Bay Park, Centennial Park, Downsview Park, Guildwood Park, Morningside Park and Rouge Park.
They and the Maple Leafs play their home games at the Air Canada Centre.
They won five Champion's Cup titles in seven years in the late 1990s and early first decade of the 21st century, appearing in an NLL record five straight championship games from 1999 to 2003, and are currently first all-time in the number of Champion's Cups won.
In the 19th century, an extensive sewage system was built, and streets became illuminated with gas lighting as a regular service.
The Toronto Rock are the city's National Lacrosse League team.
The Government of Ontario also operates an interregional rail and bus transit system called GO Transit in the Greater Toronto Area.
Toronto is also home to Casa Loma, the former estate of Sir Henry Pellatt, a prominent Toronto financier, industrialist and military man.
The median age was 36.9 years.
In the 1840s an eating house at Frederick and King Streets, a place of mercantile prosperity in early Toronto, was operated by a man of colour named Bloxom.
The many residential communities of Toronto express a character distinct from that of the skyscrapers in the commercial core.
In 2011, 49.1% of the residents of the city proper belonged to a visible minority group, and visible minorities are projected to comprise a majority in the Toronto CMA by 2017.
The sacking of York was a primary motivation for the Burning of Washington by British troops later in the war.
It beat the cities of Lima, Peru and Bogotá, Colombia, to win the rights to stage the games.
Toronto's main public transportation system is operated by the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC).
Other low-scale maritime effects on the climate include lake-effect snow, fog, and delaying of spring- and fall-like conditions, known as seasonal lag.
Toronto's population grew to more than one million in 1951 when large-scale suburbanization began, and doubled to two million by 1971.
The completion of the Saint Lawrence Seaway in 1959 gave ships access to the Great Lakes from the Atlantic Ocean.
Toronto contains the headquarters of the major English-language Canadian television networks CBC, CTV, City, Global, The Sports Network (TSN) and Sportsnet.
The vastly international population of the city reflects its current and historical role as an important destination for immigrants to Canada.
* 1.5% Multiracial; '' 1.7% including Métis''
There are a number of municipal expressways and provincial highways that serve Toronto and the Greater Toronto Area.
Toronto is a prominent centre for music, theatre, motion picture production, and television production, and is home to the headquarters of Canada's major national broadcast networks and media outlets.
The Toronto District School Board (TDSB) operates 558 public schools.
Additionally, the Toronto Catholic District School Board manages the city's publicly funded Roman Catholic schools, while the Conseil scolaire de district du Centre-Sud-Ouest and the Conseil scolaire de district catholique Centre-Sud manage public and Roman Catholic French-language schools, respectively.
In 1981, Toronto's visible minority population was 13.6%.
The structure of the municipal government is stipulated by the City of Toronto Act.
Daytime temperatures are usually above , and often rise above .
Spadina House is a 19th-century manor that is now a museum.
In 1967, the seven smallest municipalities of Metropolitan Toronto were merged into their larger neighbours, resulting in a six-municipality configuration that included the old City of Toronto and the surrounding municipalities of East York, Etobicoke, North York, Scarborough, and York.
By 1701, the Mississauga had displaced the Iroquois, who abandoned the Toronto area at the end of the Beaver Wars.
Toronto's largest park is Morningside Park, which is  in size.
Toronto's public transit network also connects to other municipal networks such as York Region Transit, Viva, Durham Region Transit, and MiWay.
Toronto covers an area of , with a maximum north-south distance of  and a maximum east-west distance of .
