The lack of reliability caused major problems for the American submarine force in the early years of the American involvement in World War II, primarily in the Pacific Theater.
On 17 August 1915, another Turkish ship was sunk by an aerial torpedo.
The Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905) was the first great war of the 20th century.
Fulton then concentrated on developing the torpedo independent of a submarine deployment.
The air was stored at pressures of up to  and fed to a piston engine that turned a single propeller at about 100 rpm.
If one drum was rotated faster than the other, then the rudder was activated.
The term ''torpedo'' was originally employed for a variety of devices, most of which would today be called mines.
In this manner the air is heated more and expands even further, and the burned propellant adds more gas to drive the engine.
The newly appointed Inspector-General of Fortifications in England, Sir Andrew Clarke, appreciated the value of the torpedo and in spring 1883 an experimental station was established at Garrison Point Fort, Sheerness on the River Medway and a workshop for Brennan was set up at the Chatham Barracks, the home of the Royal Engineers.
Destroyers of all navies were also armed with torpedoes to attack larger ships.
The Sims-Edison torpedo was similarly powered.
Destroyers could be found with two or three of these mounts with between five and twelve tubes in total.
In the Battle off Samar, destroyer torpedoes from the escorts of American task force "Taffy 3" showed effectiveness at defeating armor.
An operator controlled the relative speeds of the winches, providing guidance.
The amount of fuel that can be burned by a torpedo engine (i.e.
Around 1897, Nikola Tesla patented a remote controlled boat and later demonstrated the feasibility of radio-guided torpedoes to the United States military, only to be turned down.
At this time torpedo attacks were still very close range and very dangerous to the attackers.
Whitehead also opened a factory at St Tropez in 1890 that exported torpedoes to Brazil, Holland, Turkey and Greece.
These were cheaper than tubes, but less reliable.
Britain and its allies also used torpedoes throughout the war.
Torpedoes may be aimed at the target and fired unguided, similarly to an artillery shell, or they may be guided onto the target.
The Chinese turret ship ''Dingyuan'' was purportedly hit and disabled by a torpedo after numerous attacks by Japanese torpedo boats during the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894.
The deployment of these new underwater weapons resulted in only one battleship, but two armored cruisers and two destroyers being sunk in action; with the remainder of the 80 some odd warships being sunk by the more conventional methods of gunfire, mines, and scuttling.
In lightweight antisubmarine torpedoes designed to penetrate submarine hulls, a shaped charge can be used.
This allowed for the possibility of a small and fast ship that could attack the battleships, at a much lower cost.
One of the main novel developments seen was a mechanical handling system for torpedoes.
British submarines used torpedoes to interdict the Axis supply shipping to North Africa, while Fleet Air Arm Swordfish sank three Italian battleships at Taranto by torpedo and (after a mistaken, but abortive, attack on ''Sheffield'') scored one crucial hit in the hunt for the German battleship ''Bismarck''.
French and German inventions followed closely, and the term ''torpedo'' came to describe self-propelled projectiles that traveled under or on water.
The launch tubes could be fitted in a ship's bow, which weakened it for ramming, or on the broadside; this introduced problems because of water flow twisting the torpedo, so guide rails and sleeves were used to prevent it.
Additionally, it ran at a constant depth, unlike Whitehead models.
Several western sources reported that the Qing dynasty Imperial Chinese military, under the direction of Li Hongzhang, acquired ''electric torpedoes,'' which they deployed in numerous waterways, along with fortresses and numerous other modern military weapons acquired by China.
Later in the Second World War torpedoes were given acoustic (homing) guidance systems, originally by the Germans in the G7es torpedo.
At the Tientsin Arsenal in 1876, the Chinese developed the capacity to manufacture these "electric torpedoes" on their own.
By 1881, nearly 1500 torpedoes had been produced.
Between 1883 and 1885 the Royal Engineers held trials and in 1886 the torpedo was recommended for adoption as a harbour defence torpedo.
Active acoustic torpedoes home in on the reflection of a signal, or "ping", from the torpedo or its parent vehicle; this has the disadvantage of giving away the presence of the torpedo.
In 1275, Hasan al-Rammah described "...an egg which moves itself and burns."
The first trials were not successful as the weapon was unable to maintain a course on a steady depth.
Whitehead was unable to improve the machine substantially, since the clockwork motor, attached ropes, and surface attack mode all contributed to a slow and cumbersome weapon.
The Victorian era Brennan could be steered onto its target by varying the relative speeds of its propulsion cables.
Whitehead went on to develop more efficient devices, demonstrating torpedoes capable of  in 1876,  in 1886, and, finally,  in 1890.
Large tonnages of merchant shipping were sunk by submarines with torpedoes in both the Battle of the Atlantic and the Pacific War.
The ''Knyaz Suvorov'' was set upon by 17 torpedo firing warships, ten of which were destroyers and four torpedo boats.
The firm of L. Schwartzkopff in Germany also produced torpedoes and exported them to Russia, Japan and Spain.
Initially the Imperial Japanese Navy purchased Whitehead or Schwartzkopf torpedoes but by 1917 they were conducting experiments with pure oxygen instead of compressed air.
The flagship slipped under the waves shortly thereafter, taking over 900 men with her to the bottom.
Since compressed air contains only about 21% oxygen, engineers in Japan developed the Type 93 (nicknamed Long Lance postwar) for destroyers and cruisers in the 1930s.
A further improvement was the use of water to cool the combustion chamber of the fuel-burning torpedo.
It was slower and had shorter range than the conventional G7a, but was wakeless and much cheaper.
However, the torpedoes survived.
The Japanese went one better, covering their tube mounts with splinter protection and adding reloading gear (both unlike any other navy in the world), making them true turrets and increasing the broadside without adding tubes and top hamper (as the quadruple and quintuple mounts did).
Spar torpedoes were also used; an explosive device was mounted at the end of a spar up to  long projecting forward underwater from the bow of the attacking vessel, which would then ram the opponent with the explosives.
In the Battle of the North Cape in December 1943, torpedo hits from British destroyers ''Savage'' and ''Saumarez'' slowed German battlecruiser ''Scharnhorst'' enough for British battleship ''Duke of York'' to catch and sink her, and in May 1945 the British 26th Destroyer Flotilla (coincidentally led by ''Saumarez'' again) ambushed and sank Japanese heavy cruiser ''Haguro''.
The two prototype aircraft were embarked upon HMS ''Ben-my Chree'', which sailed for the Aegean on 21 March 1915 to take part in the Gallipoli campaign.
(In the event, most merchantmen were armed and acted as ''de facto'' naval auxiliaries, required to report the position of enemy submarines, rendering the distinction irrelevant.)
They are also used in conjunction with other weapons; for example the Mark 46 torpedo used by the United States is the warhead section of the ASROC (Anti-Submarine ROCket) and the CAPTOR mine (CAPsulated TORpedo) is a submerged sensor platform which releases a torpedo when a hostile contact is detected.
He added that the problem is that torpedo development is out of step with the type and number of warships that Russia is now building, he added.
The torpedo was fitted with elevators controlled by a depth-keeping mechanism, and the fore and aft rudders operated by the differential between the drums.
Endurance can be improved by ensuring a target can be effectively engaged by a single torpedo, which gave rise to the guided torpedo.
In semi-active mode, a torpedo can be fired to the last known position or calculated position of a target, which is then acoustically illuminated ("pinged") once the torpedo is within attack range.
Later, lightweight mounts for  homing torpedoes were developed for anti-submarine use consisting of triple launch tubes used on the decks of ships.
Modern submarine bows are usually occupied by a large sonar array, necessitating midships tubes angled outward, while stern tubes have largely disappeared.
The Fizik-1 or "product 2534" was ready five years ago but has still not been cleared for service while the next version, the Fizik-2, has already appeared.
Two Royal Italian Navy torpedo boats scored a success against an Austrian-Hungarian squadron, sinking the battleship ''Szent István'' with two torpedoes.
It was basically a modified Mark 24 Mine with wooden rails to allow firing from a  torpedo tube.
At the same time inventors were working on building a guided torpedo.
British T class submarines carried up to 13 torpedo tubes, up to 5 of them external.
It was reported on 20 May 2013 that the Russian Navy did not have enough torpedoes for training or testing purposes.
The torpedoes that we have in storage are out of their service lives and can't be used."
The warhead is generally some form of aluminised explosive, because the sustained explosive pulse produced by the powdered aluminium is particularly destructive against underwater targets.
It was propelled by a three-cylinder Brotherhood engine, using compressed air at around  and driving two contra-rotating propellers, and was designed to self-regulate its course and depth as far as possible.
Although these ships were incredibly powerful, the new weight of armour slowed them down, and the huge guns needed to penetrate that armour fired at very slow rates.
Without the weight of the torpedo Dacre was able to take off and return to the ''Ben-My-Chree''.
A simpler system was introduced by the British Royal Gun factory in 1908.
Two steel drums were mounted one behind the other inside the torpedo, each carrying several thousands yards of high-tensile steel wire.
In 1870, he improved the devices to travel up to approximately  at a speed of up to , and by 1881 the factory was exporting torpedoes to ten other countries.
The first French and Russian submarines carried their torpedoes externally in Drzewiecki drop collars.
The first torpedo boats were built at the shipyards of Sir John Thornycroft, and gained recognition for their effectiveness.
The speed and range of later models was improved by increasing the pressure of the stored air.
These were used by the Confederate submarine ''H.
Detonation can be triggered by direct contact with the target or by a proximity fuze incorporating sonar and/or magnetic sensors.
Torpedoes may be launched from submarines, surface ships, helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, unmanned naval mines and naval fortresses.
It was produced from 1885 to 1895, and it ran straight, leaving no wake.
With such torpedoes the method of attack in small torpedo boats, torpedo bombers and small submarines was to steer a predictable collision course abeam to the target and release the torpedo at the last minute, then veer away, all the time subject to defensive fire.
Its lead-acid rechargeable battery was sensitive to shock, required frequent maintenance before use, and required preheating for best performance.
Many classes of ships, including submarines, and aircraft were armed with torpedoes.
Five varieties were produced, all  diameter.
An unnamed source in the Navy said that "Our manufacturers make obsolete torpedoes that were developed back in the 1980s and we don't even have enough of them for testing when building or refitting ships and submarines.
The success of these experiments led to the construction of the first purpose-built operational torpedo aircraft, the Short Type 184, built from 1915.
Royal Navy representatives visited Fiume for a demonstration in late 1869, and in 1870 a batch of torpedoes was ordered.
Whitehead faced competition from the American Lieutenant Commander John A. Howell, whose own design, driven by a flywheel, was simpler and cheaper.
During the course of the war the Imperial Russian and Imperial Japanese navies launched nearly 300 torpedoes at each other, all of them of the "self propelled automotive" type.
Because of explosions they abandoned the experiments but resumed them in 1926 and by 1933 had a working torpedo.
This prompted the British Capt.
The use of multiple torpedoes to engage single targets depletes torpedo supplies and greatly reduces a submarine's combat endurance.
The first successful aerial torpedo drop was performed by Gordon Bell in 1914 - dropping a Whitehead torpedo from a Short S.64 seaplane.
Considering their Type 93s very effective weapons, the IJN equipped their cruisers with torpedoes.
Cursory trials had allowed bad designs to enter service.
Fiske determined that the notional torpedo bomber should descend rapidly in a sharp spiral to evade enemy guns, then when about  above the water the aircraft would straighten its flight long enough to line up with the torpedo's intended path.
The torpedo would be set to run at a depth just beneath the ship, relying on a magnetic exploder to activate at the appropriate time.
There was concern torpedoes would be ineffective against warships' heavy armor; an answer to this was to detonate torpedoes underneath a ship, badly damaging its keel and the other structural members in the hull, commonly called "breaking its back".
Torpex was popular until the 1950s, but has been superseded by PBX compositions.
A number of experimental rocket-propelled torpedoes were tried soon after Whitehead's invention but were not successful.
Torpedoes were used by the Russian Empire during the Crimean War in 1855 against British warships in the Gulf of Finland.
Today's torpedoes can be divided into lightweight and heavyweight classes; and into straight-running, autonomous homers, and wire-guided.
The Whitehead torpedo of 1866, the first successful self-propelled torpedo, used compressed air as its energy source.
However, both the French and the Dutch governments were uninterested in the submarine.
The homing systems for torpedoes are generally acoustic, though there have been other target sensor types used.
After the Austrian government decided to invest in the invention, Whitehead started the first torpedo factory in Fiume.
By 1900, the term no longer included mines and booby-traps as the navies of the world added submarines, torpedo boats and torpedo boat destroyers to their fleets.
Aerial torpedoes may be carried by fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters or missiles.
Although lightweight torpedoes are fairly easily handled, the transport and handling of heavyweight ones is difficult, especially in the small space of a submarine.
It was used throughout the British Empire for more than fifteen years.
Fulton carried out a similar demonstration for the US government on 20 July 1807, destroying a vessel in New York's harbor.
It used pure compressed oxygen instead of compressed air and had performance unmatched by any contemporary torpedo in service, through the end of World War II.
In the early 1800s, the American inventor Robert Fulton, while in France, "conceived the idea of destroying ships by introducing floating mines under their bottoms in submarine boats."
In the case of aircraft launched torpedoes, the key factors are weight, provision of suitable attachment points, and launch speed.
He coined the term "torpedo" in reference to the explosive charges he outfitted his submarine ''Nautilus''.
They would be detonated on contact with the ship, or after a set time, although electrical detonators were also occasionally used.
Shore-based steam winches pulled the wires, which spun the drums and drove the propellers.
Modern electric torpedoes such as the Mark 24 Tigerfish or DM2 series commonly use silver oxide batteries that need no maintenance, so torpedoes can be stored for years without losing performance.
Some torpedoes—like the Russian VA-111 Shkval, Iranian Hoot, and German Unterwasserlaufkörper/ Barracuda—use supercavitation to increase speed to over .
This was the first instance in history when a torpedo craft sank its targets without also sinking.
Good hydrodynamics are needed for it to attain high speed efficiently and also to give long range, since the torpedo has limited stored energy.
Germany, Britain and the U.S. independently devised ways to do this; German and American torpedoes, however, suffered problems with their depth-keeping mechanisms, coupled with faults in magnetic pistols shared by all designs.
By WW1, Whitehead's torpedo remained a worldwide success, and his company was able to maintain a monopoly on torpedo production.
In fact a submarine deployed torpedo was used in an unsuccessful attempt to destroy HMS ''Ramillies'' while in New London's harbor.
Faced with such an attack, the prudent thing for a target to do was to turn so as to parallel the course of the incoming torpedo and steam away from the torpedoes and the firer, allowing the relatively short range torpedoes to use up their fuel.
Later a below-decks launcher was used by the RN.
His formation colleague, Flt Lt G B Dacre, was forced to land on the water owing to engine trouble but, seeing an enemy tug close by, taxied up to it and released his torpedo, sinking the tug.
The Howell torpedo was the only USN model until Whitehead torpedoes produced by Bliss and Williams entered service in 1894.
The torpedoes were originally ejected from the tubes by compressed air but later slow burning gunpowder was used.
The ''Kriegsmarine'' and Royal Navy promptly identified and eliminated the problems.
In 1906 Whitehead built torpedoes that could cover nearly  at an average speed of .
The British later established a Torpedo Experimental Establishment at HMS ''Vernon'' and a production facility at the Royal Naval Torpedo Factory, Greenock in 1910.
While the battleship had evolved primarily around engagements between armoured ships with large-caliber guns, the torpedo allowed torpedo boats and other lighter surface ships, submersibles, even ordinary fishing boats or frogmen, and later, aircraft, to destroy large armoured ships without the need of large guns, though sometimes at the risk of being hit by longer-range shellfire.
A Torpedo Test Station was set up on Rhode Island in 1870.
Until the appearance of the ''Tambor''s, most American submarines only carried 4 bow and either 2 or 4 stern tubes, something many American submarine officers felt provided inadequate firepower.
These were either aligned to fire forward or at an offset angle from the centerline.
John Ericsson invented an electrically propelled torpedo in 1873; it was powered by a cable from an external power source, as batteries of the time had insufficient capacity.
Length, weight, and other factors also contribute to compatibility.
Historically, it was called an automotive, automobile, locomotive or fish torpedo; colloquially called a ''fish''.
Although a form of Chinese art, the Nianhua, depict such torpedoes being used against Russian ships during the Boxer Rebellion, whether they were actually used in battle against them is undocumented and unknown.
These are now closed.
In the inter-war years, tight budgets caused nearly all navies to skimp on testing their torpedoes.
Passive acoustic torpedoes home in on emissions from a target.
The torpedo attained a speed of  using a wire  in diameter but later this was changed to  to increase the speed to .
From about 1900, ''torpedo'' has been used strictly to designate an underwater self-propelled weapon.
In 1893, RN torpedo production was transferred to the Royal Gun Factory.
During the War of 1812, torpedoes were employed in attempts to destroy British vessels and protect American harbors.
Both Britain and America experimented with external tubes in World War II.
In 1883 an agreement was reached between the Brennan Torpedo Company and the government.
A homing torpedo also needs to be able to outmanoeuvre a target.
The earlier version, FaT, ran out after launch in a straight line, and then weaved backwards and forwards parallel to that initial course, whilst the more advanced LuT could transit to a different angle after launch, and then enter a more complex weaving pattern.
Awarded a patent in 1912, Fiske worked out the mechanics of carrying and releasing the aerial torpedo from a bomber, and defined tactics that included a night-time approach so that the target ship would be less able to defend itself.
Prototypes were built by John Ericsson, John Louis Lay, and Victor von Scheliha, but the first practical guided missile was patented by Louis Brennan, an emigre to Australia, in 1877.
Royal Navy Coastal Motor Boats of World War I used a rear-facing trough and a cordite ram to push the torpedoes into the water tail-first; they then had to move rapidly out of the way to avoid being hit by their own torpedo.
Naval strategy at the time was to use torpedoes, launched from submarines or warships, against enemy warships in a fleet action on the high seas.
Torpedoes with such a propulsion system became known as ''wet heaters'', while heated torpedoes without steam generation were retrospectively called ''dry heaters''.
The Brennan torpedo had two wires wound around internal drums.
The largest Whitehead torpedo was  in diameter and  long, made of polished steel or phosphor bronze, with a  gun-cotton warhead.
The result was a submarine weapon, the ''Minenschiff'' (mine ship), the first modern self-propelled torpedo, officially presented to the Austrian Imperial Naval commission on December 21, 1866.
The Howell torpedo used by the US Navy in the late 19th century featured a heavy flywheel that had to be spun up before launch.
Therefore, for the first part of its history, the torpedo was guided only in the sense that its course could be regulated so as to achieve an intended impact depth (because of the sine wave running path of the Whitehead, this was a hit or miss proposition, even when everything worked correctly) and, through gyroscopes, a straight course.
Versions for aircraft and assisted launching have sometimes been based on deck or tube launched versions, and there has been at least one case of a submarine torpedo tube being designed to fire an aircraft torpedo.
The report strongly recommended that an improved model be built at government expense.
It was a mechanism consisting of a hydrostatic valve and pendulum that caused the torpedo's hydroplanes to be adjusted so as to maintain a preset depth.
Pattern-following and wake homing torpedoes were also developed.
External tubes offered a cheap and easy way of increasing torpedo capacity without radical redesign, something neither had time or resources to do prior to, or early in, the war.
It was designed to run at a consistent depth of , and was fitted with an indicator mast that just broke the surface of the water.
This gave the target vessel less chance to detect and evade the torpedo, and avoided giving away the attacker's position.
With the Russians sunk and scattering, Togo prepared for pursuit, and while doing so ordered his torpedo boat destroyers (TBDs) (mostly referred to as just ''destroyers'' in most written accounts) to finish off the Russian battleship.
Similarly, squadrons of torpedo boats and torpedo bombers would attack together, creating a "fan" of torpedoes across the target's course.
Inadequate testing had failed to reveal the effect of the Earth's magnetic field on ships and exploder mechanisms, which resulted in premature detonation.
It could travel about  at an average speed of .
In WW2 the Germans introduced programmable pattern running torpedoes, which would run a predetermined pattern until they either ran out of fuel, or hit something.
The French navy followed suit in 1878 with Torpilleur No 1, launched in 1878 though she had been ordered in 1875.
Most torpedoes used in World War I and World War II were wet-heaters.
Modern torpedoes use an umbilical wire, which nowadays allows the computer processing power of the submarine or ship to be used.
The Howell had the advantage of not leaving a trail of bubbles behind it, unlike compressed air torpedoes.
Speed was about  for over 2,400 m.
On 16 January 1878, the Turkish steamer ''Intibah'' became the first vessel to be sunk by self-propelled torpedoes, launched from torpedo boats operating from the tender ''Velikiy Knyaz Konstantin'' under the command of Stepan Osipovich Makarov during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78.
In naval usage, the American Robert Fulton introduced the name to refer to a towed gunpowder charge used by his French submarine ''Nautilus'' (first tested in 1800) to demonstrate that it could sink warships.
On 26 May 1877, during the Romanian War of Independence, the Romanian spar torpedo boat ''Rândunica'' attacked and sank the Ottoman river monitor ''Seyfi''.
The aircraft would release the torpedo at a distance of  from the target.
It was able to travel about  at .
Nuclear warheads for torpedoes have also been developed, e.g.
USS ''Cairo'' was the first warship to be sunk in 1862 by an electrically detonated mine.
Control surfaces are essential for a torpedo to maintain its course and depth.
Torpedo boats originally used a frame that dropped the torpedo into the sea.
Further development languished as Fulton focused on his "steam-boat matters".
They may be guided automatically towards the target by some procedure, e.g., sound (homing), or by the operator, typically via commands sent over a signal-carrying cable (wire guidance).
The drums connected via a differential gear to twin contra-rotating propellers.
wet engine) is limited by the amount of oxygen it can carry.
Rocket propulsion has been implemented successfully by the Soviet Union, for example in the VA-111 Shkval—and has been recently revived in Russian and German torpedoes, as it is especially suitable for supercavitating devices.
Meanwhile, the Royal Naval Air Service began actively experimenting with this possibility.
In 1866 British engineer invented the first effective Whitehead torpedo.
This basic launch system continues to be used today with improved torpedoes and fire control systems.
Brennan travelled to Britain, where the Admiralty examined the torpedo and found it unsuitable for shipboard use.
21 torpedoes were launched at the pre-dreadnought, and three struck home, one fired from the destroyer ''IJN Murasame'' and two from torpedo boats #72 and #75.
