In the case of asylum seekers and refugees, the services may also include assisting in documentation of torture for the asylum decision, language classes and help in finding somewhere to live and work.
On the other hand, some have pointed to some specific cases where torture has elicited true information.
The modern Church's views regarding torture have changed drastically, largely reverting to the earlier stance.
Article 5 states, "No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."
In the 1990s, some activist rabbis had interpreted this statement to mean that torture could be applied against husbands in troubled marriages in order to force them into granting religious divorces to their wives.
Historically, in those countries where torture was legally supported and officially condoned, wealthy patrons sponsored the creation of extraordinarily ingenious devices and techniques of torture.
These reports showed that torture and ill treatment are consistently report based on all four sources in 32 countries.
Torture ranges from physical, psychological, political, interrogations techniques, and also includes rape of anyone outside of law enforcement.
The treaty also states that there must not be any "violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture" or "outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment".
The wretches say whatever comes into their heads and whatever they think one wants to believe.
The protocol also broadens the definition of a lawful combatant in wars against "alien occupation, colonial domination and racist regimes" to include those who carry arms openly but are not wearing uniforms, so that they are now lawful combatants and protected by the Geneva Conventions—although only if the Occupying Power has ratified Protocol I.
The Age of Enlightenment in the western world further developed the idea of universal human rights.
The adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 marks the recognition at least nominally of a general ban of torture by all UN member states.
Although widely illegal and reviled there is an ongoing debate as to what exactly is and is not legally defined to be torture.
and Egyptians had desert sun death.
Certain Native American peoples, especially in the area that later became the eastern half of the United States, engaged in the sacrificial torture of war captives.
In 2003, the United Kingdom's Ambassador to Uzbekistan, Craig Murray, suggested that it was "wrong to use information gleaned from torture".
Mental torture, however can leave scars just as deep and long-lasting as physical torture.
He thought that Western countries moved people to regimes and nations where it was known that information would be extracted by torture, and made available to them.
Its effect in practice is limited, however, as the Declaration is not ratified officially and does not have legally binding character in international law, but is rather considered part of customary international law.
He was one of the first to protest against all means of torture.
I presumed at the time that these were all Uzbek nationals — that may have been a false presumption.
In England the trial by jury developed considerable freedom in evaluating evidence and condemning on circumstantial evidence, making torture to extort confessions unnecessary.
The most prevalent modern example is bastinado, a technique of beating or whipping the soles of the bare feet.
Its effects are not immediately apparent unless they alter the behavior of the tortured person.
The modern concept of torture methods that leave no physical evidence is noted in 1995 by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM-IV within the changing definition of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder PTSD.
Through the openings between the spokes, the executioner hit the victim with an iron hammer that could easily break the victim's bones.
Judicial torture was probably first applied in Persia.
If the tribunal decides that he is an unlawful combatant, he is not considered a protected person under GCIII.
"Rehabilitation centres therefore play a key role in promoting democracy, co-existence and respect for human rights.
The purported link between al Qaida and Hussein's regime, which has been disproven, was a key political justification for the Iraq War.
Any attempts upon their lives, or violence to their persons, shall be strictly prohibited; in particular, they shall not be murdered or exterminated, subjected to torture or to biological experiments".
''Ad Consulta Vestra'' (as entitled in Latin) declared judicial torture to be a practice that was fundamentally contrary to divine law.
Physical problems can be wide-ranging, e.g.
Article 2 of the Inter-American Convention reads:
A 2006 BBC poll held in 25 nations gauged support for each of the following positions:
In the 21st century, even when states sanction their interrogation methods, torturers often work outside the law.
Often, the victim was hoisted into the air after partial impalement.
According to the findings of Dr. Christian Davenport of the University of Notre Dame, Professor William Moore of Florida State University, and David Armstrong of Oxford University during their torture research, evidence suggests that non-governmental organizations have played the most determinant factor for stopping torture once it gets started.
The ''breaking wheel'' was a torturous capital punishment device used in the Middle Ages and early modern times for public execution by cudgeling to death, especially in France and Germany.
Since there is no international political consensus on what constitutes psychological torture, it is often overlooked, denied, and referred to by different names.
In the worst case, torture can affect several generations.
until the skin and foot muscles were burnt black and the bones fell to ashes are examples of torture in the third degree.
However,  Pope Innocent IV, in the Bull Ad exstirpanda (May 15, 1252),  stipulated that the inquisitors were to "stop short of danger to life or limb".
In 1547 John Calvin had Jacques Gruet arrested in Geneva, Switzerland.
Tortures later in the Middle Ages consisted of whipping; the crushing of thumbs, feet, legs, and heads in iron presses; burning the flesh; and tearing out teeth, fingernails, and toenails with red-hot iron forceps.
Torture victims often feel guilt and shame, triggered by the humiliation they have endured.
GCI covers wounded combatants in an international armed conflict.
I neither can nor may tell all the wounds or all the tortures which they inflicted on wretched men in this land."
POW status under GCIII has far fewer exemptions than "Protected Person" status under GCIV.
In France the condemned were placed on a cart-wheel with their limbs stretched out along the spokes over two sturdy wooden beams.
Specific devices were also created and used during this time, including the rack, the Pear (also mentioned in Grose's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue (1811) as "Choak ''sic.''
However, if he is a protected person under GCIV he still has some protection under GCIV, and must be "treated with humanity and, in case of trial, shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed by the present Convention" (GCIV Article 5).
On October 28, 2008, Guantanamo military judge Stephen R. Henley ruled that the government cannot use statements made as a result of torture in the military commission case against Afghan national Mohammed Jawad.
Captured combatants in an international armed conflict automatically have the protection of GCIII and are POWs under GCIII unless they are determined by a competent tribunal to not be a POW (GCIII Article 5).
In times of armed conflict between a signatory of the Geneva Conventions and another party, delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) monitor the compliance of signatories to the Geneva Conventions, which includes monitoring the use of torture.
For this reason in England a regularized system of judicial torture never existed and its use was limited to political cases.
It too stretched the limbs of the accused, this time however the victim's feet were strapped to the ground and their arms were tied behind their back before a rope was tied to their hands and lifted upwards.
The APA echoed the Bush administration by condemning isolation, sleep deprivation, and sensory deprivation or over-stimulation only when they are likely to cause lasting harm.
For survivors, torture often leads to lasting mental and physical health problems.
According to professor Darius Rejali, although dictatorships may have used tortured "more, and more indiscriminately", it was modern democracies, "the United States, Britain, and France" who "pioneered and exported techniques that have become the lingua franca of modern torture: methods that leave no marks."
It also mentions spies, and defines who is a mercenary.
Medical and Human Rights Organizations worldwide have collaborated to produce the Istanbul Protocol, a document designed to outline common torture methods, consequences of torture, and medico-legal examination techniques.
Differences in general political views also can matter.
These rabbis were later implicated in the 2013 New York divorce torture plot.
Often, defendants already sentenced to death would be tortured to force them to disclose the names of accomplices.
Because psychological torture needs no physical violence to be effective, it is possible to induce severe psychological pain, suffering, and trauma with no externally visible effects.
One old English chronicle from the Dark Ages reads, "They hanged them by the thumbs, or by the head, and hung fires on their feet; they put knotted strings about their heads, and writhed them so that it went to the brain ...
On 10 December 1948, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).
Among the acts prohibited against these persons are, "Violence to the life, health and physical or mental well-being of persons, in particular murder as well as cruel treatment such as torture, mutilation or any form of corporal punishment" (Article 4.a), "Outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment, rape, enforced prostitution and any form of indecent assault" (Article 4.e), and "Threats to commit any of the foregoing acts" (Article 4.h).
Besides degrading the victim, torture debases the torturer: American advisors alarmed at torture by their South Vietnamese allies early in the Vietnam War concluded that "if a commander allowed his officers and men to fall in to these vices they would pursue them for their own sake, for the perverse pleasure they drew from them."
The most notable treaties relating to torture are the United Nations Convention Against Torture and the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols I and II of 8 June 1977.
The Rome Statute, which established the International Criminal Court (ICC), provides for criminal prosecution of individuals responsible for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.
Organizations like Freedom from Torture and the Center for Victims of Torture try to help survivors of torture obtain medical treatment and to gain forensic medical evidence to obtain political asylum in a safe country and/or to prosecute the perpetrators.
States that ratified the United Nations Convention Against Torture have a treaty obligation to include the provisions into municipal law.
report widespread use condoned by states in many regions of the world.
If there is a question of whether a person is a lawful combatant, he (or she) must be treated as a POW "until their status has been determined by a competent tribunal" (GCIII Article 5).
According to Diderot's ''Encyclopédie'', torture was also referred to as "the question" in seventeenth century France.
SSRI antidepressants, counseling, Cognitive Behavioural Therapy, family systems therapy and physiotherapy.
Ingenious variants of the Spanish boot were also designed to slowly crush feet between iron plates armed with terrifying spikes.
Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, the American commander in charge of detentions and interrogations, stated "''a rapport-based interrogation that recognizes respect and dignity, and having very well-trained interrogators, is the basis by which you develop intelligence rapidly and increase the validity of that intelligence.''"
It included the provision for a court to interpret the treaty, and Article 3 '''"Prohibition of torture"''' stated; ''"No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."''
Professional torturers in some countries have used techniques such as electrical shock, asphyxiation, heat, cold, noise, and sleep deprivation, which leave little evidence, although in other contexts torture frequently results in horrific mutilation or death.
Some people, such as Alan M. Dershowitz  and Mirko Bagaric,  have argued the need for information outweighs the moral and ethical arguments against torture.
GCII covers shipwreck survivors at sea in an international armed conflict.
This is only true in cases where specific grounds for the verdict exist.
Impalement was frequently practiced in Asia and Europe throughout the Middle Ages.
Psychiatric treatment of torture-related medical problems might require a wide range of expertise and often specialized experience.
In 1978, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the five techniques of "sensory deprivation" were not torture as laid out in Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, but were "''inhuman or degrading treatment''" (see Accusations of use of torture by United Kingdom for details).
Throughout history and today, many states have engaged in torture, albeit unofficially.
In 1953, in an address to the 6th International Congress of Penal Law, Pope Pius XII approvingly reiterated the position of Pope Nicholas the Great over a thousand years before him, when his predecessor had unilaterally opposed the use of judicial torture, stating:   Thus, the ''Catechism of the Catholic Church'' (published in 1994) condemns the use of torture as a grave violation of Human Rights.
Throughout the Early Middle Ages, the Catholic Church generally opposed the use of torture during criminal proceedings.
The definition is similar to the U.S. Code § 2340, which reads:
Protocol I does not mention torture but it does affect the treatment of POWs and Protected Persons.
Two additional Protocols amended the Convention, which entered into force on 1 March 2002.
Amnesty International estimates that at least 81 world governments currently practice torture, some of them openly.
A month later, on November 19, the judge again rejected evidence gathered through coercive interrogations in the military commission case against Afghan national Mohammed Jawad, holding that the evidence collected while Jawad was in U.S. custody on December 17–18, 2002, cannot be admitted in his trial, mainly because the U.S. interrogator had blindfolded and hooded Jawad in order to frighten him.
Primary responsibility to investigate and punish crimes is therefore reserved to individual states.
Prisoners of war who refuse to answer may not be threatened, insulted or exposed to unpleasant or disadvantageous treatment of any kind."
They shall be treated humanely and cared for by the Party to the conflict in whose power they may be, without any adverse distinction founded on sex, race, nationality, religion, political opinions, or any other similar criteria.
The sharp point of the instrument was first pushed under the nail to the root, splitting the nail down the centerline.
After 1995, the sweeping definition of changes from 'any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether ''mental'' or ''physical'',is intentionally inflicted on a person' to including the terms ''psychological torture'' and including examples such as,interrogation techniques range from sleep deprivation, solitary confinement, fear and humiliation to severe sexual and cultural humiliation and use of threats and phobias to induce fear of death or injury.
This term is derived from torture's use in criminal cases: as the accused is tortured, the torturers would typically ask questions to the accused in an effort to learn more about the crime.
The echelle more commonly known as the "ladder" or "rack" was a long table that the accused would lie upon and be stretched violently.
The ruling excluded an important witness, whose name had been extracted from the defendant under duress.
The laws of many states therefore formally prohibit torture.
This caused the arms to break before the horrific portion of the stretching began.
Torture was abolished in England around 1640 (except ''peine forte et dure'', which was abolished in 1772).
# punishment allowed by national laws, even if the punishment uses techniques similar to those used by torturers such as mutilation, whipping, or corporal punishment when practiced as lawful punishment.
The torture was used so intensely that on many occasions the victim's limbs would be pulled out of the socket and, at times, the limbs would even be torn from the body entirely.
Modern scholars find the concept of torture to be compatible with society's concept of Justice during the time of the Roman Empire.
Medieval and early modern European courts used torture, depending on the crime of the accused and his or her social status.
The ICC came into existence on 1 July 2002 and can only prosecute crimes committed on or after that date.
On 13 May 2009, former NBC News investigative producer Robert Windrem reported, as confirmed by former Iraq Survey Group leader Charles Duelfer, that the Vice President's Office suggested that an interrogation team led by Duelfer waterboard an Iraqi prisoner suspected of knowing about a relationship between al Qaeda and Saddam.
The treaty was adopted at a diplomatic conference in Rome on 17 July 1998 and went into effect on 1 July 2002.
Any person who conspires to commit an offense shall be subject to the same penalties (other than the penalty of death) as the penalties prescribed for an actual act or attempting to commit an act, the commission of which was the object of the conspiracy.
Preliminary research suggests that it is civil society, not government institutions, that can stop torture once it has begun.
Johann Graefe in 1624 published ''Tribunal Reformation'', a case against torture.
Vlad III Dracula and Ivan the Terrible have passed into legend as major users of the method.
In Colonial America, women were sentenced to the stocks with wooden clips on their tongues or subjected to the "dunking stool" for the gender-specific crime of talking too much.
Limb-smashing and drowning were also popular medieval tortures.
If this request to drop the torture case is true, it is frankly monstrous.
Bavaria abolished torture in 1806 and Württemberg in 1809.
By this time torture was not routine in England and a special warrant from King James I was needed before he could be tortured.
Other sharia-derived punishments that might overlap with widely held notions of torture include the various forms of hudud.
Some professionals in the torture rehabilitation field believe that this definition is too restrictive and that the definition of politically motivated torture should be broadened to include all acts of organized violence.
The consequent degeneracy destroyed discipline and morale: "a soldier had to learn that he existed to uphold law and order, not to undermine it."
Torturers often inflict both types of torture in combination to compound the associated effects.
Psychological torture uses non-physical methods that cause psychological suffering.
Many feel that they have betrayed themselves or their friends and family.
Clauses in other articles implore humane treatment of enemy personnel in an internal conflict.
He goes on to say that he did not know at the time that any non-Uzbek nationals were flown to Uzbekistan and although he has studied the reports by several journalists and finds their reports credible he is not a firsthand authority on this issue.
These provisions have the double dissuasive effect of nullifying any utility in using torture with the purpose of eliciting confession, as well as confirming that should a person extract statements by torture, this can be used against him or her in criminal proceedings.
Under Article 7 of the statute, torture may be considered a crime against humanity "when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack".
I knew that the CIA were obtaining intelligence from their subsequent interrogation by the SNB."
Protocol II "develops and supplements Article 3 relating to the protection of victims of non-international armed conflicts common to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 without modifying its existing conditions of application" (Article 1).
The French 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, of constitutional value, prohibits submitting suspects to any hardship not necessary to secure his or her person.
'''Second-degree''' torture consisted almost entirely of crushing devices and procedures, including exceptionally clever screw presses or "bone vises" that crushed thumbs, toes, knees, feet, even teeth and skulls in a wide variety of ways.
The Pontiff made it a point of incontrovertible truth that, in his own words: "confession to a crime should be spontaneous, not compelled, and should not be elicited with violence but rather proferred voluntarily".
The Council of Geneva had him beheaded with Calvin's approval.
If the terrorist is tortured, he may explain how to defuse the bomb.
The court is designed to complement existing national judicial systems: it can exercise its jurisdiction only when national courts are unwilling or unable to investigate or prosecute such crimes.
To prevent torture, many legal systems have a right against self-incrimination or explicitly prohibit undue force when dealing with suspects.
The reason for this because experience has shown that under torture, or even under a threat of torture, a person will say or do anything solely to avoid the pain.
In contrast, psychological torture is directed at the psyche with calculated violations of psychological needs, along with deep damage to psychological structures and the breakage of beliefs underpinning normal sanity.
Voltaire (1694–1778) also fiercely condemned torture in some of his essays.
Finally, '''third-degree''' tortures savagely mutilated the body in numerous dreadful ways, incorporating spikes, blades, boiling oil, and extremely carefully controlled fire.
After this point it began to be extended to all members of the lower classes.
It would at the very least be a criminal misuse of the powers and funds under the Government's Contest strategy, and at worst a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice."
The question of the use of evidence obtained under torture has arisen in connection with prosecutions during the War on Terror in the United Kingdom and the United States.
It was permitted by law only if there was already half-proof against the accused.
In practice, so-called "enhanced interrogation" techniques were employed by the CIA in situations that did not involve the "ticking time bomb" scenario that has been the subject of opinion polls and public debate.
Norway abolished it in 1819 and Portugal in 1826.
Pincers then grabbed either edge of the destroyed nail and very, very slowly tore it away from the nail bed.
Violations in some stricter jurisdictions include acts of public indecency or immorality, which can result in floggings.
By contrast, torturous executions were typically public, and woodcuts of English prisoners being hanged, drawn and quartered show large crowds of spectators, as do paintings of Spanish auto-da-fé executions, in which heretics were burned at the stake.
Deliberately painful methods of torture and execution for severe crimes were taken for granted as part of justice until the development of Humanism in 17th century philosophy, and "cruel and unusual punishment" came to be denounced in the English Bill of Rights of 1689.
As stated in Article 1, the purpose of the protocol is to "establish a system of regular visits undertaken by independent international and national bodies to places where people are deprived of their liberty, in order to prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."
In the 17th century the number of incidents of judicial torture decreased in many European regions.
Any attempts upon their lives, or violence to their persons, shall be strictly prohibited; in particular, they shall not be murdered or exterminated, subjected to torture or to biological experiments".
Some countries have legally codified it, and others have claimed that it is not practiced, while maintaining the use of torture in secret.
He argued for an alternative and more humane procedure, in which the accused person would be required to swear an oath of innocence upon the "holy Gospel that he did not commit the crime which is laid against him and from that moment on the matter is to be put at an end".
However, after coercive practices were banned, interrogators in Iraq saw an increase of 50 percent more high-value intelligence.
The wheel was made to slowly revolve.
Sweden was the first to do so in 1722 and the Netherlands did the same in 1798.
Often this lessened rejection is found in countries severely and frequently threatened by terrorist attacks.
The Spanish Boot, or "leg-screw", used mostly in Germany and Scotland, was a steel boot that was placed over the leg of the accused and was tightened.
E.g., Israel, despite its Supreme Court outlawing torture in 1999, showed 43% supporting torture, but 48% opposing, India showed 37% supporting torture and only 23% opposing.
Human rights organizations, such as Amnesty International, the World Organization Against Torture, and Association for the Prevention of Torture work actively to stop the use of torture throughout the world and publish reports on any activities they consider to be torture.
However the most common and prevalent form of torture worldwide in both developed and under-developed countries is beating.
Such persons shall be treated humanely and cared for by the Parties to the conflict in whose power they may be, without any adverse distinction founded on sex, race, nationality, religion, political opinions, or any other similar criteria.
However, there was a clear divide between those countries with strong rejection of torture (such as Italy, where only 14% supported torture) and nations where rejection was less strong.
In the High Middle Ages the Church became increasingly concerned with the perceived threat posed to its existence by resurgent heresy, in particular that attributed to a purported sect known as the Cathars.
All such symptoms are normal human responses to abnormal and inhuman treatment.
But the information thus obtained could be used by the British police and security services as "it would be ludicrous for them to disregard information about a ticking bomb if it had been procured by torture."
However, the APA rejected a stronger resolution that sought to prohibit "all psychologist involvement, either direct or indirect, in any interrogations at U.S. detention centers for foreign detainees or citizens detained outside normal legal channels."
Sexual humiliation torture included forced sitting on red-hot stools.
These American citizens could theoretically be tried by the International Criminal Court even though the US is not a signatory.
The heavily carved bodies of the deceased were then put on a parade for a show in the public.
Therefore, other members of the survivor’s family – in particular the spouse and children – are also offered treatment and counselling.
Medieval torture devices were varied.
These reports confirm the assumption that torture occurs in a quarter of the world's countries on a regular basis.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office itself is being investigated by the National Audit Office because of accusations that it has victimized, bullied and intimidated its own staff.
As a result, there is no way to know whether or not the resulting statement is actually correct.
''Impalement'' was a method of torture and execution whereby a person is pierced with a long stake.
In the years 2004 and 2005, over 16 countries were documented using torture.
Modern sensibilities have been shaped by a profound reaction to the war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by the Axis Powers and Allied Powers in the Second World War, which have led to a sweeping international rejection of most if not all aspects of the practice.
This process was repeated several times per limb.
Torture still occurs in liberal democracies despite several international treaties such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the UN Convention Against Torture making torture illegal.
For this reason, some prefer methods that, while unpleasant, leave victims alive and unmarked.
"), thumbscrews, animals like rats, the iron chair, and the cat o nine tails.
"Such groups comprise refugees and persons who are or have been under torture."
In 1950 during the Cold War, the participating member states of the Council of Europe signed the European Convention on Human Rights.
Romans, Jews, Egyptians and many other cultures during that time included torture as part of their justice system.
The privy council attempted to have John Felton who stabbed George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham to death in 1628 questioned under torture on the rack, but the judges resisted, unanimously declaring its use to be contrary to the laws of England.
Catharism had its roots in the Paulician movement in Armenia and eastern Byzantine Anatolia and the Bogomils of the First Bulgarian Empire.
The jury acquitted him of 280 charges and convicted on only one charge of conspiracy.
The wording of the warrant shows some concerns for humanitarian considerations, the severity of the methods of interrogation were to be increased gradually until the interrogators were sure that Fawkes had told all he knew.
The entire process was said to last three days, and to total 3,600 cuts.
This serves as the basis of the Miranda warning, which U.S. law enforcement personnel issue to individuals upon their arrest.
