The former television presenter Christian Prudhomme&nbsp;— he commentated on the Tour among other events&nbsp;— replaced Leblanc in 2007, having been assistant director for three years.
Broadcasting in France was largely a state monopoly until 1982, when the socialist president François Mitterrand allowed private broadcasters and privatised the leading television channel.
This change encourages riders to sprint to the finish for points awards without fear of losing time to the group.
On top of that come the more considerable costs of the commercial samples that are thrown to the crowd and the cost of accommodating the drivers and the staff—frequently students—who throw them.
''Wired to Win'' chronicles Française des Jeux riders Baden Cooke and Jimmy Caspar in 2003.
The format changed over time.
Postal Service cycling team, implicating, amongst others, Armstrong.
A similar award, the Souvenir Jacques Goddet, is made at the summit of the Col du Tourmalet, at the memorial to Jacques Goddet, Desgrange's successor.
''Vive Le Tour'' by Louis Malle is an 18-minute short of 1962.
The film, made for IMAX theaters, appeared in December 2005.
Ullrich had won the 1997 Tour and finished second to Armstrong three times—in 2000, 2001 and 2003—but declined to stake a claim for his rival's stripped titles.
American rider Floyd Landis, who finished the Tour as holder of the overall lead, had tested positive for testosterone after he won stage 17, but this was not confirmed until some two weeks after the race finished.
The race alternates between clockwise and counterclockwise circuits of France.
The smallest margins between the winner and the second placed cyclists at the end of the Tour is 8s between winner Greg LeMond and Laurent Fignon in 1989.
The first live coverage from the side of the road was from the Aubisque on 8 July 1958.
Months before the start of the 1988 Tour, director Jean-François Naquet-Radiguet was replaced by Xavier Louy.
The Young rider classification is restricted to the riders that are under the age of 26.
He handed Desgrange the keys to the company safe and said: "Take whatever you need."
The largest margin, by comparison, remains that of the first Tour in 1903: 2h 49m 45s between Maurice Garin and Lucien Pothier.
Goddet and Lévitan continued to clash over the running of the race.
The leading television commentator in France was a former rider, Robert Chapatte.
The Tour returned to trade teams in 1962.
A bank, GAN, gave out 170,000 caps, 80,000 badges, 60,000 plastic bags and 535,000 copies of its race newspaper in 1994.
The combination of unprecedented rigorous doping controls and almost no positive tests helped restore fans' confidence in the 2009 Tour de France.
The first stage in modern Tours is often a short trial, a ''prologue'', to decide who wears yellow on the opening day.
In 1984, for the first time, the Société du Tour de France organized the Tour de France Féminin, a version for women.
Twice the Tour was won by a racer who never wore the yellow jersey until the race was over.
A snowstorm at the start area led to a shortening of the stage from 190 to just 46&nbsp;km.
The winners of the points classification and mountains classification each win €25,000, the young rider competition and the combativity prize €20,000, and €50,000 for the winner of the team classification (calculated by adding the cumulative times of the best three riders in each team).
Stagnating sales lower than the rival it was intended to surpass led to a crisis meeting on 20 November 1902 on the middle floor of ''L'Auto'''s office at 10 Rue du Faubourg Montmartre, Paris.
He was not successful in acquiring more funds, and was fired within one year.
The oldest and most sought after classification in the Tour de France is the general classification.
He was the fourth and most recent rider to win a stage by more than 20 minutes.
The situation became critical at the start of the 1960s.
Our movement, which is nationalist and in favour of self-government, would be delighted if the Tour came to Corsica."
In 1989 the last stage was a time trial.
Fellow Cofidis rider David Millar confessed to EPO after his home was raided.
The next day Cristian Moreni tested positive for testosterone.
The 1988 event, at La Baule, was called "la préface".
Desgrange and his Tour invented bicycle stage racing.
The real start, the ''départ réel'' is announced by the Tour director waving a white flag.
Competition between channels raised the broadcasting fees paid to the organisers from 1.5 per cent of the race budget in 1960 to more than a third by the end of the century.
This never happened.
Greg LeMond overtook Laurent Fignon to win by eight seconds, the closest margin in the Tour's history.
He announced his new race on 1 July 1903 by citing the writer Émile Zola, whose open letter in which every paragraph started" ''J'accuse&nbsp;...''" led to Dreyfus's acquittal, establishing the florid style he used henceforth.
While the route changes each year, the format of the race stays the same with the appearance of time trials, the passage through the mountain chains of the Pyrenees and the Alps, and the finish on the Champs-Élysées in Paris.
On 24 May 2007, Erik Zabel admitted using EPO during the first week of the 1996 Tour, when he won the points classification.
The leader in the first Tour de France was awarded a yellow armband.
The story was published in ''Le Petit Parisien'' under the title ''Les Forçats de la Route'' ('The Convicts of the Road')
The riders' times are compounded with their previous stage times; so the rider with the lowest aggregate time is the leader of the race.
Some of the Tour's most colourful characters have been touriste-routiers.
''L'Auto'' hadn't featured the race on its front page that morning.
The Tour is important for fans in Europe.
The race was taken over by his deputy, Jacques Goddet.
The Tour de France was created in 1903.
It spreads 20–25&nbsp;km and takes 40 minutes to pass at between 20 and 60&nbsp;km/h.
That attracted between 60 and 80 entrants&nbsp;– the higher number may have included serious inquiries and some who dropped out&nbsp;– among them not just professionals but amateurs, some unemployed, some simply adventurous.
The 1979 Tour was the first to be broadcast in the United States.
Mark Cavendish has the most mass finish stage wins with 30 as of stage 14 in 2016, ahead of André Darrigade and André Leducq with 22, François Faber with 19 and Eddy Merckx with 18.
In 2004, Philippe Gaumont said doping was endemic to his Cofidis team.
Passage was secured through a meeting at Metz between Desgrange's collaborator, Alphonse Steinès, and the German governor.
The modern tour typically has 21 stages, one per day.
Eddy Mercx has the most wins (4) for the overall award.
Bourlon finished 16&nbsp;m 30s ahead.
The 1927 and 1928 Tours, however, consisted mainly of team time-trials, an unsuccessful experiment which sought to avoid a proliferation of sprint finishes on flat stages.
The number of teams usually varies between 20 and 22, with nine riders in each.
That record belongs to José-Luis Viejo, who beat the peloton by 22&nbsp;m 50s in the 1976 stage Montgenèvre-Manosque.
On 11 July 2008 Manuel Beltrán tested positive for EPO after the first stage.
Sponsors were always unhappy about releasing their riders into anonymity for the biggest race of the year, as riders in national teams wore the colours of their country and a small cloth panel on their chest that named the team for which they normally rode.
Desgrange and Lefèvre discussed it after lunch.
Doping controversy has surrounded Lance Armstrong.
Crowds flanking the course are reminiscent of the community festivals that are part of another form of cycle racing in a different country - the Isle of Man TT.
Further measures were introduced by race organisers and the UCI, including more frequent testing and tests for blood doping (transfusions and EPO use).
Since 2005, when riders fall or crash within the final 3 kilometres of a stage with a flat finish, they are awarded the same time as the group they were in.
Following his plea that other cyclists admit to drugs, former winner Bjarne Riis admitted in Copenhagen on 25 May 2007 that he used EPO regularly from 1993 to 1998, including when he won the 1996 Tour.
There had already been a car race called the Tour de France but it was the publicity behind the cycling race, and Desgrange's drive to educate and improve the population, that inspired the French to know more of their country.
All of the stages are timed to the finish.
There was no place for individuals in the post-1930s teams and so Desgrange created regional teams, generally from France, to take in riders who would not otherwise have qualified.
Traditionally, the race is held primarily in the month of July.
Jean-Marie Leblanc, when he was organiser, said the island had never asked for a stage start there.
From 1968 there was a combination classification, scored on a points system based on standings in the general, points and mountains classifications.
Most stages would last one day but the scheduling of 'split' stages continued well in to the 1980s.
Then the Germans invaded and the race was not held again until 1947 (see Tour de France during the Second World War).
The first kilometres, the ''départ fictif'', are a rolling start without racing.
The most combative rider wears a number printed white-on-red instead of black-on-white next day.
1953 saw the introduction of the Green Jersey 'Points' competition.
Rights to the Tour were therefore owned by the government.
The first live radio broadcast was in 1929, when Jean Antoine and Alex Virot of the newspaper ''L'Intransigeant'' broadcast for Radio Cité.
Bonuses were previously also awarded to winners of intermediate sprints.
During the era of national teams, France and Belgium won 10 times each.
The Tour was shown first on cinema newsreels a day or more after the event.
There are usually two or three time trials.
The loyalty of riders was sometimes questionable, within and between teams.
The lead can change after each stage.
''Le Vélo'', meanwhile, went out of business in 1904.
By time, a rider coping with a mechanical problem—which the rules insisted he repair alone—could lose so much time that it cost him the race.
He helped drive an internationalization of the Tour de France, and cycling in general.
Teams would have been drawn from military units in France, including the British, who would have been organised by a journalist, Bill Mills.
Initially he used total accumulated time (as used in the modern Tour de France)  but from 1906 to 1912 by points for placings each day.
The Italian journalist Davide Cassani told Danish television he had seen Rasmussen in Italy.
The first to sign to precede the Tour was the chocolate company, Menier, one of those who had followed the race.
In 2005, three films chronicled a team.
His admission meant the top three in 1996 were all linked to doping, two admitting cheating.
In 1983, the organizers made it so that only first time riders were eligible for the classification.
The Danish film ''Overcoming'' by Tómas Gislason recorded the 2004 Tour from the perspective of Team CSC.
The Tour returned to national teams for 1967 and 1968 as "an experiment".
Domestic television covers the most important stages of the Tour, such as those in the mountains, from mid-morning until early evening.
He said he had used skin cream containing triamcinolone to treat saddle sores.
That number expands to about 220 during the race itself, not including 500 contractors employed to move barriers, erect stages, signpost the route and other work.
Numbers vary but there are normally around 250 vehicles each year.
The fastest massed-start stage was in 1999 from Laval to Blois (194.5&nbsp;km), won by Mario Cipollini at 50.4&nbsp;km/h.
Riders completing a stage may be eliminated if their time exceeds the time limit for the stage.
The scale ranges from category 4, the easiest, to hors catégorie, the hardest.
In 1993 ownership of ''L'Équipe'' moved to the Amaury Group, which formed Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO) to oversee its sports operations, although the Tour itself is operated by its subsidiary the Société du Tour de France.
The modern editions of the Tour de France consist of 21 day-long segments (stages) over a 23-day period and cover around .
Eddy Merckx has worn the yellow jersey for 96 stages, which is more than any other rider in the history of the Tour de France.
''L'Équipe'' was given the right to organise the 1947 Tour de France.
That reduced the daily and overall distance but the emphasis remained on endurance.
The ''prix de la combativité'' goes to the rider who most animates the day, usually by trying to break clear of the field.
Prizes for the classification were first awarded in 1934.
The last to speak was the most junior there, the chief cycling journalist, a 26-year-old named Géo Lefèvre.
In 1968, Jan Janssen of the Netherlands secured his win in the individual time trial on the last day.
The time is that of the fifth rider of each team: riders more than a bike-length behind their team's fifth rider are awarded their own times.
It was edited there and shown the following day.
The Tour returned after its suspension during World War One and continued to grow, with circulation of ''L'Auto'' reaching 500,000 by 1923.
The two worked together, Goddet running the sporting side and Lévitan the financial.
It was then impossible to follow the frontiers, and the Tour increasingly zig-zagged across the country, sometimes with unconnected days' races linked by train, while still maintaining some sort of loop.
The book sold six million copies by the time of the first Tour de France, the biggest selling book of 19th-century France (other than the Bible).
It became clear in a trial that management and health officials of the Festina team had organised the doping.
The race finished on the edge of Paris at Ville d'Avray, outside the Restaurant du Père Auto, before a ceremonial ride into Paris and several laps of the Parc des Princes.
Sales of bicycles had fallen and bicycle factories were closing.
Desgrange persuaded his surgeon to let him follow the race.
Riders went on strike.
However, ''L'Équipe'''s finances were never sound and Goddet accepted an advance by Émilion Amaury, who had supported his bid to run the post-war Tour.
When switching to the use of national teams in 1930, the costs of accommodating riders fell to the organizers instead of the sponsors and Henri Desgrange raised the money by allowing advertisers to precede the race.
Desgrange saw problems in judging both by time and by points.
It is not unusual for the entire field to finish in a group, taking time to cross the line but being credited with the same time.
The organisation of the 1987 Tour de France was taken over by Jean-François Naquet-Radiguet.
He was a prominent cyclist and owner with Victor Goddet of the velodrome at the Parc des Princes.
The first photo-finish was in 1955.
But this proved too daunting and the costs too great for most and only 15 competitors had entered.
Riders usually try to make the extra effort to keep the jersey for as long as possible in order to get more publicity for the team and the sponsor(s) of the team.
But in 1987, Pedro Delgado broke away on the Champs to challenge the 40-second lead held by Stephen Roche.
It could, as Desgrange said, "nail Giffard's beak shut."
From 1973 up to 1988, there was also a team classification based on points (stage classification); members of the leading team would wear green caps.
In October 2012 the UCI acted upon this report, formally stripping Armstrong of all titles since 1 August 1998, including all seven Tour victories, and announced that his Tour wins would not be reallocated to other riders.
For example, for a stage classed as "Coefficient 1: Stages with no particular difficulty", the time limit is the winner's time plus 3% for an average speed of up to 36&nbsp;km/h, increasing in 8 steps to 11% for a speed of over 50&nbsp;km/h, while on a "Coefficient 5: Very difficult short stages" it varies from 11% (up to 30&nbsp;km/h) to 22% (over 40&nbsp;km/h).
On 30 June 2008 Landis lost his appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, and Óscar Pereiro was named as winner.
The Tour has been won three times by racers who led the general classification on the first stage and holding the lead all the way to Paris.
The Tour de France, the Giro d'Italia and Vuelta a España make up cycling's prestigious, three-week-long Grand Tours; the Tour is the oldest and generally considered the most prestigious of the three by fans and riders alike.
In October 2008, it was revealed that Riccò's teammate and Stage 10 winner Leonardo Piepoli, as well as Stefan Schumacher&nbsp;– who won both time trials&nbsp;– and Bernhard Kohl&nbsp;– third on general classification and King of the Mountains&nbsp;– had tested positive.
Advertisers pay the Société du Tour de France approximately €150,000 to place three vehicles in the caravan.
Four riders have won both the young rider classification and the general classification in the same year: Laurent Fignon (1983), Jan Ullrich (1997), Alberto Contador (2007), and Andy Schleck (2010).
This 30-minute documentary has no narration and relies on sights and sounds of the Tour.
By following their quest for the points classification, won by Cooke, the film looks at the working of the brain.
On 1 August 2013, Jan Ullrich—arguably Armstrong's biggest Tour de France rival—reportedly said that Armstrong should have his seven stripped wins reinstated, due to the prevalence of doping at the time.
It was one of seven breakaways longer than 200&nbsp;km, the last being Thierry Marie's 234&nbsp;km escape in 1991.
ASO employs around 70 people full-time, in an office facing but not connected to ''L'Équipe'' in the Issy-les-Moulineaux area of outer western Paris.
When Lévitan arrived at his office on 17 March 1987, he found that his doors were locked and he was fired.
ASO now also operate several other major bike races throughout the year.
In fiction, the 2003 animated feature ''Les Triplettes de Belleville'' (''The Triplets of Belleville'') ties into the Tour de France.
Climbs are classified according to the steepness and length of that particular hill, with more points available for harder climbs.
After mediation by director Jean-Marie Leblanc, police limited their tactics and riders continued.
Prior to 2013, the Tour de France had visited every region of Metropolitan France except Corsica.
It was directed by Bayley Silleck, who was nominated for an Academy Award for documentary short subject in 1996 for ''Cosmic Voyage''.
The leader of each of the aforementioned classifications wears a distinctive jersey, with riders leading multiple classifications wearing the jersey of the most prestigious that he leads.
Desgrange was a traditionalist with equipment.
Desgrange seems not to have forgotten the Dreyfus Affair that launched his race and raised the passions of his backers.
Four riders have won the general classification five times in their career: Jacques Anquetil, Eddy Merckx, Bernard Hinault, and Miguel Indurain.
The stations use a staff of 300 with four helicopters, two aircraft, two motorcycles, 35 other vehicles including trucks, and 20 podium cameras.
The same day, leader Michael Rasmussen was removed for "violating internal team rules" by missing random tests on 9 May and 28 June.
The most appearances have been by George Hincapie with 17.
Over the years they began to increase performance and the Union Cycliste Internationale and governments enacted policies to combat the practice.
The comedy, ''Le Vélo de Ghislain Lambert'' (2001), featured the Tour of 1974.
Already in 1908 a sort of combativity award was offered, when ''Sports Populaires'' and ''L'Education Physique'' created ''Le Prix du Courage'', 100 francs and a silver gilt medal for "the rider having finished the course, even if unplaced, who is particularly distinguished for the energy he has used."
Toulouse was added later to break the long haul across southern France from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic.
A fan, Scott Coady, followed the 2000 Tour with a handheld video camera to make ''The Tour Baby!
The first Tour de France started almost outside the Café Reveil-Matin at the junction of the Melun and Corbeil roads in the village of Montgeron.
Film was flown or taken by train to Paris.
The last rider, Millocheau, finished 64h 47m 22s behind him.
He made Félix Lévitan co-organizer of the Tour, and it was decided that Levitan would focus on the financial issues, and Jacques Goddet on the sporting issues.
Advertisers following the race found that many who had watched the race had already gone home.
The race has finished since 1975 with laps of the Champs-Élysées.
The only rider to win the Tour de France and an Olympic gold medal in the same year was Bradley Wiggins in 2012.
Such was sympathy that he could command higher fees in the races that previously followed the Tour.
Vehicles travel in groups of five.
Riders in most stages start together.
After this stages were gradually shortened, such that by 1936 there were as many as three stages in a single day.
The point distribution for the mountains is as follows:
These races are public spectacles where thousands of people can see their ''heroes'', from the Tour de France, race.
The color yellow was chosen as the magazine that created the Tour, ''L'Auto'', printed its newspapers on yellow paper.
The procession of often colourfully decorated trucks and cars became known as the publicity caravan.
In 1924, Henri Pélissier and his brother Charles told the journalist Albert Londres they used strychnine, cocaine, chloroform, aspirin, "horse ointment" and other drugs.
The final kilometre has been indicated since 1906 by a red triangle&nbsp;– the ''flamme rouge''&nbsp;– above the road.
The first prize in 1988 was a car, a studio-apartment, a work of art and 500,000 francs in cash.
The longest successful post-war breakaway by a single rider was by Albert Bourlon in the 1947 Tour de France.
A team time trial (TTT) is a race against the clock in which each team rides alone.
Most stages are in mainland France, although since the 1960s it has become common to visit nearby countries: Andorra, Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Spain and Switzerland have all hosted stages or part of a stage.
The first prologue was in 1967.
The prologue and first stage (Grand Départ) are particularly prestigious.
