Also, a detachment of the unit providing the Queen's Guard at Buckingham Palace still mounts a guard at the Tower, and with the Yeomen Warders, takes part in the Ceremony of the Keys each day.
William made Gundulf, Bishop of Rochester, responsible for its construction, although it may not have been completed until after William's death in 1087.
From the early 14th&nbsp;century until the reign of Charles&nbsp;II, a procession would be led from the Tower to Westminster Abbey on the coronation of a monarch.
Only the Wakefield and St&nbsp;Thomas's Towers survived.
At the south-east corner there is a larger semi-circular projection which accommodates the apse of the chapel.
Edward also moved the Royal Mint into the Tower; its exact location early on is unknown, although it was probably in either the outer ward or the Lion Tower.
The Lion Tower itself no longer survives.
Today the Tower of London is one of the country's most popular tourist attractions.
With permission from the King, Byron relinquished control of the Tower.
During the reign of Henry&nbsp;VIII, the Tower was assessed as needing considerable work on its defences.
Public interest was partly fuelled by contemporary writers, of whom the work of William Harrison Ainsworth was particularly influential.
Although the facilities for the garrison were improved with the addition of the first purpose-built quarters for soldiers (the "Irish Barracks") in 1670, the general accommodations were still in poor condition.
St&nbsp;John's Chapel was not part of the White Tower's original design, as the apsidal projection was built after the basement walls.
Edward extended the south side of the Tower of London onto land that had previously been submerged by the River Thames.
In the 21st&nbsp;century, tourism is the Tower's primary role, the remaining routine military activities, under the Royal Logistic Corps, having wound down in the latter half of the 20th century and moved out of the castle.
It was rebuilt by Edward&nbsp;I at a cost of over £300 and again by Henry&nbsp;VIII in 1519; the current building dates from this period, although the chapel was refurbished in the 19th&nbsp;century.
The fortification that would later become known as the Tower of London was built onto the south-east corner of the Roman town walls, using them as prefabricated defences, with the River Thames providing additional protection from the south.
He was held in luxury and permitted servants, but on 2 February 1101 he hosted a banquet for his captors.
Mandeville exploited this, selling his allegiance to Matilda after Stephen was captured in 1141 at the Battle of Lincoln.
Plans for defence were drawn up and gun platforms were built, readying the Tower for war.
Persecution of the country's Jewish population under Edward began in 1276 and culminated in 1290 when he issued the Edict of Expulsion, forcing the Jews out of the country.
New creations included a new defensive perimeter, studded with towers, while on the west, north, and east sides, where the wall was not defended by the river, a defensive ditch was dug.
The tradition of whitewashing the White Tower (from which it derives its name) began in 1240.
Through his role as Constable of the Tower, Mandeville became "the richest and most powerful man in England".
They began an affair and plotted to overthrow the King.
Although the Constable was still responsible for maintaining the castle and its garrison, from an early stage he had a subordinate to help with this duty: the Lieutenant of the Tower.
Victorious at the Battle of Hastings on 14 October 1066, the invading Duke of Normandy, William the Conqueror, spent the rest of the year securing his holdings, by fortifying key positions.
In an effort to make the castle self-sufficient, Edward&nbsp;I also added two watermills.
In 1254, the sheriffs were ordered to subsidise the construction of an elephant house at the Tower.
A new  moat was dug beyond the castle's new limits; it was originally  deeper in the middle than it is today.
Henry won a significant victory at the Battle of Evesham in 1265, allowing him to regain control of the country and the Tower of London.
Despite its enduring reputation as a place of torture and death, popularised by 16th-century religious propagandists and 19th-century writers, only seven people were executed within the Tower before the World Wars of the 20th&nbsp;century.
In October 1817, a tubular, glowing apparition was claimed to have been seen in the Jewel House by the Keeper of the Crown Jewels, Edmund Lenthal Swifte.
However, it was during this period that the Privy Wardrobe was founded.
Tower Wharf was built on the bank of the Thames under Edward&nbsp;I and was expanded to its current size during the reign of Richard&nbsp;II (1377–1399).
Over the 18th and 19th&nbsp;centuries, the palatial buildings were slowly adapted for other uses and demolished.
They are under the care of the Yeomen Warders.
At the western corners of the building are square towers, while to the north-east a round tower houses a spiral staircase.
The Jews used the Tower as a retreat, when threatened by anti-Jewish violence.
According to military historian Allen Brown, "The great tower White Tower was also, by virtue of its strength, majesty and lordly accommodation, the donjon ''par excellence''".
Between the Wakefield and Lanthorn Towers, the innermost ward's wall also serves as a curtain wall for the inner ward.
Other buildings were remodelled to match the style and the Waterloo Barracks were described as "castellated Gothic of the 15th&nbsp;century".
The treasure allowed the monarch independence from the aristocracy, and consequently was closely guarded.
However, he was taken away and beheaded on Tower Hill.
The entrance, as is usual in Norman keeps, was above ground, in this case on the south face, and accessed via a wooden staircase which could be removed in the event of an attack.
One of the rooms contained a well.
Bones thought to belong to them were discovered in 1674 when the 12th-century forebuilding at the entrance to the White Tower was demolished; however, the reputed level at which the bones were found () would put the bones at a depth similar to that of the recently discovered Roman graveyard found  underneath the Minories a few hundred yards to the north.
Since 1990, the Tower of London has been cared for by an independent charity, Historic Royal Palaces, which receives no funding from the Government or the Crown.
A new position for "keeper of the jewels, armouries and other things" was created, which was well rewarded; in the reign of Edward&nbsp;III (1312–1377) the holder was paid 12d a day.
The reign of Henry&nbsp;V (1413–1422) renewed England's fortune in the Hundred Years' War against France.
The main entrance to the inner ward would have been through a gatehouse, most likely in the west wall on the site of what is now Beauchamp Tower.
After the war, the damage was repaired and the Tower of London was reopened to the public.
The Tower steadily gained popularity with tourists through the 19th&nbsp;century, despite the opposition of the Duke of Wellington to visitors.
The Crown Jewels also garner much interest, and have been on public display since 1669.
From 1547 onwards, the Tower of London was only used as a royal residence when its political and historic symbolism was considered useful, for instance each of Edward&nbsp;VI, Mary&nbsp;I, and Elizabeth&nbsp;I briefly stayed at the Tower before their coronations.
Their condition was so poor that they were virtually uninhabitable.
It lies within the London Borough of Tower Hamlets, separated from the eastern edge of the square mile of the City of London by the open space known as Tower Hill.
The incident is one of the most infamous events associated with the Tower of London.
By the 18th&nbsp;century, the menagerie was open to the public; admission cost three half-pence or the supply of a cat or dog to be fed to the lions.
The main building material is Kentish rag-stone, although some local mudstone was also used.
The crypt of St&nbsp;John's Chapel occupied the south-east corner and was accessible only from the eastern chamber.
A new moat was created in front of the new curtain wall.
Exactly when the royal lodgings began to encroach from the White Tower into the innermost ward is uncertain, although it had happened by the 1170s.
Amongst Edward's successes were the battles of Crécy and Poitiers where King John II of France was taken prisoner, and the capture of the King David II of Scotland at Neville's Cross.
The castle encloses an area of almost  with a further  around the Tower of London constituting the Tower Liberties&nbsp;– land under the direct influence of the castle and cleared for military reasons.
The popularity of the Chartist movement between 1828 and 1858 led to a desire to refortify the Tower of London in the event of civil unrest.
The princes were last seen in public in June 1483; it has traditionally been thought that the most likely reason for their disappearance is that they were murdered late in the summer of 1483.
The escape came as such a surprise that one contemporary chronicler accused the bishop of witchcraft.
It has been a tourist attraction since at least the Elizabethan period, when it was one of the sights of London that foreign visitors wrote about.
The Bloody Tower acquired its name in the 16th&nbsp;century, as it was believed to be the site of the murder of the Princes in the Tower.
In the 16th&nbsp;century, the Tower acquired an enduring reputation as a grim, forbidding prison.
Just over £4,000 was spent in 1663 on building a new storehouse, now known as the New Armouries in the inner ward.
No one claimed responsibility for the blast, but the police investigated suspicions that the IRA was behind it.
After plying them with drink, when no one was looking he lowered himself from a secluded chamber, and out of the Tower.
The Crown Jewels are on display in the Jewel House in the Waterloo Block.
Edward&nbsp;II had allowed the Tower of London to fall into a state of disrepair, and by the reign of Edward&nbsp;III the castle was an uncomfortable place.
Relinquishing the Tower of London was among the conditions.
In 1669, the Jewel House was demolished and the Crown Jewels moved into Martin Tower where they could be viewed by the paying public.
Although they laid their hands on the Imperial State Crown, Sceptre and Orb, they were foiled when the keeper's son turned up unexpectedly and raised the alarm.
Beginning around 1238, the castle was expanded to the east, north, and north-west.
Construction of the Grand Storehouse north of the White Tower began in 1688, on the same site as the dilapidated Tudor range of storehouses; it was destroyed by fire in 1841.
The expansion caused disruption locally and £166 was paid to St Katherine's Hospital and the prior of Holy Trinity in compensation.
They were multi-purpose buildings, serving as fortifications (used as a base of operations in enemy territory), centres of administration, and residences.
As the building was intended to be a comfortable residence as well as a stronghold, latrines were built into the walls, and four fireplaces provided warmth.
Flambard was loathed by the English for exacting harsh taxes.
While these towers provided positions from which flanking fire could be deployed against a potential enemy, they also contained accommodation.
Usually they were given control of the city and were responsible for levying taxes, enforcing the law and maintaining order.
The Norman Conquest of London manifested itself not only with a new ruling class, but in the way the city was structured.
In 1321, Margaret de Clare, Baroness Badlesmere became the first woman imprisoned in the Tower of London after she refused Queen Isabella admittance to Leeds Castle and ordered her archers to fire upon Isabella, killing six of the royal escort.
The peak period of the castle's use as a prison was the 16th and 17th&nbsp;centuries, when many figures who had fallen into disgrace, such as Elizabeth&nbsp;I before she became queen, Sir Walter Raleigh, and Elizabeth Throckmorton were held within its walls.
As holding prisoners was originally an incidental role of the Tower&nbsp;– as would have been the case for any castle&nbsp;– there was no purpose-built accommodation for prisoners until 1687 when a brick shed, a "Prison for Soldiers", was built to the north-west of the White Tower.
During the war, the Tower's garrison joined forces with the barons.
This haunting is commemorated in the 1934 comic song "With Her Head Tucked Underneath Her Arm".
Just over 2.7&nbsp;million people visited the Tower of London in 2015.
It was a simple structure, protected by a portcullis and gate.
A turret at the top of Lanthorn Tower was used as a beacon by traffic approaching the Tower at night.
Opposition to Richard escalated until he was defeated at the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485 by the Lancastrian Henry Tudor, who ascended to the throne as Henry&nbsp;VII.
Other reported ghosts include Henry VI, Lady Jane Grey, Margaret Pole, and the Princes in the Tower.
They hacked a hole in his cell wall and Mortimer escaped to a waiting boat.
As well as having ceremonial duties, the Yeoman Warders provide guided tours around the Tower.
The White Tower is the earliest stone keep in England, and was the strongest point of the early castle.
While negotiations continued with the barons, the King ensconced himself in the castle, although no army moved to take it.
In 1258, the discontented barons, led by Simon de Montfort, forced the King to agree to reforms including the holding of regular parliaments.
It was the last major programme of fortification at the castle.
The area around the White Tower was cleared so that anyone approaching would have to cross open ground.
It was still an integral part of the castle's defences, so in 1830 the Constable of the Tower, the Duke of Wellington, ordered a large-scale clearance of several feet of silt.
Blocked battlements (also known as crenellations) in the south side of Legge's Mount are the only surviving medieval battlements at the Tower of London (the rest are Victorian replacements).
Most of the surviving installations for the use of artillery and firearms date from this period.
At the same time, there was greater interest in the history of the Tower of London.
He said that the apparition hovered over the shoulder of his wife, leading her to exclaim: "Oh, Christ!
Among those held and executed at the Tower was Anne Boleyn.
In the event of a German invasion, the Tower, together with the Royal Mint and nearby warehouses, was to have formed one of three "keeps" or complexes of defended buildings which formed the last-ditch defences of the capital.
The new fortifications were first tested in October 1191, when the Tower was besieged for the first time in its history.
Caen stone was imported from northern France to provide details in the Tower's facing, although little of the original material survives as it was replaced with Portland stone in the 17th&nbsp;and 18th&nbsp;centuries.
In 1251, the sheriffs were ordered to pay fourpence a day towards the upkeep for the King's polar bear, probably a gift from Haakon IV of Norway; the bear attracted a great deal of attention from Londoners when it went fishing in the Thames.
The importance of the city and its Tower is marked by the speed at which he secured London.
The three most common forms used were the infamous rack, the Scavenger's daughter, and manacles.
The 18th&nbsp;century marked an increasing interest in England's medieval past.
Encircling it to the north, east, and west is the inner ward, built during the reign of Richard the Lionheart (1189–1199).
The executions for espionage during the wars took place in a prefabricated miniature rifle range which stood in the outer ward and was demolished in 1969.
As the Tower was considered an impregnable fortress in a strategically important position, possession was highly valued.
In 1663 just over £4,000 was spent building a new storehouse (now known as the New Armouries) in the inner ward.
As Longchamp's main fortress, he made the Tower as strong as possible.
In the late 15th century the castle was the prison of the Princes in the Tower.
When the monarchy was restored in 1660, the only surviving items of the coronation regalia were a 12th-century spoon and three ceremonial swords.
The number of guns at the Tower was reduced from 118 to 45, and one contemporary commentator noted that the castle "would not hold out four and twenty hours against an army prepared for a siege".
Even so, this was not sufficient to bring the castle up to the standard of contemporary military fortifications which were designed to withstand powerful artillery.
Although the layout has remained the same since the tower's construction, the interior of the basement dates mostly from the 18th&nbsp;century when the floor was lowered and the pre-existing timber vaults were replaced with brick counterparts.
The two bodies were resident at the Tower from at least 1454, and by 16th&nbsp;century they had moved to a position in the inner ward.
This earliest phase of the castle would have been enclosed by a ditch and defended by a timber palisade, and probably had accommodation suitable for William.
Although the Yeoman Warders were once the Royal Bodyguard, by the 16th and 17th&nbsp;centuries their main duty had become to look after the prisoners.
High-status prisoners could live in conditions comparable to those they might expect outside; one such example was that while Walter Raleigh was held in the Tower his rooms were altered to accommodate his family, including his son who was born there in 1605.
The Second World War also saw the last use of the Tower as a fortification.
When he tried the same ploy again, this time holding secret talks with Matilda, Stephen had him arrested, forced him to cede control of his castles, and replaced him with one of his most loyal supporters.
The complex consisted of an inner and an outer gatehouse and a barbican, which became known as the Lion Tower as it was associated with the animals as part of the Royal Menagerie since at least the 1330s.
Although he is the first recorded prisoner held in the Tower, he was also the first person to escape from it, using a smuggled rope secreted in a butt of wine.
Finally, there is the outer ward which encompasses the castle and was built under Edward&nbsp;I.
In the 15th&nbsp;century, there was little building work at the Tower of London, yet the castle still remained important as a place of refuge.
The Jewel House was built specifically to house the royal regalia, including jewels, plate, and symbols of royalty such as the crown, sceptre, and sword.
Political tensions between Charles&nbsp;I and Parliament in the second quarter of the 17th&nbsp;century led to an attempt by forces loyal to the King to secure the Tower and its valuable contents, including money and munitions.
On several occasions through the year gun salutes are fired from the Tower by the Honourable Artillery Company, these consist of 62 rounds for royal occasions, and 41 on other occasions.
The three rectangular towers along the east wall  apart were dismantled in 1843.
Consequently, even though the animals had long since left the building, the Lion Tower was not demolished until the last keeper's death in 1853.
There is a recess in the north wall of the crypt; according to Geoffrey Parnell, Keeper of the Tower History at the Royal Armouries, "the windowless form and restricted access, suggest that it was designed as a strong-room for safekeeping of royal treasures and important documents".
As was the case at other castles, such as the 11th-century Hen Domen, the innermost ward was probably filled with timber buildings from the Tower's foundation.
Although the position of Constable of the Tower remains the highest position held at the Tower, the responsibility of day-to-day administration is delegated to the Resident Governor.
Between 1845 and 1885 institutions such as the Mint which had inhabited the castle for centuries moved to other sites; many of the post-medieval structures left vacant were demolished.
The death in 1135 of Henry&nbsp;I left England with a disputed succession; although the king had persuaded his most powerful barons to swear support for the Empress Matilda, just a few days after Henry's death Stephen of Blois arrived from France to lay claim to the throne.
The innermost ward was originally surrounded by a protective ditch, which had been filled in by the 1220s.
When this failed he fled the city, and Parliament retaliated by removing Sir John Byron, the Lieutenant of the Tower.
In the 13th&nbsp;century, Kings Henry&nbsp;III (1216–1272) and Edward&nbsp;I (1272–1307) extended the castle, essentially creating it as it stands today.
As there was no standing army before 1661, the importance of the royal armoury at the Tower of London was that it provided a professional basis for procuring supplies and equipment in times of war.
The new ruling elite undertook what has been described as "the most extensive and concentrated programme of castle-building in the whole history of feudal Europe".
The Tower was often a safer place than other prisons in London such as the Fleet, where disease was rife.
Construction of Wakefield and Lanthorn Towers&nbsp;– located at the corners of the innermost ward's wall along the river&nbsp;– began around 1220.
The Trained Bands had switched sides, and now supported Parliament; together with the London citizenry, they blockaded the Tower.
With the help of Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick (nicknamed "the Kingmaker") Henry recaptured the throne for a short time in 1470.
William sent an advance party to prepare the city for his entrance, to celebrate his victory and found a castle; in the words of William's biographer, William of Poitiers, "certain fortifications were completed in the city against the restlessness of the huge and brutal populace.
As 16th-century chronicler Raphael Holinshed said the Tower became used more as "an armouries and house of munition, and thereunto a place for the safekeeping of offenders than a palace roiall for a king or queen to sojourne in".
Traditional accounts have held that the 12-year-old Edward was confined to the Tower of London along with his younger brother Richard.
The innermost ward encloses an area immediately south of the White Tower, stretching to what was once the edge of the River Thames.
When money needed to be raised, the treasure could be pawned by the monarch.
The upper floor contained a grand hall in the west and residential chamber in the eastboth originally open to the roof and surrounded by a gallery built into the walland St&nbsp;John's Chapel in the south-east.
In January 1816, a sentry on guard outside the Jewel House claimed to have witnessed an apparition of a bear advancing towards him, and reportedly died of fright a few days later.
The inner ward's western curtain wall was rebuilt by Edward&nbsp;I.
In 1828 there were over 280 animals representing at least 60 species The last of the animals left in 1835, relocated to Regent's Park, after one of the lions was accused of biting a soldier.
The precursor of the Liberties was laid out in the 13th&nbsp;century when Henry&nbsp;III ordered that a strip of land adjacent to the castle be kept clear.
The lodgings were renovated and elaborated during the 1220s and 1230s, becoming comparable with other palatial residences such as Windsor Castle.
The White Tower, not including its projecting corner towers, measures  at the base, and is  high at the southern battlements.
Edward&nbsp;I was a seasoned castle builder, and used his experience of siege warfare during the crusades to bring innovations to castle building.
Anthony Salvin and John Taylor took the opportunity to restore the Tower to what was felt to be its medieval appearance, clearing out many of the vacant post-medieval structures.
As was typical of most keeps, the bottom floor was an undercroft used for storage.
The last monarch to uphold the tradition of taking a procession from the Tower to Westminster to be crowned was Charles&nbsp;II in 1660.
In the absence of the monarch, the Constable of the Tower is in charge of the castle.
It was probably during Henry&nbsp;II's reign (1154–1189) that a forebuilding was added to the south side of the tower to provide extra defences to the entrance, but it has not survived.
The rest of the Crown Jewels had to be recreated.
By the time the English Civil War broke out in November 1642, the Tower of London was already in Parliament's control.
The moat surrounding the castle had become silted over the centuries since it was created despite attempts at clearing it.
The preparations were never put to the test.
As a whole, the Tower is a complex of several buildings set within two concentric rings of defensive walls and a moat.
In 1214, while the king was at Windsor Castle, Robert Fitzwalter led an army into London and laid siege to the Tower.
John was deposed in 1216 and the barons offered the English throne to Prince Louis, the eldest son of the French king.
The tradition of housing the Crown Jewels in the Tower of London probably dates from the reign of Henry&nbsp;III (1216–1272).
Numbers became so high that by 1851 a purpose-built ticket office was erected.
The building could accommodate 1,000&nbsp;men; at the same time, separate quarters for the officers were built to the north-east of the White Tower.
With the backing of mercenaries, Henry installed himself in the Tower in 1261.
When supporters of the late Richard&nbsp;II attempted a coup, Henry&nbsp;IV found safety in the Tower of London.
In 1649, during the English Civil War, the contents of the Jewel House were disposed of along with other royal properties.
The south entrance was blocked during the 17th&nbsp;century, and not reopened until 1973.
There were luxurious lodgings on the first floor.
Between 1339 and 1341, a gatehouse was built into the curtain wall between Bell and Salt Towers.
Henry&nbsp;III created the ward's east and north walls, and the ward's dimensions remain to this day.
One of Mortimer's first acts on entering England was to capture the Tower and release the prisoners held there.
The 13th-century Beauchamp Tower marks the first large-scale use of brick as a building material in Britain, since the 5th-century departure of the Romans.
Due to changes in function and design since the tower's construction, except for the chapel little is left of the original interior.
The Pipe Rolls record £2,881 1s 10d spent at the Tower of London between 3 December 1189 and 11 November 1190, from an estimated £7,000 spent by Richard on castle building in England.
A third ward was created during Edward&nbsp;I's extension to the Tower, as the narrow enclosure completely surrounded the castle.
Although only one bomb fell on the Tower of London in the First World War (it landed harmlessly in the moat), the Second World War left a greater mark.
Longchamp capitulated to John after just three days, deciding he had more to gain from surrender than prolonging the siege.
The Tower of London has become established as one of the most popular tourist attractions in the country.
