Statutory cities can create their own selfgoverning municipal parts.
In the United States these are referred to as "incorporated towns".
Cities/towns should be distinguished from urban-type settlements ("", ''selyshche mis'koho typu''; informally "", ''mistechko''), which, although urban in nature, do not have a city status.
Just to name a few: Bolesławiec, Gniezno, Zamość.
In Estonia, there is no distinction between a town and a city as the word ''linn'' is used for both bigger and smaller settlements, which are bigger than villages and boroughs.
For Greeks, a town (komópoli) is a human settlement with a population of 2,000–9,999.
Every year the Minister of Internal Affairs selects candidates from a committee-screened list of applicants, whom the President of Republic usually affirms by issuing a bill of town's rank to them.
The sign in front of the municipal offices in Los Gatos, California, for example, reads "City of Los Gatos", but the words engraved on the building above the front entrance when the city hall was built read "Town of Los Gatos."
Designations in different states are as diverse as for example in Australian States and Territories and differ from state to state.
The council may enact an ordinance to delegate all or a portion of the executive responsibilities of the town to a municipal administrator.
Rail transport is usually available at a later stage.
A burgh (pronounced ''burruh'') is the Scots' term for a town or a municipality.
The defining feature of a New England town, as opposed to a city, is that a town meeting and a board of selectmen serve as the main form of government for a town, while cities are run by a mayor and a city council.
In reality, the pre-qualification of having a cathedral of the established Church of England, and the formerly established Church in Wales or Church of Ireland, ceased to apply from 1888.
In the Swedish language the term for a major city is ''storstad'' (literally "big town"), but there is no clear definition as to when a ''stad'' should be called a ''storstad''.
In Hungary there is no official distinction between a city and a town (the word for both in Hungarian is: város).
In Arizona, the terms "town" and "city" are largely interchangeable.
Israeli law does not define any nomenclature for distinction between urban areas based on size or any other factor – meaning that all urban settlements in Israel are legally referred to as "cities".
However, since 1971 all municipalities are officially defined as ''kommun'', thus making no legal difference between, for instance, Stockholm and a small countryside municipality.
It is analogous to a corporate business entity choosing to have a name with "incorporated" or with "corporation", both terms mean the same thing.
A veto may be overridden by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the council.
A municipality with a population of 1,000 or more is a city, while less than 1,000 is a town.
However, in recent 50 years, this word has become obsolete.
In the Czech Republic, the word ''město'' (a city) is used for very wide extent of municipalities.
In Lithuanian,  a city is called ''miestas'', a town is called ''miestelis'' (literally "small ''miestas'').
In short they speak of "towns with legally defined boundaries" ( i.e.
Utah code governing the requirements for cities and town including the requirements for each separate class of city can be found at the Utah Legislature  website.
128/2000 Coll., in addition to Prague, the capital city which is a de facto statutory city.
Modern Hebrew does provide a word for the concept of a town: ''Ayara'' (עיירה), derived from ''Ir'' (עיר), the biblical word for "city".
Government Code Sections 34500–34504 applies to cities organized as general law cities, which differ from charter cities in that they do not have charters but instead operate with the powers conferred them by the pertinent sections of the Government Code.
Unique in Philippine towns is that they have fixed budget, population and land requirements to become as such, i.e.
However, every urban area that was a ''stad'' before 1971 is still a called ''stad'' in daily speech, and since the 1980s, 14 of these municipalities brand themselves as ''stad'' again, although it has no legal or administrative significance, as they still have refer to themselves as ''kommun'' in all legal documentation.
Old Irish dun, Welsh din "fortress, fortified place, camp," dinas "city").
Bosnians and Herzegovinians do not have different words to express 'town' and 'city'.
Dujali in Davao del Norte province, which was formed in 1998 from a cluster of 5 ''barangays'', and the city of El Salvador, which was converted from a town to a city in 2007.
However, the term "Ayara" is normally used only to describe towns in foreign countries, i.e.
Wyoming statute indicates towns are incorporated municipalities with populations of less than 4,000.
Note that the existence of an unincorporated town may be legally set forth through other means, as through zoning districts.
The word ''köping'' corresponds to an English ''market town'' ''(chipping)'' or German ''Markt'' but is mainly of historical significance, as the term is not used today and only survives in some toponyms.
Bigger cities and towns usually are centers of a township (in Persian: ''Shahrestan'' (شهرستان).
In Denmark, in many contexts no distinction is made between "city", "town" and "village"; all three translate as "by".
In Alabama, the legal use of the terms "town" and "city" is based on population.
Visegrád, Zalakaros or Gönc) and meeting the conditions of development is often disregarded to quickly elevate larger villages into towns.
St Asaph, which is the seat of the diocese of St Asaph, only became a city on 1 June 2012 though the diocese was founded in the mid sixth century.
Every municipality, or town, in the country has a mayor and a vice mayor as well as local town officials.
In North Carolina, all cities, towns, and villages are incorporated as municipalities.
In albanian "qytezë" means "small city" or "new city", while in ancient times "small residential center within the walls of a castle".
urban areas of limited population, particularly when the speaker is attempting to evoke nostalgic or romantic attitudes.
In Germany also the historical importance, the centrality and the population density of an urban place might be taken as characteristics of a 'city'.
Of some importance, a town provides a closer level of governance than its enclosing county, providing almost all municipal services to unincorporated communities, called hamlets, and selected services to incorporated areas, called villages.
Some settlements tend to remain villages even though they have a larger population than many smaller towns.
Many communities have found this "semi-incorporated" status attractive; the state has only 20 incorporated cities, and towns as large as Paradise (186,020 in 2000 Census), home of the Las Vegas Strip.
The 2011 Census of India defines towns of two types viz., Statutory town and Census town.
Some forms of non-rural settlement, such as temporary mining locations, may be clearly non-rural, but have at best a questionable claim to be called a town.
Shahrestan itself is a subdivision of ''Ostan'' استان (Province).
The second new provision defines the election procedure in towns with wards.
Some newer settlements were only designated as police burghs from the 19th century onward, a classification which also applies to most of the older burghs.
For resort settlements the requirements are lower with the population needing to be no fewer than 1000 people but infrastructure requirements remain.
In Bulgaria the Council of Ministers defines what constitutes a settlement, while the President of Bulgaria grants each settlement its title.
In 2005 the requirement that villages that wish to classify themselves as town must have a social and technical infrastructure, as well as a population of no fewer than 3500 people.
Historically those had ''Marktrecht'' (market right) but not full town privileges; see Market town.
In Utah, the legal use of the terms "town" and "city" is based on population.
Small town life has been a major theme in American literature, especially stories of rejection by young people leaving for the metropolis.
There are 25 statutory cities defined by law no.
For example, The Hague, the third largest settlement of the country, never received official city rights, but is undoubtedly regarded as a city.
Cca 192 of the current ''města'' have less than 3000.
Milton Keynes was designed to be a "new city" but legally it is still a town despite its size.
A town, in contrast, can be an inhabited place which would elsewhere be styled a city, but has not received any official recognition.
Everyone in New York who does not live on an Indian reservation or a city lives in a town and possibly in one of the town's hamlets or villages.
A commune-level town ('''') a third-level (commune-level) subdivision, below a district ('''').
Each town in the Philippines was classified by its annual income and budget.
(There are a few exceptions, when towns of fewer than 50,000 people gained the status: Érd, Hódmezővásárhely, Salgótarján and Szekszárd) As of middle 2013, there are only 23 such towns in Hungary.
They were highly autonomous units of local government from at least the 12th century until their abolition in 1975, when a new regional structure of local government was introduced across the country.
In Austria, designations are similar to those in Germany with a trichotomy in ''Gemeinde'', ''Markt(gemeinde)'' and ''Stadt''.
Some towns with names ending in ''-köping'' are cities with over 100 000 inhabitants today, e.g.
For the cities, Greeks, use the word 'póli', whereas for bigger cities with a population above 1 million, they usually use another name, ''μητρόπολη''  (mitrópoli), in English Metropolis.
In the Philippines, the local official equivalent of the town is the municipality (Filipino ''bayan'').
The United States Census identifies many census-designated places (CDPs) by the names of unincorporated towns which lie within them; however, those CDPs typically include rural and suburban areas and even surrounding villages and other towns.
In English and Dutch, the meaning of the word took on the sense of the space which these fences enclosed.
which have millions of populations are referred to as ''Kalan-shahr''کلان‌شهر (metropole).
"nagyváros") have been normalized to differentiate between cities and towns (towns being smaller, therefore bearing the name "kisváros".)
Towns with different structures predating the 1988 Act may retain those features unless changed by a petition and referendum process.
Many locations of greatly different size will be encountered with a name ending with ''-town'', ''-ton'', ''-toun'' etc.
From an administrative standpoint, the smallest level of local authorities are all called "communes".
In Vietnam, a district-level town () is the second subdivision, below a province (''tỉnh'') or municipality (''thành phố trực thuộc trung ương'').
The first towns are Sha Tin, Tsuen Wan, Tuen Mun and Tseung Kwan O. Tuen Mun was intended to be self-reliant, but was not successful and turned into a bedroom community like the other new towns.
Kidlington, Oxfordshire).
In general, today towns can be differentiated from townships, villages, or hamlets on the basis of their economic character, in that most of a town's population will tend to derive their living from manufacturing industry, commerce, and public services rather than primary industry such as agriculture or related activities.
The characteristic that distinguishes a town from another type of populated place &mdash; a city, borough, village, or township, for example &mdash; differs from state to state.
Metropolis is called ''didmiestis'' (literally "big ''miestas'').
But while cities are by Virginia law independent of counties, towns are contained within counties.
Since the use of the term varies considerably by state, individual usages are presented in the following sections:
It appears that a city may become a town, though perhaps only through administrative error: Rochester (Kent) has been a city for centuries but, when in 1998 the Medway district was created, a bureaucratic blunder meant that Rochester lost its official city status and is now technically a town.
In Illinois, the word "town" has been used both to denote a subdivision of a county called a township, and to denote a form of municipality similar to a village, in that it is generally governed by a president and trustees rather than a mayor.
Respectively, examples of these are the town of B.E.
Large cities such as Tehran, Mashhad, Isfahan, Tabriz, etc.
In Old Norse ''tun'' means a (grassy) place between farmhouses, and is still used in a similar meaning in modern Norwegian.
Historically some towns held various privileges, the most important of which was the right to hold market.
The mayor may both vote on legislation before council and veto ordinances.
Before 1848 there was a legal distinction between stad and non-stad parts of the country, but the word no longer has any legal significance.
In some states, the term "town" refers to an area of population distinct from others in some meaningful dimension, typically population or type of government.
Some settlements which describe themselves as towns (e.g.
Cities may function under slightly differing governmental systems, such as the option to organize a district system for city governments, but largely retain the same powers as towns.
having a local secondary school or installing full-area sewage collection pipe network).
Also, the Italian word for village (''paese'' with lowercase P) must not be confused with the Italian word for country/nation (''Paese'' usually with uppercase P).
It is often thought that towns with bishops' seats rank automatically as cities: however, Chelmsford was a town until 5 June 2012 despite being the seat of the diocese of Chelmsford, created in 1914.
The contrastive word for a ''village'' as a smaller settlement is ''dorp''.
For historical reasons, six communes in the Meuse département still exist as independent entities despite having no inhabitant at all.
The term is also used to describe a Shtetl, a pre-Holocaust Eastern European Jewish town.
(The "City of London" is the historical nucleus, informally known as the "Square Mile", and is administratively separate from the rest of Greater London, while the City of Westminster is also technically a city and is also a London borough.)
Smaller settlements are usually called "villages".
The status of a ''city'' is reserved for places that have Letters Patent entitling them to the name, historically associated with the possession of a cathedral.
Meanwhile, the village does not exist in California as a municipal corporation.
However, a city can be called ''lielpilsēta'' in reference to its size.
A ''town'' in Scotland has no specific legal meaning and (especially in areas which were or are still Gaelic-speaking) can refer to a mere collection of buildings (e.g.
New Zealand's towns vary greatly in size and importance, ranging from small rural service centres to significant regional centres such as Blenheim and Taupo.
The mayor in a town chairs the town council and heads the municipal government.
The word for both is ''Miasto'', as a form of settlement distinct from following: village (wioska), hamlet (przysiółek), settlement (osada), or colony (kolonia).
According to the North Carolina League of Municipalities, there is no legal distinction among a city, town, or village—it is a matter of preference of the local government.
The word they use to refer to either is град/''grad''.
In Pennsylvania, only one municipality is incorporated as a "town": Bloomsburg.
Recently some settlements as small as 2,500 souls have received the rank of town (e.g.
The modern phenomenon of extensive suburban growth, satellite urban development, and migration of city-dwellers to villages have further complicated the definition of towns, creating communities urban in their economic and cultural characteristics but lacking other characteristics of urban localities.
One councilman from each ward is up for election each year.
Both these words are translated into Ukrainian as "" (''misto'').
They were administered separately from the rural areas in both fiscal, military and legal matters.
Nonetheless, they are rarely (if ever) referred to simply as "towns"; when referring to one directly, it will be either be called a "development town" or a "city", depending on context.
A village is called село/''selo''.
the application of various endowments providing for public benefit) which might only apply within the area previously served by a burgh; in consequence a burgh can still exist (if only as a defined geographical area) and might still be signed as such by the current local authority.
In some areas a "Town" may be incorporated legally as a Village (meaning it has at large Trustees) or a City (meaning it has aldermen from districts) and absorb the duties of the Township it is coterminous with (maintenance of birth records, certain welfare items).
These cities, created during the earlier decades of Israeli independence (1950s and 1960s, generally), were designed primarily to serve as commercial and transportation hubs, connecting smaller agricultural settlements in the northern and southern regions of the country (the "Periphery") to the major urban areas of the coastal and central regions.
The province of Quebec is unique in that it makes no distinction under law between towns and cities.
Towns often exist as distinct governmental units, with legally defined borders and some or all of the appurtenances of local government (e.g., a police force).
Under the 1895 Act, a newly incorporated town was divided into at least three wards, with two councilmen per ward serving staggered two-year terms, and one councilman at large, who also served a two-year term.
Towns have no independent legal existence, being administered simply as built-up parts of districts, or, in some cases, of cities.
Usually "large towns" refers to Sofia, Plovdiv, Varna and Burgas or sometimes to all 28 oblast cities.
A town in the state of Washington is a municipality that has a population of less than 1,500 at incorporation, however an existing town can reorganize as a code city.
A municipality with a population of 2,000 or more is a city, while less than 2,000 is a town (Code of Alabama 1975,  Section 11-40-6).
In fact, because of many successive changes to the structure of local government, there are now few large towns which are represented by a body closely related to their historic borough council.
The city of Brighton and Hove was created from the two former towns and some surrounding villages, and within the city the correct term for the former distinct entities is somewhat unclear.
Most of the rest of the state is incorporated as townships (there are also boroughs and cities), which function in much the same way as the towns of New York or New England, although they may have different forms of government.
The Council under the Town Act of 1988 consists of eight members serving staggered two-year terms with two elected from each of four wards.
from town to a city.
In Romania there is no official distinction between a city and a town (the word for both in Romanian is: ''oraş'').
A community may incorporate under either a town or a city organization with no regard to population or other restrictions according to Arizona law (see Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9).
Germans do not, in general, differentiate between 'city' and 'town'.
could refer to kinds of settlements as diverse as agricultural estates and holdings, partly picking up the Norse sense (as in the Scots word ''fermtoun'') at one end of the scale, to fortified municipality at the other.
In Russia, the criteria an inhabited locality needs to meet in order to be granted city/town (''gorod'') status vary in different federal subjects.
The German word ''Zaun'' comes closest to the original meaning of the word: a fence of any material.
(or beginning with the Gaelic equivalent ''baile'' etc.
For example, Brookline, Massachusetts is a town, even though it is fairly urban, because of its form of government.
In New York, a town typically contains a number of such hamlets and villages.
Sometimes, the word "town" is short for "township".
Various cities together may form a metropolitan area (''area metropolitana'').
What is a "town" in New York is called a township in some other states.
As a rule, the population of an urban-type settlement is between 2,000 and 10,000.
However, inhabited localities which were previously granted the city/town status but no longer meet the criteria can still retain the status for historical reasons.
Most Swedes would only call Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö ''storstäder'', i.e.
In this usage, a city is a type of town; a large one, with a certain status.
In spoken speech, Greeks use the word for village to refer both to villages and towns and the word for city to refer to both cities and metropoleis.
Since the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution largely leaves local-government organization to the individual U.S. states, the definition (if any) of "town" varies widely from state to state.
Some large municipalities (such as Northampton and Bournemouth) are legally boroughs but not cities, whereas some cities are quite small — such as Ely or St David's.
It should be noted that the word 'burgh' is generally not used as a synonym for 'town' or 'city' in everyday speech, but is reserved mostly for government and administrative purposes.
from a ''barangay'', or a cluster of such, to a town, or to become cities, i.e.
In more specific use, for small villages and hamlets the word "landsby" (meaning "country town") is used, while the Danish equivalent of English "city" is "storby" (meaning "large town").
Town government authority is limited relative to cities, the other main classification of municipalities in the state.
Which translate to "Community", "Market Community" and "City".
Before 1971, 132 larger municipalities in Sweden enjoyed special royal charters as ''stad'' instead of ''kommun'' (which is similar to a US county).
There are also signs at the municipal corporation limit, some of which welcome visitors to the "City of Los Gatos" while older, adjacent signs welcome people to the "Town of Los Gatos."
Historically, the most important burghs were royal burghs, followed by burghs of regality and burghs of barony.
In addition, Germans may speak of ''Millionenstadt'', a city with over one million inhabitants (such as Munich, Hamburg and Berlin).
The name is a contraction of two Latvian words: ''pils'' (castle) and ''sēta'' (fence), making it very obvious what is meant by the word – what is situated between the castle and the castle fence.
In older Persian texts (until the first half of the 20th century), the Arabic word "Qasabeh" (قصبه) was used for a town.
The Town Act of 1988 completely revised the Town form of government and applied to all towns incorporated under the Town Act of 1895 and to those incorporated by a special charter granted by the Legislature prior to 1875.
An early borrowing from Celtic *dunom (cf.
Class 8 includes all towns, plus cities with populations of less than 6,000 (Code of Alabama 1975,  Section 11-40-12).
The German word for both is ''Stadt'' as it is in many other languages that do not make any difference between the Anglo-Saxon concepts.
In general, to qualify for this status, an inhabited locality should have more than 12,000 inhabitants and the occupation of no less than 85% of inhabitants must be other than agriculture.
Whereas, Census town is defined based on the places that satisfy the following criteria:
There are 30 municipal towns (''omavalitsuslik linn'') in Estonia and a further 17 towns, which have merged with a municipal parish (''vallasisene linn'').
The exception to the above is the term ''Ayeret Pituakh'' (עיירת פיתוח, lit.
Some cities change their minds as to how they want to be called.
About 220 places got "stadsrechten" (city rights) and are still so called for historical and traditional reasons, though the word is also used for large urban areas that never got such rights.
In Louisiana a "town" is defined as being a municipal government having a population of 1,001 to 4,999 inhabitants.
The word '''town''' shares an origin with the German word ''Zaun'', the Dutch word ''tuin'', and the Old Norse ''tun''.
Like charter cities, general law cities may incorporate as "City of (Name)" or "Town of (Name)."
Nine new towns have been developed so far.
This difference between towns and cities is still in use in other Portuguese speaking countries, but in Brazil is no longer in use.
Town may be called in diminutive way as "Miasteczko", what is colloquially used for localities with a few thousand residents.
There is no difference in the Ukrainian language between the notions of "town" and "city".
In addition, cities are divided into five separate classes based on population.
Some states do not use the term "town" at all, while in others the term has no official meaning and is used informally to refer to a populated place, of any size, whether incorporated or unincorporated.
(See List of towns in Washington.)
In some instances, the term "town" refers to a small incorporated municipality of less than a population threshold specified by state statute, while in others a town can be significantly larger.
Under the current Illinois Municipal Code, an incorporated or unincorporated town may choose to incorporate as a city or as a village, but other forms of incorporation are no longer allowed.
Before the fall of communism in 1990, Hungarian villages with fewer than 10,000 residents were not allowed to become towns.
Cities are the biggest localities, generally must be bigger than 100 thousand of residents, they are ruled by '''President''' (Prezydent) as a chief of City Council.
In the six New England states, a town is a municipality and a more important unit than the county.
The councilman at large served as chairman of the town council.
All the Statutory towns, Census towns and Out growths are considered as urban settlements.
