For vehicle assembly, Toyota would use plants in Thailand, Indonesia, Argentina, and South Africa.
After receiving 27,000 entries, one was selected that additionally resulted in a change of its moniker to "Toyota" from the family name "Toyoda".
The world headquarters of Toyota are located in its home country in Toyota City, Japan.
But Risaburō Toyoda, who had married into the family and was not born with that name, preferred "Toyota" () because it took eight brush strokes (a lucky number) to write in Japanese, was visually simpler (leaving off the diacritic at the end), and with a voiceless consonant instead of a voiced one (voiced consonants are considered to have a "murky" or "muddy" sound compared to voiceless consonants, which are "clear").
Toyota developed an ''oekaki''-style sewing machine called the Oekaki Renaissance, which, like others of its type, is designed to allow the user to be able to draw ideas directly onto fabric using the art of free-motion embroidery.
Two years later, Toyota set up a base in the United Kingdom, TMUK, as the company's cars had become very popular among British drivers.
To remedy this, Toyota introduced a new worldwide logo in October 1989 to commemorate the 50th year of the company, and to differentiate it from the newly released luxury Lexus brand.
Toyota has also studied participation in the general aviation market and contracted with Scaled Composites to produce a proof of concept aircraft, the TAA-1, in 2002.
With 266,567 units sold in Japan in 2012, the Aqua is considered the most successful nameplate launch in the Japanese market in the last 20 years.
It also added the V8 engine that the T100 was criticized for not having.
In 1929, the patent for the automatic loom was sold to a British company, generating the starting capital for the automobile development.
The difference in performance was largely attributed to surging demand for fuel-efficient vehicles.
However new figures from the United States National Research Council show that the continuing hidden health costs of the auto industry to the US economy in 2005 amounted to .
The Toyota FCV-R fuel cell concept car was unveiled at the 2011 Tokyo Motor Show.
With a major presence in Europe, due to the success of Toyota Team Europe, the corporation decided to set up Toyota Motor Europe Marketing and Engineering, TMME,  to help market vehicles in the continent.
Tesla built the electric powertrain at its plant at Tesla Factory in Fremont, California, and then shipped them to Canada.
Ranking next is the Auris with 309,200 units sold, with Europe as the top market with 296,400 units sold through April 2016.
Initially the Mirai will only be available in California.
Toyota also played a part in the development of Kirobo, a 'robotic astronaut'.
The sales price was 3,350 yen, 400 yen cheaper than Ford or GM cars.
* Aisin Seiki Co. (23.0% – September 30, 2006)
Cumulative sales of the Prius in Japan reached the 1&nbsp;million mark in August 2011. , sales of the Prius liftback in both Japan and the United States had exceeded the 1.6 million mark.
NETZ locations have been repositioned to resemble the North American Toyota network, called Scion, and sells the Toyota 86.
Due to the 1973 oil crisis, consumers in the lucrative US market began turning to small cars with better fuel economy.
The company's vice chairman, Takeshi Uchiyamada, said "''The current capabilities of electric vehicles do not meet society’s needs, whether it may be the distance the cars can run, or the costs, or how it takes a long time to charge''."
Presidents of Toyota Motor Company:
In November 2015, the company announced that it would invest  over the next 5 years into artificial intelligence and robotics research.
In 2005, Toyota, combined with its half-owned subsidiary Daihatsu Motor Company, produced 8.54&nbsp;million vehicles, about 500,000 fewer than the number produced by GM that year.
Toyota has a large market share in the United States, but a small market share in Europe.
France, the UK and Germany had the largest fleets with 150 PHEVs.
Volkswagen AG, which recorded sales of 5.07 million vehicles, was close behind.
Looms were built on a small production line.
The Prius liftback ranks as the top selling hybrid car in the U.S. market, and passed the 1&nbsp;million milestone in April 2011.
Toyota's emphasis would be re-focused on the hybrid concept, and 21 new hybrid gas-electric models scheduled to be on the market by 2015.
During its first year in the market, a total of 27,279 Prius PHVs were sold worldwide, allowing the plug-in version to rank as the second most sold plug-in electric car for 2012.
Production ended in September 2014.
Chairmen of Toyota Motor Corporation:
The move came after a series of recalls between 2009 and 2011 in which it pulled back around 10 million cars amidst claims of faulty mechanics.
The main headquarters of Toyota is located in a 4-story building in Toyota.
In Chinese-speaking countries using simplified Chinese characters (e.g.
In response to the tariff, Toyota, Nissan Motor Co. and Honda Motor Co. began building plants in the US by the early 1980s.
In 2007, Toyota's Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) fleet average of  exceeded all other major manufacturers selling cars within the United States.
The 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami led to a severe disruption of the supplier base and a drop in production and exports.
In 2002, Toyota managed to enter a Formula One works team and establish joint ventures with French motoring companies Citroën and Peugeot a year after Toyota started producing cars in France.
Beginning in 2011, TMC introduced three new members to the Prius family, the Prius v (Prius  α in Japan and Prius + in Europe), the Prius c (Toyota Aqua in Japan), and the Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid, released in 2012 in Japan, the U.S. and Europe.
Its first vehicles were the A1 passenger car and the G1 in 1935.
The 9&nbsp;million sales mark was reached in April 2016, again, selling one million hybrids in just ninth months.
As reported on its consolidated financial statements, Toyota has 540 consolidated subsidiaries and 226 affiliates.
Designed for use with wheelchairs, it "allows a person to control an electric wheelchair accurately, almost in real-time", with his or her mind.
Hino products were sold at specific Hino locations, and shared at Toyota Diesel Store locations after Toyota acquired the company in 1967.
* PT Toyota Motor Manufacturing Indonesia (95% – 2003)
Currently, the "Toyota Corolla Store" (トヨタカローラ店 ''Toyota Karōra-ten'') was renamed from the "Toyota Publica Store" (トヨタパブリカ店 ''Toyota Paburika-ten''), which was established to sell the Toyota Publica in 1961, then renamed to sell the Toyota Corolla in 1966.
In January 2015 it was announced that production of the Mirai fuel cell vehicle would increase from 700 units in 2015 to approximately 2,000 in 2016 and 3,000 in 2017.
It was followed in 1954 by the RK (renamed in 1959 as the Stout) and in 1968 by the compact Hilux.
Dark Blue – Regional headquarters (HQ) and localized manufacturing plants
Toyota is official sponsor of Cricket Australia, England and Wales Cricket Board and AFL.
* Daihatsu Motor Company (51.2% – March 31, 2006)
The logo made its debut on the 1989 Toyota Celsior and quickly gained worldwide recognition.
Some former Vista models were rebranded as Lexus (レクサス ''Rekusasu''), such as the Altezza and the Aristo, while other products have been taken over by the "Toyota NETZ", which was already selling the Toyota ist and the Toyota RAV4.
Shoichiro Toyoda presided over Toyota Motor Sales in preparation for the consummation of the merger that occurred in 1982.
A total of 1,484 were leased and/or sold in California to meet the state’s CARB mandate for zero-emissions vehicles.
The money will be used to fund environmental programs at the park.
Toyota Motor Corporation produces vehicles under five brands, including the Toyota brand, Hino, Lexus, Ranz, and Daihatsu.
Outside the United States, Toyota produced the Hilux in Standard and Double Cab, gasoline and diesel engine, and 2WD and 4WD versions.
"NETZ" is an acronym for "Network of Energetic Teams for Zenith".
The project is being run in Grenoble, France; Toyota City, Japan; and also Tokyo, Japan.
Toyota's market share struggles in Europe where its Lexus brand has 0.3% market share, compared to nearly 2% market share as the US luxury segment leader.
Two years later, Toyota entered into a joint venture with General Motors called the New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc, NUMMI, operating an automobile-manufacturing plant in Fremont, California.
;Vehicles sold at Toyopet Store (nationally)
It also holds a 16.66% stake in Fuji Heavy Industries, a 5.9% stake in Isuzu,  a 3.58% stake in the Yamaha Motor Company, and a 0.27% stake in Tesla, as well as joint-ventures with two in China (GAC Toyota and Sichuan FAW Toyota Motor), one in India (Toyota Kirloskar), one in the Czech Republic (TPCA), along with several "nonautomotive" companies.
The newly formed word was trademarked and the company was registered in August 1937 as the Toyota Motor Company.
In 2015 Toyota released 5,600 patents for free use until 2020, hoping to promote global development of hydrogen fuel-cell technology.
The Prius c/Aqua model, with global sales of 1,249,100 units through April 2016, is TMC's second best selling hybrid after the Prius liftback, followed the Prius α/v/+ with 634,000 units, and the two generations of the Camry Hybrid, with 574,400 units sold worldwide, all through April 2016.
The iQ EV/eQ was scheduled to be released in both countries in December 2012.
* Hino Motors (50.1% – 2001)
The plan contains four major themes involving the environment and the corporation's development, design, production, and sales.
In 1980, the "Toyota Vista Store" replaced the "Toyota Auto Store" (トヨタオート店 ''Toyota Ōto-ten'') sales network that sold the Corolla companion, called the Toyota Sprinter established in 1967.
On November 4, 2009, Toyota announced they were pulling out of the sport due to the global economic situation.
In September 2012 Toyota announced that due to customers' concerns about range and charging time, the production of the Scion iQ (Toyota eQ in Japan) will be limited to about 100 units for special fleet use in Japan and the U.S. only.
Until September 2012, the Prius liftback was the top selling new car in Japan for 16 months in a row, until it was surpassed by the Toyota Aqua (Prius c) in October 2012.
In addition, Toyota announced that is backing away from fully electric vehicles.
* Toyota Motor North America (100% – 2004)
The iQ EV was scheduled to be produced at Toyota’s Takaoka Plant in Toyota City beginning in August 2012 and the initial production was planned to be limited to 600 units, with 400 staying in Japan, 100 units destined to the U.S. and the other 100 for Europe.
Cumulative TMC hybrid sales since the Prius introduction in Europe in 2000 passed the 1&nbsp;million unit milestone in November 2015.
Its Tokyo office is located in Bunkyo, Tokyo.
The market release in Europe is slated for September 2015, and initially will be available only in the UK, Germany and Denmark, followed by other countries in 2017.
In early November 2014, Toyota USA enlisted a recall involving defective inflaters and propellant devices that may deploy improperly in the event of a crash, shooting metal fragments into vehicle occupants.
* Toyota Industries (23.51% – March 31, 2006)
The word "Toyopet (Japanese article)" was a nickname given to the Toyota SA due to its small size, as the result of a naming contest the Toyota Company organized in 1947.
In 1924, Sakichi Toyoda invented the Toyoda Model G Automatic Loom.
Global cumulative sales of Lexus brand hybrids reached the 500 thousand mark in November 2012.
Cyan – Regional headquarters (HQ)
Toyota's nationwide driver hunt of drivers for Etios Motor Racing Series ended up with selection of 25 drivers, who will participate in the race in 2013.
Most models were exclusive to particular retail chains, while some models, like the Prius, are available at all sales channels.
Global production since 1998, global and Japanese production, Japanese sales since 2001 consolidated include Daihatsu and Hino.
* Katsuaki Watanabe (2005–2009)
In September 1936, the company ran a public competition to design a new logo.
It proved to be as economical and reliable as any typical Toyota pickup, but sales never became what Toyota brass had hoped for.
The second generation Prius plug-in hybrid, the Toyota Prius Prime, unveiled at the 2016 New York International Auto Show, is expected to be released in the U.S. by the end of 2016, and, unlike the first generation model, it will be available in all 50 states.
In November 2006, Toyota Motor Manufacturing Texas added a facility in San Antonio.
The Toyota RAV4 EV Concept was released in September 2012.
For both Prius family variants Japan is the top selling market, while the U.S. is the top selling Camry market.
At the time, the UFJ was one of the largest shareholders of Toyota.
Since October 2006, Toyota's new Japanese-market vehicle models with automatic transmissions are equipped with an Eco Drive Indicator.
Toyota is also pushing hybrid vehicles in the US such as the Prius, Camry Hybrid, Highlander Hybrid, and various Lexus products.
In 1981, Toyota Motor Co., Ltd. announced plans to merge with its sales entity Toyota Motor Sales Co., Ltd.
The following is a list of all past and present models and where they were available at retail channels nationally, as retail chains in Tokyo and Osaka are different.
The production version of the Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid was released in Japan in January 2012, followed by the United States in late February, and deliveries in Europe began in late June 2012. , global sales totaled 75,400 Prius PHVs since 2012, with North America as the leading regional market with 42,700 units, followed by Japan with about 22,100 units, Europe with 10,500 units, and only about 100 units in the rest of the world.
It held the title of the most profitable automobile maker ( in 2006) along with increasing sales in, among other countries, the United States.
The Scion iQ EV is the successor to the FT-EV II as an electric vehicle based on the Toyota iQ chassis.
By the early 1960s, the US had begun placing stiff import tariffs on certain vehicles.
The company eventually began providing this option on its main passenger cars such as Camry and later with the Lexus divisions, producing some hybrid luxury vehicles.
Extended- and crew-cab versions of these small haulers were eventually added, and Toyota continues to produce them today under various names depending on the market.
In Japan, Toyota currently maintains separate dealership sales channels.
The lithium metal-oxide battery and other power train components were supplied by Tesla Motors.
Toyota also runs a driver development programme known as the Toyota Young Drivers Program, which they made for funding and educating future Japanese motorsports talent.
These concerns were addressed with an even larger 2007 redesign.
On June 14, 2013, Toyota Motor Corp. announced the appointment of external board members; this was a first for the corporation and occurred following approval from general shareholders at a meeting on the same day.
In 2011, Toyota, along with large parts of the Japanese automotive industry, suffered from a series of natural disasters.
Presidents of Toyota Motor Corporation:
Only Lotus Cars, which sold the Elise and Exige (powered by Toyota's ''2ZZ-GE'' engine), did better with an average of .
In , Toyota entered Formula One as a constructor and engine supplier; however, despite having experienced drivers and a larger budget than many other teams, they failed to match their success in other categories, with five second-place finishes as their best results.
Its subsidiary, Toyota Financial Services sells financing and participates in other lines of business.
Toyota had a joint-venture operation with General Motors at New United Motor Manufacturing Inc. in Fremont, California, which began in 1984 and ended in 2009.
The five-year plan is directed at the, "arrival of a revitalized recycling and reduction based society."
In 1999 for the 2000 model year, Toyota replaced the T100 with the larger Tundra.
The system takes into consideration rate of acceleration, engine and transmission efficiency, and speed.
Toyota received its first Japanese Quality Control Award at the start of the 1980s and began participating in a wide variety of motorsports.
Toyota also owns 51% of Daihatsu, and 16.7% of Fuji Heavy Industries, which manufactures Subaru vehicles.
Since the recession of 2001, it has gained market share in the United States.
The principle of ''jidoka'', which means the machine stops itself when a problem occurs, became later a part of the Toyota Production System.
It has started producing larger trucks, such as the new Tundra, to go after the large truck market in the United States.
China), Toyota is known as "丰田" (pronounced as ''Fēngtián'' in Mandarin Chinese and ''Hɔng Tshan'' in Minnanese).
The Toyota Foundation takes a global perspective providing grants in the three areas of human and natural environments, social welfare, and education and culture.
On May 8, 2013, Toyota Motor Corporation announced its financial results for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2013.
Cumulative global sales of Toyota and Lexus hybrid passenger car models passed the 9&nbsp;million milestone in April 2016.
They also acquired 5.9% of Isuzu Motors Ltd. on November 7, 2006 and will be introducing Isuzu diesel technology into their products.
The factory was an old General Motors plant that had been closed for two years.
It labeled such technology in Toyota cars as "'''Hybrid Synergy Drive'''" and in Lexus versions as "'''Lexus Hybrid Drive'''."
Toyota is a minority shareholder in Mitsubishi Aircraft Corporation, having invested  in the new venture which will produce the Mitsubishi Regional Jet, slated for first deliveries in 2017.
Toyota crossovers range from the compact Matrix and RAV4, to midsize Venza and Kluger/Highlander.
This plant was originally intended to build the Toyota Highlander, but Toyota decided to use the plant in Princeton, Indiana, USA, instead.
The Tundra addressed criticisms that the T100 did not have the look and feel of a legitimate American-style full-size pickup.
Green – Official dealership(s) present.
* Eiji Toyoda (1967–1981)
Of 27,000 entries, the winning entry was the three Japanese ''katakana'' letters for "Toyoda" in a circle.
Vans include the Previa/Estima, Sienna, and others.
* Shoichiro Toyoda (1992–1999)
Sales in Japan began on 15 December 2014 at a price of  (~).
Toyota then started to establish new brands at the end of the 1980s, with the launch of their luxury division Lexus in 1989.
In August 2012, Toyota announced its plans to start retail sales of a hydrogen fuel-cell sedan in California in 2015.
This recall only affects vehicles equipped with Takata airbags released after the year 2000 in North America.
The exterior of the production version is based on the FT-EV III concept shown at the 2011 Tokyo Motor Show.
* Hiroshi Okuda (1999–2006)
Toyota, and Toyota-produced Lexus and Scion automobiles, consistently rank near the top in certain quality and reliability surveys, primarily J.D.
Toyota assembled around 150,000 Standard and Double Cabs, and only 70,000 Crew Max's in 2007.
Toyota is the world's first automobile manufacturer to produce more than 10 million vehicles per year.
In October 2012, Toyota announced a recall of 7.43 million vehicles worldwide to fix malfunctioning power window switches, the largest recall since that of Ford Motor Company in 1996.
* Lexus 100% (1989)
Toyota established the Toyota Technological Institute in 1981, as Sakichi Toyoda had planned to establish a university as soon as he and Toyota became successful.
Toyota agreed to purchase  of Tesla common stock subsequent to the closing of Tesla's planned initial public offering.
In 1936, Toyota entered the passenger car market with its Model AA and held a competition to establish a new logo emphasizing speed for its new product line.
Due to its Daihatsu subsidiary it has significant market shares in several fast-growing Southeast Asian countries.
The BBC's ''Top Gear'' TV show featured two episodes of a Hilux that was deemed "virtually indestructible".
Net revenues totaled  (+18.7%).
Vitz, SAI, Prius, Aqua, ist, Auris, bB, Avensis, Raum, Spade, Wish, Voxy, RAV4, Kluger, Vellfire, iQ, Allex, Fun Cargo, Pronard, Altezza, Verossa, Curren, Aristo, MR-S, MR2, Starlet, Vista, Cresta, Sprinter, Voltz, Blizzard, Chaser, Sprinter Marino, Carib, Granvia, Sprinter Trueno, LiteAce, Ipsum, GT-86, WiLL (1999–2004).
The "Vista" name was used on a new Camry-clone, called the Toyota Vista.
230 were delivered in Japan beginning in late December 2009, 125 models released in the U.S. by early 2010, and 200 units in 18 European countries in 2010.
The prototype of its first hydrogen fuel cell vehicle will be exhibited at the November 2013 Tokyo Motor Show, and in the United States at the January 2014 Consumer Electronics Show.
''Motor Trend'' named the Tundra "Truck of the Year", and the 2007 Toyota Camry "Car of the Year" for 2007.
Toyota marketing, sales, and distribution in the US are conducted through a separate subsidiary, Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc.
* Toyota Tsusho – Trading company for the Toyota Group
More than 7 million vehicles are potentially affected in the United States.
* Eiji Toyoda (1981)
Toyota has a large presence in the United States with six major assembly plants in Huntsville, Alabama, Georgetown, Kentucky, Princeton, Indiana, San Antonio, Texas, Buffalo, West Virginia, and Blue Springs, Mississippi.
The U.S. launch of the Scion iQ EV was announced for 2012, and according to Toyota, for the initial roll-out the iQ EV would not be available to individual consumers, instead the carmaker decided to focus on fleet customers and car sharing programs.
Since ''toyoda'' literally means "fertile rice paddies", changing the name also prevented the company from being associated with old-fashioned farming.
The name was soon dropped for the American market, but continued in other markets until the mid-1960s.
As of mid-2012, there were almost 500 units still in use.
Its Prius family is the world's top selling hybrid nameplate with almost 5.7&nbsp;million units sold worldwide .
In 2007, Toyota maintained over 16% of the US market share and was listed second only to GM in terms of volume.
In 1999, the company decided to list itself on the New York and London Stock Exchanges.
Hong Kong and Taiwan, Toyota is known as "豐田".
Shoichiro then succeeded his uncle Eiji as the President of the combined organization that then became known as Toyota Motor Corporation.
* Shoichiro Toyoda (1982–1992)
In 2002, Toyota began a development and demonstration program to test the Toyota FCHV, a hybrid hydrogen fuel cell vehicle based on the Toyota Highlander production SUV.
The so-called "chicken tax" of 1964 placed a 25% tax on imported light trucks.
, the Prius plug-in ranking among the top selling plug-in cars fell to fifth place after the Tesla Model S and the Mitsubishi Outlander P-HEV.
It also sells vehicles in Africa and is a market leader in Australia.
Its first vehicle assembly plant, in Cambridge, Ontario, since 1988, now produces Corolla compact cars, Matrix crossover vehicles, and Lexus RX 350 luxury SUVs, with a workforce of 4,300 workers.
Severe flooding during the 2011 monsoon season in Thailand affected Japanese automakers that had chosen Thailand as a production base.
When the vehicle is operated in a fuel-efficient manner, the Eco Drive Indicator on the instrument panel, lights up.
In predominantly Chinese-speaking countries or regions using traditional Chinese characters, e.g.
The production of Toyota automobiles was started in 1933 as a division of Toyoda Automatic Loom Works devoted to the production of automobiles under the direction of the founder's son, Kiichiro Toyoda.
The first vehicle sold under this name was the Toyopet SA, but it also included vehicles such as the Toyopet SB light truck, Toyopet Stout light truck, Toyopet Crown, Toyopet Master, and the Toyopet Corona.
, besides the four Prius liftback generations, Toyota's hybrid lineup includes the Prius α/Prius v/Prius +, Aqua/Prius c, Camry Hybrid (1st and 2nd generation), Toyota Highlander Hybrid (Kluger Hybrid in Japan), Toyota Avalon Hybrid, Toyota Auris Hybrid, Toyota Yaris Hybrid (Europe only), and the following models sold only in Japan: Alphard Hybrid/Vellfire Hybrid, Estima Hybrid, Toyota Sai, Toyota Harrier, Toyota Crown Hybrid, Toyota Crown Mild Hybrid, Toyota Crown Majesta, Corolla Axio, Corolla Fielder, Toyota Voxy/Noah/Esquire, Toyota Sienta, Toyota Corolla Hybrid, Toyota Levin Hybrid, and Toyota RAV4 Hybrid.
Before Toyota, Ford and GM's Holden had announced similar moves, all citing an unfavorable currency and attendant high manufacturing costs.
TMC is part of the Toyota Group, one of the largest conglomerates in the world.
When the Toyota Diesel Store was disbanded, commercial products were divided between Toyota Store and Toyopet Store locations.
SAI, Camry, Prius, Aqua, Corolla Axio, GT-86, Belta, Spade, Probox, Corolla Rumion, Ractis, Passo, Sera, Vanguard, Estima, Noah, Sienta, TownAce, all Daihatsu products, Publica, Tercel, Windom, Scepter, Corolla Ceres, Origin, Nadia, WiLL, RAV4, Sports 800, Celica, Supra, Corolla Levin, Celica XX.
