National governing bodies control the national record lists, the area associations organise their respective continental lists, and the IAAF ratifies world records.
If the athlete reacts in less than 0.1 second, an alert sounds for a recall starter and the offending athlete is guilty of a false start.
The most recent complete set of rules is the 2009 rules that relate only to competitions in 2009.
From the 1990s onwards, North Africans such as Noureddine Morceli of Algeria and Hicham El Guerrouj of Morocco came to dominate the 1500 and mile events.
The competitor must clear the bar without knocking it off the standards that are holding the bar (flat).
The athletes must jump before a marked line and their achieved distance is measured from the nearest point of sand disturbed by the athlete's body.
The throwing area is similar to the outdoor event, but the landing sector is a rectangular section surrounded by netting or a stop barrier.
Some of these have gained significant exposure and prestige, such as the NCAA Track and Field Championship in the United States and the Jamaican High School Championships.
Middle- and long-distance races mainly use the waterfall start.
If they still miss, the bar goes down one increment where they again jump.
The high jump is a stripped down version of this, with an open area of track or field that leads to a crossbar with a square area of landing mats behind it.
Physiologically, these middle-distance events demand that athletes have good aerobic and anaerobic energy producing systems, and also that they have strong speed endurance.
Human physiology dictates that a runner's near-top speed cannot be maintained for more than thirty seconds or so because lactic acid builds up once leg muscles begin to suffer oxygen deprivation.
After all competitors have taken their attempts, the one jumping the highest is the winner, and so on down the other competitors in the event.
3M's Tartan track (an all-weather running track of polyurethane) gained popularity after its use at the 1968 US Olympic Trials and the 1968 Summer Olympics and it began the process in which synthetic tracks became the standard for the sport.
With the accuracy of the timing systems, ties are rare.
For major competitions, each competitor gets three tries.
The modern long jump, standardised in England and the United States around 1860, bears resemblance to the ancient event although no weights are used.
The South American Championships in Athletics, created in 1919, was the first continental championships and the European Athletics Championships became the second championships of this type in 1934.
There has not been a consistent championships for all of North America, which may be (in part) due to the success of both the Central American and Caribbean Championships and the USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships.
Track and field events are divided into three broad categories: track events, field events, and combined events.
Track and field-style events are among the oldest of all sporting competitions, as running, jumping and throwing are natural and universal forms of human physical expression.
The modern event features a short run up on a track and then the thrower releases the javelin before the foul line.
The two basic features of a track and field stadium are the outer oval-shaped running track and an area of turf within this track—the field.
There is usually a designated area where athletes must exchange the baton.
Varieties of strength athletics, such as the World's Strongest Man and highland games, often incorporate forms of footracing carrying heavy objects as well as throwing events such as the caber toss and keg toss, which bear similarities to track and field throwing events.
Discrete modern track and field competitions, separate from general sporting festivals, were first recorded in the 19th century.
Medically, the use of banned substances may have an adverse effect upon athletes' health.
Races over short distances, or sprints, are among the oldest running competitions.
Each runner completes their specified distance (referred to as a leg) before handing over a baton to a team mate, who then begins their leg upon receiving the baton.
For sprint races up to 400&nbsp;m, the starter gives two commands: "on your marks" to instruct athletes to approach the start line, followed by "set" to advise the athletes that the start of the race is imminent.
The performances of jumping events for distance are measured from a board or marker, and any athlete overstepping this mark is judged to have fouled.
Lane rules also apply for initial periods of other track races, for example, the beginning of the 800&nbsp;m. Similar rules apply for longer distance races when a large field of athletes is present and separate starting points are designated, with the field merging into one group shortly after the starting phase.
Some national federations are named after the sport, including USA Track & Field and the Philippine Amateur Track & Field Association, but these organisations govern more than just track and field and are in fact athletics governing bodies.
Any athlete who jostles or obstructs another athlete, in a way that impedes his progress, should be disqualified from that event.
The bar does not go back to a lower height except to break a tie for first place or a qualifying position.
The modern rules were first laid out in 1860 and required that competitors take legal throws within a square throwing area of seven feet (2.13&nbsp;m) on each side.
The major global track and field competitions are both held under the scope of athletics.
Just as the hurdling events, the steeplechase finds its origin in student competition in Oxford, England.
The International Association of Athletics Federations is the global governing body for track and field, and athletics as a whole.
Ties are broken by first, the number of attempts taken at the highest height (fewest wins), and then if still tied, by the total number of misses in the competition as a whole.
For the intermediate hurdles (400 meter hurdles), the men's hurdle height is 36 inches compared to 30 inches for women.
It is one of the oldest sports.
The officials at the landing end of the tape have the zero, while the officials at the point of initiation measure and record the length.
Track and field is categorised under the umbrellas la la la sport of athletics, which also includes road running, cross country running, and race walking.
Meanwhile, the United States began holding an annual national competition—the USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships—first held in 1876 by the New York Athletic Club.
The profile of the sport reached a new high in the 1980s, with a number of athletes becoming household names (such as Carl Lewis, Sergey Bubka, Sebastian Coe, Zola Budd and Florence Griffith-Joyner).
Combined events involve the same group of athletes contesting a number of different track and field events.
A pass could be used to save energy and avoid taking a jump that would not improve their position in the standings.
Jumping technique has played a significant part in the history of the event.
Ultimately the "allcomers" ethos of the NOA won through and the AAC was reconstituted as the Amateur Athletic Association in 1880, the first national body for the sport of athletics.
The 5000&nbsp;m and 10,000&nbsp;m events have their historical roots in the 3-mile and 6-mile races.
Ties between different athletes are resolved as follows: In determining whether there has been a tie in any round for a qualifying position for the next round based on time, a judge (called the chief photo finish judge) must consider the actual time recorded by the athletes to one thousandth of a second.
The pole vault has been an Olympic event since 1896 for men, but it was over 100 years later that the first women's world championship competition was held at the 1997 IAAF World Indoor Championships.
The competitor has the option to PASS their attempt, which can be used to strategic advantage (of course that advantage is lost if the competitor misses).
The following year, all world records in sprint events would only be recognised if fully automatic electronic timing was used (as opposed to the traditional hand-timing stopwatch method).
The women's javelin underwent a similar redesign in 1999.
That same year, the International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) was established, becoming the international governing body for track and field, and it enshrined amateurism as one of its founding principles for the sport.
It was the latter type from which the modern event derives.
The establishment of the modern Olympic Games at the end of the 19th century marked a new high for track and field.
Some countries hold many track and field championships at high school and college-level, which help develop younger athletes.
The distances thrown by male athletes became greater from the 1950s onwards as a result of improved equipment using the denser metals, a switch to concrete throwing areas, and more advanced training techniques.
Events such as the 100 metres receive some of the highest levels of media coverage of any Olympic or Paralympic sporting event.
The field of the stadium combines a number of elements for use in the jumping and throwing events.
Events are almost exclusively divided by gender, although both the men's and women's competitions are usually held at the same venue.
The other two major international competition for track and field are organised by the IAAF.
At other competitions, meet management may choose to limit all competitors to four or three attempts.
Athletes performances are timed or measured at virtually all track and field competitions.
All sprints beyond this distance increasingly incorporate an element of endurance.
The men's 110&nbsp;m has been featured at every modern Summer Olympics while the men's 400&nbsp;m was introduced in the second edition of the Games.
The long distance track events gained popularity in the 1920s by the achievements of the "Flying Finns", such as multiple Olympic champion Paavo Nurmi.
The modern event sees athletes run down a strip of track, plant the pole in the metal box, and vault over the horizontal bar before letting go of the pole and falling backwards onto the landing mattress.
To prevent use of performance-enhancing substances, athletes must submit to drug tests that are conducted both in and out of competition by anti-doping officials or accredited medical staff.
Cash bonuses are usually offered to athletes if they break significant records, as doing so can generate greater interest and public attendance in track and field competitions.
The school organised Paper Chase races in which runners followed a trail of paper shreds left by two "foxes"; even today RSSH runners are called "hounds" and a race victory is a "kill".
The first continental track and field competition was the 1919 South American Championships, which was followed by the European Athletics Championships in 1934.
Athletes have a short run up and then take off from one foot to jump over a horizontal bar and fall back onto a cushioned landing area.
In 1923, physical education advocate Zhang Ruizhen called for greater equality and participation of women in Chinese track and field.
The IAAF keeps world records for five different types of track relays.
The weight of the metal ball was set at 16&nbsp;pounds (7.26&nbsp;kg) while the attached wire had to measure between 1.175&nbsp;m and 1.215&nbsp;m.
The athletes would take a short run up and jump into an area of dug up earth, with the winner being the one who jumped farthest.
There are three common long distance running events in track and field competitions: 3000 metres, 5000 metres and 10,000 metres.
Races up to 100&nbsp;m are largely focused upon acceleration to an athlete's maximum speed.
Vertical jumps (high jump and pole vault) set a bar at a particular height.
The first 13 editions of the Ancient Olympic Games featured only one event, the stadion race, which was a race from one end of the stadium to the other.
those fully equipped to host all events for the World Indoor Championships) bear similarities with their outdoor equivalents.
One-day track and field meetings form the most common and seasonal aspect of the sport – they are the most basic level of track and field competition.
This was also accompanied by an increase in the use of performance-enhancing drugs, and prominent cases, such as those of Olympic gold medallists Ben Johnson and Marion Jones, damaged the public image and marketability of the sport.
As with 4×100&nbsp;m and 4×400&nbsp;m events, all races comprise teams of four athletes running the same distances, with the less commonly contested distances being the 4×200&nbsp;m, 4×800&nbsp;m and 4×1500&nbsp;m relays.
The first women's Olympic pole vaulting competition occurred in 2000.
Jumps are measured from a take off board—typically a small strip of wood with a plasticine marker attached—which ensures athletes jump from behind the measurement line.
Despite the long history of men's steeplechase in track and field, the women's steeplechase only gained World Championship status in 2005, with its first Olympic appearance coming in 2008.
At the first Games in 776 BC in Olympia, Greece, only one event was contested: the stadion footrace.
This was amended to a circle area with a seven-foot diameter in 1906, and the weight of the shot was standardised to 16&nbsp;pounds (7.26&nbsp;kg).
By the 1912 Olympics, the ancient standing throw style had fallen into disuse and contests starting within a 2.5&nbsp;m squared throwing area became the standard.
However, athletes must also have a consistent stride to allow them to take off near the board while still maintaining their maximum speed.
Key rules of track events are those regarding starting, running and finishing.
Relay races are the only track and field event in which a team of runners directly compete against other teams.
Gold chains are sometimes worn in short distances to keep the body leaning forward longer, giving more power off the blocks and a more comfortable stride to gain a slight competitive advantage.
The IAAF had selected the Olympic competition as its world championship event in 1913, but a separate world championships for athletics alone was first held in 1983 – the IAAF World Championships in Athletics.
There are also indoor continental competitions in Europe (European Athletics Indoor Championships) and Asia (Asian Indoor Athletics Championships).
In terms of competition rules and physical demands, long distance track races have much in common with middle-distance races, except that pacing, stamina, and race tactics become much greater factors in performances.
Most countries have a national championship in track and field and, for athletes, these often play a role in gaining selection into major competitions.
Records from 708 BC show two javelin competition types co-existing: throwing at a target and throwing the javelin for distance.
Mirroring the role that track and field events have at the Summer Olympics and Paralympics, the sport is featured within the athletics programmes of many major multi-sport events.
This national event was a great success, attracting a crowd of over ten thousand people.
Athletes have historically been willing to take legal and health risks to improve their performance, with some even stating their willingness to risk their lives, as exemplified by research by Mirkin, Goldman and Connor in researching attitudes to the so-called Goldman dilemma.
The standing high jump was contested at the Olympics from 1900 to 1912, but is now relatively uncommon outside of its use as an exercise drill.
All these forms of racing tend to record finishing times, have strictly defined start and finish points, and are generally individual in nature.
The 1500&nbsp;m and mile run events have historically been some of the most prestigious track and field events.
Other games such as the Commonwealth Games and Summer Universiade, and World Masters Games have significant participation from track and field athletes.
Fully automatic timing (FAT) is required for high level meets and any time a (sprint) record is set (though distance records can be accepted if timed by three independent stopwatches).
A steeplechase event was held on a track for the 1879 English championships and the 1900 Summer Olympics featured men's 2500&nbsp;m and 4000&nbsp;m steeplechase races.
Track and field contains some of the foremost kinds of throwing sports, and the four major disciplines are the only pure throwing events to feature at the Olympic Games.
Other ancient competitions included throwing a cast iron ball attached to a wooden handle – the root of the term "hammer throw" due to their resemblance to the tools.
The 1500&nbsp;m came about as a result of running three laps of a 500&nbsp;m track, which was commonplace in continental Europe in the 20th century.
The top competitors (usually 8 or 9 depending on that competition's rules or the number of lanes on the track) gets three more tries.
This rule was introduced to reduce the amount of physical jostling between runners in the early stages of the race.
In the mid-first decade of the 21st century, the BALCO Scandal eventually resulted in the downfall of prominent sprinters such as Marion Jones and Tim Montgomery, among others, through their usage of banned substances.
Up until the early 1920s, track and field had been almost exclusively a male-only pursuit.
In the jumps for height, an athlete must clear their body over a crossbar without knocking the bar off the supporting standards.
The javelin throwing area is a sector shape frequently across the Pitch (sports field) in the middle of the stadium, ensuring that the javelin has a minimal chance of causing damage or injury.
One of the last track and field events to develop was the pole vault, which stemmed from competitions such as the Fierljeppen contests in the Northern European Lowlands in the 18th century.
Athletes sprint along a length of track that leads to a jumping board and a sandpit.
Sprinting events are focused around athletes reaching and sustaining their quickest possible running speed.
The majority of jumping events are unaided, although athletes propel themselves vertically with purpose-built sticks in the pole vault.
In 1865, Dr William Penny Brookes of Wenlock helped set up the National Olympian Association, which held their first Olympian Games in 1866 at The Crystal Palace in London.
There are also "combined events" or "multi events", such as the pentathlon consisting of five events, heptathlon consisting of seven events, and decathlon consisting of ten events.
, any athlete making a false start is disqualified.
Due to stadium limitations, indoor combined events competition have a reduced number of events, resulting in the men's heptathlon and the women's pentathlon.
If the runner is in the "set" position and moves, then the runner is also disqualified.
The most common middle-distance track events are the 800 metres, 1500 metres and mile run, although the 3000 metres may also be classified as a middle-distance event.
The pole vault track and landing area are also alongside the central running track.
State-sponsored doping in East Germany with hormones and anabolic steroids marked the rise of women from the German Democratic Republic in track and field from the late 1960s to the 1980s.
Outside of the hurdles events, the steeplechase race is the other track and field event with obstacles.
The modern regulations stem from the 1900 Summer Olympics: the distance was fixed to 400&nbsp;m while ten 3-foot (91.44&nbsp;cm) hurdles were placed 35&nbsp;m apart on the track, with the first and final hurdles being 45&nbsp;m and 40&nbsp;m away from the start and finish, respectively.
Small weights (Halteres) were held in each hand during the jump then swung back and dropped near the end to gain extra momentum and distance.
Top speed can only be maintained for up to 20&nbsp;metres.
Meetings are generally organised annually either under the patronage of an educational institution or sports club, or by a group or business that serves as the meeting promoter.
Women's hurdles are slightly lower at 84&nbsp;cm (2&nbsp;ft 9&nbsp;in) for the 100&nbsp;m event and 76&nbsp;cm (2&nbsp;ft 6&nbsp;in) for the 400&nbsp;m event.
Track and field events were also present at the Panhellenic Games in Greece around this period, and they spread to Rome in Italy around 200 BC.
The first recorded instances of high jumping competitions were in Scotland in the 19th century.
These events have their roots in races of imperial measurements that later changed to metric: the 100&nbsp;m evolved from the 100 yard dash, the 200&nbsp;m distances came from the furlong (or 1/8 of a mile), and the 400&nbsp;m was the successor to the 440 yard dash or quarter-mile race.
Bamboo poles were introduced in the 20th century and a metal box in the runway for planting the pole became standard.
Assuming a proper attempt, officials measure the distance from the closest landing point back to the line.
Some have a second running track going straight across the field area, parallel to the straights of the main circuit.
There are two very common relay events: the 4×100 metres relay and the 4×400 metres relay.
This was quite popular when races were held at imperial distances, which gradually was phased out by different organizations in the 1970s and 1980s.
Doping problems have also been associated with sprinters such as Tyson Gay, Michael Rogers, and Justin Gatlin, all from the United States.
The genesis of the shot put can be traced to pre-historic competitions with rocks: in the Middle ages the stone put was known in Scotland and the steinstossen was recorded in Switzerland.
For sprinting events (bar the 4 × 400&nbsp;m relay and the indoor 400&nbsp;metres), each athlete must run the race within their allocated lane from start to finish.
The 150 metres, though rarely competed, has a star-studded history: Pietro Mennea set a world best in 1983, Olympic champions Michael Johnson and Donovan Bailey went head-to-head over the distance in 1997, and Usain Bolt improved Mennea's record in 2009.
The Olympic athletics programme, comprising track and field events plus a marathon race, contained many of the foremost sporting competitions of the 1896 Summer Olympics.
There were 53 recognised records in running, hurdling and relay, and 12 field records.
The long and triple jump areas run alongside the central 60&nbsp;m track and are mostly identical in form to their outdoor counterparts.
Track events involve running on a track over a specified distances and—in the case of the hurdling and steeplechase events—obstacles may be placed on the track.
Track and field athletes are banned from ingesting or using certain substances by governing bodies for the sport, from the national to the international level.
The rules of track athletics or of track events in athletics as observed in most international athletics competitions are set by the Competition Rules of the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF).
Further throwing techniques have arisen since the post-war era: in the 1950s Parry O'Brien popularised the 180 degree turn and throw technique commonly known as the "glide", breaking the world record 17 times along the way, while Aleksandr Baryshnikov and Brian Oldfield introduced the "spin" or rotational technique in 1976.
Women's initially competed in the 80 metres hurdles event, which entered the Olympic programme in 1932.
As an implement of war and hunting, javelin throwing began in prehistoric times.
First, all records in imperial measurements were abandoned in 1976, with the sole exceptional being the mile run due to the prestige and history of the event.
After the period of Classical antiquity (in which the sport was largely Greco-Roman influenced) new track and field events began developing in parts of Northern Europe in the Middle Ages.
Once the gun fires, they must run in the lane they began in until markers on the track notify them it is time to move towards the inside lane.
These were typically organised by educational institutions, military organisations and sports clubs as competitions between rival establishments.
In earlier competitions, track lengths varied: the Panathinaiko Stadium measured 333.33&nbsp;metres at the 1896 Summer Olympics, while at the 1904 Olympics the distance was a third of a mile (536.45&nbsp;m) at Francis Field.
At the professional level, sprinters begin the race by assuming a crouching position in the starting blocks before leaning forward and gradually moving into an upright position as the race progresses and momentum is gained.
A growing women's sports movement in Europe and North America led to the establishment of the Women's World Games in 1921 and this ultimately caused the introduction of five track and field events for women in the athletics at the 1928 Summer Olympics.
If, in the judgment of the starter or recallers, he does so any earlier, it is considered a false start.
The commands of the starter are typically given in the native language in national competitions, or in English or French in international competitions.
Originally, athletes would hop on the same leg twice before jumping into the pit, but this was changed to the current "hop, step and jump" pattern from 1900 onwards.
The establishment of general sports governing bodies for the United States (the Amateur Athletic Union in 1888) and France (the Union des sociétés françaises de sports athlétiques in 1889) put the sport on a formal footing and meant that international competitions became possible.
Outdoors, the most common combined events are the men's decathlon (ten events) and the women's heptathlon (seven events).
Fully automatic timing systems (photo timing) are becoming more and more common at increasingly lower levels of track meets, improving the accuracy, while eliminating the need for eagle-eyed officials on the finish line.
Track and field continued to be a largely amateur sport, as this rule was strictly enforced: Jim Thorpe was stripped of his track and field medals from the 1912 Olympics after it was revealed that he had played baseball professionally.
In the 17th century, cannonball throwing competitions within the English military provided a precursor to the modern sport.
However, the number and status of such competitions significantly vary from country to country.
Typically, a team is made up of four runners of the same sex.
The 4 × 100 m event is run strictly within the same lane on the track, meaning that the team collectively runs one complete circuit of the track.
The governance of track and field at continental and national level is also done by athletics bodies.
Full-size indoor arenas (i.e.
After over half a century of amateurism, the amateur status of the sport began to be displaced by growing professionalism in the late 1970s.
A large variety of record types exist and men's and women's performances are recorded separately.
In ancient times a heavy circular disc was thrown from a set standing position on a small pedestal, and it was this style that was revived for the 1896 Olympics.
The shot put features a circular throwing area with a toe board at one end.
Steel tapes are easily bent and damaged, so are not used to measure everyday competitions.
The javelin throw gained much popularity in Scandinavia in the late 18th century and athletes from the region are still among the most dominant throwers in men's competitions.
Athletes found to have taken substances on the World Anti-Doping Agency's banned list receive sanctions and may be banned from competition for a period of time that corresponds to the seriousness of the infraction.
Practices such as blood doping and the use of anabolic steroids, peptide hormones, stimulants, or diuretics can give athletes a physical competitive advantage in track and field.
Competitions in the English public schools were conceived as human equivalents of horse racing, fox hunting and hare coursing, influenced by a Classics-rich curriculum.
The Royal Shrewsbury School Hunt is the oldest running club in the world, with written records going back to 1831 and evidence that it was established by 1819.
Middle- and long-distance runners usually participate in cross country and road events, in addition to the track.
In the case of horizontal jumps, that line is a straight line perpendicular to the runway.
Doping has played a significant part in the modern history of track and field.
As meetings become more organized they can gain official sanctioning by the local or national association for the sport.
As a result, the Amateur Athletic Union was dissolved in the United States and it was replaced with a non-amateur body solely focused on the sport of athletics: The Athletics Congress (later USA Track and Field).
Runners were entered by "owners" and named as though they were horses.
In response, that same year the Amateur Athletic Club was formed and held a championship for "gentlemen amateurs" in an attempt to reclaim the sport for the educated elite.
Runners start the race from a standing position along a curved starting line and after hearing the starter's pistol they head towards the innermost track to follow the quickest route to the finish.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association held their first Men's Outdoor Track and Field Championship in 1921, making it one of the most prestigious competitions for students, and this was soon followed by the introduction of track and field at the inaugural World Student Games in 1923.
