The inability of the parties to reach an agreement may lead to industrial action, culminating in either strike action or management lockout, or binding arbitration.
The Bourse du Travail was founded in 1887 and merged with the Fédération nationale des syndicats (National Federation of Trade Unions) in 1895 to form the General Confederation of Labour (France).
* In the '''Anglo-Saxon System''' of labour market regulation, the government’s legislative role is much more limited, which allows for more issues to be decided between employers and employees and any union and/or employers’ associations which might represent these parties in the decision-making process.
Trade unions have sometimes been seen as successors to the guilds of medieval Europe, though the relationship between the two is disputed, as the masters of the guilds employed workers (apprentices and journeyman) who were not allowed to organize.
The organization attracted a range of socialists from Owenites to revolutionaries and played a part in the protests after the Tolpuddle Martyrs' case, but soon collapsed.
Historically, the Republic of Korea has regulated collective bargaining by requiring employers to participate, but collective bargaining has only been legal if held in sessions before the lunar new year.
The first attempts at setting up a national general union were made in the 1820s and 30s; the National Association for the Protection of Labour was established in 1830 by John Doherty, after an apparently unsuccessful attempt to create a similar national presence with the National Union of Cotton-spinners.
Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Switzerland), religious unions have existed for decades.
In all the Nordic countries with a Ghent system - Sweden, Denmark and Finland - union density is about 70%.
In consequence, many working conditions are not negotiable due to a strong legal protection of individuals.
The trade unions aim at nothing less than to prevent the reduction of wages below the level that is traditionally maintained in the various branches of industry.
Most unions in America are aligned with one of two larger umbrella organizations: the AFL-CIO created in 1955, and the Change to Win Federation which split from the AFL-CIO in 2005.
As Smith noted, unions were illegal for many years in most countries, although Smith argued that it should remain illegal to fix wages or prices by employees or employers.
In 1930 the ACLVB-CGSLB adopted its current name.
The ITUC is a federation of national trade union centres, such as the AFL-CIO in the United States and the Trades Union Congress in the United Kingdom.
Some of these Christian unions have had some ties to centrist or conservative political movements and some do not regard strikes as acceptable political means for achieving employees' goals.
Typically this is a left-wing, socialist, or social democratic party, but many exceptions exist, including some of the aforementioned Christian unions.
This allows much wider legal boundaries for collective bargaining, compared to the narrow boundaries for individual negotiations.
In 2010, the percentage of workers belonging to a union in the United States (or total labour union "density") was 11.4%, compared to 18.3% in Japan, 27.5% in Canada and 70% in Finland.
With 54% of the workers belonging to a union Belgium is a country with one of the highest percentages of labour union membership.
Trade unions may be composed of individual workers, professionals, past workers, students, apprentices and/or the unemployed.
However, in Japan, union organization is slightly different due to the presence of enterprise unions, i.e.
In such cases, unions have certain legal rights, most importantly the right to engage in collective bargaining with the employer (or employers) over wages, working hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.
In Western Europe, professional associations often carry out the functions of a trade union.
Workplace militancy had also manifested itself as Luddism and had been prominent in struggles such as the 1820 Rising in Scotland, in which 60,000 workers went on a general strike, which was soon crushed.
The latter name was to hide the organization's real purpose in a time when trade unions were still illegal.
However, it has strengthened once more after the Labour party's election of Ed Miliband, who beat his brother David Miliband to become leader of the party after Ed secured the trade union votes.
Trade unions and collective bargaining were outlawed from no later than the middle of the 14th century when the Ordinance of Labourers was enacted in the Kingdom of England.
By this time, the existence and the demands of the trade unions were becoming accepted by liberal middle class opinion.
In contrast, in several European countries (e.g.
In Germany only open shops are legal; that is, all discrimination based on union membership is forbidden.
Today, the highest rates of union membership are in the Scandinavian countries.
Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such means.
Larger unions also typically engage in lobbying activities and supporting endorsed candidates at the state and federal level.
Unions may organize a particular section of skilled workers (craft unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Netherlands, the UK and the US), or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism, found in Australia, Canada, Germany, Finland, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US).
Labour unions are legally recognized as representatives of workers in many industries in the United States.
These enterprise unions, however, join industry-wide federations which in turn are members of Rengo, the Japanese national trade union confederation.
International unions active in Canada include the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, United Automobile Workers, and United Steelworkers.
As collective bargaining and early worker unions grew with the onset of the Industrial Revolution, the government began to clamp down on what it saw as the danger of popular unrest at the time of the war.
Trade union density was 14.1% in the private sector and 56.5% in the public sector.
A modern definition by the Australian Bureau of Statistics states that a trade union is "an organization consisting predominantly of employees, the principal activities of which include the negotiation of rates of pay and conditions of employment for its members."
The third 'big' union in Belgium is the liberal General Confederation of Liberal Trade Unions of Belgium (ACLVB-CGSLB) which is relatively small in comparison to the first two with a little under 290 thousand members.
A source of international news about unions is RadioLabour which provides daily (Monday to Friday) news reports.
In Britain, previous to this EU jurisprudence, a series of laws introduced during the 1980s by Margaret Thatcher's government restricted closed and union shops.
In Costa Rica, trade unions first appeared in the late 1800s to support workers in a variety of urban and industrial jobs, such as railroad builders and craft tradesmen.
Between 2000 and 2010 Colombia accounted for 63.12% of trade unionists murdered globally.
Next to these specialized unions there is also the Neutral and Independent Union that reject the pillarization that, according to them, the "big three" represent.
The biggest union with around 1.7 million members is the Christian democrat Confederation of Christian Trade Unions (ACV-CSC) which was founded in 1904.
An EU case concerning Italy stated that, "The principle of trade union freedom in the Italian system implies recognition of the right of the individual not to belong to any trade union ("negative" freedom of association/trade union freedom), and the unlawfulness of discrimination liable to cause harm to non-unionized employees."
In Germany, only very few professional associations obtained the right to negotiate salaries and working conditions for their members, notably the medical doctors association Marburger Bund and the pilots association Vereinigung Cockpit.
Beginning in the mid-1800s, trade unions today have a large impact on the nature of employment and worker's rights in many of the Nordic countries.
After facing violent repression, such as during the 1934 United Fruit Strike, unions gained more power following the 1948 Costa Rican Civil War.
In the United States, the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 outlawed the closed shop.
Also the Eastern European countries that have recently entered into the EU come closest to the '''Anglo-Saxon''' model.
Karl Marx described trade unions thus; - “...the value of labour-power constitutes the conscious and explicit foundation of the trade unions, whose importance for the … working class can scarcely be overestimated.
Prominent domestic unions in Canada include ACTRA, the Canadian Union of Postal Workers, the Canadian Union of Public Employees, the Public Service Alliance of Canada, the National Union of Public and General Employees, and Unifor.
That is to say, they wish to prevent the price of labour-power from falling below its value” (Capital V1, 1867, p.&nbsp;1069).
In 1886, it became known as the American Federation of Labor or AFL.
These federations themselves will affiliate with Internationals, such as the International Trade Union Confederation.
Trade unions in Germany have a history reaching back to the German revolution in 1848, and still play an important role in the German economy and society.
Tradesmen who came from Britain brought traditions of the British trade union movement, and many British unions had branches in Canada.
In Germany the Free Association of German Trade Unions was formed in 1897 after the conservative Anti-Socialist Laws of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck were repealed.
If such an employees association is competing against another union, its leverage may be questioned by unions and then evaluated in a court trial.
They would also have a limited power of obtaining, by combination, an increase of general wages at the expense of profits.
In the United States, state level right-to-work laws mandate the open shop in some states.
* An '''open shop''' does not require union membership in employing or keeping workers.
Although their political structure and autonomy varies widely, union leaderships are usually formed through democratic elections.
Where a union is active, workers who do not contribute to a union may include those who approve of the union contract (free riders) and those who do not.
The labour movement went through a process of reorganization from 1987 to 1991 from which emerged the present configuration of three major labour union federations, Rengo, Zenroren, and Zenrokyo, along with other smaller national union organizations.
Trade unions (Danish: ''Fagforeninger'', Swedish: ''Fackföreningar'') has a long tradition in Scandinavian society.
* In the '''Nordic System''' of labour market regulation, the government’s legislative role is limited in the same way as in the Anglo-Saxon system.
With 1.4 million members, the teachers' union is Latin America's largest; half of Mexico's government employees are teachers.
As well, unions in some countries are closely aligned with political parties.
These unions are often divided into "locals", and united in national federations.
Justice Ivan Rand issued a landmark legal decision following a strike in Windsor, Ontario, involving 17,000 Ford workers.
Pressures on unions continued into the 1980s and '90s.
The origins of the union can be traced back to the "Anti-Socialist Cotton Workers Union" that was founded in 1886.
Legislation was introduced in many jurisdictions reversing union collective bargaining rights, and many jobs were lost to contractors.
From the 1990s onwards, this new model of independent unions prevailed, a number of them represented by the National Union of Workers / Unión Nacional de Trabajadores.
Both advocate policies and legislation on behalf of workers in the United States and Canada, and take an active role in politics.
Besides these "big three" there is a long list of smaller unions, some more influential then others.
Several sources of current news exist about the trade union movement in the world.
There is also a small Flemish nationalist union that exists only in the Flemish-speaking part of Belgium, called the Vlaamse Solidaire Vakbond.
This affects the function and services of the union.
By the 1810s, the first labour organizations to bring together workers of divergent occupations were formed.
Thus, it comes closest to the above '''Anglo-Saxon''' model.
The ABVV-FGTB traces its origins to 1857, when the first Belgian union was founded in Ghent by a group of weavers.
From 2006 to 2008 union density declined by six percentage points: from 77% to 71%.
In 2006 the European Court of Human Rights found Danish closed-shop agreements to be in breach of Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The socialist union, in its current form, was founded in 1898.
In general, Costa Rican unions support government regulation of the banking, medical, and education fields, as well as improved wages and working conditions.
However, the 1980s expansion of paramilitarism in Colombia saw trade union leaders and members increasingly targeted for assassination, and as a result Colombia has been the most dangerous country in the world for trade unionists for several decades.
In the 1970s the federal government came under intense pressures to curtail labour cost and inflation.
In 1834, the Welsh socialist Robert Owen established the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union.
The decline in unionization since the Second World War in the United States has been associated with a pronounced rise in income and wealth inequality and, since 1967, with loss of middle class income.
Therefore, he reasoned they must pay union dues, although they do not have to join the union.
Unions allege that employer-incited opposition has contributed to this decline in membership.
The post-World War II era also saw an increased pattern of unionization in the public service.
The Canadian Labour Congress was founded in 1956 as the national trade union center for Canada.
The United States takes a more laissez-faire approach, setting some minimum standards but leaving most workers' wages and benefits to collective bargaining and market forces.
Because of their inherently governmental function, public sector workers are paid the same regardless of union affiliation or non-affiliation after controlling for individual, job, and labour market characteristics.
Until recently, retiring teachers routinely "gave" their lifelong appointment to a relative or "sell" it for anywhere in between $4,700 and $11,800.
Rand ruled that all workers in a bargaining unit benefit from a union-negotiated contract.
In 1975, the Liberal government of Pierre Trudeau introduced mandatory price and wage controls.
It reports news and analysis about union activity or problems facing the labour movement.
The ACLVB-CGSLB was founded in 1920 in an effort to unite the many small liberal unions.
In many countries unions are tightly bonded, or even share leadership, with a political party intended to represent the interests of the working class.
Membership rose to between 10,000 and 20,000 individuals spread across the five counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire within a year.
Legalization occurred slowly as a result of a series of court decisions.
In 1799, the Combination Act was passed, which banned trade unions and collective bargaining by British workers.
This is sometimes called the Rand formula.
Ireland and the UK belong to this category, and in contrast to the EU core countries above, these countries first joined the EU in 1973.
In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, the US Occupation authorities initially encouraged the formation of independent unions.
Alternately, the organizing model typically involves full-time union organizers, who work by building up confidence, strong networks, and leaders within the workforce; and confrontational campaigns involving large numbers of union members.
The largest trade union federation in the world is the Brussels-based International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), which has approximately 309 affiliated organizations in 156 countries and territories, with a combined membership of 166 million.
Trade union density figures are provided below for various countries:
Sympathy for the plight of the workers brought repeal of the acts in 1824, although the Combination Act 1825 severely restricted their activity.
In Britain, the perceived left-leaning nature of trade unions has resulted in the formation of a reactionary right-wing trade union called Solidarity which is supported by the far-right BNP.
''Labor Notes'' is the largest circulation cross-union publication remaining in the United States.
steel, coal, printing, the docks&nbsp;&ndash; was one of the causes of this loss of trade union members.
There were severe penalties for attempting to organize unions, up to and including execution.
In the United States, trade unions are almost always aligned with the Democratic Party with a few exceptions.
The origins of trade unions can be traced back to 18th century Britain, where the rapid expansion of industrial society then taking place, drew women, children, rural workers and immigrants into the work force in large numbers and in new roles.
The Association quickly enrolled approximately 150 unions, consisting mostly of textile related unions, but also including mechanics, blacksmiths, and various others.
All agreements requiring a worker to join a union are now illegal.
It controls school curriculums, and all teacher appointments.
Legislation was passed that enshrined the right to organize, and membership rapidly rose to 5 million by February, 1947.
The most important labour organization is the  German Confederation of Trade Unions ''(Deutsche Gewerkschaftsbund or DGB)'', which represents more than 6 million people (31 December 2011) and is the umbrella association of several single trade unions for special economic sectors.
Social Unionism encompasses many unions that use their organizational strength to advocate for social policies and legislation favourable to their members or to workers in general.
However, in these countries, collective agreements are not widespread; only a few businesses and a few sectors of the economy have a strong tradition of finding collective solutions in labour relations.
Some research, such as that conducted by the Australian Centre for Industrial Relations Research and Training, argues that unionized workers enjoy better conditions and wages than those who are not unionized.
The last Belgian union worth mentioning is the very small, but highly active anarchist union called the Vrije Bond.
Unions are also delineated by the service model and the organizing model.
It was stressed that Denmark and Iceland were among a limited number of contracting states that continue to permit the conclusion of closed-shop agreements.
More permanent trade unions were established from the 1850s, better resourced but often less radical.
In ''The Wealth of Nations'', Book I, chapter 8, Smith wrote:
The second biggest union is the socialist General Federation of Belgian Labour (ABVV-FGTB) which has a membership of more than 1.5 million.
The engineers association Verein Deutscher Ingenieure does not strive to act as a union, as it also represents the interests of engineering businesses.
This generally sought to end child labour practices, improve worker safety, increase wages for both union workers and non-union workers, raise the entire society's standard of living, reduce the hours in a work week, provide public education for children, and bring other benefits to working class families.
Labour unions emerged in Japan in the second half of the Meiji period as the country underwent a period of rapid industrialization.
A '''union''' may acquire the status of a "juristic person" (an artificial legal entity), with a mandate to negotiate with employers for the workers it represents.
As of 2008, there are 11 Central Trade Union Organisations (CTUO) recognized by the Ministry of Labour.
Their activity today centres on collective bargaining over wages, benefits and working conditions for their membership, and on representing their members in disputes with management over violations of contract provisions.
To establish awareness and legitimacy, the union started the weekly ''Voice of the People'' publication, having the declared intention "to unite the productive classes of the community in one common bond of union."
Concerning labour market regulation in the EU, Gold (1993)  and Hall (1994) have identified three distinct systems of labour market regulation, which also influence the role that unions play:
According to the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) there were 2832 murders of trade unionists between 1 January 1986 and 30 April 2010, meaning that "on average, men and women trade unionists in Colombia have been killed at the rate of one every three days over the last 23 years."
* An '''agency shop''' requires non-union workers to pay a fee to the union for its services in negotiating their contract.
The trade union, through its leadership, bargains with the employer on behalf of union members (rank and file members) and negotiates labour contracts (collective bargaining) with employers.
Beyond the classification listed above, unions' relations with political parties vary.
The most prominent unions are among public sector employees such as teachers, police and other non-managerial or non-executive federal, state, county and municipal employees.
As a condition to obtain the legal status of a trade union, employee associations need to prove that their leverage is strong enough to serve as a counterforce in negotiations with employers.
Collective bargaining was first recognized in 1937, following a strike by the United Auto Workers at the General Motors' plant in Oshawa, Ontario.
In 2011 there were 6,135,126 members in TUC-affiliated unions, down from a peak of 12,172,508 in 1980.
Union workers in the private sector average 10-30% higher pay than non-union in America after controlling for individual, job, and labour market characteristics.
Public sector unions came under attack by federal and provincial governments as they attempted to reduce spending, reduce taxes and balance budgets.
In the 1980s, Mexico began adhering to Washington Consensus policies, selling off state industries such as railroad and telecommunications to private industries.
There is a record of skilled tradesmen in the Maritimes having a union organization during the War of 1812.
* “In the '''Continental European System''' of labour market regulation, the government plays an important role as there is a strong legislative core of employee rights, which provides the basis for agreements as well as a framework for discord between unions on one side and employers or employers’ associations on the other.
Private sector unions faced plant closures in many manufacturing industries and demands to reduce wages and increase productivity.
Until around 1990 Colombian trade unions were among the strongest in Latin America.
The organization rate, however, peaked at 55.8% in 1949 and subsequently declined to 18.2% (2006).
However, the German flavor or works legislation has as its main objective to create a balance of power between employees organized in unions and employers organized in employers associations.
This model was said to be found in EU core countries such as Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Italy, and it is also mirrored and emulated to some extent in the institutions of the EU, due to the relative weight that these countries had in the EU until the EU expansion by the inclusion of 10 new Eastern European member states in 2004.
These include LabourStart and the official website of the international trade union movement Global Unions.
Recent historical research by Bob James in ''Craft, Trade or Mystery'' (2001) puts forward the view that trade unions are part of a broader movement of benefit societies, which includes medieval guilds, Freemasons, Oddfellows, friendly societies, and other fraternal organizations.
Canadian unionism had early ties with Britain.
In France, labour organization was illegal until 1884.
In extreme cases, violent or illegal activities may develop around these events.
In Britain trade union movement's relationship with the Labour Party frayed as party leadership embarked on privatization plans at odds with what unions see as the worker's interests.
In ''Principles of Political Economy'' (1871) John Stuart Mill wrote:
Additionally, in the past, there was a group known as the Conservative Trade Unionists, or CTU, formed of people who sympathized with right wing Tory policy but were Trade Unionists.
The multitudes who compose the working class are too numerous and too widely scattered to combine at all, much more to combine effectually.
These smaller unions tend to specialize in one profession or economic sector.
Members of unions are disproportionately older, male and residents of the Northeast, the Midwest, and California.
Although the unions were subject to often severe repression until 1824, they were already widespread in cities such as London.
These unions typically distanced themselves from some of the doctrines of orthodox Marxism, such as the preference of atheism and from rhetoric suggesting that employees' interests always are in conflict with those of employers.
The London Trades Council was founded in 1860, and the Sheffield Outrages spurred the establishment of the Trades Union Congress in 1868, the first long-lived national trade union center.
Another source of union news is the ''Workers Independent News'', a news organization providing radio articles to independent and syndicated radio shows in the United States.
Excluding full-time students working part-time, Swedish union density was 70% in 2011, 2012 and 2013.
The service model union focuses more on maintaining worker rights, providing services, and resolving disputes.
This model was said to encompass Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden.
In other circumstances, unions may not have the legal right to represent workers, or the right may be in question.
By this stage, some 12,000,000 workers in the United Kingdom were trade union members.
In 2010, the percentage of workers belonging to a union (or total labour union "density") was 68.3% in Sweden and 54.8% in Norway, while it was 34.9% in Ireland and 18.4% in Germany.
The economist Joseph Stiglitz has asserted that, "Strong unions have helped to reduce inequality, whereas weaker unions have made it easier for CEOs, sometimes working with market forces that they have helped shape, to increase it".
The level of trade union membership also fell sharply in the 1980s, and continued falling for most of the 1990s.
If it were possible for the working classes, by combining among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at.
Possibly the first such union was the General Union of Trades, also known as the Philanthropic Society, founded in 1818 in Manchester.
In Denmark, there are some newer apolitical "discount" unions who offer a very basic level of services, as opposed to the dominating Danish pattern of extensive services and organizing.
However, the election of the Conservative Party led by Margaret Thatcher at the general election in May 1979, at the expense of Labour's James Callaghan, saw substantial trade union reform which saw the level of strikes fall.
National and regional trade unions organizing in specific industry sectors or occupational groups also form global union federations, such as Union Network International, the International Transport Workers Federation, the International Federation of Journalists, the International Arts and Entertainment Alliance or Public Services International.
However, in contrast to the countries in the Anglo-Saxon system category, this is a much more widespread network of collective agreements, which covers most industries and most firms.
Thus, for instance, trade unions in both Nordic and southern European countries have devised collective bargaining agreements that improved the conditions of temporary agency workers.
According to provisional statistics from the Ministry of Labour, trade unions had a combined membership of 24,601,589 in 2002.
In these cases, they may be negotiating for white-collar and/or professional workers, such as physicians, engineers or teachers.
Supporters of unions, such as the ACTU or Australian Labor Party (ALP), often credit trade unions with leading the labour movement in the early 20th century.
Originating in Great Britain, trade unions became popular in many countries during the Industrial Revolution.
Canadian unionism ties with the United States eventually replaced those with Britain.
Unions may also engage in broader political or social struggle.
Current old institutions like the Oil Workers Union and the National Education Workers' Union (''Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educación'', or SNTE) are examples of how the use of government benefits are not being applied to improve the quality in the investigation of the use of oil or the basic education in Mexico as long as their leaders show publicly that they are living wealthily.
