* Yellow – stop if possible to do so without braking so sharply such as may cause an accident
For the Sportsman tree, the amber light will flash from top to bottom.
Barnes did not claim to have invented the system but was a strong advocate of it, having observed the difficulties his daughter faced crossing the road to get to school.
One of the best historical examples of computerized control of lights was in Denver in 1952.
In addition to aiming, Fresnel lenses, and louvers, visors and back panels are also useful in areas where sunlight would diminish the contrast and visibility of a signal face.
In Spring 2015, Hunter College in New York City completed an observational study of red light running, the first of its kind.
* Red: do not cross.
The low energy consumption of LED lights can pose a driving risk in some areas during winter.
Ferrari decided to use a traditional "lollipop" for the remainder of the 2008 season.
One computer took control of 120 lights with six pressure-sensitive detectors measuring inbound and outbound traffic.
The blue staging light is divided into two parts: Pre-stage and stage.
Signaled intersections can reduce delay for side road traffic and reduce the occurrence of collisions by turning traffic and cross traffic.
For places where adjacent traffic control signals do not keep traffic grouped together efficiently.
This is prominently featured in the Sydney CBD outside town hall.
There is often a white box painted on the road in this location to indicate where the riders should group.
Today, McCain Traffic Systems is the only U.S.-based manufacturer producing optically programmable traffic signals similar to the 3M model.
In some cases red light cameras have been abused by local governments, where vehicle operators have been fined as a result of traffic systems that have been improperly modified.
There may also be a special area a few meters in advance of the stop line where cyclists may legally wait but not motor vehicles; this advanced stop line is often painted with a different road surface with greater friction and a high color, both for the benefit of cyclists and for other vehicles.
Continuous lanes are restricted in that vehicles turning from a side street may not cross over the double white line to enter the continuous lane, and no lane changes are permitted to the continuous lane from an adjacent lane or from the continuous lane to an adjacent lane, until the double white line has been passed.
This intervening period is called the "all-red time".
The Christmas Tree has six lights: a blue staging light, three amber lights, a green light and a red light.
In right-lane countries, the sequence (from left to right) is red–yellow–green.
In April 2015 it was destroyed by a motorist.
These adjustments are designed to either decrease the likelihood that the transit vehicle will arrive during a red interval or decrease the length of the red interval for those vehicles that are stopped.
In some European countries and Russia, dedicated traffic signals for public transport (tram, as well any that is using a dedicated lane) have four white lights that form the letter T. If the three top lamps are lit, this means "stop".
* Peak hour volume or delay.
Light then bounces off a mirrored glass or polished aluminium reflector bowl, and out through a polycarbonate plastic or glass signal lens.
* Flashing red or orange stop hand or "don't walk": do not start crossing, but continue if already in the middle of the intersection.
In the United States, there is a recommended federal safety minimum of three seconds for yellow lights.
In Germany the priority directions will not be illuminated while the intersecting streets will be shown a flashing yellow signal.
The traffic lights are mounted so that cyclists can still see them.
Depending upon the location, traffic lights may be mounted on poles situated on street corners, hung from horizontal poles or wires strung over the roadway, or installed within large horizontal gantries that extend out from the corner and over the right-of-way.
It exploded on 2&nbsp;January 1869, as a result of a leak in one of the gas lines underneath the sidewalk, injuring or killing the policeman who was operating it.
They are also sometimes used for ramp metering, where motorists enter a controlled-access highway during heavy traffic.
In 1912, a traffic control device was placed on top a tower in Paris at the Rue Montmartre and Grande Boulevard.
In the UK and parts of North America, drivers simply treat the junction as being uncontrolled when traffic lights fail, giving way as appropriate, unless a police officer is present.
The southbound traffic gets a red light so northbound traffic can make a left turn, but the straight-through northbound traffic continues to get a green light.
The traffic tower soon used twelve floodlights to control traffic and the reason for a tower in the first place was that at the time the intersection was one of the busiest in world, with over 20,000 vehicles daily.
The Barnes Dance is named after an American traffic engineer, Henry A. Barnes.
* Green: safe to cross.
The signal may display flashing yellow to the main road and flashing red to the side road, or flashing red in all directions.
Instead, in order to make a left turn, the rider moves to the right side of the road, travels through the first half of the intersection on green, then slows down and stops directly in front of the line of cars on the driver's right waiting to travel across the intersection, which are of course being held by a red light.
The main advantage for the use of the timer was that it saved cities money by replacing traffic officers.
That is, green on top and red below is the standard placement of the signal colors on railroad tracks.
By 1923 the city had installed 31 Acme traffic control devices.
Ampelmännchen pedestrian traffic signals have come to be seen as a nostalgic sign for the former German Democratic Republic.
In some jurisdictions, including most American states, a vehicle already in the intersection when the light turns red legally has the right of way, and vehicles who have green must yield to the vehicle in the intersection.
Eight intersections near Parliament have shillouettes of suffragette Kate Sheppard, while four intersections along Cuba Street have shillouetes of drag performer and LGBT rights activist Carmen Rupe.
Usually, the system was automatic, but heavy traffic in the pit lane forced the team to operate it manually.
The normal function of traffic lights requires sophisticated control and coordination to ensure that traffic moves as smoothly and safely as possible and that pedestrians are protected when they cross the roads.
The beacon was a local historical site and the logo for a local Boy Scout Troop, Troop 711 Albion.
Traditionally, incandescent and halogen bulbs were used.
People praised the computers for their detection abilities.
Ashville, Ohio claims to be the home of the oldest working traffic light in the United States, used at an intersection of public roads from 1932 to 1982 when it was moved to a local museum.
In many southern and southwestern U.S. states, most traffic signals are similarly horizontal in order to ease wind resistance during storms and hurricanes.
Horizontal signals have consistent orientation, like their vertical counterparts.
The Acme semaphore traffic lights were often used in Warner Bros. Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies cartoons for comedic effect due to their loud bell.
Enforcement of traffic lights is done in one of several ways:
However, the system was withdrawn after the 2008 Singapore Grand Prix, due to the fact that it heavily delayed Felipe Massa during the race, when he was in the lead.
In these areas, it is not permitted for such small and often hard-to-see vehicles to turn left in front of oncoming traffic on certain high-volume roads when there is no dedicated left-turn signal.
A partial listing of these state statutes include  Wisconsin 346.37(1)(c)(4),  Illinois Sec.
Hans Monderman, the innovative Dutch traffic engineer, and pioneer of shared space schemes, was sceptical of their role, and is quoted as having said of them: "We only want traffic lights where they are useful and I haven't found anywhere where they are useful yet."
In some signals, these lenses were cut to include a specific refracting pattern.
Typical applications for these signals were skewed intersections, specific multi-lane control, left-turn pocket signals or other areas where complex traffic situations existed.
A study in the State of Illinois (a right-driving jurisdiction) concluded that allowing drivers to proceed straight on red after stopping, at specially posted T-intersections where the intersecting road went left only, was dangerous.
In some other countries, the permission is indicated by a flashing yellow arrow (cars do not have to stop but must give way to other cars and pedestrians).
The ''Amber Gambler Twins'' is one of many public interest films trying to change the public's behavior regarding running of yellow lights.
Unlike preemption, which immediately interrupts a signal's normal operation to serve the preempting vehicle and is usually reserved for emergency use, "priority" is a set of strategies intended to reduce delay for specific vehicles, especially mass transit vehicles such as buses.
In the United States, signs reading "Oncoming traffic has extended green" or "Oncoming traffic may have extended green" must be posted at intersections where the "yellow trap" condition exists.
Generally, a dedicated left-turn signal is illuminated at the beginning of the green phase of the green-yellow-red-green cycle.
Some busy intersections have an overhead traffic light for heavy vehicles and vehicles further away.
If the bottom lamp and some lamps on the top row are lit, this means permission to go in a direction shown.
It is not uncommon to see lenses with both symbols on them.
The stop line alignment is done to prevent vehicles blocking any crosswalk and allow for better pedestrian traffic flow.
In the 1930s throughout the 1950s, they utilized a beaded prismatic lens with a "smiley" pattern embossed into the bottom of each lens.
* Green, blue, or white walking person or "walk": cross with caution (pedestrians have the right of way; motorists turning left or right must yield to pedestrians).
Railroad signals, for stopping trains in their own right of way, use the opposite positioning of the colors, the two types cannot be confused.
On 9 December 1868, the first, non-electric, gas-lit traffic lights were installed outside the Houses of Parliament in London to control the traffic in Bridge Street, Great George Street and Parliament Street.
A variety of strategies exist to give priority to transit but they all generally work by detecting approaching transit vehicles and making small adjustments to the signal timing.
The computers maintained control over 159 signals in the cities through telephone lines.
Some jurisdictions allow turning on red in the opposite direction (left in right-driving countries; right in left-driving countries) from a one-way road onto another one-way road; some of these even allow these turns from a two-way road onto a one-way road.
* Crash experience.
On an oval track, four sets may be used, two facing a straight-away and two facing the middle of the 180-degree turn between straight-away.
The Netherlands use a distinctive "negenoog" (nine-eyed) design shown on the top row of the diagram; bottom row signals are used in Belgium, Luxembourg, France and Germany.
The three-aspect standard is also used at locks on the Upper Mississippi River.
In some jurisdictions such as Australia and Ireland pedestrian lights are associated with a sound device, for the benefit of blind and visually impaired pedestrians.
11-306(c)(3.5),  Minnesota 169.06 Subd.
A third signal equal to yellow is accomplished by flashing the "go" signal.
If a Pro tree is used, then the three amber lights will flash at the same time.
1,475,024 was granted on November 20, 1923 for Morgan's three-position traffic signal.
Most of the systems operate with small transmitters that send radio waves, infrared signals, or strobe light signals that are received by a sensor on or near the traffic lights.
In case of a tram signal, if there are no tram junctions or turns on an intersection, a simpler system of one yellow signal in the form of letter T is used instead; the tram must proceed only when the signal is lit.
An intersection is usually required to meet one or more of these warrants before a signal is installed.
This is sometimes used as a justification for making a turn across the opposing travel lanes on a red light at a busy intersection, by pulling partway into the intersection at a green light waiting to perform the turn, and, if oncoming traffic is not abated before the light changes to red, proceeding to turn once the light has turned red and opposing traffic has stopped.
At particularly busy junctions for freight, higher lights may be mounted specifically for trucks.
This is applied only in unusual cases, such as office parks, industrial complexes, and park and ride lots that attract or discharge large numbers of vehicles in a short time, and, for a minimum of one hour of an average day.
It requires a connection to a laptop or smartphone with the manufacturer software installed.
In Florida, horizontal signals mounted on poles, known as "mast arms", are in wide use due to their lower wind profile, important for minimizing hurricane damage.
These early signals, manufactured by the Acme Traffic Signal Co., paired “Stop” and “Go” semaphore arms with small red and green lights.
With the rapid increase of vehicles for hire through smart phone apps and the competition from taxis and livery cabs, the urgency to complete as many rides in as short a period of time as possible has led to drivers pushing the limits on red lights.
These generally take the form of four signal sections (green, yellow, yellow arrow, red).
Crouse-Hinds is one notable company for this practice.
In Britain, normal traffic lights follow this sequence:
This standard has been criticized as ambiguous and difficult to enforce (red light cameras in Oregon are activated only if a motorist enters the intersection on a red).
In some cases, a fourth aspect, for a turn arrow for example, is below the three lights or aspects in more complicated road traffic intersections.
In areas where wind-load is not as much of a concern as ice-load, such as Illinois or Minnesota, the lights are mounted vertically to reduce the accumulation of ice or snow over the surface of the signal heads.
This is often done due to the pedestrian crossings, so that traffic has to wait if they get a red light.
Typically, a 67, 69, or 115 watt medium-base (household lamp in the US) light bulb provides the illumination.
There are significant differences from place to place in how traffic lights are mounted or positioned so that they are visible to drivers.
In North America, there is often a pole-mounted signal on the same side of the intersection, but additional pole-mounted and overhead signals are usually mounted on the far side of the intersection for better visibility.
Addition to that, at any tramway junction, another set of signals is available to indicate the direction of the tracks.
Priority does not guarantee that transit vehicles always get a green light the instant they arrive like preemption does.
The separation of conflicting streams of traffic in time can reduce the chances of right-angle collisions.
Automatic control of interconnected traffic lights was introduced March 1922 in Houston, Texas.
There are some that can pick up these vehicles without problems and most are capable of doing so.
This is known as a "pedestrian scramble" or Barnes Dance in some places.
In Germany, the Czech Republic and some other Central European countries, a combination of red and orange lights is used just before the switch back to green.
Bells played the role of today's amber or yellow lights, ringing when the flags changed—a process that took five seconds.
As a response to the safety concerns, a heating element on the lens was developed.
However, following a study sponsored by the UK Highways Agency and completed by Aston University, Birmingham, UK, an enhanced optical design was introduced in the mid 1990s.
Another interesting practice seen at least in Ontario is that cars wishing to turn left that arrived after the left turn signal ended can do so during the yellow phase, as long as there is enough time to make a safe turn.
Automobile racing circuits can also use standard traffic signals to indicate to racing car drivers the status of racing.
9,  South Carolina S.C. Code 56-5-970 (5), North Carolina, Idaho, Arkansas, and Tennessee.
The light was called the semaphore and had arms that would extend horizontally that commanded drivers to "Stop" and then the arms would lower to a 45 degrees angle to tell drivers to proceed with "Caution".
In the United Kingdom, 12&nbsp;inch lights were implemented only with Mellor Design Signal heads designed by David Mellor.
The light sequence is as follows:
In British Columbia, the law addresses this problem by giving a left-turning driver already in an intersection the right-of-way to make the turn once the intersection is otherwise clear, regardless of the traffic light state.
In Colorado Springs, Colorado, yellow lights at numerous intersections have been noted with durations of approximately two seconds.
A typical vertical traffic signal has three aspects, or lights, facing the oncoming traffic, red on top, yellow below, and green below that.
Other signals are sometimes added for more control, such as for public transportation and right or left turns allowed only when the green arrow is illuminated or specifically prohibited if the red arrow is illuminated.
The design combined three semaphore arms with red and green gas lamps for night-time use, on a pillar, operated by a police constable.
It used the words "STOP" and "PROCEED", although neither word lit up.
Typically, these lights allow or forbid traffic to use one or more of the available lanes by the use of green lights or arrows (to permit) or by red lights or crosses (to prohibit).
Many pictures of historical traffic lights appear at a Traffic Signal Trivia page.
The same system is used also in Switzerland and Macau.
Thanks to computers, the changing of lights made Crosby's flow even quicker thanks to computerized detection.
The time from when a red light is displayed and when a cross street is given a green light is usually based on the physical size of the intersection.
Lane-control lights are a specific type of traffic light used to manage traffic on a multi-way road, highway or tollway.
Red light cameras in New South Wales, Australia, are activated only if a motorist enters an intersection 0.3 seconds after the light has turned red.
The driver will now have to check the traffic light behind them, which is often impossible from the viewing angle of a driver's seat.
(Occupying the space inside the crosswalk lines is itself a traffic infraction, but different from gridlocking).
The rise of computers is the model of traffic control which is now used in the 21st century.
Additional state laws regarding actuated traffic lights can be found at the  American Motorcycle Association (AMA) website, including this  quick reference guide.
Generally one aspect is illuminated at a time.
* with red light cameras
Some continuous lanes are protected by a raised curb located between the continuous lane and a normal traffic lane, with white and/or yellow reflective paint or tape, prohibiting turning or adjacent traffic from entering the lane.
'''Actuated traffic lights'''
For example, it may be decided not to install a signal at an intersection if traffic stopped by it will back up and block another, more heavily trafficked intersection.
Countdown timers on traffic lights were introduced in the 1990s.
Scuderia Ferrari, a Formula One racing team, formerly used a traffic light system during their pit stops to signal to their drivers to when to leave the pits.
The tower was the first innovation that used the three-colored traffic signal and appeared first in the City of Detroit, where the first three-colored traffic light was built at the intersection of Michigan and Woodward Avenues in 1920.
In Spain, the mounted traffic lights on the far side of the intersection is meant for the traffic that exits the intersection in that particular direction.
In some places that generally disallow this, a sign next to the traffic light indicates that it is allowed at a particular intersection.
At the front of these programmable visibility signals is a 12" Fresnel lens, each lens tinted to meet United States Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) chromaticity and luminance standards.
For example, a Fresnel lens on an adjacent through-lane signal may be aimed to prevent left-turning traffic from anticipating its own green arrow.
Although the site HISTORY.com credits this signal as the ancestor of today's yellow warning light, earlier devices including the aforementioned Potts signal in Detroit included the yellow (amber) light.
The control room that housed the computer in charge of the system was in the basement of the City and County Building.
Such lights tend to decrease the overall efficiency of the intersection as it becomes congested, although it makes intersections safer by reducing the risk of head-on collisions and may even speed up through traffic, but if a significant amount of traffic is turning, a dedicated turn signal helps eliminate congestion.
Some newer LED turn arrows seen in parts of Canada are capable of multicolored animation.
Thanks to the new and better computers traffic flow moved even quicker than with the use of the tower.
Using a special aluminum foil-based adhesive tape, these signals are "masked" or programmed by the programming lens so that only certain lanes of traffic will view the indication.
The colors red, yellow and green are often used as a simple-to-understand rating system for products and processes.
Toronto, Ontario was the first city to computerize its entire traffic signal system, which it accomplished in 1963.
* Orange: continue to cross only if unable to stop safely.
As a result of this, and the penalty he also incurred, Massa finished 13th.
In the US, lane-control lights are often used to control and/or direct the flow of traffic through toll plazas and highway tunnels, such as during unusually-heavy traffic flow when more lanes may be required in one direction than in the other direction, or during a hurricane evacuation, when the lane signals for most or all lanes will show green for one direction to assist in more rapid traffic flow from the evacuation site.
These make a slow beeping sound when the pedestrian lights are red and a continuous buzzing sound when the lights are green.
The light then passes through a nearly identical lens known as an optical limiter (3M's definition of the lens itself), also known as a "programming lens", also five inches in diameter.
The words “Stop” and “Go” were in white on a green background and the lights had red and green lenses illuminated by kerosene lamps for night travelers and the arms where eight feet above ground.
The conclusion, after monitoring 3,259 vehicles at 50 intersections over a period of days around the 5 boroughs, found that almost 10% of vehicles and 15% of taxis ran the red light, amounting to nearly 400,000 red lights run every single day.
Variations used have also included a hybrid design, which had one or more 12&nbsp;inch lights along with one or more lights of  on the same light.
In Japan, tram signals are under the regular vehicle signal; however the color of the signal intended for trams is orange.
They are only on when the red light they are associated with is on.
These lights will also often have the words "no turn" displayed, or an explanatory reason why the turn is not allowed, such as "train" in the case of a rail or light rail crossing.
Los Angeles installed its first automated traffic signals in October 1920 at five locations on Broadway.
A motorist entering an intersection (even if on a green light) but unable to proceed and who gets stranded in the intersection (when traffic ahead fails to proceed), and who remains after the light turns red (thus blocking traffic from other directions) may be cited.
Aspect is a term referring to the light that faces the drivers.
In 1967, the city of Toronto was the first to use more advanced computers that were better at vehicle detection.
In some instances the stoplight traffic detector will not change the light for small vehicles such as motorcycles, scooters and particularly bicycles, because the induction loop sensor fails to detect the small vehicle.
2014-12-20 14 49 17 Horizontally-mounted traffic light at the intersection of Calhoun Street (Mercer County Route 653) and Spring Street in Trenton, New Jersey.JPG|Example of horizontally mounted traffic light in Trenton, New Jersey.
In North European countries, the tram signals feature white lights of different forms: "S" for "stop", "—" for "caution" and arrows to permit passage in a given direction.
This maneuver is commonly referred to as "occupying the intersection" or "being legally allowed to complete one's turn".
* Intersection near a grade crossing.
As urban centers become more dense and vehicles and pedestrians come into closer contact with each other, the risk of crashes increases.
This means that at busy junctions without a protected green arrow for turning traffic, one turns after the light turns red.
A second officer would direct traffic on the east end of the bridge to control the flow of people leaving London and going into Southwark.
A vehicle with sufficient mass of metal such as steel interacts with the sensor's magnetic field causing the light to change at the appropriate time.
* by police officers observing traffic, and issuing citations to motorists who violate the signal
A third type is known as a "doghouse" or "cluster head"&nbsp;– a vertical column with the two normal lights is on the right side of the signal, a vertical column with the two arrows is located on the left, and the normal red signal is in the middle above the two columns.
Signals such as the 3M High Visibility Signal and McCain Programmable Visibility signal utilize light-diffusing optics and a Fresnel lens to create the signal indication.
In some jurisdictions, including the United States and Italy, private companies have been contracted to operate traffic-related cameras and receive a portion of the resulting revenues.
These have two lights, usually mounted vertically.
For intersections with red light cameras, one extra second must be added.
When the signal flashes red, the recording will start to count down with the countdown timer.
In Canada, the white walking person is almost always used.
The twelve-light system did not become available until 1928 and another feature of the light system was that hoods were placed over the light and each lens was sand-blasted to increase daytime visibility.
This design proved very successful and was taken in to production by a number of traffic signal manufacturers through the engineering designs of Dr Mark Aston, working firstly at the SIRA Ltd in Kent, and latterly as an independent optical designer.
A traffic control signal is often justified at an intersection near a railroad crossing, in order to provide a preemption sequence to allow traffic queued up on the tracks an opportunity to clear the tracks before the train arrives.
A vertical five-light bar holds the arrows underneath the standard green light (in this arrangement, the yellow arrow is sometimes omitted, leaving only the green arrow below the solid green light, or possibly an LED based device capable of showing both green and yellow arrows within a single lamp housing).
In the Australian States of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia, the sound is produced in the same unit as the push buttons.
