Maze systems provide users many choices; however, some users may find navigation difficult.
Raised walkways include turnpikes, causeways, embankments, stepping stones, and bridges (or deckwalks).
Cycle trails built for commuting may be built to a different set of standards than pedestrian-only trails and, in some cases, may require a harder surface, fewer changes in grade and slope, increased sight visibility, and fewer sharp changes in direction.
For example, the Norwegian Mountain Touring Association maintains over 400 huts stretching across hundreds of kilometres of trails which are used by hikers in the summer and by skiers in the winter.
A particularly unusual use of the term is in the Canadian province of Alberta, which has multi-lane freeways called trails.
They exist throughout the world and the following is a description of trails in Australia:
For equestrian use, shallow fords may be preferred.
In France it is possible to cycle, rollerblade, and hike along the banks of the Canal du Midi.
In the United States agencies administering trails include the National Park Service, the US Forest Service, the Bureau of Land Management, State Park systems, County Parks, cities, private organizations such as land trusts, businesses and individual property owners.
In Canada, following the abandonment of the Prince Edward Island Railway in 1989, the government of Prince Edward Island purchased the right-of-way to the entire railway system.
This ranges from random sticks to split logs being laid across the path.
Not all towpaths are suitable for use by cyclists, but where they are, and the canal is owned by British Waterways, a permit is required.
The companion guide to this publication, the 2013 Pennsylvania Trail Design and Development Principles: Guidelines for Sustainable, Non-Motorized Trails (the “Pennsylvania Trail Design Manual”), provides a great deal of guidance and detailed information about the characteristics of the various types of trails and paths.
Urban trails are designed with connections to neighborhoods, businesses,places of employment and public transport stops.
In Scotland, a right of way is a route over which the public has been able to pass unhindered for at least 20 years.
It was initiated by the Association Grande Traversée des Alpes in Grenoble, which hosted the Via Alpina international secretariat until January 2014, when it was transferred to the International Commission for the Protection of the Alps CIPRA, in Liechtenstein.
In France alone, the trails cover approximately .
* Jogging or running paths.
A paved stretch of 50&nbsp;km (30 miles) from Toulouse to Avignonet-Lauragais and another 12&nbsp;km (7 miles) between Béziers and Portiragnes are particularly suited to cycling and rollerblading.
The concept of free access to towpaths is enshrined in the legislation which transferred responsibility for the English and Welsh canals from British Waterways to the Canal & River Trust in 2012.
Longer distance walking routes, and government-promoted long distance paths, collectively known as National Trails, are also frequently called ''ways''; as in the Pennine Way and South Downs Way.
European long distance walking paths are blazed with yellow points encircled with red.
Most of the seemingly natural rock steps on the mountain trails of the northeast United States are, in fact, the work of professional and volunteer trail crews.
In some places, like the Alps, trails are used for moving cattle and other livestock.
Certain categories of land are excluded from this presumption of open access such as railway land, airfields and private gardens.
In Scotland, the equivalent trails are called Long Distance Routes and are administered by Scottish Natural Heritage.
Trails with an easy or moderate technical complexity are generally deemed cross-country trails, while trails difficult even to experienced riders are more often dubbed all-mountain, freeride, or downhill.
Trail design parameters for these uses include trail base width and material, trail clear width, trail clear height, access to water suitable for stock (not human) use, and trail routing.
In a spoked-wheel system, linear trails connect a central trailhead with an outer loop.
Natural surface, single-track trails will require some ongoing maintenance.
A trail may be completely contained within one administration (e.g.
Urban footpaths are usually paved, may have steps, are called alleys, lanes, steps, etc., and may be named.
In France, the network is maintained by the ''Fédération Française de la Randonnée Pédestre'' (French Hiking Federation), and in Spain by the Spanish Mountain Sports Federation.
As such, much of the Trans Canada Trail development emulated the successful Rails-to-Trails initiative in the United States,  The Trail is multi-use and depending on the section may allow hikers, bicyclists, horseback riders, cross country skiers and snowmobilers.
Foreshoreway (also oceanway) is a term used in Australia for a type of greenway that provides a public right-of-way along the edge of the sea open to both walkers and cyclists.
A '''trail''' is usually a '''path''', '''track''' or unpaved lane or road, though the term is also applied, in North America, to routes along rivers, and sometimes to highways.
For example, a shared use path has a recommended one directional width of , while a bidirectional path should be significantly wider () to accommodate bidirectional traffic and users.
The number of off-road cycle trails has increased significantly, along with the popularity of mountain bikes.
Trail segregation may be supported by signage, markings, trail design and construction (especially selection of tread materials), and by separation between parallel treads.
* Sculpture gardens and open-air museums, as sculpture trails and historic interpretive trails.
Linear trails usually follow long distances.
Such urban trails or footpaths are narrow, usually paved and often between the walls of buildings.
However, if the trail is properly designed and constructed, maintenance should be limited to clearing downed trees, trimming back brush and clearing drainages.
The Countryside Agency estimated that over 10% of public paths were not yet listed on the definitive map.
To achieve a proper slope in hilly terrain a '''sidehill''' trail is excavated.
A well designed recreational mountain bike path for the exclusive use of bicycles has an average grade of less than 10%, and generally follow a contour line, rather than straight downhill.
These rules potentially greatly expand the types of vehicular devices that must be permitted on trails, shared use paths, other routes, and other areas open to the public.
Groups such as the Blueribbon Coalition advocate Treadlightly, which is the responsible use of public lands used for off-road activities.
Urban trails average ten foot in width and are surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
In such cases the soil is packed down firmly and the site is periodically checked to maintain the stability of the trail.
In the US, the term was historically used for a route into or through wild territory used by emigrants (e.g.
This type of trailway is created with the establishing a line of suitable slope across a hillside, which is then dug out by means of a mattock or similar tool.
The Appalachian Trail is a marked hiking route in the eastern United States extending between Springer Mountain, Georgia and Mount Katahdin, Maine.
Water trails (also referred to as Blueways or Paddling Trails) are marked routes on navigable waterways such as rivers, lakes, canals and coastlines for people using small non-motorized boats such as kayaks, canoes, rafts, or rowboats.
The Bicentennial National Trail (BNT) in Australia is the longest marked multi-use trail in the world, stretching 5,330 kilometres from Cooktown, Queensland, through New South Wales to Healesville, Victoria.
Some US states have laws to reduce noise generated by off-road and non-highway vehicles.
The Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 established a general presumption of access to all land in Scotland, making the existence of rights of way less important in terms of access to land in Scotland.
Trail users go to the side of the trail to avoid the mud pit, and the trail becomes widened.
In Scotland equestrians have legal access to all towpaths, and there is a campaign for similar rights in England and Wales.
There is no legal distinction between footpaths and bridleways in Scotland, as there is in England and Wales, though it is generally accepted that cyclists and horseriders may follow rights of way with suitable surfaces.
This Trail provides access to some of the wildest, most remote country in the world.
The Appalachian Trail is blazed with white rectangles, and blue is often used for side trails.
National parks, nature preserves, conservation areas and other protected wilderness areas may have trails that are restricted to pedestrians.
Off-road vehicle use on public land has been criticized by some members of the US government and environmental organizations including the Sierra Club and The Wilderness Society.
This includes Pittsburg (see Steps of Pittsburgh), Cincinnati (see Steps of Cincinnati), Seattle, and San Francisco in the United States, as well as Hong Kong, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, and Rome.
Urban pedestrian footpaths or trails are sometimes called alleys or lanes and in older cities and towns in Europe and are often what is left of a medieval street network or right-of-ways or ancient footpaths.
There are also state programs and other promotion for water trails.
This type is usually short and straight, and on steep ground can consist partially or entirely of steps.
This publication focuses on the accessibility aspects of the most commonly constructed types.
In the USA and Canada, where urban sprawl has begun to strike even the most rural communities, developers and local leaders are currently striving to make their communities more conducive to non-motorized transportation through the use of less traditional trails.
The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials recommends different widths for different types of bicycle facilities.
Off-road trails often incorporate a mix of challenging terrain, singletrack, smooth fireroads, and even paved paths.
An urban trail is a citywide network of non-motorized, multi-use pathways that are utilized by bicyclists, walkers and runners for both transportation and recreation.
Trail construction requires proper drainage.
'''See also''': List of rail trails
Some trails may be suitable for float tubing or developed in concert with motorized use.
Sustrans' flagship project is the National Cycle Network, which has created over 14,000 milesof signed cycle routes throughout the UK.
However, some ten years later British Waterways started to relax the rule that a permit was required to give access to a towpath, and began to encourage leisure usage by walkers, anglers and in some areas, cyclists.
On the other hand, the cross-slope of a bicycle trail may be significantly greater than a foot trail, and the path may be narrower in some cases.
The American Canoe Association has compiled a database of water trails in the United States.
However, mountain trails which see both significant rainfall and human traffic may require "trail hardening" efforts in order to prevent further erosion.
However, other walking paths in European countries are blazed in a variety of manners.
Cyclists using a bridleway are obliged to give way to other users on foot or horseback.
In the Republic of Ireland, the Keep Ireland Openorganization is campaigning for similar rights.
a stopping up) exists then the right of way is conclusive in law.
Because of geography steps (stairs) are the predominant form of footpath in hilly cities and towns.
The route must link two "public places", such as villages, churches or roads.
The lane for cyclists and skaters goes one-way in a counterclockwise loop.
In the United Kingdom, the term trail is in common usage.
The term trail has also been used by developers and urban planners for a variety of modern paved roads, highways, and boulevards, in these countries, and some highways continue to be officially called a trail, such as the Susquehanna Trail in Pennsylvania, a designation that varies from a two-lane road to a four-lane freeway.
Some trails are segregated for use by both equestrians and mountain bikes, or by equestrians only, or by mountain bikes only.
There are also unpaved trails used by dirt bikes and other off-road vehicles.
EuroVelo is a project of the European Cyclists' Federation (ECF).
When a trail passes across a flat area that is not wet, brush, tree limbs and undergrowth are removed to create a clear, walkable trail.
For example, bike trails are used not only on roads open to motor vehicles, but also in trail systems open to other trail users.
Northern Ireland shares the same legal system as England, including concepts about the ownership of land and public rights of way, but it has its own court structure, system of precedents and specific access legislation.
These trails are also known as "out-and-back" or "destination" trails.
In a multiple-loop system, each loop extends from a single trailhead.
In England and Wales many trails and footpaths are of ancient origin and are protected under law as rights of way.
* Gardens and designed landscapes: in private gardens and in public areas; and at park visitors centers as natural history interpretive nature trails in designed wildlife gardens.
In 1968, the United States created its National Trails System, which includes National Scenic Trails, National Historic Trails and National Recreation Trails.
The National Park Service Rivers, Trails, and Conservation Assistance Program has compiled a list of water trail resources, success stories, and statewide contacts for water trails.
The Confederation Trail was developed as a tip-to-tip walking/cycling gravel rail trail which doubles as a monitored and groomed snowmobile trail during the winter months, operated by the PEI Snowmobile Association.
They can be paved or unpaved and are popular with cyclists and walkers, and some are suitable for equestrians.
Most trails have a gravel or dirt surface suitable for walking, mountain bikes and horses.
Off-road cycling can cause soil erosion and habitat destruction if not carried out on established trails.
Timbers or rocks are also used for this purpose to creates erosion barriers.
A series of looped trails is a stacked-loop trail system.
In the early years of the 20th century, the term auto trail was used for a marked highway route, and trail is now also used to designate routes, including highway routes, designated for tourist interest like the Cabot Trail, Nova Scotia, Canada and the Quilt Trails in the US.
Rail trails or paths are shared-use paths that make use of abandoned railway corridors.
This includes the Stairway Trails in Bernal Heights, East San Francisco.
Bicycles and horses can share the same trails where the trail is wide enough with good visibility.
All trails and shared use paths—indeed, any areas open to pedestrians—that are owned or operated by a public or private entity covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act are subject to federal regulations on Other Power-Driven Mobility Devices (“OPDMDs”).
The US Department of Transportation provides standards and guidelines for traffic control, including signage and striping, for bicycle facilities.
Downhilling is particularly popular at ski resorts such as Mammoth Mountain in California or Whistler Blackcomb in British Columbia, where ski lifts are used to get bikes and riders to the top of the mountain.
The rules and regulations for a trail are written and enforced by the land management agency in charge of the trail.
They may take the form of single routes or form part of larger complexes, known as trail centres.
Apart from being great places to walk, cycle or horse ride, rail trails are linear conservation corridors protecting native plants and animals.
Within the United States National Trail Classification System, equestrian trails include simple day-use bridle paths and others built to accommodate long strings of pack animals on journeys lasting many days.
Other options are culverts, stepping stones, and shallow fords.
In the USA the 27 mile/43&nbsp;km long Cheshire Rail Trail, in New Hampshire, can be used by hikers, horseback riders, snowmobilers, cross-country skiers, cyclists, or even a dogsledders.
A linear trail goes from one point to another without connecting trails.
This creates an efficient, compact design with many route options.
To remedy the first problem, water accumulation on flat terrain, raised walkways are often built.
An important network of long distance paths in Europe the Via Alpina was created by a group of public and private organisations from the eight Alpine countries in 2000, receiving EU funding from 2001 until 2008.
The publication Universal Access Trails and Shared Use Paths: Design, Management, Ethical and Legal Considerations focuses on the accessibility aspects of the most commonly constructed types.
Other public rights of way, such as bridleways, byways, towpaths, and green lanes are also used by pedestrians.
Trail segregation, the practice of designating certain trails as having a specific preferred or exclusive use, is increasingly common and diverse.
They include: signs and route markers; maps; facilities for parking, boat ramps or docks, and places to camp and picnic.
Separation may be achieved by "natural" barriers including distance, ditching, banking, grading, and vegetation, and by "artificial" barriers including fencing, curbing, and walls.
Sometimes, a short bridge is used.
Water accumulation is particularly common in the North Country of England.
It is possible to cycle or walk the entire Canal des Deux Mers from Sète to Bordeaux.
Some of the early turnpikes in the United States were log corduroys, and these can still be found in third-world forested areas.
The creation of water bars, with or without ditching, at major points of water flow on or along the trail, and in conjunction with existing drainage channels below the trail is also a technique that is applied Another important technique that is adopted is the construction '''coweeta dips''', or drain dips, points on the trail where it falls briefly (for a meter or so) and then rises again.
* Parks: including public spaces, urban parks, neighborhood parks, linear parks, botanic gardens, arboretum, and regional parks.
With recreational trails, it is common the sticks that may be one to three inches thick and laid in place, close together.
There are many types of non-motorized, land-based recreational trails and shared use paths: hiker and pedestrian trails, mountain biking trails, equestrian trails, and multi-use trails designed for several user types.
Some skiers stay out for extended periods using tents and equipment similar to bushwalkers and hikers, whereas others take relatively short trips from ski resorts on maintained trails.
A considerable part of the Trans Canada trail are repurposed defunct rail lines donated to provincial governments by CP and CN rail rebuilt as walking trails.
A local spot or short stretch of the trail may be chronically wet.
The second problem, water erosion, is caused because trails, by their nature, tend to become drainage channels and eventually gullies when the drainage is poorly controlled.
Northern Ireland has very few public rights of way and access to land in Northern Ireland is more restricted than other parts of the UK, so that in many areas walkers can only enjoy the countryside because of the goodwill and tolerance of landowners.
In a primary-and-secondary loop system, a linear trails connect a primary loop with secondary loops.
Designated "wilderness area" trails may be segregated for non-wheeled use (hence permit backpacking and horses but exclude mountain bikes and motorized vehicles).
Last, a maze system incorporates both loops and linear trails.
These include Hadrian's Wall Path, the Pembrokeshire Coast Path, the Pennine Bridleway (bridleway), the South West Coast Path (South West Way) (the longest), and the Thames Path, and many more.
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation has established the Active Living by Design program to improve the livability of communities in part through developing trails, The Upper Valley Trails Alliance has done similar work on traditional trails, while the Somerville Community Path and related paths, are examples of urban initiatives.
There are national secretariats (hosted by public administrations or hiking associations) in each country.
In some countries, organizations maintain a network of huts for use by cross-country skiers in wintertime.
In England and Wales a National Trails system also exists of long distance footpaths, which  are administered by Natural England and the Countryside Council for Wales, statutory agencies of the UK government.
There are two paths, one for skaters and cyclists and the other for pedestrians.
This trail runs the length of the rugged Great Dividing Range through national parks, private property and alongside of wilderness areas.
A "corduroy" is a technique that is used when this area cannot be drained.
EuroVelo routes can be used for bicycle touring across the continent, as well as by local people making short journeys.
The terms bridleway, byway, restricted byway are all recognised legal terms and to a greater or lesser extent in general usage.
Footpaths can be located in different settings for various uses.
Its aim is to support sustainable development in remote mountain areas and promote the Alpine cultures and cultural exchanges.
The network makes use of towpaths on river banks and disused railway or vicinal tramway lines.
The most famous American long trails are The Appalachian National Scenic Trail, generally known as the Appalachian Trail and the Pacific Crest Trail.
In problem areas trails are established entirely on fill.
Depending on location, if the trail is properly designed, there should be no need for major rework such as grading or erosion control efforts.
In England and Wales a bridleway is a trail intended for use by equestrians, but walkers also have a right of way, and Section 30 of the Countryside Act 1968 permits the riding of bicycles on public bridleways, though the act says that it "shall not create any obligation to facilitate the use of the bridleway by cyclists".
But just because a path is not on that map does not mean that it is not a public path, as the rights may not have been recorded.
Recreational cross-country skiing is also called touring, especially in Europe.
The trail's southern terminus is on the US border with Mexico, and its northern terminus on the US–Canada border on the edge of Manning Park in British Columbia, Canada; its corridor through the US is in the states of California, Oregon, and Washington.
For long-distance trails, or trails where there is any possibility of anyone taking a wrong turn, '''blazing''' or signage is provided (the term waymarking is used in Britain).
A looped trail allows a user to end up where they started with either minimal or no repeating parts of the trail.
The Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 provides that paths that are not recorded on the definitive map by 2026 and that were in use prior to 1949 will automatically be deemed stopped-up on 1 January 2026.
The Recreational Trails Program defined as part of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 mandates that states must use a minimum of 30 percent of these funds for motorized trail uses.
They can be used for walking, cycling and horse riding.
Other French canals provide walkers "with many excellent routes, as they are always accompanied by a towpath, which makes a pleasant off-road track, and have the added virtues of flatness, shade and an abundance of villages along the way", though walking a canal can be monotonous, so that "a long trip beside a canal is better done by bicycle".
The earthen approaches are often done by cutting poles from the woods, staking parallel poles in place on the ground, then filling between them with whatever material is available to create the raised walkway.
Off-road bicycle trails are generally function-specific and most commonly waymarked along their route.
Often, trail segregation for a particular use is accompanied by prohibitions against that use on other trails within the trail system.
Third, inadequate drainage may create local mud spots.
Footpaths can be connected to form a long distance trail or way, which can be used by both day hikers and by backpackers.
Some are striped likes roads to designate two-way traffic.
Local highways authorities, in England and Wales, (usually county councils or unitary authorities) are required to maintain the definitive map of all public rights of way in their areas and these can be inspected at council offices.
Readers should use that publication as a primary resource to help evaluate which specific type of route they want to plan, design, construct, and manage for their site.
The first, and probably the most popular, is the West Highland Way, which is 95 miles (153&nbsp;km) long and was opened in 1980.
Thus the right to cycle exists even though it may be difficult to exercise on occasion, especially in winter.
Motorized trail use also remains very popular with some people.
They have noted several consequences of illegal ORV use such as pollution, trail damage, erosion, land degradation, possible species extinction, and habitat destruction which can leave hiking trails impassable.
Some areas including London are exempt from this policy, but are covered instead by the London Towpath Code of Conduct and cyclists are required to have a bell, which is rung twice when approaching pedestrians.
Looped-trail systems come in many permutations.
In Britain, most canals were owned by private companies, and the towpaths were deemed to be private, for the benefit of legitimate users of the canal.
Where necessary, new paths are created to link  parts of the network.
Stairway trails are found in a number of hilly American cities.
::Following the route of the railways, they cut through hills, under roads, over embankments and across gullies and creeks.
Some trails are single use and can only be used for walking, cycling, horse riding, snowshoeing, and cross-country skiing; others, as in the case of a bridleway in the UK, are multi-use, and can be used by walkers, cyclists and equestrians.
New trail construction by an agency must often be assessed for its environmental impact and conformance with State or Federal laws.
In the United States, this sport remains very popular.
* Disability and wheelchair accessible paths in sensory gardens and all the above settings.
Many runners also favor running on trails rather than pavement, as giving a more vigorous work-out and better developing agility skills, as well as providing a more pleasant exercise environment.
There is open access to most Forestry Commission roads and land in Great Britain for walkers, cyclists and horse riders and, since the Countryside Bill of 1968, it has become the largest provider of outdoor recreation in Britain.
The Commission works with associations involved in rambling, cycling, mountain biking and horse riding to promote the use of its land for recreation.
There is no charge for a permit, but it acts as an opportunity to inform cyclists about safe and unsafe areas to cycle.
In St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada the "Grand Concourse", is an integrated walkway system that has over  of walkways, which link every major park, river, pond, and green space in six municipalities.
For example, in California new trails must undergo reviews specified by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
