At the end of a run, the tram must be turned around via a balloon loop or some other method, to face in the opposite direction for a return trip.
The first tram for permanent service with overhead lines was the Mödling and Hinterbrühl Tram in Austria.
At crush loadings this would be even higher.
Before its decline, the BVG in Berlin operated a very large network with  of route.
During a period in the 1980s, the world's largest tram system was in Leningrad (now known as St. Petersburg) with , USSR, and was included in Guinness World Records; however Saint Petersburg's tram system has declined in size since the fall of the Soviet Union.
In North America, professional or formal documents generally use more precise alternative terms, such as ''streetcar'' or ''light rail vehicle'' (LRV).
The latter part of this route is today served by tram route 703 terminating at Gerresheim Stadtbahn station ("by the glassworks" as Grass notes, referring to the famous glass factory).
Toronto's system currently uses Canadian Light Rail Vehicles and Articulated Light Rail Vehicles, after a history of using PCCs, Peter Witt cars, and horse-drawn carriages.
A double-ended tram has an operator's cab and controls at each end of the vehicle, which allows it to easily be driven at full speed in either direction on a continuous segment of track.
Exceptions included Boston, New Orleans, Newark, Philadelphia (with a much shrunken network), Pittsburgh, San Francisco, Cleveland, Toronto and Mexico City.
In Milan, Italy, hearse trams were used from the 1880s (initially horse-drawn) to the 1920s.
At the high end are highly detailed brass models which are usually imported from Japan or Korea and can cost in excess of $500.
The chief engineer of the CSR subsidiary CSR Sifang Co Ltd., Liang Jianying, said that the company is studying how to reduce the running costs of the tram.
In Australia there were electric systems in Sydney, Newcastle, Geelong, Ballarat, Bendigo, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, Fremantle, Kalgoorlie, Leonora, Hobart and Launceston.
Tramways powered by electricity, the most common type historically, were once called '''electric street railways''' (mainly in the USA).
In Milan, Italy, the old "Ventotto" trams are considered by its inhabitants a "symbol" of the city.
One recent proposal to bring cargo tramways back into wider use was the plan by City Cargo Amsterdam to reintroduce them into the city of Amsterdam.
However, trams were widely used in urban areas before the universal adoption of electrification; other methods of powering trams are listed below under "History".
Bistro trams with buffets operated between Krefeld and Düsseldorf in Germany, while Helsinki in Finland has a pub tram.
The length of the following networks is disputed: Philadelphia trolleycar network comprise from Subway–Surface Trolley Lines with line length  or by another source  (the sum of all lines (lines 10 (), 11 (), 13 (), 34 () and 36 ()), light rail routes 101 and 102 with length  and heritage route 15 (line length ).
In contrast to other low-floor trams, the floor in the interior of ULF is at sidewalk height (about 18&nbsp;cm or 7&nbsp;inches above the road surface), which makes access to trams easy for passengers in wheelchairs or with baby carriages.
Historically, the Paris Tram System was,1 at its peak, the world's largest system, with 1,111&nbsp;km (690&nbsp;mi) of track in 1925 (according to other sources, ca.
In recent years the Melbourne system, generally recognised as one of the largest in the world, has been considerably moderrnised and expanded.
With this type, the articulation is normally suspended between carbody sections.
Toronto currently has the largest streetcar system in the Americas in terms of track length and ridership, operated by the Toronto Transit Commission.
Heritage lines exist at Auckland's MOTAT, the Wellington Tramway Museum at Queen Elizabeth Park on the Kapiti Coast, the Tramways Trust Wanganui and the Tramway Historical Society at Ferrymead in Christchurch, as well as the Christchurch Tramway Limited in the central city.
In some places, other forms of power were used to power the tram.
The horse-drawn streetcar combined the low cost, flexibility, and safety of animal power with the efficiency, smoothness, and all-weather capability of a railway.
The pilot involved two cargo trams, operating from a distribution centre and delivering to a "hub" where special electric trucks delivered the trams' small containers to their final destination.
The third largest was Chicago, with over  of track, but it was all converted to trolleybus and bus services by 21 June 1958.
After that it followed current network in Melbourne.
For safety, the cable tractors are always deployed on the downhill side of the tram vehicle.
Meanwhile, inside, Matzerath tries to rescue the half-blind Victor Weluhn (who had escaped from the siege of the Polish post office in Danzig at the beginning of the book and of the war) from his two green-hatted would-be executioners.
Virtually all known types of motive power have been utilised at some stage, in Australia.
More modern vehicles use a locomotive-style controller which incorporate a dead man's switch.
:"Henrietta Stackpole was struck with the fact that ancient Rome had been paved a good deal like New York, and even found an analogy between the deep chariot-ruts traceable in the antique street and the overjangled iron grooves which express the intensity of American life."
Another of his models was London E/1 1800, which was the only tramway exhibit in the Faraday Memorial Exhibition of 1931.
Other countries with discontinued tram systems include Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Pakistan and Vietnam.
This is specifically a modern trend.
The local rabbi explains: "In English, they call it a tram....
It initially drew current from the rails, with overhead wire being installed in 1883.
The first practical cable car line was tested in San Francisco, in 1873.
"In the wire overhead, there's electricity, we don't have a word for that either."
The 1960s marked the end of its dominance in public transportation with most major systems closed and the equipment and rails sold for scrap; however, some extensive original lines still remain in service in Hong Kong and Japan.
The English terms ''tram'' and ''tramway'' are derived from the Scots word ''tram'', referring respectively to a type of truck (goods wagon or freight railroad car) used in coal mines and the tracks on which they ran.
However, a tram system is planned for construction in Gwadar, Pakistan where construction started in late 2011.
Tram stops may be similar to bus stops in design and use, particularly in street-running sections, where in some cases other vehicles are legally required to stop clear of the tram doors.
Cable cars do have wheel brakes and track brakes, but the cable also helps restrain the car to going downhill at a constant speed.
640&nbsp;km of route length in 1930, but those five years length reduced to a minimum), before its complete destruction in the 1938.
Streetcars also once operated in cities such as Ottawa, Montreal, Quebec City, Kitchener, Hamilton, Kingston, London, Windsor, Peterborough, Regina, and Saskatoon.
This list is not exhaustive.
The first streetcars, also known as horsecars in North America, were built in the United States and developed from city stagecoach lines and omnibus lines that picked up and dropped off passengers on a regular route without the need to be pre-hired.
:&nbsp;– O that be damned for a story, Mr Dedalus said.
The first and most common had a small steam locomotive (called a tram engine in the UK) at the head of a line of one or more carriages, similar to a small train.
In March 2015, China South Rail Corporation (CSR) demonstrated the world's first hydrogen fuel cell vehicle tramcar at an assembly facility in Qingdao.
In 1958 trams in Rio de Jainero rode on () of route length, before closure the network expect Santa teresa line in 1968.
Passenger satisfaction with low-floor trams is high.
The most common device found today is the pantograph, while some older systems use trolley poles or bow collectors.
This creates undue wear on the tracks and wheels.
In many cases, these early forms of public transport developed out of industrial haulage routes or from the omnibus that first ran on public streets, using the newly invented iron or steel rail or 'tramway'.
Typically at the end of a run, the tram's operator will walk from one end of the tram to the other, and then commence the tram route in the other direction.
In the US these models are usually purchased in epoxy or wood kits and some as brass models.
Although the use of the term ''trolley'' for tram was not adopted in Europe, the term was later associated with the ''trolleybus'', a rubber-tyred vehicle running on hard pavement, which draws its power from pairs of overhead wires.
Etymologists believe that the word ''tram'' refers to the wooden beams the railway tracks were initially made of before the railroad pioneers switched to the much more wear-resistant tracks made of iron and, later, steel.
Mazerath deposits his briefcase, which contains Sister Dorotea's severed ring finger in a preserving jar, on the dashboard "where professional motorman put their lunchboxes".
Multiple functioning experimental electric trams were exhibited at the 1884 World Cotton Centennial World's Fair in New Orleans, Louisiana, but they were not deemed good enough to replace the Lamm fireless engines that then propelled the St. Charles Avenue Streetcar in that city.
Auckland has recently introduced heritage trams into the Wynyard area, near the CBD, using former Melbourne trams.
It began operating in October 1883, but was closed in 1932.
The Northern and Central areas of the City of Colombo in Sri Lanka had an electric Tram Car system (42" Gauge).
Trams are now included in the wider term "light rail", which also includes segregated systems.
Due to overall wear, the entire length of cable (typically several kilometres) would have to be replaced on a regular schedule.
Most of Central and Eastern Europe retained the majority of its tramway systems and it is here that the largest and busiest tram systems in the world are found.
parts of the London system), used twin overhead wires and poles to avoid the effects of stray currents flowing through the earth.
However, on one steep segment of track, they are assisted by cable tractors, which push the trams uphill and act as brakes for the downhill run.
In China there is a Nanjing battery Tram line and has been running since 2014.
Sydney reintroduced its tram in 1997 on a modern light rail network, while Ballarat and Bendigo retained their trams as heritage systems.
Tram systems that have their own right of way are often called light rail but this does not always hold true.
Trams using trolley-pole current collection are normally powered through a single pole, with return current earthed through the steel wheels and rails, though some systems (e.g.
It is thought that the first example of a working model tramcar in the UK built by an amateur for fun was in 1929, when Frank E. Wilson created a replica of London County Council Tramways E class car 444 in 1:16 scale, which he demonstrated at an early Model Engineer Exhibition.
Galveston Island Trolley in Texas operated diesel trams due to the city's hurricane-prone location, which would result in frequent damage to an electrical supply system.
Prior to 2000, most of these new-generation streetcar systems were heritage streetcar lines, using vintage or replica-vintage vehicles, but following the 2001 opening of the Portland Streetcar system&nbsp;– the first to use modern vehicles&nbsp;– most new US systems have been designed to use modern, low-floor cars.
The tram, which runs on a circular route around the town of Portland, uses 'dummies' (grip-cars) and saloon trailer cars formerly used on the extensive Melbourne cable tramway system and now beautifully restored.
The car also carried an electricity generator for 'lighting up the tram and also for driving the engine on steep grades and effecting a start'.
Trams built since the 1970s have had conventional high or low floors.
Before its system started to be converted to trolleybus (and later bus) in the 1930s (last tramway closed 6 July 1952), the first-generation London network had  of route in 1931.
Double decker trams still operate in Alexandria, Blackpool and Hong Kong.
In New York City some minor lines also used storage batteries.
Trams for Christchurch and Wellington built in the 1920s with an enclosed section at each end and an open-sided middle section were also known as ''boon cars'', but did not have the drop-centre.
Los Angeles also had several cable car lines, including the Second Street Cable Railroad, which operated from 1885 to 1889, and the Temple Street Cable Railway, which operated from 1886 to 1898.
Prior to the introduction of the Škoda ForCity, this carried the mechanical penalty of requiring bogies to be fixed and unable to pivot (except for less than 5 degrees in some trams) and thus reducing curve negotiation.
Substituting tram subway continues today.
Newer model trams may be up to  long and carry 510 passengers at a comfortable .
Similar systems were used elsewhere in the past, notably on the Queen Anne Counterbalance in Seattle and the Darling Street Wharf line in Sydney.
"Trolley" and variants refer to the verb ''troll'', meaning 'roll' and probably derived from Old French, and cognate uses of the word were well established for handcarts and horse drayage, as well as for nautical uses.
Generally, there were two types of steam tram.
The first Japanese tram line was inaugurated in 1895 as the Kyoto Electric Railroad.
However a large number of the old systems were closed during the mid-20th century because of such perceived drawbacks as route inflexibility and maintenance expense.
Newcastle, NSW, Australia also operated two hearse trams between 1896 and 1948.
Conventional electric trams are operated in street running and on reserved track for most of their route.
In other world regions, the first tramway systems (all horse-drawn) were:
Newer light rail lines in Toronto and Kitchener-Waterloo will be using the Flexity Freedom.
Tramway systems were well established in the Asian region at the start of the 20th century, but started a steady decline during the mid to late 1930s.
There are many boutique vendors offering limited run epoxy and wood models.
After World War Two, in both Warsaw and Wrocław, Poland, so-called trams-nurseries were in operation, collecting children from the workplaces of their parents (often tram employees).
In 1904 trams were put into operation in Hong Kong.
:- Yes, Mr Bloom said, and another thing I often thought is to have municipal funeral trams like they have in Milan, you know.
A line in Washington DC ran to Georgetown (where some of the underground cable vaults can still be seen today).
In practice, these trams can be up to  long (such as CAF Urbos 3 in Budapest, Hungary), while a regular tram has to be much shorter.
Two former passenger cars from the Melbourne system were converted and used as mobile offices within the Preston Workshops between 1969 and 1974, by personnel from Commonwealth Engineering and ASEA who were connected with the construction of Melbourne's Z Class cars.
Except it, in city is  of cable car.
:- I can't make out why the corporation doesn't run a tramline from the parkgate to the quays, Mr Bloom said.
The 15 systems utilised no less than five gauges, thus making swapping of rolling stock from system to system, a bit of a challenge.
For all these reasons, the differences between the various modes of rail transportation are often indistinct.
An articulated tram may be low-floor variety or high (regular) floor variety.
The first mechanical trams were powered by steam.
All three often run in tandem and there are usually multiple meal sittings.
Together with likeminded friends, Frank Wilson went on to found the Tramway & Light Railway Society in 1938, establishing tramway modelling as a hobby.
Model trams are popular in HO scale (1:87) and O scale (1:48 in the US and generally 1:43,5 and 1:45 in Europe and Asia).
The cable had to be disconnected ("dropped") at designated locations to allow the cars to coast by inertia, for example when crossing another cable line.
In Yiddish, we don't have a word for it."
In Dresden, Germany, in 1901 an elevated suspended cable car following the ''Eugen Langen one-railed floating tram system'' started operating.
*  In ''Funeral in Berlin'' the protagonist approaches Checkpoint Charlie driving "across the tram tracks of Zimmerstrasse that bump you into a world where 'communist' is not a dirty word".
* South America, 1858 - SANTIAGO, Chile;
Many systems have passenger carrying vehicles with all-over advertising on the exterior and/or the interior.
* Oceania, 1860 - SYDNEY, Australia;
Trams were traditionally operated with separate levers for applying power and brakes.
This allows them to load passengers, including those in wheelchairs, directly from low-rise platforms that are not much more than raised footpaths/sidewalks.
San Francisco's Muni Metro system is the largest surviving streetcar system in the United States, and has even revived previously closed streetcar lines such as the F Market & Wharves heritage streetcar line.
A rather obsolete system for power supply is conduit current collection.
Wouldn't it be more decent than galloping two abreast?
Tram vehicles are usually lighter and shorter than conventional :trains and rapid transit trains, but the size of trams (particularly light rail vehicles) is rapidly increasing.
The German firm Hödl and the Austrian Halling specialize in 1:87 scale.
In the US, one of the best resources for model tram enthusiasts is the East Penn Traction Club of Philadelphia  and Trolleyville a website of the Southern California Traction Club.
* Continental Europe, 1839 - MONTBRISON to MONTROND, France;
Steam tramways also were used on the suburban tramway lines around Milan and Padua; the last ''Gamba de Legn'' ("Peg-Leg") tramway ran on the Milan-Magenta-Castano Primo route in late 1958.
Additional funeral stations were located at Piazza Firenze and at Porta Romana.
The same can be said of trams in Melbourne in general, but particularly the iconic W class.
Siemens later designed his own method of current collection, from an overhead wire, called the bow collector.
In a trend started in the 1980s, some American cities have brought back streetcars, examples of these being Memphis, Portland, Tampa, Little Rock, Seattle and Dallas.
* In his fictionalised but autobiographical ''Memoirs of an Infantry Officer'', published in 1930, Siegfried Sassoon's narrator ruminates from his hospital bed in Denmark Hill, London, in 1917 that "Even the screech and rumble of electric trams was a friendly sound; trams meant safety; the troops in the trenches thought about trams with affection."
In the last chapter the novel's hero Oskar Matzerath and his friend Gottfried von Vittlar steal a tram late at night from outside Unterrath depot on the northern edge of Düsseldorf.
The most notable system to adopt such trams was in Paris.
Systems with such steam trams included Christchurch, New Zealand; Sydney, Australia; other city systems in New South Wales; Munich, Germany (from August 1883 on), British India (Pakistan) (from 1885) and the Dublin & Blessington Steam Tramway in Ireland.
Most systems had cars that were converted to specific uses on the system, other than simply the carriage of passengers.
In Australia, there were horse-drawn lines or systems in: Adelaide, S.A.; Ballarat, Victoria; Brisbane, Queensland; Gawler, S.A.; Perth, W.A.
O scale trams are also very popular among tram modellers because the increased size allows for more detail and easier crafting of overhead wiring.
Belgian vicinal tramway routes were used to haul agricultural produce, timber and coal from Blégny colliery while several of the US interurbans carried freight.
It was introduced due to the wartime shortage of automotive fuel.
In India trams still operate in Calcutta.
Such a setup is operated as if it were a double-ended tram, except that the operator must exit one vehicle and enter the other, when reversing at the end of the run.
Next networks with disputed route length are Milan () or , Düsseldorf Stadtbahn () or /streetcars  or , The Hague () or by other sources , Strasbourg () or , Kolkata () or , Nizhny Novgorod (formerly Gorky) () or .
But Matzerath drums, Weluhn sings, and together they conjure up the Polish cavalry, who spirit both victim and executioners away.
Though these two systems differ in their operation, their equipment is much the same.
Many of these run on  gauge track, which is correct for the representation of  (standard gauge) in HO scale as in US and Japan, but incorrect in 4&nbsp;mm (1:76.2) scale, as it represents .
These mobile nurseries either carried the children around the system or delivered them to the nursery school run by transport company.
The trial was successful, releasing an intended investment of €100&nbsp;million in a fleet of 52 cargo trams distributing from four peripheral "cross docks" to 15 inner-city hubs by 2012.
Nevertheless, there had been tramways ranging from large, comprehensive systems to single lines, in Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin, Gisborne, Invercargill, Napier, New Plymouth, Greymouth, Westport, Hokitika, Ross, Brighton, Charleston, Kamiere and Kamara.
In Australia, three different "Freight Cars" operated in Melbourne between 1927 and 1977 and the city of Kislovodsk in Russia had a freight-only tram system consisting of one line which was used exclusively to deliver bottled Narzan mineral water to the railway station.
Next, San Francisco light rail and streetcars have route length  or .
These electric buses, which use twin trolley poles, are also called ''trackless trolleys'' (particularly in the northeastern US), or sometimes simply ''trolleys'' (in the UK, as well as in Seattle and Vancouver).
However, research on the subject was carried out for an article in the October 2011 edition of "The Times", the historical journal of the Australian Association of Timetable Collectors, now the Australian Timetable Association.
Ljubljana introduced its tram system in 1901&nbsp;– it closed in 1958.
As from March 2014, the Sydney line was extended to Dulwich Hill, with a further major line planned from Circular Quay to the Sydney south-eastern suburbs.
In a surreal journey, von Vittlar drives the tram through the night, south to Flingern and Haniel and then east to the suburb of Gerresheim.
The route length is .
French-designed steam trams also operated in Rockhampton, in the Australian state of Queensland between 1909 and 1939.
The second city to operate cable trams was Dunedin in New Zealand, from 1881 to 1957.
An unusual feature of New Zealand's trams was the diversity of gauges.
In the US, Bachmann Industries is a mass supplier of HO streetcars and kits.
A widely held belief holds the word to derive from the ''troller'' (said to derive from the words ''traveler'' and ''roller''), a four-wheeled device that was dragged along dual overhead wires by a cable that connected the troller to the top of the car and collected electrical power from the overhead wires; this portmanteau derivation is, however, most likely folk etymology.
The Sydney tram network, before it was closed 25 February 1961, had  of route, and was thus the largest in Australia.
The Ultra Low Floor or (ULF) tram is a type of low-floor tram operating in Vienna, Austria as of 1997 and in Oradea, Romania, with the lowest floor-height of any such vehicle.
These trams were an animal railway, usually using teams of horses and sometimes mules to haul the cars, usually two as a team.
The next largest system appears to have been , in Buenos Aires before the 19 February 1963.
Cable cars operated on Highgate Hill in North London and Kennington to Brixton Hill In South London.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, both cities built and expanded new light rail systems.
Today, most trams use electrical power, usually fed by an overhead pantograph; in some cases by a sliding shoe on a third rail, trolley pole or bow collector.
Budapest established its tramway system in 1887, and its ring line has grown to be the busiest tram line in Europe, with a tram running every 60 seconds at rush hour (however Istanbul's line T1, with a minimum headway of two minutes, probably carries more passengers&nbsp;– 265,000 per day).
Today, trams can be found in Melbourne (by length, the world's largest system), and to a lesser extent, Adelaide; all other major cities having largely dismantled their networks by the 1970s.
This was intended to make passenger access easier, by reducing the number of steps required to reach the inside of the vehicle.
This was achieved by a member of the crew swinging the pole through 180 degrees (if there was only one pole) or lowering one pole and raising the other if there were two.
When electrification came, Americans began to speak of ''trolleycars'' or later, ''trolleys''.
The troller design frequently fell off the wires, and was soon replaced by other more reliable devices, the trolley pole and notably the bow collector.
In most North American cities, streetcar lines were largely torn up in the mid-20th century for a variety of financial, technological and social reasons.
Some traditional tram systems did however survive and remain operating much as when first built over a century ago.
Performance in steep terrain partially explains the survival of cable cars in San Francisco.
This system commenced operations about 1900 and was discontinued by 1960.
Occasionally other animals were put to use, or humans in emergencies.
Low-floor trams are now running in many cities around the world, including Adelaide, Amsterdam, Bratislava, Dublin, Gold Coast, Helsinki, Hiroshima, Houston, Istanbul, Melbourne, Milan, Prague, Riga, Strasbourg, Sydney, Vienna, Zagreb and Zürich.
In addition to Dresden, the cities of Vienna and Zürich currently use trams as mobile recycling depots.
Conventional diesel tourist buses decorated to look like streetcars are sometimes called ''trolleys'' in the US (tourist trolley).
The tram declined in popularity through the remaining years of the 1930s and during the 1960s many of the remaining operational tramways were shut down and dismantled.
Systems which have or have had restaurant trams include Adelaide, Bendigo and Melbourne, in Australia; Brussels in Belgium; The Hague in the Netherlands; Christchurch in New Zealand; Milan, Rome and Turin in Italy; Moscow, Russia; Almaty, Kazakhstan  and Zurich, Switzerland.
This satisfies requirements to provide access to disabled passengers without using expensive wheelchair lifts, while at the same time making boarding faster and easier for other passengers.
A third system, actually two separate cable lines with a shared power station in the middle, operates from the Welsh town of Llandudno up to the top of the Great Orme hill in North Wales, UK.
Frankfurt, Germany has a tourist circle line called "Ebbelwei-Express", in which the traditional local drink "Apfelwein" (locally called "Ebbelwei", a type of hard cider) is served.
The first regular electric tram service using pantographs or trolley poles, the Gross-Lichterfelde Tramway, was put into service in Lichterfelde, then a suburb of Berlin, (now part of the southwestern Berlin city district of Steglitz-Zehlendorf), by Siemens & Halske AG (company founder Werner von Siemens), in May 1881.
In the spring of 2007 the city piloted this cargo tram operation, which among its aims aimed to reduce particulate pollution in the city by 20% by halving the number of lorries (5,000) unloading in the inner city during the permitted timeframe from 07:00 till 10:30.
A more ecological solution is to embed tracks into grass turf.
Bookings often close months in advance.
