Historically, one reason some people preferred ''transsexual'' to ''transgender'' is that the medical community in the 1950s through the 1980s encouraged a distinction between the terms that would only allow the former access to medical treatment.
Their website provides information and resources on legislation, case law, employer and college policies and other resources.They also work with the Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders (GLAD) in New England.
Christine Jorgensen was a transgender woman who received considerable attention in American mass media in the 1950s.
By contrast, metoidioplasty, which is more popular, is significantly less expensive and has far better sexual results.
"Coronation Street" once had a transsexual woman named Hayley, who was Harold in her childhood.
In the 1970s on ''The Jeffersons'', George's Navy buddy Eddie shows up as Edie and is eventually accepted by George.
The current diagnosis for transsexual people who present themselves for medical treatment is gender dysphoria (leaving out those who have sexual identity disorders without gender concerns).
In the United States National Transgender Discrimination Survey, 44% of respondents reported not getting a job they applied for because of being transgender.
In these cases, people who change their gender are usually required to live as members of their target gender for at least one year prior to genital surgery, gaining real-life experience, which is sometimes called the "real-life test" (RLT).
Other representations of transgender women appeared in mainstream media in the 1950s and 1960s, such as Delisa Newton, Charlotte McLeod, Tamara Rees, and Marta Olmos Ramiro, but Jorgensen received the most attention.
Thomas Harris's ''Silence of the Lambs'' included a serial killer who considered himself a transsexual.
Psychologist Rachel Ann Heath writes, "The terms homosexual and heterosexual are awkward, especially when the former is used with, or instead of, gay and lesbian.
Like other trans people, transsexual people prefer to be referred to by the gender pronouns and terms associated with their gender identity.
Significant heterogeneity was observed in most analyses.
The ICD-10 incorporates ''transsexualism'', ''dual role transvestism,'' and ''gender identity disorder of childhood'' into its gender identity disorder category.
It featured six men wooing 21-year-old Mexican model Miriam without revealing that she was a pre-operative trans woman until the final episode.
''Southern Comfort'' is a 2001 documentary by filmmaker Katie Davis, which follows the final months of the life of Robert Eads, a female-to-male transsexual living in Georgia.
Medical treatment for transsexual and transgender people is available in most Western countries.
Legal needs such as a change of sex on legal documents, and medical needs, such as sex reassignment surgery, are usually difficult to obtain without a doctor or therapist's approval.
Sexologist Charles Allen Moser is likewise critical of the terminology.
Miss Wenzel was the first transgender woman to compete in a Miss Universe Organization pageant since officials disqualified 23-year-old Miss Canada Jenna Talackova the previous year after learning she was transgender.
Transgender people who have been fired due to bias are more than 34 times likely than members of the general population to attempt suicide.
Within the US, some states allow amendments or complete replacement of the original birth certificates.
What would be the situation after corrective surgery has been performed and the sex anatomy now resembles that of a woman?
Their psychological sex, that is to say, the mind, is female."
54% of trans women and 50% of trans men report having been harassed in the workplace.
They do this by connecting media outlets with members of the transsexual community throughout the UK in order to foster a greater sensitivity toward this group of people.
The entire process of switching from one physical sex and social gender presentation to another is often referred to as transitioning, and usually takes several years.
Jenna Talackova, the 23-year-old woman who forced Donald Trump and his Miss Universe Canada pageant to end its ban on transgender contestants, competed in the pageant on May 19, 2012 in Toronto.
Jorgensen was a former G.I.
A 2010 meta-study, based on 28 previous long-term studies of transsexual men and women, found that the overall psychological functioning of transsexual people after transition was similar to that of the general population and significantly better than that of untreated transsexual people.
Benjamin suggested that moderate intensity male to female transsexual people may benefit from estrogen medication as a "substitute for or preliminary to operation."
This is especially so in the case of trans men, many of whom are dissatisfied with the current state of phalloplasty, which is typically very expensive, not covered by health insurance, and commonly does not achieve desired results.
36% of trans women reported losing a job due to discrimination compared to 19% of trans men.
In fall 2005, the Sundance Channel aired a documentary series known as ''TransGeneration''.
For example, not only does phalloplasty not result in a completely natural erection, it may not allow for an erection at all, and its results commonly lack penile sexual sensitivity; in other cases, however, phalloplasty results are satisfying for trans men.
It also works to find information regarding the specific issues faced by intersex and transsexual individuals who are victimized.
Another reason for objecting to the term ''transsexual'' is the concern that it implies something to do with sexuality, when it is actually about gender identity.
In many places, it is not possible to change birth records or other legal designations of sex, although changes are occurring.
After initially being frightened, he eventually forms sexual attraction to his friend, but is scorned, as he is 'not her type'.
198724, Coleman and Bockting, 198825, Blanchard, 198926).
Openly transsexual people can have difficulty maintaining employment.
Sociomedical scientist Rebecca Jordan-Young challenges researchers like Simon LeVay, J. Michael Bailey, and Martin Lalumiere, who she says "have completely failed to appreciate the implications of alternative ways of framing sexual orientation."
The documentary won several awards, including the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival, First Prize at the Seattle International Film Festival, and the Special Audience Award at the Berlin International Film Festival.
Others may find balance at a mid-point during the process, regardless of whether or not they are binary-identified.
The word ''transsexual'' is most often used as an adjective rather than a noun&nbsp;– a "transsexual person" rather than simply "a transsexual".
Any attempt to classify them may not only cause confusion but arouse offense among the affected subjects.
A study of Swedes estimated a ratio of 1.4:1 trans women to trans men for those requesting sex reassignment surgery and a ratio of 1:1 for those who proceeded.
In 1923, Hirschfeld introduced the (German) term "Transsexualismus", after which David Oliver Cauldwell introduced "transsexualism" and "transsexual" to English in 1949 and 1950.
''Hit & Miss'' is a drama about Mia, played by ''Chloë Sevigny'', a preop transsexual woman who works as a contract killer and discovers she fathered a son.
Around the same time as Benjamin's book, in 1965, the term ''transgender'' was coined by John Oliven.
After 1967 Benjamin abandoned his early terminology and adopted that of "gender identity."
Transexuality was included for the first time in the DSM-III in 1980 and again in the DSM-III-R in 1987, where it was located under ''Disorders Usually First Evident in Infancy, Childhood or Adolescence''.
After an initial psychological evaluation, trans men and trans women may begin medical treatment, starting with hormone replacement therapy or hormone blockers.
In 1930, Hirschfeld supervised the second genital reassignment surgery to be reported in detail in a peer-reviewed journal, that of Lili Elbe of Denmark.
Other stresses that transsexual people face in the workplace are being fearful of coworkers negatively responding to their transition, and losing job experience under a previous name—even deciding which rest room to use can prove challenging.
''Survivor Project'' is a non-profit organization founded in 1997 that is devoted to assisting intersex and transsexual survivors of domestic and sexual violence.
Not all transsexual people undergo a physical transition.
A 2008 study of the number of New Zealand passport holders who changed the sex on their passport estimated that 1:3,639 birth-assigned males and 1:22,714 birth-assigned females were transsexual.
Critics argue that the term "homosexual transsexual" is "heterosexist", "archaic", and demeaning because it labels people by sex assigned at birth instead of their gender identity.
'', David Spade's character meets up with his childhood male friend, who has transitioned to living as a woman.
Transsexual people are sometimes referred to with directional terms, such as "female-to-male" for a transsexual man, abbreviated to "F2M", "FTM", and "F to M", or "male-to-female" for a transsexual woman, abbreviated "M2F", "MTF" and "M to F".
In such cases, while defining sexual attraction, it is best to focus on the object of their attraction rather than on the sex or gender of the subject.
According to Julia Serano, deliberate mis-gendering of transsexual people is "an arrogant attempt to belittle and humiliate trans people"
Eads was diagnosed with ovarian cancer and rejected for treatment by over two dozen doctors due to his transsexuality.
Many transsexual people choose the language of how they refer to their sexual orientation based on their gender identity, not their birth assigned sex, though some transsexual people still find identification with a physical-sex-based community: many trans men, for instance, are involved with lesbian communities.
Sexologist John Bancroft also recently expressed regret for having used this terminology, which was standard when he used it, to refer to transsexual women.
...it seems evident that the question "Is the transsexual homosexual?"
Male-to-female transsexualism has sometimes been called "Harry Benjamin's syndrome" after the endocrinologist who pioneered the study of dysphoria.
Although ''Better Than Chocolate'' is primarily about the romance of two lesbians, a subplot in the 1999 Canadian film has Judy (Peter Outerbridge), a trans woman with a crush on Frances (Ann-Marie MacDonald), the owner of a lesbian bookstore.
The National Transgender Advocacy Coalition is a lobbying organization in the United States dedicated to preserving the civil rights of transsexual individuals.
Of studies assessing self-reported transgender identity, prevalence was 871 (95% CI = 519–1,224); however, this result was influenced by a single outlier study.
This assessment is usually accompanied by counseling on issues of adjustment to the desired gender role, effects and risks of medical treatments, and sometimes also by psychological therapy.
These labels thereby ignore the individual’s personal sense of gender identity taking precedence over biological sex, rather than the other way around."
A presentation at the LGBT Health Summit in Bristol, UK, based upon figures from a number of reputable European and UK sources, shows that this population is increasing rapidly (14% per year) and that the mean age of transition is actually rising.
must be answered "yes" and " no."
Family members and friends who may be confused about pronoun usage or the definitions of sex are commonly instructed in proper pronoun usage, either by the transsexual person or by professionals or other persons familiar with pronoun usage as it relates to transsexual people.
So a gynephilic man is a man who likes women, that is, a heterosexual man, whereas an androphilic man is a man who likes men, that is, a gay man.
"Yes," if pedantry and technicalities prevail.
Gregory Hemingway).
Sometimes transsexual people have to correct their friends and family members many times before they begin to use the transsexual person's desired pronouns consistently.
The most recent (2016) systematic review of prevalence, leading to a meta-analysis of 27 studies, found estimates per 100,000 population of 9.2 (95% CI = 4.9–13.6) for surgical or hormonal gender affirmation therapy and 6.8 (95% CI = 4.6–9.1) for transgender-related diagnoses.
Many transsexual people, including binary-identified transsexual people, do not undergo genital surgery, because they are comfortable with their own genitals, or because they are concerned about nerve damage and the potential loss of sexual pleasure, including orgasm.
An increasing number of companies are including "gender identity and expression" in their non-discrimination policies.
This change was made to reflect the consensus view by members of the APA that transsexuality is not in and of itself a disorder and that transsexual people should not be stigmatized unnecessarily.
Many sources, including some supporters of the typology, criticize this choice of wording as confusing and degrading.
that went to Denmark to receive sex reassignment surgery.
Her story was sensationalized, but received positively.
The trans woman victim, Wendy, was played by Sarah Buxton, a cisgender woman.
Psychiatrist Anil Aggrawal explains why the terms are useful in a glossary: Androphilia – The romantic and/or sexual attraction to adult males.
Bagemihl goes on to take issue with the way this terminology makes it easy to claim transsexuals are really homosexual males seeking to escape from stigma.
Laws regarding changes to the legal status of transsexual people are different from country to country.
Other self-identified transsexual people state that those who do not seek sex reassignment surgery (SRS) are fundamentally different from those who do, and that the two have different concerns, but this view is controversial, and others argue that merely having some medical procedures does not have such far-reaching consequences as to put those who have them and those who have not (e.g.
The film ''Boys Don't Cry'' chronicles the case of Brandon Teena, a transsexual man who was raped and murdered after his status was discovered.
Empowering survivors and allowing them to participate in anti-violence activism is one major philosophy of the organization.
''Ma Vie en Rose'' portrays a six-year-old child who is gender variant.
The European Union provides employment protection as part of gender discrimination protections following the European Court of Justice decisions in ''P v S and Cornwall County Council''.
There are examples of people having been denied medical treatment upon discovery of their trans status, whether it was revealed by the patient or inadvertently discovered by the doctors.
because they cannot afford them) into such distinctive categories.
In ''Just Shoot Me!
In the US, the DSM-IV (1994) says that roughly 1 in 30,000 assigned males and 1 in 100,000 assigned females seek sex reassignment surgery.
Because of this, some transsexual people feel coerced into affirming outdated concepts of gender to overcome simple legal and medical hurdles (Brown 107).
The TLPI brings experts together to work on law and policy initiatives designed to advance transgender equality.
It also strives to provide personal and educational resources for individuals struggling with issues related to transsexuality and those close to them.
Leavitt and Berger stated in 1990 that "The homosexual transsexual label is both confusing and controversial among males seeking sex reassignment.
Calpernia Addams has appeared in numerous movies and television shows, including the 2005 movie ''Transamerica'', in which Felicity Huffman portrays a transsexual woman.
''Without a Trace'' and ''CSI: Crime Scene Investigation'' have had episodes dealing with violence against transsexual characters.
Gender dysphoria is not excluded.
Its goal is to allow transsexual employees to work productively without feeling as if they must hide an essential part of themselves.
Films depicting transgender issues include: ''Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean'', ''The World According to Garp'', ''The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert'', ''All About My Mother'' and ''The Crying Game''.
The Project provides presentations, workshops, and consultation materials to many communities and universities across the United States.
In February 2006, Logo aired ''Beautiful Daughters'', a documentary film about the first all-trans cast of ''The Vagina Monologues'', which included Addams, Lynn Conway, Andrea James, and Leslie Townsend.
A 2009 review of Medline literature suggests the total rate of patients expressing feelings of doubt or regret is estimated to be as high as 8%.
Some people posit that transsexualism is a physical condition, not a psychological issue, and assert that sex reassignment therapy should be given on request.
In an episode of ''Becker'' Dr. Becker gets an out-of-town visit from an old friend who turns out to have undergone SRS, it plays out very similar to the situations in ''Just Shoot Me!''.
However, a modern, pan-Indian status known as Two-Spirit has emerged among LGBT Natives in recent years.
In a 1980s episode of ''The Love Boat'', McKenzie Phillips portrays a trans woman who is eventually accepted as a friend by her old high school classmate, series regular Fred Grandy.
Norman Haire reported that in 1921, Dora R of Germany began a surgical transition, under the care of Magnus Hirschfeld, which ended in 1930 with a successful genital reassignment surgery.
Similarly, the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH), and many transsexual people, have recommended the removal of transsexualism from the mental health chapter of the upcoming ICD, ICD-11 (due to be released in 2017).
The SOC are intended as guidelines, not inflexible rules, and are intended to ensure that clients are properly informed and in sound psychological health, and to discourage people from transitioning based on unrealistic expectations.
California's anti-discrimination laws protect transsexual persons in the workplace and specifically prohibit employers from terminating or refusing to hire a person based on their transsexuality.
Their website includes articles about being young and transgender, both personal accounts and scientific articles that are intended to help transgender youth become more informed and comfortable with their sexuality and gender.
Jurisdictions allowing changes to birth records generally allow trans people to marry members of the opposite sex to their gender identity and to adopt children.
They argue that at least some mental health professionals are being insensitive by labelling transsexualism as "a disease", rather than the inborn trait which those who have it believe it to be.
In the novel, it is noted that the character is not actually a transsexual; this distinction is made only briefly in the film.
Some find reasons not to; for example, the expense of surgery, the risk of medical complications, or medical conditions which make the use of hormones or surgery dangerous.
Olyslager and Conway also argue that the US population of assigned males having already undergone reassignment surgery by the top three US SRS surgeons alone is enough to account for the entire transsexual population implied by the 1:10,000 prevalence number, yet this excludes all other US SRS surgeons, surgeons in countries such as Thailand, Canada, and others, and the high proportion of transsexual people who have not yet sought treatment, suggesting that a prevalance of 1:10,000 is too low.
Finding employment can be especially challenging for those in mid-transition.
Jurisdictions which prohibit same sex marriage often require pre-transition marriages to be ended before they will issue an amended birth certificate.
Some people have had SRS but do not meet the above definition of transsexual (e.g.
Brown and Rounsley noted that "some transsexual people acquiesce to legal and medical expectations in order to gain rights granted through the medical/psychological hierarchy."
It is dedicated to engaging in effective advocacy for transgender people in our society.
Transsexual people must decide whether to transition on-the-job, or to find a new job when they make their social transition.
This includes addressing such issues as transsexual individuals being excluded from employer health care on the basis of their transsexuality.
Trans*topia is section of Youth Resource (a project of Advocates for Youth, a nonprofit organization located in Washington D.C.) designed for the needs of transsexual youth.
Estelle Asmodelle’s book documented her struggle to change the Australian birth certificate and passport laws, although there are other individuals who have been instrumental in changing laws and thus attaining more acceptance for transsexual people in general.
Though no direct studies on the prevalence of GID have been done, a variety of clinical papers published in the past 20 years provide estimates ranging from 1:7,400 to 1:42,000 in assigned males and 1:30,040 to 1:104,000 in assigned females.
When the main character is conflicted about falling in love with a "woman who is also a man", Guitar Wolf tells him "Love knows no race, nationality or gender!"
Benjamin, Leavitt, and Berger have all used the term in their own work.
The ''Renaissance Education Association'' is a non-profit organization founded in Pennsylvania that is dedicated to providing education and social support regarding transgender issues.
The winner of the 2004 pageant was a woman named Mimi Marks.
Since homosexual, gay, and lesbian are often associated with bigotry and exclusion in many societies, the emphasis on sexual affiliation is both appropriate and socially just."
Cauldwell appears to be the first to use the term to refer to those who desired a change of physiological sex.
It began in Virginia in 1999 and held its first lobbying event in 2001.
Olyslager and Conway presented a paper at the WPATH 20th International Symposium (2007) arguing that the data from their own and other studies actually imply much higher prevalence, with minimum lower bounds of 1:4,500 male-to-female transsexual people and 1:8,000 female-to-male transsexual people for a number of countries worldwide.
In a 2001 study of 232 MTF patients who underwent GRS with Dr. Toby Meltzer, none of the patients reported complete regret and only 6% reported partial or occasional regrets.
Estimates of the prevalence of transgender people are highly dependent on the specific case definitions used in the studies, with prevalence rates varying by orders of magnitude.
This includes providing educational programs, support groups, and resources to community care providers.
"No" if reason and common sense are applied and if the respective patient is treated as an individual and not as a rubber stamp.
The project ''Remembering Our Dead'', founded by Gwendolyn Ann Smith, archives numerous cases of transsexual and transgender people being murdered.
To obtain sex reassignment therapy, transsexual people are generally required to undergo a psychological evaluation and receive a diagnosis of gender identity disorder in accordance with the Standards of Care (SOC) as published by the World Professional Association for Transgender Health.
For completeness, a lesbian is a gynephilic woman, a woman who likes other women.
They estimate the number of post-op women in the US to be 32,000 and obtain a figure of 1:2500 male-to-female transsexual people.
Benjamin gave certifying letters to his MTF transsexual patients that stated "Their anatomical sex, that is to say, the body, is male.
Health-practitioner manuals, professional journalistic style guides, and LGBT advocacy groups advise the adoption by others of the name and pronouns identified by the person in question, including present references to the transgender or transsexual person's past.
Beyond Benjamin's work, which focused on male-to-female transsexual people, there are cases of the female to male transsexual, for whom genital surgery may not be practical.
Biologist Bruce Bagemihl writes "..the point of reference for "heterosexual" or "homosexual" orientation in this nomenclature is solely the individual's genetic sex prior to reassignment (see for example, Blanchard et al.
All About Trans is an organization in the UK whose goal is to influence and improve media professionals' understanding and portrayal of transsexual people.
Gynephilic transsexed woman refers to a woman of transsexual background whose sexual preference is for women.
Some transsexual people live heterosexual lifestyles (see heteronormative), while some identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
Those who are writing and researching in this area would do well to adopt his clear and concise vocabulary."
It has no paid employees, but consists of a board of experienced lobbyists and activists.
Author Helen Boyd agrees, writing, "It would be much more accurate to define sexual orientation as either "androphilic" (loving men) and "gynephilic" (loving women) instead."
Is the "new woman" still a homosexual man?
In many countries, laws provide protection from workplace discrimination based on gender identity or gender expression, including masculine women and feminine men.
However, transsexual and transgender people challenge the "normative" gender roles of many cultures and often face considerable hatred and prejudice.
They further compare the annual incidences of SRS and male birth in the U.S. to obtain a figure of 1:1000 MTF transsexual people and suggest a prevalence of 1:500 extrapolated from the rising rates of SRS in the US and a "common sense" estimate of the number of undiagnosed transsexual people.
Psychologist Stephen T. Wegener writes,  "Langevin makes several concrete suggestions regarding the language used to describe sexual anomalies.
The pageant accepted pre-operation and post-operation trans women, but required proof of their gender at birth.
An issue reported by some is the inability to find sexual partners.
Other people do not desire SRS although they meet the other element's of Benjamin's definition of a "true transsexual".
In the United States, November 20 has been set aside as the "Day of Remembrance" for all murdered transgender people.
Candis Cayne, a transsexual actress, appeared in ''CSI: NY'' as a transsexual character.
Transsexual people desire to establish a permanent gender role as a member of the gender with which they identify, and many transsexual people pursue medical interventions as part of the process of expressing their gender.
The term ''transgender'' is now more common, and many transgender people prefer the designation ''transgender'' and reject ''transsexual''.
Transsexualism appears in the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD, currently in its tenth edition).
Because the Harry Benjamin Standards of Care requires one-year of real life experience prior to SRS, some feel this creates a Catch 22 situation which makes it difficult for trans people to remain employed or obtain SRS.
Transgender At Work (TAW) is an organization with a focus on addressing issues in the workplace for transsexual individuals.
"Transsexualism" was replaced in the DSM-IV by "gender identity disorder in adolescents and adults".
A number of Native American and First Nations cultures have traditional social and ceremonial roles for individuals who do not fit into the usual roles for males and females in that culture.
The term ''transsexual'', however, continues to be used, and some people who pursue medical assistance (for example, sex reassignment surgery) to change their sexual characteristics to match their gender identity prefer the designation ''transsexual'' and reject ''transgender''.
From 2007 to 2008, she also portrayed a transsexual character (this time recurring) in the ABC series ''Dirty Sexy Money''.
Benjamin went on to popularize the term in his 1966 book, ''The Transsexual Phenomenon'', in which he described transsexual people on a scale (later called the "Benjamin scale") of three levels of intensity: "Transsexual (nonsurgical)", "Transsexual (moderate intensity)", and "Transsexual (high intensity)".
However, employment discrimination against trans people is rampant and many of them are fired when they come out or are involuntarily outed at work.
Some jurisdictions allow an individual to change their name, and sometimes, their legal gender, to reflect their gender identity.
Stealthy transsexual people choose not to disclose their past for numerous reasons, including fear of discrimination and fear of physical violence.
Alternatively, I use gynephilic and androphilic to refer to sexual preference for women and men, respectively.
Use of ''androphilia'' and ''gynephilia'' was proposed and popularized by psychologist Ron Langevin in the 1980s.
The term, along with gynephilia, is needed to overcome immense difficulties in characterizing the sexual orientation of transmen and transwomen.
The ''Transgender Law and Policy Institute (TLPI)'' was founded by Paisley Currah, Associate Professor of Political Science at Brooklyn College.
Transsexual individuals may undergo some, all, or none of the medical procedures available, depending on personal feelings, health, income, and other considerations.
The film ''Wild Zero'' features Kwancharu Shitichai, a transsexual Thai actor.
Before transsexual people were depicted in popular movies and television shows, Aleshia Brevard—a transsexual whose surgery took place in 1962—was actively working as an actress and model in Hollywood and New York throughout the 1960s and '70s.
He says that he now tries to choose his words more sensitively.
With the DSM-5, transsexualism was removed as a diagnosis, and a diagnosis of gender dysphoria was created in its place.
This series focused on four transsexual college students, including two trans women and two trans men, in various stages of transition.
Both "transsexualism" and "gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairments" are specifically excluded from coverage under the Americans with Disabilities Act Section 12211.
Unless homosexual and heterosexual are more readily understood terms in a given context, this more precise terminology will be used throughout the book.
Principle 18 of The Yogyakarta Principles, a document of international human rights law, opposes such diagnosis as mental illness as medical abuse.
Transsexual people have also been depicted in popular television shows.
