In the creation story in the Bible, the tree of life and the knowledge of good and evil was planted by God in the Garden of Eden.
In some trees such as the pine (''Pinus'' species) the bark exudes sticky resin which deters attackers whereas in rubber trees (''Hevea brasiliensis'') it is a milky latex that oozes out.
Tree shaping has been practised for at least several hundred years, the oldest known examples being the living root bridges built and maintained by the Khasi people of Meghalaya, India using the roots of the rubber tree (''Ficus elastica'').
In the interglacials, trees recolonised the land that had been covered by ice, only to be driven back again in the next ice age.
The active ingredient, tannin, is extracted and after various preliminary treatments, the skins are immersed in a series of vats containing solutions in increasing concentrations.
The flame tree does not rely on fire but shoots its seeds through the air when the two sides of its long pods crack apart explosively on drying.
Primary growth is the elongation of the stems and roots.
Trees play a significant role in reducing erosion and moderating the climate.
Nowadays, bark chips, a by-product of the timber industry, are used as a mulch and as a growing medium for epiphytic plants that need a soil-free compost.
Eventually the growth of a tree slows down and stops and it gets no taller.
In many rural areas of the world, fruit is gathered from forest trees for consumption.
Other seeds, such as apple pips and plum stones, have fleshy receptacles and smaller fruits like hawthorns have seeds enclosed in edible tissue; animals including mammals and birds eat the fruits and either discard the seeds, or swallow them so they pass through the gut to be deposited in the animal's droppings well away from the parent tree.
The leaves of trees are widely gathered as fodder for livestock and some can be eaten by humans but they tend to be high in tannins which makes them bitter.
Latex is a sticky defensive secretion that protects plants against herbivores.
One litre of maple syrup is obtained from every forty litres of sap and has a sugar content of exactly 66%.
In trees and other plants that develop wood, the vascular cambium allows the expansion of vascular tissue that produces woody growth.
The roots of a tree serve to anchor it to the ground and gather water and nutrients to transfer to all parts of the tree.
Many deciduous trees flower before the new leaves emerge.
In suitable environments, such as the Daintree Rainforest in Queensland, or the mixed podocarp and broadleaf forest of Ulva Island, New Zealand, forest is the more-or-less stable climatic climax community at the end of a plant succession, where open areas such as grassland are colonised by taller plants, which in turn give way to trees that eventually form a forest canopy.
A small wooded area, usually with no undergrowth, is called a grove  and a small wood or thicket of trees and bushes is called a coppice or copse.
The interconnections are made by the inosculation process, a kind of natural grafting or welding of vegetal tissues.
It provides a thick, waterproof covering to the living inner tissue.
If insufficient water is available the leaves will die.
Trees have evolved leaves in a wide range of shapes and sizes, in response to environmental pressures including climate and predation.
Some Ancient Indian tree deities, such as Puliyidaivalaiyamman, the Tamil deity of the  tamarind tree, or Kadambariyamman, associated with the kadamba tree were seen as manifestations of a goddess who offers her blessings by giving fruits in abundance.
The kapok tree has cottony threads to catch the breeze.
In ecosystems such as mangrove swamps, trees play a role in developing the habitat, since the roots of the mangrove trees reduce the speed of flow of tidal currents and trap water-borne sediment, reducing the water depth and creating suitable conditions for further mangrove colonisation.
The carefully stacked branches, often oak, are burned with a very limited amount of air.
Because of their longevity and usefulness, trees have always been revered, with sacred groves in various cultures, and they play a role in many of the world's mythologies.
Many older trees may become hollow but may still stand upright for many years.
The fungus promotes growth of the roots and helps protect the trees against predators and pathogens.
When the climate cooled 1.5 million years ago and the first of four ice ages occurred, the forests retreated as the ice advanced.
The great diversity in tree fruits and seeds reflects the many different ways that tree species have evolved to disperse their offspring.
Near the tip of the finer roots are single cell root hairs.
The wood of conifers is known as softwood while that of broad-leaved trees is hardwood.
Trees tend to be long-lived, some reaching several thousand years old.
Democracy started in North America when the Great Peacemaker formed the Iroquois Confederacy, inspiring the warriors of the original five American nations to bury their weapons under the Tree of Peace, an eastern white pine (''Pinus strobus'').
They can be grouped informally, often surrounded by plantings of bulbs, laid out in stately avenues or used as specimen trees.
The male flowers may be high up in the tree, often in the form of dangling catkins.
The tests to demonstrate this networking are performed by injecting chemicals, sometimes radioactive, into a tree, and then checking for its presence in neighbouring trees.
There is a gradual method and there is an instant method, the gradual method slowly guides the growing tip along predetermined path ways over time where as the instant method bends and weaves saplings  long into a shape that becomes more rigid as they thicken up.
The latex exuded by the balatá tree (''Manilkara bidentata'') is used to make golf balls and is similar to gutta-percha, made from the latex of the "getah perca" tree ''Palaquium''.
Epiphytic plants such as ferns, some mosses, liverworts, orchids and some species of parasitic plants (e.g., mistletoe) hang from branches; these along with arboreal lichens, algae, and fungi provide micro-habitats for themselves and for other organisms, including animals.
A similar structure is developed by the Indian banyan.
The newly created xylem is the sapwood.
Large tree-like plants with lignified trunks in the Pteridophyta, Arecales, Cycadophyta and Poales such as the tree ferns, palms, cycads and bamboos have no true bark, but they do have an outer protective covering of some form.
Many trees have flowers rich in nectar which are attractive to bees.
In less developed nations it may be the only fuel available and collecting firewood is often a time consuming task as it becomes necessary to travel further and further afield in the search for fuel.
''Acacia'' and baobab are well adapted to living in such areas.
In Norse mythology, Yggdrasil is a central cosmic tree whose roots and branches extend to various worlds.
A commonly applied narrower definition is that a tree has a woody trunk formed by secondary growth, meaning that the trunk thickens each year by growing outwards, in addition to the primary upwards growth from the growing tip.
The Arecaceae (palms) have their leaves spirally arranged on an unbranched trunk.
These are thick, small and closely wrapped and enclose the growing point in a waterproof sheath.
A little further south, at Santa Maria del Tule, Oaxaca, Mexico, is the tree with the broadest trunk.
Tree pollen can cause allergies and hay fever.
They are particularly prevalent in tropical rainforests where the soil is poor and the roots are close to the surface.
Silviculture is the practice of controlling the establishment, growth, composition, health, and quality of forests, which are areas that have a high density of trees.
In North America, the sap of the sugar maple (''Acer saccharum'') is most often used in the production of a sweet liquid, maple syrup.
They are also used for reproduction, defence, survival, energy storage and many other purposes.
It has been named Hyperion and is  tall.
Wood is used in the construction of buildings, bridges, trackways, piles, poles for power lines, masts for boats, pit props, railway sleepers, fencing, hurdles, shuttering for concrete, pipes, scaffolding and pallets.
Nuts may be gathered by animals such as squirrels that cache any not immediately consumed.
Seeds are the primary way that trees reproduce and their seeds vary greatly in size and shape.
The Oubangui people of west Africa plant a tree when a child is born.
They are places where the deities live and where all the living things are either sacred or are companions of the gods.
The radicle or embryonic root is the first part of a seedling to emerge from the seed during the process of germination.
The resin that oozed out of trees sometimes trapped insects or spiders and these are still visible in the interior of the amber.
The long cold winter of the far north is unsuitable for plant growth and trees must grow rapidly in the short summer season when the temperature rises and the days are long.
Wood has traditionally been used for fuel, especially in rural areas.
Wood has been an important, easily available material for construction since humans started building shelters.
Tropical rainforests are one of the most biodiverse habitats in the world.
The largest tree by volume is believed to be a giant sequoia (''Sequoiadendron giganteum'') known as the General Sherman Tree in the Sequoia National Park in Tulare County, California.
Non-native tree species provide a less biodiverse community, for example in the United Kingdom the sycamore (''Acer pseudoplatanus''), which originates from southern Europe, has few associated invertebrate species, though its bark supports a wide range of lichens, bryophytes and other epiphytes.
The London plane (''Platanus × acerifolia'') periodically sheds its bark in large flakes.
The tallest known tree, a coast redwood named Hyperion, stands  high.
If it is to be preserved, meat should be cured before cold smoking.
If seeds only fell straight to the ground, competition among the concentrated saplings and the shade of the parent would likely prevent it from flourishing.
In London for example, there is an initiative to plant 20,000 new street trees and to have an increase in tree cover of 5% by 2025, equivalent to one tree for every resident.
Light is very limited under their dense cover and there may be little plant life on the forest floor, although fungi may abound.
It is a viscous liquid composed mainly of volatile terpenes and is produced mostly by coniferous trees.
Various creatures live on it.
In the 12,000 years since the start of human agriculture, the number of trees worldwide has decreased by 46%.
Wood is pulped for paper and used in the manufacture of cardboard and made into engineered wood products for use in construction such as fibreboard, hardboard, chipboard and plywood.
Temperate forest is also found in the southern hemisphere, as for example in the Eastern Australia temperate forest, characterised by ''Eucalyptus'' forest and open acacia woodland.
About 90% of the sap is water, the remaining 10% being a mixture of various sugars and certain minerals.
The cork cambium gives rise to thickened cork cells to protect the surface of the plant and reduce water loss.
The vascular system of trees allows water, nutrients and other chemicals to be distributed around the plant, and without it trees would not be able to grow as large as they do.
Some are specific to a single tree species, which will not flourish in the absence of its mycorrhizal associate.
These are supported by parenchyma cells which provide padding and include fibres for strengthening the tissue.
Ash trees and maples have larger seeds with blade shaped wings which spiral down to the ground when released.
Both the production of wood and the production of cork are forms of secondary growth.
Icons are placed beneath it to be worshipped, tree nymphs inhabit the branches and it grants favours to the devout who tie threads round the trunk.
Other uses include floor tiles, bulletin boards, balls, footwear, cigarette tips, packaging, insulation and joints in woodwind instruments.
Trees provide shade and shelter, timber for construction, fuel for cooking and heating, and fruit for food as well as having many other uses.
Thus mangrove swamps tend to extend seawards in suitable locations.
The plant hormones called cytokinins initiate root nodule formation, in a process closely related to mycorrhizal association.
In tropical regions with a drier savanna climate and insufficient rainfall to support dense forests, the canopy is not closed, and plenty of sunshine reaches the ground which is covered with grass and scrub.
Inside this bud there is a rudimentary stalk and neatly folded miniature leaves, ready to expand when the next growing season arrives.
Mangroves often grow in water and some species have propagules, which are buoyant fruits with seeds that start germinating before becoming detached from the parent tree.
Cultivated trees are planted and tended by humans, usually because they provide food (fruits or nuts), ornamental beauty, or some type of wood product that benefits people.
The anti-cancer drug Paclitaxel is derived from taxol, a substance found in the bark of the Pacific yew (''Taxus brevifolia'').
Many species of tree support their own specialised invertebrates.
Flowers and fruit may also be present, but some trees, such as conifers, instead have pollen cones and seed cones; others, such as tree ferns, produce spores instead.
Other commercially important fruit include dates, figs and olives.
Sacred groves exist in China, India, Africa and elsewhere.
Trees tend to be long-lived, some reaching several thousand years old, as well as tall.
In parts of the world, forests are shrinking as trees are cleared to increase the amount of land available for agriculture.
In Britain in the 1990s, 25 million elm trees were killed by this disease.
Sweet birch sap is more dilute than maple sap; a hundred litres are required to make one litre of birch syrup.
The crown is a name for the spreading top of a tree including the branches and leaves, while the uppermost layer in a forest, formed by the crowns of the trees, is known as the canopy.
A tree typically has many secondary branches supported clear of the ground by the trunk.
It has been dated by drilling a core sample and counting the annual rings.
Mangrove swamps also provide an effective buffer against the more damaging effects of cyclones and tsunamis.
During times of drought, trees can fall into water stress, which may cause a tree to become more susceptible to disease and insect problems, and ultimately may lead to a tree's death.
In Greek mythology, dryads were believed to be shy nymphs who inhabited trees.
When it flowers it is time for marriage.
It is composed of water-conducting cells and associated cells which are often living, and is usually pale in colour.
They remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and store large quantities of carbon in their tissues.
The hyphae of the fungus can link different trees and a network is formed, transferring nutrients from one place to another.
Sometimes the seed remains in the cone for years waiting for a trigger event to liberate it.
When the days get shorter and the temperature begins to decrease, the leaves no longer make new chlorophyll and the red and yellow pigments already present in the blades become apparent.
Under such a definition, herbaceous plants such as palms, bananas and papayas are not considered trees regardless of their height, growth form or stem girth.
Pine cones may similarly be hoarded by red squirrels, and grizzly bears may help to disperse the seed by raiding squirrel caches.
In the case of angiosperms and gymnosperms, the outermost layer of the trunk is the bark and is mostly composed of dead cells.
The pollen of pine trees contains air sacs which give it buoyancy and it has been known to travel as far as .
Leaves, flowers and fruits are seasonally available.
The bark is inelastic.
The oldest, inner part of the sapwood is progressively converted into heartwood as new sapwood is formed at the cambium.
A sapling is a young tree.
Ginkgophyta was once a widespread diverse group  of which the only survivor is the maidenhair tree ''Ginkgo biloba''.
Palm oil is obtained from the fruits of the oil palm (''Elaeis guineensis'').
It is perforated by a large number of fine breathing pores called lenticels, through which oxygen diffuses.
In their natural habitats, 284 different species of insect have been found on the English oak (''Quercus robur'')  and 306 species of invertebrate on the Tasmanian oak (''Eucalyptus obliqua'').
Synthesis in the leaf of a plant hormone called auxin also ceases.
The new stem is unlignified at first and may be green and downy.
The earliest tree-like organisms were tree ferns, horsetails and lycophytes, which grew in forests in the Carboniferous period.
This develops into a taproot which goes straight downwards.
Above ground, the branches divide into smaller branches and shoots.
Trees are often planted in town environments where they are known as street trees or amenity trees.
Trees are not a taxonomic group but include a variety of plant species that have independently evolved a woody trunk and branches as a way to tower above other plants to compete for sunlight.
Heartwood is usually darker in colour than the sapwood.
Dead trees pose a safety risk, especially during high winds and severe storms, and removing dead trees involves a financial burden, whereas the presence of healthy trees can clean the air, increase property values, and reduce the temperature of the built environment and thereby reduce building cooling costs.
The tallest known broad-leaved tree is a mountain ash (''Eucalyptus regnans'') growing in Tasmania with a height of .
Bark is continually replaced by a living layer of cells called the cork cambium.
Individual leaves may fall intermittently and be replaced by new growth but most leaves remain intact for some time.
A few trees, such as the eucalyptus, have "naked buds" with no protective scales and some conifers, such as the Lawson's cypress, have no buds but instead have little pockets of meristem concealed among the scale-like leaves.
If damage occurs the tree may in time become hollow.
Similar woodland is found on mountains where the altitude causes the average temperature to be lower thus reducing the length of the growing season.
Trees have their roots in the ground and their trunk and branches extended towards the sky.
The tree's trunk is far from round and the exact dimensions may be misleading as the circumference includes much empty space between the large buttress roots.
These lay their eggs in crevices and the larvae chew their way through the cellulose tissues leaving a gallery of tunnels.
There are a few different methods  of shaping a tree.
The tannin causes the hide to become supple, less affected by water and more resistant to bacterial attack.
Trees and forests provide a habitat for many species of animals and plants.
Nutmeg is a seed found in the fleshy fruit of the nutmeg tree (''Myristica fragrans'') and cloves are the unopened flower buds of the clove tree (''Syzygium aromaticum'').
The miniature cone-like catkins of Alder trees produce seeds that contain small droplets of oil that help disperse the seeds on the surface of water.
These leave behind scars on the surface of the twig.
The fruits of the cocoa tree (''Theobroma cacao'') are used to make cocoa and chocolate and the berries of coffee trees, ''Coffea arabica'' and ''Coffea canephora'', are processed to extract the coffee beans.
Trees are the source of many of the world's best known fleshy fruits.
It has now largely been replaced by synthetic materials.
The innermost layer of bark is known as the phloem and this is involved in the transport of the sap containing the sugars made by photosynthesis to other parts of the tree.
It has been shown that they are beneficial to humans in creating a sense of well-being and reducing stress.
Living trees have been used in bonsai and in tree shaping, and both living and dead specimens have been sculpted into sometimes fantastic shapes.
This causes the cells at the junction of the petiole and the twig to weaken until the joint breaks and the leaf floats to the ground.
Buds also form in the axils of the leaves ready to produce new side shoots.
Only the trunk is used in the calculation and the volume is estimated to be .
Some of the largest seeds come from trees, but the largest tree, ''Sequoiadendron giganteum'', produces one of the smallest tree seeds.
Charcoal can be made by slow pyrolysis of wood by heating it in the absence of air in a kiln.
The papery bark of the white birch tree (''Betula papyrifera'') was used extensively by Native Americans.
With an estimated 100,000 species, the number of trees worldwide might total twenty-five per cent of all living plant species.
It is piped to a sugarhouse where it is heated to concentrate it and improve its flavour.
Some species are popular as bonsai material because they have characteristics, such as small leaves or needles, that make them appropriate for the compact visual scope of bonsai and a miniature deciduous forest can even be created using such species as Japanese maple, Japanese zelkova or hornbeam.
The seeds of conifers, the largest group of gymnosperms, are enclosed in a cone and most species have seeds that are light and papery that can be blown considerable distances once free from the cone.
The oldest living tree with a verified age is also in California.
The estimate is about eight times higher than previous estimates, and is based on tree densities measured on over 400,000 plots.
Although "tree" is a term of common parlance, there is no universally recognised precise definition of what a tree is, either botanically or in common language.
This is also used as an insulator, particularly of undersea cables, and in dentistry, walking sticks and gun butts.
Folklore lays down the supernatural penalties that will result if desecration takes place for example by the felling of trees.
The single extant species of Ginkgophyta (''Ginkgo biloba'') has fleshy seeds produced at the ends of short branches on female trees, and ''Gnetum'', a tropical and subtropical group of gymnosperms produce seeds at the tip of a shoot axis.
Trees stabilise the soil, prevent rapid run-off of rain water, help prevent desertification, have a role in climate control and help in the maintenance of biodiversity and ecosystem balance.
Cork is produced from the thick bark of the cork oak (''Quercus suber'').
In more developed countries other fuels are available and burning wood is a choice rather than a necessity.
These float on the water and may become lodged on emerging mudbanks and successfully take root.
The estimate suggests that about 15 billion trees are cut down annually and about 5 billion are planted.
Other tree based drugs come from the paw-paw (''Carica papaya''), the cassia (''Cassia spp.
In tropical and subtropical regions, many trees keep their leaves all year round.
Timber, "trees that are grown in order to produce wood" is cut into lumber (sawn wood) for use in construction.
The sap is harvested by drilling holes in the trunks of the trees and collecting the liquid that flows out of the inserted spigots.
The expanding shoot pushes its way out, shedding the scales in the process.
Similarly, a number of angiosperms including ''Acacia cyclops'' and ''Acacia mangium'' have seeds that germinate better after exposure to high temperatures.
Aside from structural definitions, trees are commonly defined by use, for instance as those plants which yield lumber.
It is used in varnishes, for making small castings and in ten-pin bowling balls.
In India, Kalpavriksha is a wish-fulfilling tree, one of the nine jewels that emerged from the primitive ocean.
Many large trees have buttress roots which flare out from the lower part of the trunk.
In tropical regions with a monsoon or monsoon-like climate, where a drier part of the year alternates with a wet period as in the Amazon rainforest, different species of broad-leaved trees dominate the forest, some of them being deciduous.
They can be broad or needle-like, simple or compound, lobed or entire, smooth or hairy, delicate or tough, deciduous or evergreen.
At least 120 drugs come from plant sources, many of them from the bark of trees.
Some of the tree ferns, order Cyatheales, have tall straight trunks, growing up to , but these are composed not of wood but of rhizomes which grow vertically and are covered by numerous adventitious roots.
Leaves of the curry tree (''Murraya koenigii'') are eaten, those of kaffir lime ''Citrus × hystrix'' (e.g., Thai food) ''Ailanthus'' (e.g., in Korean dishes such as bugak) and those of the European bay tree (''Laurus nobilis'') and the California bay tree (''Umbellularia californica'') are used for flavouring food.
Certain monocots may be considered trees under a slightly looser definition; while the Joshua tree, bamboos and palms do not have secondary growth and never produce true wood with growth rings, they may produce "pseudo-wood" by lignifying cells formed by primary growth.
