Artillery bombardments prior to infantry assaults were often ineffective at destroying enemy defences, only serving to provide advance notice of an attack.
The Germans recorded that 15% of leg wounds and 25% of arm wounds resulted in death, mainly through infection.
In the face of modern warfare, digging in was standard practice by the start of WWI.
The duration of these initial bombardments varied, from seconds to days.
On some battlefields, such as at the Nek in Gallipoli, the bodies were not buried until after the war.
At about the same time the British were developing their own helmets.
They fulfilled a variety of purposes, such as connecting the front trench to a listening post close to the enemy wire or providing an advance "jumping-off" line for a surprise attack.
Aerial reconnaissance was so significant in exposing movements, it has been said the trench stalemate was a product of it.
At various times during the war—particularly early on—official truces were organised so that the wounded could be recovered from no man's land and the dead could be buried.
This breakdown of duty would continue down through the army structure, so that within each front-line division, typically comprising three infantry brigades (regiments for the Germans), two brigades would occupy the front and the third would be in reserve.
The Germans later combined these tank ideas with their infiltration tactics to produce blitzkrieg during World War II.
Fighting trenches were usually about  deep.
They were more willing than their opponents to make a strategic withdrawal to a superior prepared defensive position.
As remarked by General Plumer to his staff the evening before the attack:
While the armies expected to use entrenchments and cover, they did not allow for the effect of defences in depth.
The intensity of World War I trench warfare meant about 10% of the fighting soldiers were killed.
One famous truce was the Christmas truce between British and German soldiers in the winter of 1914 on the front near Armentieres.
Trench warfare is strongly associated with the First World War of 1914-18, when it was employed on the Western Front from September 1914 until the last weeks of the war.
In 1918, it became a weapon of choice for ''Stoßtruppen'' (Stormtroopers) with a team of six ''Pionieren'' (pioneers, engineers) per squad.
The Western Allies in 1944 broke through the incomplete Atlantic Wall with relative ease through a combination of amphibious landings, naval gunfire, air attack, and airborne landings.
Anzac and some British soldiers were also known to use sawn-off shotguns in trench raids, because of their portability, effectiveness at close range, and ease of use in the confines of a trench.
This had a wide brim to protect the wearer from falling objects, but offered less protection to the wearer's neck.
In 1914, the British fired a total of 545 mortar shells; in 1916, they fired over 6,500,000.
The embanked rear lip of the trench was called the parados.
The Germans, who had based their knowledge on studies of the Russo-Japanese War, made something of a science out of designing and constructing defensive works.
Tunneling was like sapping except that a "roof" of soil was left in place while the trench line was established and then removed when the trench was ready to be occupied.
Even when in the front line, the typical battalion would only be called upon to engage in fighting a handful of times a year—making an attack, defending against an attack or participating in a raid.
Attacks, even if successful, often sustained severe casualties.
Trench raiding and patrolling led to high casualties.
Fires were lit in the support line to make it appear inhabited and any damage done immediately repaired.
Early trenches were simple.
The frequency of combat would increase for the units of the "elite" fighting divisions—on the Allied side; the British regular divisions, the Canadian Corps, the French XX Corps and the Anzacs.
Poor hygiene also led to fungal conditions, such as trench mouth and trench foot.
The British eventually adopted a similar approach, but it was incompletely implemented when the Germans launched the 1918 Spring Offensive and proved disastrously ineffective.
The attacking force would have to advance with not only the weapons required to capture a trench but also the tools—sandbags, picks and shovels, barbed wire—to fortify and defend from counter-attack.
Mortars, which lobbed a shell in a high arc over a relatively short distance, were widely used in trench fighting for harassing the forward trenches, for cutting wire in preparation for a raid or attack, and for destroying dugouts, saps and other entrenchments.
In April 1915, chlorine was first used by Germany at the Second Battle of Ypres.
Frontal assaults, and their associated casualties, became inevitable because the continuous trench lines had no open flanks.
With the development of armoured warfare, emphasis on trench warfare has declined, but still occurs where battle-lines become static.
The first attempt at sophistication was the "lifting barrage" where the first objective of an attack was intensely bombarded for a period before the entire barrage "lifted" to fall on a second objective farther back.
The lower down the structure this division of duty proceeded, the more frequently the units would rotate from front-line duty to support or reserve.
The U.S. military began to issue models specially modified for combat, called "trench guns", with shorter barrels, higher capacity magazines, no choke, and often heat shields around the barrel, as well as lugs for the M1917 bayonet.
France, by contrast, relied on artillery and reserves, not entrenchment.
Additionally, tank crews were issued with or fashioned makeshift face masks to protect against the hot metal fragments that ricocheted around the compartment when the exterior of the tank was hit with machinegun fire.
This prompted the use of gas masks.
When two large armoured armies meet, the result has generally been mobile warfare of the type which developed in World War II.
However, trench warfare reemerged in the latter stages of the Chinese Civil War (Huaihai Campaign), the Korean War (from July 1951 to its end), and at Dien Bien Phu and other later locations and engagements during the Vietnam War.
Critically, it was assumed that artillery could still destroy entrenched troops, or at least suppress them sufficiently for friendly infantry and cavalry to manoeuvre.
Firing ports were installed in the newly arrived FT 1917 tanks.
During the Cold War, NATO forces routinely trained to fight through extensive works called "Soviet-style trench systems", named after the Warsaw Pact's complex systems of field fortifications, an extension of Soviet field entrenching practices for which they were famous in their Great Patriotic War.
Two divisions would occupy adjacent sections of the front and the third would be in rest to the rear.
Equally it could be used as light artillery in bombarding distant trenches.
Shell-proof dugouts became a high priority.
Between  behind the front trench was located the support (or "travel") trench, to which the garrison would retreat when the front trench was bombarded.
To fire the Stokes mortar, the round was simply dropped into the tube, where the percussion cartridge was detonated when it impacted the firing pin at the bottom of the barrel, thus being launched.
The critical advantage that could be gained by holding the high ground meant that minor hills and ridges gained enormous significance.
None of these standard helmets could protect the face or eyes, however.
German soldiers began singing Christmas carols and soon soldiers left their trenches.
Early in the war, surprise raids would be mounted, particularly by the Canadians, but increased vigilance made achieving surprise difficult as the war progressed.
The Germans and Turks were well equipped with grenades from the start of the war, but the British, who had ceased using grenadiers in the 1870s and did not anticipate a siege war, entered the conflict with virtually none, so soldiers had to improvise bombs with whatever was available (see Jam Tin Grenade).
A critical feature of period artillery pieces was the hydraulic recoil mechanism, which meant the gun did not need to be re-aimed after each shot.
The Japanese caused the American advance to slow down and caused massive casualties with these underground fixed positions.
The diggers were not exposed, but only one or two men could work on the trench at a time.
This compared to 5% killed during the Second Boer War and 4.5% killed during World War II.
Liddell Hart, J. Walter Christie, Charles de Gaulle, Cavalcanti de Albuquerque and Russian military theorists, among others.
The Japanese built fixed fortifications on Iwo Jima, Okinawa, and Guadalcanal using a system of underground tunnels to interconnect their fortified positions.
Both sides concentrated on breaking up enemy attacks and on protecting their own troops by digging deep into the ground.
They cleared surviving enemy personnel from recently overrun trenches and made clandestine raids into enemy trenches to gather intelligence.
For British and Dominion troops serving on the Western Front, the proportion of troops killed was 12.5%, while the total proportion of troops who became casualties (killed or wounded) was 56%.
More than 80,000 of the best shooters received the semi-automatic RSC 1917 rifle, allowing them to rapid fire at waves of attacking soldiers.
Some elite Italian units used a helmet derived from ancient Roman designs.
And so on for companies and platoons.
Such dominance was achieved at a high cost when the enemy replied with his own artillery, and a post-war British analysis concluded the benefits were probably not worth the cost.
Seventy five percent of wounds came from shell fire.
When the I Anzac Corps first arrived in France in April 1916 after the evacuation of Gallipoli, they were sent to a relatively peaceful sector south of Armentières to "acclimatise".
Enemy trenches, which would become objectives in an attack, needed to be named as well.
Later on, improved tanks and tactics allowed them to break through enemy lines to become a significant element of warfare.
The British detonated 19 mines of varying sizes on July 1, 1916, the first day of the Battle of the Somme.
Many trench systems were constructed within glaciers such as the Adamello-Presanella group or the famous city below the ice on the Marmolada in the Dolomites.
Liddell Hart identified barbed wire and the machine gun as the elements that had to be broken to regain a mobile battlefield.
The units who manned the front line trenches the longest were the Portuguese Expeditionary Corps from Portugal stationed in Northern France; unlike the other allies the Portuguese couldn't rotate units from the front lines due to lack of reinforcements sent from Portugal, nor could they replace the depleted units that lost manpower due to the war of attrition.
The French design was rejected as not strong enough and too difficult to mass-produce.
Minutes before the attack on Vimy Ridge the Canadians thickened the artillery barrage by aiming machine guns indirectly to deliver plunging fire on the Germans.
British regular divisions habitually named their trenches after units, which resulted in names such as "Munster Alley" (Royal Munster Fusiliers), "Black Watch Alley" (Black Watch Regiment) and "Border Barricade" (Border Regiment).
This defensive layout was soon rendered obsolete as the power of artillery grew; however, in certain sectors of the front, the support trench was maintained as a decoy to attract the enemy bombardment away from the front and reserve lines.
Part of the British artillery was positioned close behind the original start line and took no part in the initial bombardment, so as to be ready to support later phases of the operation while other guns were moved up.
On the Western Front in 1914–18, both sides constructed elaborate trench and dugout systems opposing each other along a front, protected from assault by barbed wire, mines, and other obstacles.
Consequently, trenches were busiest at night, when cover of darkness allowed the movement of troops and supplies, the maintenance and expansion of the barbed wire and trench system, and reconnaissance of the enemy's defences.
The role of the fighter was to protect friendly reconnaissance aircraft and destroy those of the enemy, or at least deny them the freedom of friendly airspace.
Other objectives were named according to their role in the trench system, such as the "Switch Trench" and "Intermediate Trench" on the Somme.
As the war progressed, raiding became part of the general British policy, the intention being to maintain the fighting spirit of the troops and to deny no man's land to the Germans.
With this rate of casualties and no reinforcements forthcoming most of the men were denied leave and had to serve long periods in the trenches with some units spending up to six consecutive months in the front line with little to no leave during that time.
Some hills were named for their height in metres, such as Hill 60.
Heavy machine guns required teams of up to eight men to move them, maintain them, and keep them supplied with ammunition.
The German 420&nbsp;mm howitzer weighed 20 tons and could fire a one-ton shell over 10&nbsp;km.
Another common killer was exposure, since the temperature within a trench in the winter could easily fall below freezing.
By 1870 the Lines no longer existed, but the two central forts in the towns of Wissembourg and Altenstadt still possessed fortifications that proved useful defensive positions during the Battle of Wissembourg.
Fundamentally, as the range and rate of fire of rifled small arms increased, a defender shielded from enemy fire (in a trench, house window, behind a large rock, or behind other cover) was often able to kill several approaching foes before they closed with his position.
The Italian Campaign fought from 1943 until the end of the war in Europe largely consisted of the Allies storming strongly fortified German lines which stretched from one coast, over the mountains to the other coast.
Some sectors of the front saw little activity throughout the war, making life in the trenches comparatively easy.
Wireless communications were still in their infancy, so the available methods were telephone, telegraph, semaphore, signal lamps, signal flares, homing pigeons and runners.
Burial of the dead was usually a luxury that neither side could easily afford.
This was only made more lethal by the introduction of rapid-firing artillery, exemplified by the "French 75", and high explosive fragmentation rounds.
A number of armies made use of the periscope rifle, which enabled soldiers to snipe at the enemy without exposing themselves over the parapet, although at the cost of reduced shooting accuracy.
They consist of kilometres of trenches linking fortified strongpoints and in Korea surrounded by millions of land mines.
*25% other (hospital, travelling, leave, training courses, etc.)
The commanders of the warring nations disapproved of this cease fire, and the British court-martialed several of their soldiers.
The French Army fielded a ground version of the Hotchkiss Canon de 37&nbsp;mm used by the French Navy.
Another benefit was that if a soldier could get close enough to the trenches, enemies hiding in trenches could be attacked.
The military usage evolved very quickly in the First World War, until whole systems of extensive main trenches, backup trenches (in case the first lines were overrun) and communication trenches had been developed, often stretching dozens of kilometres along a front without interruption, and some kilometres further back from the opponent's lines.
Dugouts of varying degrees of comfort would be built in the rear of the support trench.
In the event that a section of the first trench system was captured, a "switch" trench would be dug to connect the second trench system to the still-held section of the first.
In 1915 a special detachment 'Rohr', named after its commander Willi Rohr, was founded to further experiment with infiltration tactics and the necessary equipment.
As the war progressed, better equipment was issued, and improvised arms were discarded.
Throughout World War I, the major combatants slowly groped their way towards various tactics aimed at breaking the stalemate of trench warfare, beginning with the French and Germans, with the British Empire forces also contributing to the collective learning experience.
Volunteers for this dangerous work were often exempted from participation in frontal assaults over open ground and from routine work like filling sandbags, draining trenches, and repairing barbed wire in no-man's land.
The defenders augmented the trenches themselves with barbed wire strung in front to impede movement; wiring parties went out every night to repair and improve these forward defences.
Methods to defeat it were rudimentary.
In the Alps, trench warfare even stretched onto vertical slopes and deep into the mountains, to heights of  above sea level.
British dugouts were usually  deep, whereas German dugouts were typically much deeper, usually a minimum of  deep and sometimes dug three stories down, with concrete staircases to reach the upper levels.
Wiring was usually done at night, to avoid casualties in no man's land.
Men who had to endure prolonged bombardment would often suffer debilitating shell shock, a condition not well understood at the time.
It was fielded in 1918 by the German Army as the primary weapon of the stormtroopers, assault groups that specialised in trench combat.
Trenches were never straight but were dug in a zigzagging or stepped pattern.
Relatively minor injuries could prove fatal through onset of infection and gangrene.
Reconnaissance aircraft would map trench lines, first with hand-drawn diagrams, later with photography, monitor enemy troop movements, and locate enemy artillery batteries so that they could be destroyed with counter-battery fire.
Elaborate trench and bunker systems were independently developed by the Maori, who successfully employed them as early as the 1840s to withstand British cannon, muskets, and an experimental poison-gas mortar, in the New Zealand Wars.
The British gave an alcoholic flavour to the German trenches in front of Ginchy: "Beer Trench", "Bitter Trench", "Hop Trench", "Ale Alley", and "Pilsen Trench."
Each redoubt could provide supporting fire to its neighbours, and while the attackers had freedom of movement between the redoubts, they would be subjected to withering enfilade fire.
Later in the war, gas was delivered by artillery or mortar shell.
The largest calibers were usually howitzers.
His major trench offensives—the Somme in 1916 and Flanders in 1917—were conceived as breakthrough battles but both degenerated into costly attrition.
A farmhouse, windmill, quarry, or copse of trees would become the focus of a determined struggle simply because it was the largest identifiable feature.
A large enough dose could kill, but the gas was easy to detect by scent and sight.
The Germans used a range of mortars.
The characteristic barbed wire placed before trenches, in belts  deep or more, differed, too; the German wire was heavier gauge, and British wire cutters, designed for the thinner native product, were unable to cut it.
German troops were wearing the traditional leather ''Pickelhaube'' (spiked helmet), with a covering of cloth to protect the leather from the splattering of mud.
However, their impact was less than it could have potentially been, given their late introduction into the war and the inherent issues that plagued the primitive machines.
In most places, the water table was only a metre or so below the surface, meaning that any trench dug in the ground would quickly flood.
In addition, before the start of the Battle of Kursk, the Soviets constructed a system of defence more elaborate than any they built during World War I.
However, all armies had experienced shell shortages during the first year or two of World War I, due to underestimating their usage under intensive combat.
They required a deliberate approach to seizing positions from which fire support could be given for the next phase of the attack, rather than a rapid move to break the enemy's line.
An infantry attack was rarely successful if it advanced beyond the range of its supporting artillery.
A wound resulting from a shell fragment was usually more traumatic than a gunshot wound.
Only 2% of mustard gas casualties died, mainly from secondary infections.
In later designs the floor might be raised on a wooden frame to provide a drainage channel underneath.
On the Eastern Front and in the Middle East, the areas to be covered were so vast, and the distances from the factories supplying shells, bullets, concrete and barbed wire so great, trench warfare in the West European style often did not occur.
The fundamental strategy of trench warfare in World War I was to defend one's own position strongly while trying to achieve a breakthrough into the enemy's rear.
The Germans relied on firepower, investing heavily in howitzers and machine guns.
This strategy cost them dearly in 1917 when the British started to limit their advances so as to be able to meet the anticipated counter-attack from a position of strength.
By 1914, British infantry units were armed with two Vickers machine guns per battalion, the Germans had six per battalion, the Russians eight.
According to the semi-biographical war novel ''All Quiet on the Western Front'', many soldiers preferred to use a sharpened spade as an improvised melee weapon instead of the bayonet, as the bayonet tended to get "stuck" in stabbed opponents, rendering it useless in heated battle.
*The Lines of Stollhofen were built by members of the Grand Alliance at the start of the War of the Spanish Succession running for about  from Stollhofen on the Rhine to the impenetrable woods on the hills east of Bühl.
The fundamental purpose of the aircraft in trench warfare was reconnaissance and artillery observation.
Early on, improvised gas masks were made by urinating on a handkerchief and putting it over their nose and mouth so the urea would disable the poison.
On occasion, mines would cross and fighting would occur underground.
Consequently, the outcome of many trench battles was decided by the company and platoon commanders in the thick of the fighting.
Haig's defenders counter that the attrition was necessary in order to cause attrition in the German army.
Despite the Minsk peace agreements low-intensity firefights and combat patrols continue to this day.
Howitzers lofted the shell over a high trajectory so it plunged into the ground.
While not effectively employed at first, Allied tanks had tremendous effects on the morale of German troops in the closing stages of the war on the Western front.
The Germans employed ''Flammenwerfer'' (flamethrowers) during the war for the first time against the French on 25 June 1915, then against the British 30 July in Hooge.
This made them impractical for offensive manoeuvres, contributing to the stalemate on the Western Front.
When one side's front line bulged towards the opposition, a salient was formed.
Another example of trench stalemate was the Eritrean-Ethiopian War of 1998–2000.
Sapping involved extending the trench by digging away at the end face.
The craters from these and many other mines on the Western Front are still visible today.
Temporary trenches were also built.
In the first six months of 1916, before the launch of the Somme Offensive, the British did not engage in any significant battles on their sector of the Western Front and yet suffered 107,776 casualties.
On an individual level, a typical British soldier's year could be divided as follows:
Both sides were quick to raise specialist grenadier groups.
Used by American soldiers in the Western front, the pump action shotgun was a formidable weapon in short range combat, enough so that Germany lodged a formal protest against their use on 14 September 1918, stating "every prisoner found to have in his possession such guns or ammunition belonging thereto forfeits his life", though this threat was apparently never carried out.
Consequently, many "trenches" in Flanders were actually above ground and constructed from massive breastworks of sandbags filled with clay.
There was an emphasis on seeking breakthroughs, rather than being content with "bite and hold" battles.
This involved achieving air superiority over the battlefield by destroying the enemy's fighters as well.
After the Battle of the Aisne in September 1914, an extended series of attempted flanking moves, and matching extensions to the fortified defensive lines, soon saw the celebrated "race to the sea"; German and Allied armies produced a matched pair of trench lines from the Swiss border in the south to the North Sea coast of Belgium.
The lessons of the first day of the Somme were learned very quickly, and by 1918 attacks were generally more successful and suffered fewer casualties; in the Hundred Days Offensive there was even a return to mobile warfare.
These mines would then be packed with explosives and detonated, producing a large crater.
They were also the first to apply the concept of "defence in depth", where the front-line zone was hundreds of metres deep and contained a series of redoubts rather than a continuous trench.
Since the troops were often not adequately equipped for trench warfare, improvised weapons were common in the first encounters, such as short wooden clubs and metal maces, as well as trench knives and brass knuckles.
To the French, the equivalent is the attrition of the Battle of Verdun in which the French Army suffered 380,000 casualties.
A shell fragment would often introduce debris, making it more likely that the wound would become infected.
The distance they could advance was still limited by their ability to supply and communicate.
At the start of the Battle of Berlin, the last major assault in the European Theatre of Operations during World War II, the Russians attacked over the river Oder against German troops dug in on the Seelow Heights, about  east of Berlin.
It was used as an infantry weapon on all European and Middle Eastern fronts until the end of World War I.
Artillery mainly fired fragmentation, high explosive, or, later in the war, gas shells.
Fifty percent of those wounded in the head died and 99% of those wounded in the abdomen died.
During the next 2 years the German army tried to establish special stormtroop detachments in all its units by sending selected men to Detachment Rohr and have those men train their comrades in their original units in pebbles in a pon approach.
The soldiers exchanged gifts and stories, and played several games of football.
As the Allied forces perfected them, they broke the stalemate.
The device is most associated with Australian and New Zealand troops at Gallipoli, where the Turks held the high ground.
The Germans actively pursued a strategy of attrition in the Battle of Verdun, the sole purpose of which was to "bleed the French Army white".
Once the war entered the static phase of trench warfare, the number of lethal head wounds that troops were receiving from fragmentation increased dramatically.
Tactics used included trench warfare, machine gun posts, bayonet charges, use of barbed wire across trenches and on no-man's land, human wave attacks, and Iraq's extensive use of chemical weapons such as mustard gas against Iranian troops.
It would take a revolution in mobility to change that.
Elaborate trench and bunker systems were employed by the Māori to withstand British artillery barrages, poison-gas shells and bayonet charges during the New Zealand Wars in the 1840s.
This meant that a soldier could never see more than  or so along the trench.
Trench warfare occurred when a revolution in firepower was not matched by similar advances in mobility, resulting in a grueling form of warfare in which the defender held the advantage.
The confined, static, and subterranean nature of trench warfare resulted in it developing its own peculiar form of geography.
Initially an aircraft weapon, the Bergmann LMG 15 was modified for ground use, with the later dedicated ground version being the LMG 15 n. A.
