The responders quickly establish a casualty collection point (CCP) and advise, either by yelling, or over a loudspeaker, that "anyone requiring assistance should move to the selected area (CCP)".
Such analyses are often required for healthcare grants funded by taxpayers, and represent normal engineering and management science practice.
Any compromise to the casualty's respiration, hemorrhage control, or shock control could be fatal.
* ongoing performance improvements that could reasonably be expected from a more objective optimization-based triage system and practices
If a record is maintained, the receiving hospital doctor can see a trauma score time series from the start of the incident, which may allow definitive treatment earlier.
* '''Routine''': evacuate within 24 hours to complete treatment.
* '''Class IV''': Patients requiring such extensive care beyond medical personnel capability and time.
Pre-printed cards for this purpose are known as a triage tags.
This is also true for neurology and neurosurgical services.
Severe injuries, uncompensated blood loss, negative neurological assessment
* ''Deceased'' are left where they fell.
* resulting in inconsistent tagging and prioritizing/ordering of casualties and substantial overtriage
In the UK, the commonly used triage system is the Smart Incident Command System, taught on the MIMMS (Major Incident Medical Management (and) Support) training program.
Typically, every ambulance is equipped with a folder or bag with coloured ribbons or triage tags.
Triage should be a continuous process and categories should be checked regularly to ensure that the priority remains correct given the patient's condition.
These individuals will sometimes be asked to assist the responder with transport and applying direct aid to other victims.
Triage may also be used for patients arriving at the emergency department, or telephoning medical advice systems, among others.
* '''''': The casualty requires immediate medical attention and will not survive if not seen soon.
Some of these tracking systems are beginning to incorporate the use of handheld computers, and in some cases, bar code scanners.
As those who can move, do so, the responders then ask, "anyone who still needs assistance, yell out or raise your hands"; this further identifies patients who are responsive, yet maybe unable to move.
* The injured whose transport can be ''delayed''
However any Group, Individual and/or Hospital Triage system can be used at the appropriate level of evaluation.
* avoided capital costs for taxpayer investment in additional EMS and trauma infrastructure
''This section is for examples of specific triage systems and methods.
Unlike all other centres in North America that employ physician and primarily nurse triage models, this hospital began the practice of employing Primary Care level paramedics to perform triage upon entry to the Emergency Department.
During a "surge" in demand, such as immediately after a natural disaster, many hospital beds will be occupied by regular non-critical patients.
START and START-like (START) triage that use color-coded categories to prioritize provide poor assessments of injury severity and then leave it to providers to subjectively order and allocate resources within flawed categories.
For example, a START Delayed (second priority) can have a survival probability of 63% for blunt trauma and a survival probability of 32% for penetrating trauma with the same physiological measures – both with expected rapid deterioration, while a START Immediate (first priority) can have survival probabilities that extend to above 95% with expected slow deterioration.
Research indicates there are wide ranges and overlaps of survival probabilities of the Immediate and Delayed categories, and other START limitations.
* The injured who can be helped by ''immediate'' transportation
These inefficiencies relate to the following cost areas:
While hospitals remain the preferred destination for all patients, during a mass casualty event such improvised facilities may be required in order to divert low-acuity patients away from hospitals in order to prevent the hospitals becoming overwhelmed.
The triage hospitalist must determine, in conjunction with a hospital's "bed control" and admitting team, what beds are available for optimal utilization of resources in order to provide safe care to all patients.
Continue to re-triage in case their condition worsens.
Research continues into alternative care, and various centers propose medical decision-support models for such situations.
* tremendous investment in time and money since 9/11 to develop and improve responders' triage skills
In 1997, following the amalgamation of two of the city's largest hospitals, the Emergency Department at the Victoria General closed.
If immediate treatment is successful, the patient may improve (although this may be temporary) and this improvement may allow the patient to be categorized to a lower priority in the short term.
Immediate treatment, transport as soon as possible
The overall goal of triage, in this system, is to both determine if a patient is appropriate for a given level of care and to ensure that hospital resources are utilized effectively.
Triage at an accident scene is performed by a paramedic or an emergency physician, using the four-level scale of &nbsp; Can wait,  Has to wait,  Cannot wait, and  Lost.
Some crippling injuries, even if not life-threatening, may be elevated in priority based on the available capabilities.
Others would live if given immediate medical care, but would die without it.
The relative urgencies are just placed under watch, waiting for an evacuation.
"Medical Doctor Regulator" decides what is to be the most efficient solution = Emergency Telemedecine or dispatch of an Ambulance, a General Practitioner  or a Physician+ Nurse + Ambulance Man, Hospital based MICU (Mobile Intensive Care Unit).
There, they will be disrobed and fully examined by an emergency physician.
* using trauma measures that are problematic (e.g., capillary refill) and grouping into broad color-coded categories that are not in accordance with injury severities, medical evidence and needs.
Bioethical concerns have historically played an important role in triage decisions, such as the allocation of iron lungs during the polio epidemics of the 1940s and of dialysis machines during the 1960s.
Minor amputations, flesh wounds, fractures and dislocations
It was developed at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, California for use by emergency services.
The person's pulse and breathing is checked to confirm no vitals present.
This will take approximately 90 seconds per patient.
The bodies will not be collected until all surviving individuals have been removed from the immediate disaster area.
They could be police, fire rescue, paramedics, or community individuals with disaster training (CERT certified).
+ Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS)
An example of this would be categorizing a Priority 3 (Minimal) patient as a Priority 2 (Delayed) or Priority 1 (Immediate).
As many health care systems in the developed world continue to plan for an expected influenza pandemic, bioethical issues regarding the triage of patients and the rationing of care continue to evolve.
Injuries are potentially life-threatening, but can wait until the Immediate casualties are stabilized and evacuated.
They are trained to perform first aid, basic life saving and rescue techniques while performing the greatest good, for the greatest number of people.
For many emergency medical services (EMS) systems, a similar model may sometimes still be applied.
During the early stages of an incident, first responders may be overwhelmed by the scope of patients and injuries.
* prescribed values of a statistical life and estimated savings in human lives that could reasonably be expected using evidence-based triage practices
intensive care unit patient is stable for the medical floor).
Such improvised facilities are generally developed in cooperation with the local hospital, which sees them as a strategy for creating surge capacity.
Triage tags may take a variety of forms.
Notions of mass casualty triage as an efficient rationing process of determining priority based upon injury severity are not supported by research, evaluation and testing of current triage practices, which lack scientific and methodological bases.
The categorizations of the victims are frequently the result of triage scores based on specific physiological assessment findings.
In 2006, a triage protocol on whom to exclude from treatment during a flu pandemic was written by a team of critical-care doctors at the behest of the Ontario government.
* '''Class I''': Patients who require minor treatment and can return to duty in a short period of time.'''
The involved are addressed to another structure called the CUMP–''Cellule d'urgence médico-psychologique'' (medical-psychological urgency cell); this is a resting zone, with food and possibly temporary lodging, and a psychologist to take care of the brief reactive psychosis and avoid post-traumatic stress disorder.
There will be a body collection staging area set up away from any medical staging areas.
* '''Class II''': Patients whose injuries require immediate life sustaining measures.
The model is used by both paramedics and E/R nurses, and also for pre-arrival notifications in some cases.
As triage concepts become more sophisticated, triage guidance is also evolving into both software and hardware decision support products for use by caregivers in both hospitals and the field.
After the preliminary assessment, a more specific and definite triage will follow, as soon as patients are brought to a field treatment facility.
In order to accommodate a greater number of the new critical patients, the existing patients may be triaged, and those who will not need immediate care can be discharged until the surge has dissipated, for example through the establishment of temporary medical facilities in the region.
A trauma score is invariably taken when the victim first comes into hospital and subsequent trauma scores are taken to account for any changes in the victim's physiological parameters.
As medical technology has advanced, so have modern approaches to triage, which are increasingly based on scientific models.
In the emergency room of a hospital, the triage is performed by a physician called MAO–''médecin d'accueil et d'orientation'' (reception and orientation physician), and a nurse called IOA–'' infirmière d'organisation et d'accueil'' (organisation and reception nurse).
* ''Delayed'' or Priority 2 (yellow) can have their medical evacuation delayed until all ''immediate'' persons have been transported.
This process can be ever-changing, dependent upon the situation and must attempt to do the maximum good for the maximum number of casualties.
From that point the first responder is quickly able to identify those in need of immediate attention, while not being distracted or overwhelmed by the magnitude of the situation.
Treatment when practical, transport and/or discharge when possible
Preliminary assessment of injuries is usually done by the first ambulance crew on scene, with this role being assumed by the first Notarzt arriving at the scene.
In these extreme situations, any medical care given to people who will die anyway can be considered to be care withdrawn from others who might have survived (or perhaps suffered less severe disability from their injuries) had they been treated instead.
This has happened in disasters such as terrorist attacks, mass shootings, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tornadoes, thunderstorms, and rail accidents.
The term ''triage'' may have originated during the Napoleonic Wars from the work of Dominique Jean Larrey.
forward medical post).
The most commonly used commercial systems include the METTAG, the SMARTTAG, E/T LIGHT tm and the CRUCIFORM systems.
* '''''' –  patients who have a trauma score of 12 (maximum score) and can be delayed before transport from the scene
The casualties are then transported to a higher level of care, either a Forward Surgical Team or Combat Support Hospital and re-triaged by a nurse or doctor.
In these cases some percentage of patients will die regardless of medical care because of the severity of their injuries.
For specific triage systems and methods see the sections dedicated to that topic''
This rations patient treatment efficiently when resources are insufficient for all to be treated immediately.
Should be seen by provider within
* '''''': Known as walking wounded or uninjured, green classified individuals typically require very little medical aid if any.
For example, a geriatric patient with a penetrating injury in the Delayed category can have an 8% survival probability, and a pediatric patient in the Immediate category can have a 98% survival probability.
France has also a Phone Triage system for Medical Emergencies Phone Demands in its Samu Medical Regulation Centers through the 15 medical free national hot line.
The same physiologic measures can have markedly different survival probabilities for blunt and penetrating injuries.
For general triage concepts, see the sections for types of triage, treatment options, and outcomes.''
The local National Guard and other military units responding would be using the military system of triage rather than civilian.
* ''Immediate'' or Priority 1 (red) evacuation by MEDEVAC if available or ambulance as they need advanced medical care at once or within 1 hour.
The use of advanced triage may become necessary when medical professionals decide that the medical resources available are not sufficient to treat all the people who need help.
In the mid-1980s, The Victoria General Hospital, in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, introduced paramedic triage in its Emergency Department.
This nurse will evaluate the patient's condition, as well as any changes, and will determine their priority for admission to the Emergency Room and also for treatment.
These are clear obstacles for efficient triage and resource rationing, for maximizing savings of lives, for best practices and National Incident Management System (NIMS) compatibilities, and for effective response planning and training.
In a "naval combat situation", the triage officer must weigh the tactical situation with supplies on hand and the realistic capacity of the medical personnel.
For a typical inpatient hospital triage system, a triage nurse or physician will either field requests for admission from the ER physician on patients needing admission or from physicians taking care of patients from other floors who can be transferred because they no longer need that level of care (i.e.
''This section is for concepts in triage.
There have been no cost-benefit analyses of the costs and mitigation of triage inefficiencies embedded in the healthcare system.
* wasteful daily resource utilization and increased operating costs from acceptance of substantial levels of overtriage
Minor injury or no injury
Now the responders can rapidly assess the remaining patients who are either expectant, or are in need of immediate aid.
Poor assessments, invalid categories, no objective methodology and tools for prioritizing casualties and allocating resources, and a protocol of worst first triage provide some challenges for emergency and disaster preparedness and response.
* '''''' – patients who have a trauma score of 0 to 2 and are beyond help
This triage is performed by a physician called ''médecin trieur'' (sorting medic).
It has been taught to California emergency workers for use in earthquakes.
These people are in critical condition and would die without immediate assistance.
Issues with the other START categories have also been noted.
As a rule, there will be no cardiopulmonary resuscitation, so patients who do not breathe on their own or develop circulation after their airways are cleared, will be tagged "deceased".
Also, not every major injury automatically qualifies for a red tag.
This system is intended to rapidly identify and classify victims for arriving transport or advanced care medical personnel such as doctors and nurses.
These people are not breathing and an effort to reposition their airway has been unsuccessful.
An example of this would be categorizing a Priority 1 (Immediate) patient as a Priority 2 (Delayed) or Priority 3 (Minimal).
Usually, triage refers to prioritising admission.
* Those who are likely to live, regardless of what care they receive;
Triage separates the injured into four groups:
The triage categories are general and the names may vary by region of the nation:
Constant observation and rapid treatment, transport as soon as practical
Examples include schools, sports stadiums, and large camps that can be prepared and used for the care, feeding, and holding of large numbers of victims of a mass casualty or other type of event.
* '''''': Individuals listed as black have died.
* '''''': Yellow individuals require medical attention but it is not needed immediately.
A patient with a traumatic amputation of the forearm might just be tagged yellow, have the bleeding stopped, and then be sent to a hospital when possible.
* '''''': The casualty requires medical attention within 6 hours.
* '''''': The casualty is expected not to reach higher medical support alive without compromising the treatment of higher priority patients.
Upon completion of the initial assessment by physicians, nurses or paramedical personnel, each patient may be labelled which may identify the patient, display assessment findings, and identify the priority of the patient's need for medical treatment and transport from the emergency scene.
Some of these models are purely ethical in origin, while others attempt to use other forms of clinical classification of patient condition as a method of standardized triage.
They will afterwards be staged in an area to be checked more thoroughly later.
* lacking the clear goal of maximizing the number of lives saved, as well as the focus, design and objective methodology to accomplish that goal (a protocol of taking the worst Immediate – lowest chances for survival – first can be statistically invalid and dangerous)
At its most primitive, patients may be simply marked with coloured flagging tape or with marker pens.
A battlefield situation, however, requires medics and corpsmen to rank casualties for precedence in MEDEVAC or CASEVAC.
Similar issues may occur for paramedics in the field in the earliest stages of mass casualty incidents when large numbers of potentially serious or critical patients may be combined with extremely limited staffing and treatment resources.
This helps keep patients moving through the hospital in an efficient and effective manner.
For those patients that have a poor prognosis and are expected to die regardless of the medical treatment available, palliative care such as painkillers may be given to ease suffering before they die.
Categories do not differentiate among injury severities and survival probabilities, and are invalid based on categorical definitions  and evacuation priorities
It also provides a method, in some communities, for benchmarking the accuracy of pre-triage of calls using AMPDS (What percentage of emergency calls have return priorities of CTAS 1,2,3, etc.)
Historically, acceptable undertriage rates have been deemed 5% or less.
They will rapidly classify victims and sort them into 4 categories, treating quickly as they go.
Some countries use a nationally standardized triage tag, while in other countries commercially available triage tags are used, and these will vary by jurisdictional choice.
The civilian medical industry uses a similar system for triage.
However once a full response has occurred and many hands are available, paramedics will usually use the model included in their service policy and standing orders.
Observation and if possible administration of analgesics
Field triage is based upon the notion of up to 50% overtriage as being acceptable.
The urgency is denoted as follows:
* cited benefits from standardization of triage methodology, reproducibility and interoperability, and NIMS compatibilities
Minor lacerations, sprains, abrasions
These people are able to walk, and may only require bandages and antiseptic.
Triage may result in determining the order and priority of emergency treatment, the order and priority of emergency transport, or the transport destination for the patient.
* not considering differences in injury severities and survival probabilities between types of trauma (blunt versus penetrating, etc.)
The treatment being prioritized can include the time spent on medical care, or drugs or other limited resources.
* ''Minor'' or Priority 3 (green) are not evacuated until all ''immediate'' and ''delayed'' persons have been evacuated.
Inefficient triage also provides challenges in containing health care costs and waste.
Immediate aid is applied to stop external arterial bleeding and airways are adjusted to ensure un-obstruction as they are carefully moved to a medical staging area, usually with the aid of those marked green or unable to provide medical assistance.
* '''Class III''': Patients for whom definitive treatment can be delayed without loss of life or limb.
* '''''': Red requires immediate medical attention and will not survive if not seen soon.
Dead on arrival, downgraded from T1-4, no spontaneous breathing after clearing of airway
'''Undertriage''' is the underestimating the severity of an illness or injury.
Those responsible for the removal of the wounded from a battlefield or their care afterwards would divide the victims into three categories:
* '''''' – patients who have a trauma score of 3 to 10 (RTS) and need immediate attention
In the UK and Europe, the triage process used is sometimes similar to that of the United States (see below), but the categories are different:
This triage is usually performed at the field hospital (PMA–''poste médical avancé'', i.e.
Curiously enough the model is not currently used for mass casualty triage, and is replaced by the START protocol and METTAG triage tags.
In a combat situation, the triage system is based solely on resources and ability to save the maximum number of lives within the means of the hospital supplies and personnel.
In larger events with more victims, the head is positioned to open the airway, the body is rolled onto its side and the responder will move on to the next victim.
* ordering (prioritization) and allocating resources subjectively within Immediate and Delayed categories, which are neither reproducible nor scalable, with little chance of being optimal
The model provides a common frame of reference for both nurses and paramedics, although the two groups do not always agree on scoring.
(Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment) is a simple triage system that can be performed by lightly trained lay and emergency personnel in emergencies.
Their injuries are minor, usually scrapes, cuts, and bruising with normal capillary refill.
A major factor contributing to the triage decision is available hospital bed space.
Alternative care facilities are places that are set up for the care of large numbers of patients, or are places that could be so set up.
No or small chance of survival
One valuable technique is the Patient Assist Method (PAM).
'''Overtriage''' is the overestimating of the severity of an illness or injury.
These people are in stable condition but require medical assistance.
In Hong Kong, triage in Accident & Emergency Departments is performed by experienced registered nurses, patients are divided into five triage categories: ''Critical'', ''Emergency'', ''Urgent'', ''Semi-urgent'' and ''Non-urgent''.
Some models, such as the START model may be algorithm-based.
* '''''': "Walking wounded," the casualty requires medical attention when all higher priority patients have been evacuated, and may not require stabilization or monitoring.
Triage in a multi-scale destruction, disaster, catastrophic, casualty event, such as following a tornado or an explosion in a populated area, first responders follow a similar triage category scale as the US military.
During peacetime, most amputation injuries may be triaged "Red" because surgical reattachment must take place within minutes, even though in all probability the person will not die without a thumb or hand.
This does several things at once, it identifies patients that are not so severely injured, that they need immediate help, it physically clears the scene, and provides possible assistants to the responders.
In the field, triage sets priorities for evacuation or relocation to other care facilities.
Field assessments are made by two methods: '''primary survey''' (used to detect & treat life-threatening injuries) and '''secondary survey''' (used to treat non-life-threatening injuries) with the following categories:
Acceptable overtriage rates have been typically up to 50% in an effort to avoid undertriage.
Individuals in this category may have cuts, bruises, lacerations, some confusion, minor fractures, and a capillary refill between 4 and 7 seconds(sometimes longer in cold environments).
The triage categories (with corresponding color codes), in precedence, are:
The paramedic triage system was moved to the city's only remaining adult emergency department, located at the New Halifax Infirmary.
Triage also sets priorities for evacuation and transport as follows:
The absolute urgencies are usually treated onsite (the PMA has an operating room) or evacuated to a hospital.
A similar process can be applied to discharging patients early when the medical system is stressed.
These will not need advanced medical care for at least several hours.
