In addition to combat with predators using horns, ''Triceratops'' are classically shown engaging each other in combat with horns locked.
The main groups of ornithischians are ankylosaurians, ornithopods, ceratopsians, and pachycephalosaurians.
Discoverers would name these as separate species (listed below), and came up with several phylogenetic schemes for how they were related to each other.
Also, modern living creatures with such displays of horns and adornments use them in similar behavior.
The multituberculates represented include ''Paracimexomys'', the cimolomyids ''Paressonodon'', ''Meniscoessus'', ''Essonodon'', ''Cimolomys'', ''Cimolodon'', and ''Cimexomys''; and the neoplagiaulacids ''Mesodma'', and ''Neoplagiaulax''.
A paper describing these findings in detail was published in July 2010 by Scannella and Horner.
Only three oviraptorosaurs are from the Hell Creek Formation, ''Anzu'', ''Leptorhynchos'' and a giant species  of caenagnathid, very similar to ''Gigantoraptor'', from South Dakota.
Andrew Farke had in 2006 stressed that, apart from the frill, no systematic differences could be found between ''Torosaurus'' and ''Triceratops''.
To the rear of the skull was a relatively short, bony frill, adorned with epoccipitals in some specimens.
hatcheri'' lineage was of pathologic old males.
''Zuniceratops'', the earliest known ceratopsian with brow horns, was described in the late 1990s, and ''Yinlong'', the first known Jurassic ceratopsian, in 2005.
While studies show that such activity would be feasible, if unlike that of present-day horned animals, there is disagreement about whether they did so.
Paleontologist Peter Dodson estimates that if ''Tyrannosaurus'' attacked a bull ''Triceratops'', the ''Triceratops'' had the upper hand and would successfully defend itself by inflicting fatal wounds to the ''Tyrannosaurus'' using its sharp horns.
The researchers also concluded that the damage found on the specimens in the study was often too localized to be caused by bone disease.
Groups represented include multituberculates, metatherians, and eutherians.
10 of the 28 skulls could be placed in order in a growth series with one representing each age.
While several other genera of horned dinosaurs are known from bonebeds preserving bones from two to hundreds or thousands of individuals, to date there is only one documented bonebed dominated by ''Triceratops'' bones: a site in southeastern Montana with the remains of three juveniles.
In 2006, the first extensive ontogenetic study of ''Triceratops'' was published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society.
Subsequent discoveries and analyses upheld Sternberg's view on the position of ''Triceratops'', with Lehman defining both subfamilies in 1990 and diagnosing ''Triceratops'' as ceratopsine (chasmosaurine of his usage) on the basis of several morphological features.
They functioned by shearing in a vertical to near-vertical orientation.
Paleontologist Bob Bakker said of the imagined rivalry between ''Tyrannosaurus'' and ''Triceratops'', "No matchup between predator and prey has ever been more dramatic.
These fossil formations date back to the time of the Cretaceous-Paleogene Extinction Event, and has been dated to 66 ± 0.07 million years ago.
hatcheri'' that was characterized by a very small nasal horn.
Longrich observed that another newly described genus, ''Tatankaceratops'', displayed a strange mix of characteristics already found in adult and juvenile ''Triceratops''.
The great size and numerous teeth of ''Triceratops'' suggests that they ate large volumes of fibrous plant material, with some suggesting palms and cycads, and others suggesting ferns, which then grew in prairies.
Originally identified as a hadrosaur, this specimen consists only of post-cranial remains and is only provisionally considered an example of ''Triceratops''.
The largest known skull (specimen MWC 7584, formerly BYU 12183) is estimated to have been  in length when complete, and could reach almost a third of the length of the entire animal.
In 1942, Charles R. Knight painted a mural incorporating a confrontation between the two dinosaurs in the Field Museum of Natural History for the National Geographic Society, establishing them as enemies in popular thought.
Given the abundance of fossils, particularly of ''Triceratops'', additional field discoveries are expected to settle the debate in time.
''Triceratops'' was one of the last ceratopsian genera to appear before the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event.
There is evidence that ''Tyrannosaurus'' did have aggressive head-on encounters with ''Triceratops'', based on partially healed tyrannosaur tooth marks on a ''Triceratops'' brow horn and squamosal; the bitten horn is also broken, with new bone growth after the break.
Unlike most animals, skull fossils are far more common than postcranial bones for ''Triceratops'', suggesting that the skull had an unusually high preservation potential.
Among them are the derived pachycephalosaurids ''Stygimoloch'', ''Dracorex'', ''Pachycephalosaurus'', ''Sphaerotholus'', and an undescribed specimen from North Dakota.
Paleontologist John Scannella observed: "It is hard to walk out into the Hell Creek Formation and not stumble upon a ''Triceratops'' weathering out of a hillside."
The avialans known from the formation are ''Avisaurus'', multiple species of ''Brodavis'', and several other species of hesperornithoforms, as well as several species of true birds including ''Cimolopteryx''.
flabellatus'') stood apart from these groups.
''Triceratops'' teeth were arranged in groups called batteries, of 36 to 40 tooth columns, in each side of each jaw with 3 to 5 stacked teeth per column, depending on the size of the animal.
Later revisions supported this view, formally describing the first, short-frilled group as Centrosaurinae (including ''Triceratops''), and the second, long-frilled group as Chasmosaurinae.
It formally argues that ''Torosaurus'' and the similar contemporary ''Nedoceratops'' are synonymous with ''Triceratops''.
Part of their rationale was that generally there are only one or two species of any large animal in a region (modern examples being the elephant and the giraffe in modern Africa).
He realized that there were horned dinosaurs by the next year, which saw his publication of the genus ''Ceratops'' from fragmentary remains, but he still believed ''B.
Within the first decades after ''Triceratops'' was described, various skulls were collected, which varied to a lesser or greater degree from the original ''Triceratops'', named ''T.
In the first overview of horned dinosaurs, R. S. Lull hypothesized two lineages, one of ''Monoclonius'' and ''Centrosaurus'' leading to ''Triceratops'', the other with ''Ceratops'' and ''Torosaurus'', making ''Triceratops'' a centrosaurine as the group is understood today.
Each of the four growth stages were found to have identifying features.
Ornithopods are common in the Hell Creek Formation, and are known from several species of the ornithopod ''Thescelosaurus'', and the hadrosaurids ''Edmontosaurus'', and a possible species of ''Parasaurolophus''.
One skull, assigned to ''Triceratops'', was observed to have a hole in the jugal which appears to be a puncture wound that was sustained while this individual was still alive.
Further research by Peter Dodson, including a 1990 cladistic analysis and a 1993 study using RFTRA (resistant-fit theta-rho analysis), a morphometric technique which systematically measures similarities in skull shape, reinforces ''Triceratops''' placement in the ceratopsine subfamily.
For many years, ''Triceratops'' finds were known only from solitary individuals.
John Scannella and Jack Horner regarded it as an intermediate growth stage between ''Triceratops'' and ''Torosaurus''.
More recent theories, noting the presence of blood vessels in the skull bones of ceratopsids, find it more probable that these features were primarily used in identification, courtship and dominance displays, much like the antlers and horns of modern reindeer, mountain goats, or rhinoceros beetles.
Traditionally, these have been viewed as defensive weapons against predators.
In phylogenetic taxonomy, the genus ''Triceratops'' has been used as a reference point in the definition of Dinosauria; dinosaurs have been designated as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of ''Triceratops'' and Neornithes (i.e.
John Scannella, in a paper presented in Bristol, UK at the conference of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology (25 September 2009) reclassified ''Torosaurus'' as especially mature ''Triceratops'' individuals, perhaps representing a single sex.
It bore a single horn on the snout, above the nostrils, and a pair of horns approximately  long, with one above each eye.
The first two might be junior synonyms of ''Pachycephalosaurus''.
''Triceratops'' species possessed a sturdy build, with strong limbs, short hands with three hooves each, and short feet with four hooves each.
In ''Triceratops'', the weight of the body was carried by only the first three fingers of the hand, while digits 4 and 5 were vestigial and lacked claws or hooves.
The term ''Triceratops'', which literally means "three-horned face", is derived from the Greek τρί- (''tri-'') meaning "three", κέρας (''kéras'') meaning "horn", and ὤψ (''ops'') meaning "face".
It is one of the last known non-avian dinosaur genera, and became extinct in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago.
''Triceratops'' lived during the Late Cretaceous of North America, its fossils have come from the Evanston Formation, Scollard Formation, Laramie Formation, Lance Formation, Denver Formation, and Hell Creek Formation.
Multiple ontogenetic trends were discovered, including the size reduce of the epoccipitals, development and reorientation of postorbital horns, and hollowing out of the horns.
''Triceratops'' remains have subsequently been found in the American states of Montana and South Dakota (in addition to Colorado and Wyoming), and in the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta, Canada.
Many animals and plants have been found in these formations, but mostly from the Lance Formation and Hell Creek Formation.
Research published in 2010 suggested that the contemporaneous ''Torosaurus'', a ceratopsid long regarded as a separate genus, represents ''Triceratops'' in its mature form.
The assertion ignited debate.
Its distinguishing features are an elongated skull and the presence of two fenestrae, or holes, in the frill.
prorsus'', although the distinctive skull of ''T.''
A study by Nicholas Longrich and Daniel Field analyzed 35 specimens of both ''Triceratops'' and ''Torosaurus''.
horridus'' lineage.
This gives a range of 432 to 800 teeth, of which only a fraction were in use at any given time (tooth replacement was continuous and occurred throughout the life of the animal).
The exact placement of the ''Triceratops'' genus within the ceratopsid group has been debated by paleontologists.
Evidence for this includes a heavily tooth-scored ''Triceratops'' ilium and sacrum.
With a total number of 28 skulls studied, the youngest was only  long.
Recent years have been fruitful for the discovery of several dinosaurs related to ancestors of ''Triceratops''.
Several pachycephalosaurians have been found in the Hell Creek Formation and in similar formations.
Ichnological evidence in the form of trackways from horned dinosaurs and recent reconstructions of skeletons (both physical and digital) seem to show that ''Triceratops'' and other ceratopsids maintained an upright stance during normal locomotion, with the elbows flexed and slightly bowed out, in an intermediate state between fully upright and fully sprawling (as in the modern rhinoceros).
Instead, non-pathological bone resorption, or unknown bone diseases, are suggested as causes.
This, and other apparent healed wounds in the skulls of ceratopsians, has been cited as evidence of non-fatal intraspecific competition in these dinosaurs.
The view was immediately disputed and examination of more fossil evidence is expected to settle the debate.
Paleontologists investigating dinosaur ontogeny (growth and development of individuals over the life span) in the Hell Creek Formation, Montana, US, have recently presented evidence that the two represent a single genus.
For many years after its discovery, the evolutionary origins of ''Triceratops'' remained largely obscure.
This variation is unsurprising, given that ''Triceratops'' skulls are large three-dimensional objects, coming from individuals of different ages and both sexes, and which were subjected to different amounts and directions of pressure during fossilization.
The study, by John R. Horner and Mark Goodwin, found that individuals of ''Triceratops'' could be divided into four general ontogenetic groups, babies, juveniles, subadults, and adults.
The most distinctive feature is their large skull, among the largest of all land animals.
''Acheroraptor'' and ''Dakotaraptor'' are dromaeosaurids from the Hell Creek Formation.
Andrew Farke, in his 2011 redescription of the only known skull, concluded that it was an aged individual of its own valid taxon, ''Nedoceratops hatcheri''.
Confusion stemmed mainly from the combination of short, solid frills (similar to that of Centrosaurinae), and the long brow horns (more akin to Ceratopsinae, also known as Chasmosaurinae).
These remains are very common; for example, Bruce Erickson, a paleontologist of the Science Museum of Minnesota, has reported having seen 200&nbsp;specimens of ''T.
The exact location of ''Triceratops'' among the ceratopsians has been debated over the years.
Which animal was the aggressor is not known.
horridus'' and ''T.
It is still possible to interpret the differences as representing a single species with sexual dimorphism.
Another, more recent find may reveal that ''Triceratops'' lived in small family groups.
Opinion has varied on the validity of a separate genus for ''Nedoceratops''.
In 1986, Robert Bakker estimated it as making up 5/6ths of the large dinosaur fauna at the end of the Cretaceous.
The large frill also may have helped to increase body area to regulate body temperature.
alticornis'' to be a Pliocene mammal.
The hands and forearms of ''Triceratops'' retained a fairly primitive structure compared to other quadrupedal dinosaurs such as thyreophorans and many sauropods.
calicornis'' was defined by large brow horns and small nasal horn.
Bearing a large bony frill and three horns on its large four-legged body, and possessing similarities with the modern rhinoceros, ''Triceratops'' is one of the most recognizable of all dinosaurs and the best known ceratopsid.
Significant variety is seen even in those skulls already identified as ''Triceratops'', Horner said, "where the horn orientation is backwards in juveniles and forward in adults".
''Tyrannosaurus'' is also known to have fed on ''Triceratops''.
It's somehow fitting that those two massive antagonists lived out their co-evolutionary belligerence through the very last days of the very last epoch of the Age of Dinosaurs."
Theropods from these formations include genera of tyrannosaurids, ornithomimids, troodontids, avialans, caenagnathids, and dromaeosaurids.
The authors concluded that ''Triceratops'' individuals too old to be considered immature forms are represented in the fossil record, as are ''Torosaurus'' individuals too young to be considered fully mature adults.
However, only fossilized foot prints were discovered.
The first named specimen now attributed to ''Triceratops'' is a pair of brow horns attached to a skull roof, found near Denver, Colorado in the spring of 1887.
A ''Triceratops''  long has been estimated by Gregory S. Paul to have massed .
Troodontids are only represented by ''Pectinodon'' and ''Paronychodon'' in the Hell Creek Formation; with a possible species of ''Troodon'' from the Lance Formation.
Originally, it was believed that the front legs of the animal had to be sprawling at angles from the thorax in order to better bear the weight of the head.
Since the ''Triceratops'' wounds healed, it is most likely that the ''Triceratops'' survived the encounter and managed to overcome the ''Tyrannosaurus''.
prorsus'' in the Hell Creek Formation of Montana.
As ''Triceratops'' is increasingly shown to be a member of the long-frilled Ceratopsinae subfamily, a likely ancestor may have resembled ''Chasmosaurus'', which thrived some 5 million years earlier.
Scannella's ''Triceratops'' specimen with a hole on its frill, they argued, could represent a diseased or malformed individual rather than a transitional stage between an immature ''Triceratops'' and mature ''Torosaurus'' form.
brevicornus'' lineage was composed of females, the ''T.calicornis''-''T.elatus'' lineage was made up of males, and the ''T.
Furthermore, the bird-hipped dinosaurs, Ornithischia, have all been designated dinosaurs with a more recent common ancestor to ''Triceratops'' than modern birds.
In 2009, John Scannella and Denver Fowler supported the separation of ''T.
It is believed that the animals were traveling as a family unit, but it remains unknown if the group consists of a mated pair and their offspring, or two females and a juvenile they were caring for.
The below cladogram follows Longrich (2015), who named a new species of ''Pentaceratops'', and included nearly all species of chasmosaurine.
brevicornus'' was now thought to be the most conservative lineage, with an increase in skull size and a decrease in nasal horn size, and ''T.
serratus'' and ''T.
A newer study compared incidence rates of skull lesions and periosteal reaction in ''Triceratops'' and ''Centrosaurus'' and showed that these were consistent with ''Triceratops'' using its horns in combat and the frill being adapted as a protective structure, while lower pathology rates in ''Centrosaurus'' may indicate visual rather than physical use of cranial ornamentation, or a form of combat focused on the body rather than the head.
By 1933, and his revision of the landmark 1907 Hatcher-Marsh-Lull monograph of all known ceratopsians, he retained his two groups and two unaffiliated species, with a third lineage of ''T.
Similarly, Barnum Brown claimed to have seen over 500&nbsp;skulls in the field.
The ''Torosaurus'' genus resembles ''Triceratops'' in geological age, distribution, anatomy and physical size and it has been recognised as a close relative.
C. M. Sternberg made one modification, adding ''T.
Andrew Farke (2011) maintained that it represents a valid distinct genus.
brevicornus'' stood alone, and since there were many more specimens in the first group, she suggested that this meant the two groups were two species.
Ornithischians are abundant in the Scollard Lance, Laramie, Lance, Denver, and  Hell Creek Formation.
One species of coelurosaur is known from Hell Creek and similar formations by a single species, ''Richardoestesia''.
It may be significant that only juveniles were present.
It shared the landscape with and was probably preyed upon by ''Tyrannosaurus'', though it is less certain that the two did battle in the manner often depicted in traditional museum displays and popular images.
A recurring theme, especially in children's dinosaur books, is a climactic showdown or battle between ''Triceratops'' and ''Tyrannosaurus''.
With time, the idea that the differing skulls might be representative of individual variation within one (or two) species gained popularity.
A 2006 study of the smallest ''Triceratops'' skull, ascertained to be a juvenile, shows the frill and horns developed at a very early age, predating sexual development and thus probably important for visual communication and species recognition in general.
Although ''Triceratops'' are commonly portrayed as herding animals, there is currently little evidence that they lived in herds.
The synonymy of ''Triceratops'' and ''Torosaurus'' cannot be supported, they said, without more convincing intermediate forms than Scannella and Horner initially produced.
After reflection, Marsh changed his mind and gave it the generic name ''Triceratops'', accepting his ''Bison alticornis'' as another species of ''Ceratops'' (it would later be added to ''Triceratops'').
His reasoning was that males had taller, more erect horns and larger skulls, and females had smaller skulls with shorter, forward-facing horns.
In those two groups, the forelimbs of quadrupedal species were usually rotated so that the hands faced forward with palms backward ("pronated") as the animals walked.
To their findings, Lehman added the old Lull-Sternberg lineages combined with maturity and sexual dimorphism, suggesting that the ''T.
The sturdy nature of the animal's skull has ensured that many examples have been preserved as fossils, allowing variations between species and individuals to be studied.
She found that ''T.
The distinctive appearance of ''Triceratops'' has led to them being frequently depicted in films, computer games and documentaries, such as the 1993 film ''Jurassic Park'' and the 1999 BBC television documentary ''Walking with Dinosaurs''.
This observation is highly suggestive of what is now believed to be the primary function, display.
''Triceratops'', like other ceratopsians and the related quadrupedal ornithopods, walked with most of their fingers pointing out and away from the body, the primitive condition for dinosaurs also retained by bipedal forms like the theropods.
Nicholas Longrich and Daniel Fields also did not consider it a transition between ''Torosaurus'' and ''Triceratops'', suggesting that the frill holes were pathological.
Multiple genera of ceratopsians are known from the formation other than ''Triceratops'', the leptoceratopsid ''Leptoceratops'', and the chasmosaurine ceratopsids  ''Torosaurus'',''Nedoceratops'' and ''Tatankaceratops''.
The remains are currently under excavation by paleontologist Peter Larson and a team from the Black Hills Institute.
It took a third and much more complete skull to change his mind.
horridus'' and ''T.
Creatures would require the growth of epoccipitals, reversion of bone texture from adult to immature forms back to adult, and growth of frill holes at a later stage than usual.
Mammals are plentiful in the Hell Creek Formation.
Among ornithomimids are the genera ''Struthiomimus'' as well as ''Ornithomimus'', although an undescribed animal named "Orcomimus" could be from the formation.
Three ankylosaurians are known, ''Ankylosaurus'', ''Denversaurus'', and possibly a species of ''Edmontonia'' or an undescribed genus.
In 2012, a group of three ''Triceratops'' in relatively complete condition, each of varying sizes from a full-grown adult to a small juvenile, were found in Wyoming, near Newcastle.
This stance can be seen in paintings by Charles Knight and Rudolph Zallinger.
Evidence that visual display was important, either in courtship or in other social behavior, can be seen in the fact that horned dinosaurs differ markedly in their adornments, making each species highly distinctive.
''Triceratops'' were long thought to have possibly used their horns and frills in combat with predators such as ''Tyrannosaurus'', the idea being discussed first by C. H. Sternberg in 1917 and 70 years later by Robert Bakker.
horridus'' by Marsh (from the Latin ''horridus''; "rough, rugose", suggesting the roughened texture of those bones belonging to the type specimen, later identified as an aged individual).
This is supported by signs of healing that are present in the bone around the supposed wound.
Forty-seven complete or partial skulls were discovered in just that area from 2000 to 2010.
horridus'' specimens that were previously attributed to the defunct species ''T.
horridus'' named Kelsey measured  long with a  skull, stood about  tall, and was estimated by the Black Hills institute to weight nearly .
prorsus'', and ''T.
In 2010, paleontologists revealed a fossil (named "Yoshi's Trike," MOR 3027) with  horn cores, housed and displayed at the Museum of the Rockies in Montana.
The remains also show signs of predation or scavenging from ''Tyrannosaurus'', particularly on the largest specimen, with the bones of the front limbs showing breakage and puncture wounds from ''Tyrannosaurus'' teeth.
The theory would find additional support if ''Torosaurus'' was found to be the mature form of ''Triceratops'', as this would mean the frill also developed holes (fenestrae) as individuals reached maturity, rendering the structure more useful for display than defense.
As described above, John Scannella had argued in 2010 that ''Nedoceratops'' should be considered a synonym of ''Triceratops''.
horridus'' and several other species belonged together, and ''T.
The functions of the frills and three distinctive facial horns on its head have long inspired debate.
Specimens representing life stages from hatchling to adult have been found.
Indeterminate dromaeosaurs are known from other fossil formations.
The specimen, collected in 1888 by John Bell Hatcher from the Lance Formation of Wyoming, was initially described as another species of ''Ceratops''.
A similar theory has been proposed regarding the plates of ''Stegosaurus'', although this use alone would not account for the bizarre and extravagant variation seen in different members of the Ceratopsidae.
''Triceratops'' is the best known genus of the Ceratopsidae, a family of large North American horned dinosaurs.
In the first attempt to understand the many species, Lull found two groups, although he did not say how he distinguished them: one composed of ''T.
He nevertheless disputed Scannella's conclusion by arguing in 2011 that the proposed morphological changes required to "age" a ''Triceratops'' into a ''Torosaurus'' would be without precedent among ceratopsids.
The phalangeal formula is 2-3-4-3-1, meaning that the innermost finger of the forelimb has two bones, the next has three, etc.
In 1949, C. M. Sternberg was the first to question this and favoured instead that ''Triceratops'' was more closely related to ''Arrhinoceratops'' and ''Chasmosaurus'' based on skull and horn features, making ''Triceratops'' a ceratopsine (chasmosaurine of his usage) genus.
When examined closely, the hole in the bone has a diameter that is very similar to diameter of the distal end of a ''Triceratops'' horn.
''Triceratops'' has been documented by numerous remains collected since the genus was first described in 1889, including at least one complete individual skeleton.
Common teeth previously referred to ''Dromaeosaurus'' and ''Saurornitholestes'' later were considered to be ''Acheroraptor''.
A characteristic of metaplastic bone is that it lengthens and shortens over time, extending and resorbing to form new shapes.
horridus'', and noted that the two species are also separated stratigraphically within the Hell Creek Formation, indicating that they did not live together at the same time.
The fossils, he argued, are indistinguishable from the ''T.
In 1986, Ostrom and Wellnhofer published a paper in which they proposed that there was only one species, ''Triceratops horridus''.
Approximately 50% of all subadult ''Triceratops'' skulls have two thin areas in the frill that correspond with the placement of "holes" in ''Torosaurus'' skulls, suggesting that holes developed to offset the weight that would otherwise have been added as maturing ''Triceratops'' individuals grew longer frills.
The related ''Torosaurus'', and the more distantly related diminutive ''Leptoceratops'', were also present, though their remains have been rarely encountered.
Most other ceratopsids had large fenestrae in their frills, while those of ''Triceratops'' were noticeably solid.
The frequency of injury was found to be 14% in ''Triceratops''.
Because ''Triceratops'' teeth, horn fragments, frill fragments, and other skull fragments are such abundant fossils in the Lancian faunal stage of the late Maastrichtian (late Cretaceous, 66&nbsp;mya) Period of western North America, it is regarded as among the dominant herbivores of the time, if not the most dominant herbivore.
Although pitting, holes, lesions, and other damage on ''Triceratops'' skulls (and the skulls of other ceratopsids) are often attributed to horn damage in combat, a 2006 study finds no evidence for horn thrust injuries causing these forms of damage (for example, there is no evidence of infection or healing).
In 1922, the newly discovered ''Protoceratops'' was seen as its ancestor by Henry Fairfield Osborn, but many decades passed before additional findings came to light.
horridus'' can be distinguished from ''T.
Although certainly quadrupedal, the posture of these dinosaurs has long been the subject of some debate.
("''Nedoceratops''") ''hatcheri'' differed enough to warrant a separate genus.
In fact, it fits well into the ceratopsine subfamily, apart from its one feature of a shortened frill.
This specimen was sent to Othniel Charles Marsh, who believed that the formation from which it came dated from the Pliocene, and that the bones belonged to a particularly large and unusual bison, which he named ''Bison alticornis''.
Nick Longrich agreed with Scannella about ''Nedoceratops'' and made a further suggestion: that the recently described ''Ojoceratops'' was likewise a synonym.
