*''Endops'' (Middle Permian)
The facial sutures lie along the anterior edge, at the division between the cranidium and the librigena.
*Holochroal eyes had a great number (sometimes over 15,000) of small (30–100&nbsp;μm, rarely larger) lenses.
Several exemplary time series of species show the "migration" of the dorsal suture until it coincides with the margins of the cephalon.
Secondary blindness is not uncommon, particularly in long lived groups such as the Agnostida and Trinucleioidea.
Prosopon does not include large scale extensions of the cuticle (e.g.
Little is known of the early history of holochroal eyes; Lower and Middle Cambrian trilobites rarely preserve the visual surface.
Some trilobites (particularly the family Olenidae) are even thought to have evolved a symbiotic relationship with sulfur-eating bacteria from which they derived food.
Endopodites are attached to the coxa, which also bore a feather-like exopodite, or gill branch, which was used for respiration and, in some species, swimming.
Specific changes to the cephalon are also noted; variable glabella size and shape, position of eyes and facial sutures, and hypostome specialization.
*''Exallaspis (Mid to Late-Silurian)
By the time trilobites first appeared in the fossil record, they were already highly diversified and geographically dispersed.
hollow pleural spines) but to finer scale features, such as ribbing, domes, pustules, pitting, ridging and perforations.
Most scientists believe that order Redlichiida, more specifically its suborder Redlichiina, contains a common ancestor of all other orders, with the possible exception of the Agnostina.
The Phacopida and other "new" clades almost certainly had Cambrian forebears, but the fact that they have avoided detection is a strong indication that novel morphologies were developing very rapidly.
asaphids) failed to last through the Ordovician extinctions, while trilobites that were planktonic for only the first protaspid stage before metamorphosing into benthic forms survived (e.g.
There are three main forms of trace fossils associated with trilobites: ''Rusophycus''; ''Cruziana'' & ''Diplichnites''&nbsp;– such trace fossils represent the preserved life activity of trilobites active upon the sea floor.
By the Ordovician mass extinction vigorous trilobite radiation has stopped and gradual decline beckons.
fine details of eye structure) as well as the exoskeleton.
Thus eye morphology can be used to make assumptions about the ecosystem of trilobites.
However, the end Ordovician mass extinction did not leave the trilobites unscathed; some distinctive and previously successful forms such as the Trinucleioidea and Agnostida became extinct.
Hypostome morphology is highly variable; sometimes supported by an un-mineralised membrane (natant), sometimes fused onto the anterior doublure with an outline very similar to the glabella above (conterminant) or fused to the anterior doublure with an outline significantly different from the glabella (impendent).
Very shortly after trilobite fossils appeared in the lower Cambrian, they rapidly diversified into the major orders that typified the Cambrian—Redlichiida, Ptychopariida, Agnostida, and Corynexochida.
Evidence suggests that significant diversification had already occurred before trilobites were preserved in the fossil record, easily allowing for the "sudden" appearance of diverse trilobite groups with complex derived characteristics (e.g.
Examples of these specimens have been found in the Hamar Laghdad Formation of Alnif in Morocco.
Another common feature of the Olenellina also suggests this suborder to be the ancestral trilobite stock:  early protaspid stages have not been found, supposedly because these were not calcified, and this also is supposed to represent the original state.
the posterior antenniform cerci preserved only in ''Olenoides serratus'') remain difficult to assess in the wider picture.
Highly complex compound eyes are another obvious feature of the cephalon.
Although intra-species trilobite diversity seems to have peaked during the Cambrian, trilobites were still active participants in the Ordovician radiation event with a new fauna taking over from the old Cambrian one.
Lenses of trilobites' eyes were made of calcite (calcium carbonate, CaCO3).
The "feeding limbs" attached to the cephalon are thought to have fed food into the mouth, possibly "slicing" the food on the hypostome and/or gnathobases first.
Prior to the onset of the first meraspid stage the animal had a two-part structure&nbsp;— the head and the plate of fused trunk segments, the pygidium.
Because of this (along with other primitive characteristics), they are thought to be the earliest ancestors of later trilobites.
*''Triproetus'' (Late Carboniferous to Early Permian)
Some of the genera of Trilobites appearing in the Ordovician include:
In the 1959 Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology, what are now members of orders Ptychopariida, Asaphida, Proetida, and Harpetida were grouped together as order Ptychopariida; subclass Librostoma was erected in 1990 to encompass all of these orders, based on their shared ancestral character of a natant (unattached) hypostome.
A trilobite's cephalon, or head section, is highly variable with a lot of morphological complexity.
All species assigned to the suborder Olenellina, that became extinct at the very end of the Early Cambrian (like ''Fallotaspis'', ''Nevadia'', ''Judomia'', and ''Olenellus'') lacked facial sutures.
have been found in British Columbia, Canada (the Cambrian Burgess Shale and similar localities); New York, U.S.A. (Ordovician Walcott-Rust quarry, near Russia, and Beecher's Trilobite Bed, near Rome); China (Lower Cambrian Maotianshan Shales near Chengjiang); Germany (the Devonian Hunsrück Slates near Bundenbach) and, much more rarely, in trilobite-bearing strata in Utah (Wheeler Shale and other formations), Ontario, and Manuels River, Newfoundland and Labrador.
'''Trilobites''' (; meaning "three lobes") are a fossil group of extinct marine arthropods that form the class '''Trilobita'''.
However, despite morphological complexity and an unclear position within higher classifications, there are a number of characteristics that distinguish the trilobites from other arthropods: a generally sub-elliptical, dorsal, chitinous exoskeleton divided longitudinally into three distinct lobes (from which the group gets its name); having a distinct, relatively large head shield (cephalon) articulating axially with a thorax comprising articulated transverse segments, the hindmost of which are almost invariably fused to form a tail shield (pygidium).
In some trilobites macula are suggested to function as simple "ventral eyes" that could have detected night and day or allowed a trilobite to navigate while swimming (or turned) upside down.
This implies that lenses need to be larger under low light conditions (such as for ''Pricyclopyge'', when comparing it to ''Carolinites''), and for fast moving predators and prey.
Llandrindod Wells, Powys, Wales, is another famous trilobite location.
A hole was bored in the head and the fossil was worn on a string.
The first appearance of trilobites in the fossil record defines the base of the Atdabanian stage of the Early Cambrian period (), and they flourished throughout the lower Paleozoic era before beginning a drawn-out decline to extinction when, during the Devonian, all trilobite orders except the Proetids died out.
When enrolled, trilobite spines offered additional protection.
Sometimes the Nektaspida are included, but these lack a calcified exoskeleton and eyes.
Effacement, the loss of surface detail in the cephalon, pygidium, or the thoracic furrows, is also a common evolutionary trend.
The pair of antennae suspected in most trilobites (and preserved in a few examples) were highly flexible to allow them to be retracted when the trilobite was enrolled.
However, a number of characteristic forms do not extend far into the Devonian and almost all the remainder were wiped out by a series of drastic Middle and Late Devonian extinctions.
Trilobite development was unusual in the way in which articulations developed between segments, and changes in the development of articulation gave rise to the conventionally recognized developmental phases of the trilobite life cycle (divided into 3 stages), which are not readily compared with those of other arthropods.
A continuing decrease in Laurentian continental shelf area is recorded at the same time as the extinctions, suggesting major environmental upheaval.
The connection between large pitted fringes on the cephalon of Harpetida and Trinucleoidea with corresponding small or absent eyes makes for an interesting possibility of the fringe as a "compound ear".
The mouth is linked by a small esophagus to the stomach that lay forward of the mouth, below the glabella.
The size of the glabella and the lateral fringe of the cephalon, together with hypostome variation, have been linked to different lifestyles, diets and specific ecological niches.
*''Elrathia'' (Middle Cambrian)
The Early Ordovician is marked by vigorous radiations of articulate brachiopods, bryozoans, bivalves, echinoderms, and graptolites, with many groups appearing in the fossil record for the first time.
As might be expected for a group of animals comprising  genera, the morphology and description of trilobites can be complex.
However, that trilobites share a common ancestor with other arthropods before the Ediacaran-Cambrian boundary is still reasonable to assume.
The exoskeleton is composed of calcite and calcium phosphate minerals in a lattice of chitin that covers the upper surface (dorsal) of the trilobite and curled round the lower edge to produce a small fringe called the "doublure".
Holochroal eyes are the ancestral eye of trilobites, and are by far the most common, found in all orders except the Agnostida, and through the entirety of the Trilobites' existence.
Early trilobites show all the features of the trilobite group as a whole;  transitional or ancestral forms showing or combining the features of trilobites with other groups (e.g.
It is absent in some trilobites like ''Lachnostoma''.
Example genera showing this type of suture include ''Peltura'' of Olenina (Ptychopariida) and ''Bumastus'' of Illaenina (Corynexochida).
Each segment consists of the central axial ring and the outer pleurae, which protected the limbs and gills.
*''Eodalmanitina'' (Middle Ordovician)
On the same trip he examined a burial, of unknown age, with a drilled trilobite fossil lying in the chest cavity of the interred.
Travelling through the badlands, he photographed two petroglyphs that most likely represent trilobites.
The anterior and lateral fringe of the cephalon is greatly enlarged in the Harpetida, in other species a bulge in the pre-glabellar area is preserved that suggests a brood pouch.
Holochroal eyes had no sclera, the white layer covering the eyes of most modern arthropods.
Example genera showing this type of suture include ''Dalmanites'' of Phacopina (Phacopida) and ''Ekwipagetia'' of Eodiscina (Agnostida).
The exact purpose of the prosopon is not resolved but suggestions include structural strengthening, sensory pits or hairs, preventing predator attacks and maintaining aeration while enrolled.
A toothless mouth and stomach sat upon the hypostome with the mouth facing backward at the rear edge of the hypostome.
*''Parabolina ''(Early Ordovician)
Schizochroal eyes appear quite suddenly in the early Ordovician, and were presumably derived from a holochroal ancestor.
*''Paradoxides'' (Middle Cambrian)
Trilobites with these sutures lose the entire surface of the eyes when molting.
s, in which existing segments increased in size and new trunk segments appeared at a sub-terminal generative zone during the anamorphic phase of development.
Although rarely preserved, long lateral muscles extended from the cephalon to midway down the pygidium, attaching to the axial rings allowing enrollment while separate muscles on the legs tucked them out of the way.
Moulting continued during the holaspid stages, with no changes in thoracic segment number.
The first major crisis in the trilobite fossil record occurred in the Middle Cambrian; surviving orders developed isopygus or macropygius bodies and developed thicker cuticles, allowing better defense against predators (see Thorax below).
The progenitor of order Phacopida is unclear.
The 9  trilobite orders are: Agnostida, Redlichiida, Corynexochida, Lichida, Phacopida, Proetida, Asaphida, Harpetida and Ptychopariida.
Opisthoparian sutures have developed several times independently.
The discovery of ''Calymene blumenbachi'' (the Dudley locust) in 1749 by Charles Lyttleton, could be identified as the beginning of trilobite research.
Effacement poses a problem for taxonomists since the loss of details (particularly of the glabella) can make the determination of phylogenetic relationships difficult.
Modern eyes that are functionally equivalent to the schizochroal eye were not thought to exist, but are found in the modern insect species ''Xenos peckii''.
Trilobites form one of the earliest known groups of arthropods.
Changes also included narrowing of the thorax and increasing or decreasing numbers of thoracic segments.
German naturalist Johann Walch, who executed the first inclusive study of this group, proposed the use of the name “trilobite”.
Even in an agnostid, with only 2 articulating thoracic segments, the process of enrollment required a complex musculature to contract the exoskeleton and return to the flat condition.
Less ambiguous references to trilobite fossils can be found in Chinese sources.
The sclera was separate from the cornea, and did not run as deep as the sclera in schizochroal eyes.
*''Cyclopyge'' (Early to Late Ordovidician)
*'''Proparian''' - The facial suture ends in front of the genal angle, along the lateral margin.
*''Hesslerides'' (Middle Carboniferous)
*''Selenopeltis ''(Early to Late Ordovician)
Trilobites range in length from minute (less than ) to very large (over ), with an average size range of .
Several other structures on trilobites have been explained as photo-receptors.
Effacement is believed to be an indication of either a burrowing lifestyle or a pelagic one.
''Rusophycus'', the resting trace, are trilobite excavations involving little or no forward movement and ethological interpretations suggest resting, protection and hunting.
*''Xiuqiella'' (Middle Cambrian)
Many variations in shape and placement of the hypostome have been described.
This is known in ''Triarthrus'', and in the Phacopidae, but in that family are the facial sutures not functional, as can be concluded from the fact that free cheeks are not found separated from the cranidium.
Segments are generally added one per moult (although two per moult and one every alternate moult are also recorded), with number of stages equal to the number of thoracic segments.
Until the early 1900s, the Ute Native Americans of Utah wore these trilobites, which they called ''pachavee'' (little water bug), as amulets.
A large glabella, (implying a large stomach), coupled with an impendent hypostome has been used as evidence of more complex food sources, i.e.
The course of the facial sutures from the front of the visual surface varies at least as strong as it does in the rear branche, but the lack of a clear reference point similar to the genal angle makes it difficult to  categorize.
The earliest post-embryonic trilobite growth stage known with certainty are the "protaspid" stages (anamorphic phase).
As instars from closely related taxa are more similar than instars from distantly related taxa, trilobite larvae provide morphological information important in evaluating high-level phylogenetic relationships among trilobites.
The glabella is outlined in red broken lines.
The spatial resolving power of grated eyes (such as holochroal eyes) is dependent on light intensity, circular motion, receptor density, registered light angle, and the extent to which the signal of individual rhabdoms are neurally combined.
Some trilobites were blind, probably living too deep in the sea for light to reach them.
The cranidium can be further divided into the glabella (the central lobe in the cephalon) and the fixigena ("fixed cheeks").
Principal evolutionary trends from primitive morphologies, such as exemplified by ''Eoredlichia'', include the origin of new types of eyes, improvement of enrollment and articulation mechanisms, increased size of pygidium (micropygy to isopygy), and development of extreme spinosity in certain groups.
*''Paralejurus'' (Early Devonian)
Lenses were hexagonally close packed, touching each other, with a single corneal membrane covering all lenses.
Rigid calcite lenses would have been unable to accommodate to a change of focus like the soft lens in a human eye would; however, in some trilobites the calcite formed an internal doublet structure, giving superb depth of field and minimal spherical aberration, according to optical principles discovered by French scientist René Descartes and Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens in the 17th century.
the Burgess shale fauna and the Maotianshan shales fauna) make analysis of ancestral relationships difficult.
The doublure carries a Panderian notch or protuberance on each segment to prevent over rotation and achieve a good seal.
There are several types of prosopon that have been suggested as sensory apparatus collecting chemical or vibrational signals.
Based on the size, location, and shape of the horns it has been suggested that these horns may have been used to combat for mates.
The loss of dorsal sutures may arise from the proparian state, such as in some Eodiscina like ''Weymouthia'', all Agnostina, and some Phacopina such as ''Ductina''.
Lyttleton submitted a letter to the Royal Society of London in 1750 concerning a “petrified insect” he found in the “limestone pits at Dudley”.
''Paradoxides'') left a gap between the cephalon and pygidium.
In the 1880s, archaeologists discovered in the Grotte du Trilobite (Caves of Arcy-sur-Cure, Yonne, France) a much handled trilobite fossil that had been drilled as if to be worn as a pendant.
The Proetida survived for millions of years, continued through the Carboniferous period and lasted until the end of the Permian (when the vast majority of species on Earth were wiped out).
*''Yiliangellina'' (Middle Cambrian)
Hypoparian sutures have also arisen independently in several groups of trilobites.
Some other later trilobites also lost facial sutures secondarily.
''Phacops''), while others with long pleural spines (e.g.
The pygidium is formed from a number of segments and the telson fused together.
*''Olenellus'' (Lower Cambrian)
Lenses were separate, with each lens having an individual cornea that extended into a rather large sclera.
Trilobites that exhibit opisthoparian sutures as adults commonly have proparian sutures as instars (known exceptions being ''Yunnanocephalus'' and ''Duyunaspis'').
*''Yiliangella'' (Middle Cambrian)
Ordovician trilobites were successful at exploiting new environments, notably reefs.
Other scholars do not consider Agnostina to be trilobites, and hence not related to the Eodiscina.
During the meraspid stages, new segments appeared near the rear of the pygidium as well as additional articulations developing at the front of the pygidium, releasing freely articulating segments into the thorax.
However, care must be taken as similar trace fossils are recorded in freshwater and post Paleozoic deposits, representing non-trilobite origins.
A few locations ('''') preserve identifiable soft body parts (legs, gills, musculature & digestive tract) and enigmatic traces of other structures (e.g.
This trilobite is featured on the town's coat of arms and was named the ''Dudley Bug'' or ''Dudley Locust'' by quarrymen who once worked the now abandoned limestone quarries.
All trilobites are thought to have originated in present-day Siberia, with subsequent distribution and radiation from this location.
*''Lioharpes ''(Middle Devonian)
The earliest sutured trilobite found so far (''Lemdadella''), occurs almost at the same time as the earliest Olenellina, however, implying that trilobite origin lies before the start of the Atdabanian, but without leaving fossils.
Trilobites are often placed within the arthropod subphylum Schizoramia within the superclass Arachnomorpha (equivalent to the Arachnata), although several alternative taxonomies are found in the literature.
There are also two types of sutures in the dorsal surface connected to the compound eyes of trilobites.
Many examples of hairs on the legs suggest adaptations for feeding (as for the gnathobases) or sensory organs to help with walking.
It is common among Cambrian trilobites.
*Abathochroal eyes are found only in Cambrian Eodiscina, and have around 70 small separate lenses that had individual cornea.
*'''Gonatoparian''' - The facial suture ends at the tip of the genal angle.
Another function of these spines was protection from predators.
*''Trinucleus ''(Middle Ordovician)
The fossil record of trilobite eyes is complete enough that their evolution can be studied through time, which compensates to some extent the lack of preservation of soft internal parts.
Morphological similarities between early trilobites and other Cambrian arthropods (e.g.
Determining a junction between thorax and pygidium can be difficult and many segment counts suffer from this problem.
They are believed to have never developed facial sutures, having pre-dated their evolution.
Similar to lobsters and crabs, trilobites would have physically "grown" between the moult stage and the hardening of the new exoskeleton.
Field of view (all around vision), eye placement and coincidental development of more efficient enrollment mechanisms point to the eye as a more defensive "early warning" system than directly aiding in the hunt for food.
According to the Ute themselves, trilobite necklaces protect against disease and bullets.
Phacopida and Trinucleioidea are characteristic forms, highly differentiated and diverse, most with uncertain ancestors.
The doublure is shown in light gray, the inside surface of the cephalon in dark gray, and the hypostome in light blue.
Only a single order, the Proetida, survived into the Carboniferous.
The glabella forms a dome underneath which sat the "crop" or "stomach".
Within the marine paleoenvironment, trilobites were found in a broad range from extremely shallow water to very deep water.
The earliest trilobites known from the fossil record are redlichiids and ptychopariid bigotinids dated to some .
Some species may have kept eggs or larvae in a brood pouch forward of the glabella, particularly when the ecological niche was challenging to larvae.
In addition, the tracks left behind by trilobites living on the sea floor are often preserved as trace fossils.
As such, they became secondarily blind in this branch of trilobite evolution.
Written descriptions of trilobites date possibly from the third century BC and definitely from the fourth century AD.
On the other hand, blindness is not always accompanied by the loss of facial sutures.
For such a long-lasting group of animals, it is no surprise that trilobite evolutionary history is marked by a number of extinction events where some groups perished while surviving groups diversified to fill ecological niches with comparable or novel adaptations.
Environmental conditions seem to have resulted in the later loss of visual organs in many Eodiscina.
This conclusion is likely to be applicable to other trilobites as well, such as in the Phacopid trilobite genus ''Walliserops,'' that developed spectacular tridents.
Some trilobites had horns on their heads similar to several modern beetles.
*''Abadiella'' (Lower Cambrian)
In ''Phacops'', the pleurae overlap a smooth bevel (facet) allowing a close seal with the doublure.
Other trilobites (e.g.
Except possibly for the members of the orders Phacopida and Lichida (which first appear during the early Ordovician), nine of the eleven trilobite orders appear prior to the end of the Cambrian.
Segments in the pygidium are similar to the thoracic segments (bearing biramous limbs) but are not articulated.
Trilobite fossils are often found "enrolled" (curled up) like modern pill bugs for protection; evidence suggests enrollment helped protect against the inherent weakness of the arthropod cuticle that was exploited by anomalocarid predators.
Once soft-part anatomy had been recovered, the trilobites were originally allied to the Crustacea; however, this suggestion has since fallen out of favour.
The remnants of trilobites can range from the preserved body to pieces of the exoskeleton, which it sheds in the process known as ecdysis.
The primitive state of the dorsal sutures is proparian.
This type of trilobite is not found around Yonne, so it may have been highly prized and traded from elsewhere.
As the circular velocity caused by the forward speed of an animal itself is much higher for the ommatidia directed perpendicular to the movement, fast-moving trilobites (such as ''Carolinites'') have eyes flattened from the side and more curved were ommatia are directed to the front or back.
Later evolution in trilobites was largely a matter of variations upon the Ordovician themes.
early arthropods) do not seem to exist.
This is, inter alia, the case in the Asaphida.
Contenders for the earliest trilobites include ''Profallotaspis jakutensis'' (Siberia), ''Fritzaspis'' spp.
In the New World, American fossil hunters found plentiful deposits of ''Elrathia kingi'' in western Utah in the 1860s.
The study of these fossils has facilitated important contributions to biostratigraphy, paleontology, evolutionary biology, and plate tectonics.
Radical change in morphology is linked to the loss or gain of distinctive features that mark a change in mode of life.
The "intestine" led backward from there to the pygidium.
*''Calymene (Silurian)
The world's largest known trilobite specimen, assigned to ''Isotelus rex'' of 72&nbsp;cm, was found in 1998 by Canadian scientists in Ordovician rocks on the shores of Hudson Bay.
Supposedly the smallest species is ''Acanthopleurella stipulae'' with a maximum of .
A change in lifestyle during development has significance in terms of evolutionary pressure, as the trilobite could pass through several ecological niches on the way to adult development and changes would strongly affect survivorship and dispersal of trilobite taxa.
The number of lenses in such an eye varied: some trilobites had only one, while some had thousands of lenses in a single eye.
