A first effort to estimate the number of endemic fungi tentatively listed 407 species.
The country's wealth is attributed to its large reserves and exploitation of oil and natural gas.
In 1687, the Catholic Catalan Capuchin friars were given responsibility for the conversions of the indigenous people of Trinidad and the Guianas.
Train 4 has increased Atlantic LNG's overall output capacity by almost 50% and is the largest LNG train in the world at 5.2&nbsp;million tons/year of LNG.
The North Terminal was completed in 2001, and consists of 14 second-level aircraft gates with jetways for international flights, two ground-level domestic gates and 82 ticket counter positions.
The Scarlet Ibis is kept safe by the government by living in the Caroni Bird Sanctuary which was set up by the government for the protection of these birds.
From 24 December 2001 to 24 May 2010, the governing party has been the People's National Movement (PNM) led by Patrick Manning; the Opposition party was the United National Congress (UNC) led by Basdeo Panday.
Trinidad and Tobago also has the distinction of being the smallest country to have two Miss Universe titleholders and the first black woman ever to win: Janelle Commissiong in 1977, followed by Wendy Fitzwilliam in 1998; the country has also had one Miss World titleholder, Giselle LaRonde.
In the 1920–1930 period, the collapse of the sugarcane industry concomitant with the failure of the cocoa industry resulted in widespread depression among the rural and agricultural workers in Trinidad, and encouraged the rise of the Labour movement.
As a member of CARICOM, Trinidad and Tobago strongly backed efforts by the United States to bring political stability to Haiti, contributing personnel to the Multinational Force in 1994.
Swimmer George Bovell III won a bronze medal in the men's 200 m IM in 2004.
There is an extensive network of paved roads with several good four and six lane highways including one controlled access expressway.
Interestingly, three actors who appeared on Will Smith's sitcom ''The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'' are of Trinidadian descent: Tatyana Ali and Alfonso Ribeiro were series regulars as Will's cousins Ashley and Carlton, respectively, while Nia Long played Will's girlfriend Lisa.
Tobago also has its own elections, separate from the general elections.
This effort was severely undermined by the British Home Office and by the British-educated Trinidadian elite, many of whom were descended from the plantocracy themselves.
The highest point in the country is found on the Northern Range at El Cerro del Aripo, which is  above sea level.
The league began in 1999 as part of a need for a professional league to strengthen the country's national team and improve the development of domestic players.
In the post-war period, the wave of decolonisation that swept the British Empire led to the formation of the West Indies Federation in 1958 as a vehicle for independence.
The Island of Tobago is served by the A.N.R.
These new immigrants established local communities in Blanchisseuse, Champs Fleurs, Paramin, Cascade, Carenage and Laventille.
In the Northern Range, the climate is often different in contrast to the sweltering heat of the plains below.
Indians entering the colony were also subject to particular crown laws which segregated them from the rest of Trinidad's population, such as the requirement that they carry a pass with them once off the plantations, and that if freed, they carry their "Free Papers" or certificate indicating completion of the indenture period.
Trinidad and Tobago is the birthplace of calypso music and the steelpan, which is widely claimed in Trinidad and Tobago to be the only acoustic musical instrument invented during the 20th century.
They are however, expected to have basic reading and writing skills when they commence primary school.
Its national team is one of the most successful teams in the Caribbean.
The country is also a regional financial centre, and the economy has a growing trade surplus.
There are a number of 9 and 18-hole golf courses on Trinidad and Tobago.
The ethnic composition of Trinidad and Tobago reflects a history of conquest and immigration.
Furthermore, it is recognised as a high-income economy by the World Bank.
Information about invertebrates is dispersed and very incomplete.
It is estimated that 20% – 30% of measured GDP represents the hidden economy.
He came second place to Usain Bolt in the Beijing Olympics in the 100m with a time of 9.89s.
Basketball is commonly played in Trinidad and Tobago in colleges, universities and throughout various urban basketball courts.
There is also a small Baha'i community.
He won the 1997 200&nbsp;m sprint World Championship in Athens.
In the 1530s, Antonio de Sedeño, a Spanish soldier intent on conquering the island of Trinidad, landed on its southwest coast with a small army of men.
The shield bears three ships, representing both the Trinity, and the three ships that Columbus sailed.
He was in search of the long-rumoured "City of Gold" supposedly located in South America.
The President is required to appoint the leader of the party who in his opinion has the most support of the members of the House of Representatives to this post; this has generally been the leader of the party which won the most seats in the previous election (except in the case of the 2001 General Elections).
The land grant was 30 fanegas (13 hectares/32 acres) for each free man, woman and child and half of that for each slave that they brought with them.
This represented a 1.9 percent increase in total revenues generated by this industry compared to last year.
Petroleum had been discovered in 1857, but became economically significant only in the 1930s and afterwards, as a result of the collapse of sugarcane and cocoa, and increasing industrialization.
One such mission was ''Santa Rosa de Arima,'' established in 1789, when Amerindians from the former ''encomiendas'' of Tacarigua and ''Arauca'' (Arouca) were relocated further west.
Red, black and white symbolise the warmth of the people, the earth and water respectively.
Following the match, the referee of their critical game against Haiti was awarded a lifetime ban for his actions.
The total population of Trinidad was 17,718, of which 2,151 were of European ancestry, 4,476 were "free blacks and people of colour", 10,009 were slaves and 1,082 Amerindians.
It granted free land and tax exemption for 10 years to Roman Catholic foreign settlers who were willing to swear allegiance to the King of Spain.
The alluvial valleys of the Northern Range and the soils of the East-West Corridor are the most fertile.
Public Primary and Secondary education is free for all, although private and religious schooling is available for a fee.
Oil sands and mud volcanoes are especially common in this area.
Trinidad and Tobago gained its independence from the United Kingdom on 31 August 1962.
Nearly 200 species of marine algae have been recorded.
This movement was led by Tubal Uriah "Buzz" Butler, who, in combination with his Indian partners (notably Adrian Cola Rienzi), aimed to unite the working class and agricultural labour class to achieve a better standard of living for them, as well as to hasten the departure of the British.
On that day, Amerindians bound to the Church's ''encomienda'' at the mission at Arena/Arima revolted, killing the priests and desecrating the church.
While the Cocrico is more indigenous to the island of Tobago and are more likely to be seen in the forest.
Through cultural preservation some residents of Indian descent continue to maintain traditions from their ancestral homelands.
It also is active in the Summit of the Americas process and supports the establishment of the Free Trade Area of the Americas, lobbying other nations for seating the Secretariat in Port of Spain.
Trinidad and Tobago has transitioned from an oil-based economy to a natural gas based economy.
Children generally start pre-school at two and a half years but this is not mandatory.
The terrain of the islands is a mixture of mountains and plains.
Similarly, there is a noticeable increase in numbers of Evangelical Protestant and Fundamentalist churches usually lumped as "Pentecostal" by most Trinidadians, although this designation is often inaccurate.
The coat of arms was designed by the Independence committee, and features the scarlet ibis (native to Trinidad), the cocrico (native to Tobago) and hummingbird.
With constant cloud and mist cover, and heavy rains in the mountains, the temperature is much cooler.
Trinidad and Tobago is known for its Carnival and is the birthplace of steelpan, limbo, and the music styles of calypso, soca, parang, chutney, chutney soca, chut-kai-pang, cariso, extempo, kaiso, parang soca, pichakaree, and rapso.
Trinidad and Tobago, in an effort to undergo economic transformation though diversification formed InvesTT in 2012 to serve as the country's sole investment promotion agency.
The Defence Force has been engaged in domestic incidents, such as the 1990 Coup Attempt, and international missions, such as the United Nations Mission in Haiti between 1993 and 1996.
Tourism and the public service are the mainstay of the economy of Tobago, though authorities have begun to diversify the island.
The Pro League serves as a league for professional football clubs in Trinidad and Tobago.
However, Trinidad in this period was still mostly forest, populated by a few Spaniards with their handful of slaves and a few thousand Amerindians.
Record temperatures for Trinidad and Tobago are  for the high in Port of Spain, and a low of .
International  voice services  was next in line,  generating, TT$0.27 billion 4.7 percent)  in revenues.
It was opened on 8 January 1931.
Among those killed in the governor's party was Fr.
Its mission statement is to "defend the sovereign good of The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, contribute to the development of the national community and support the State in the fulfillment of its national and international objectives".
Winds are predominantly from the northeast and are dominated by the northeast trade winds.
Prior to 24 May 2010, the PNM held 26 seats in the House of Representatives and the UNC Alliance (UNC-A) held 15 seats, following elections held on 5 November 2007.
Trinidad and Tobago lie on the continental shelf of South America, and are thus geologically considered to lie entirely in South America.
Also in 2012 Lalonde Gordon competed in the XXX Summer Olympics where he won a Bronze Medal in the 400 meters, being surpassed by Luguelin Santos of the Dominican Republic and Kirani James of Grenada.
Elections are due to be held every three years, but have not been held since 2003, four extensions having been sought by the government.
The members of the Senate are appointed by the president.
In contrast, at twice the size of Trinidad, Jamaica had roughly 360,000 slaves.
Trinidad is also the birthplace of Soca music, Chutney music, Parang, and Carnival (in the form that has been widely copied in the Caribbean and around the world).
Nine different athletes from Trinidad and Tobago have won twelve medals at the Olympics, beginning with a silver medal in weightlifting, won by Rodney Wilkes in 1948, and most recently, a gold medal by Keshorn Walcott in the men's javelin throw in 2012.
The national birds for Trinidad and Tobago are the scarlet ibis and the cocrico.
Although the list is far from complete, 1647 species of fungi, including lichens, have been recorded.
These overlie oil and natural gas deposits, especially north of the Los Bajos Fault.
After two and a half years, Prime Minister Patrick Manning dissolved Parliament in April 2010, and called a general election on 24 May 2010.
Spanish is estimated to be spoken by around 5% of the population and has been promoted by recent governments as a "first foreign language".
The older South Terminal underwent renovations in 2009 for use as a VIP entrance point during the 5th Summit of the Americas.
Trinidad was first settled by pre-agricultural Archaic people at least 7,000 years ago, making it the earliest settled part of the Caribbean.
After its 1962 independence, Trinidad and Tobago joined the United Nations and Commonwealth of Nations.
After the acquisition of the now defunct Air Jamaica, it became the largest airline and was voted as the Caribbean's leading airline.
At the time of European contact, Trinidad was occupied by various Arawakan-speaking groups including the Nepoya and Suppoya, and Cariban-speaking groups such as the Yao, while Tobago was occupied by the Island Caribs and Galibi.
Piarco International Airport was voted the Caribbean's leading airport for customer satisfaction and operational efficiency at the prestigious World Travel Awards (WTA), held in the Turks and Caicos in 2006.
Foxy Brown, Dean Marshall, Sommore, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Gabrielle Reece, pop singer Haddaway, Tracy Quan, Mike Bibby, Lauryn Williams, Fresh Kid Ice, and Roy Hibbert are all of Trinidadian descent.
The various councils are made up of a mixture of elected and appointed members.
COP gained 23% of the votes in the 2007 general elections but failed to win a seat.
Trinidad is  in area (comprising 93.0% of the country's total area) with an average length of  and an average width of .
Britain consolidated its hold on both islands during the Napoleonic Wars, and they were combined into the colony of Trinidad and Tobago in 1889.
Only a couple of years later, Sir Walter Raleigh arrived in Trinidad on 22 March 1595.
This was followed by Internet services which contributed TT$1.18 billion or 21.1 percent.
The airport consists of two terminals, the North Terminal and the South Terminal.
Government also currently subsidizes some Masters programmes.
By 1797, the population of Port of Spain had increased from under 3,000 to 10,422 in five years, and consisted of people of mixed race, Spaniards, Africans, French republican soldiers, retired pirates and French nobility.
Emergency services are reliable, but may suffer delays in rural districts.
Unlike most of the English-speaking Caribbean, the country's economy is primarily industrial, with an emphasis on petroleum and petrochemicals.
The airline is wholly owned by the Government of Trinidad and Tobago.
The Southern Range forms the third anticlinal uplift.
Unlike most of the other Caribbean islands, both Trinidad and Tobago have frequently escaped the wrath of major devastating hurricanes, including Hurricane Ivan, the most powerful storm to have passed close to the islands in recent history, in September 2004.
24.4% of the population identified in the 2011 census as being of "mixed" ethnic heritage.
The Northern Lowlands (East-West Corridor and Caroni Plains) consist of younger shallow marine clastic sediments.
Tourism and manufacturing are also important to the local economy.
The national team plays at the first-class level in regional competitions.
The missions aimed at conversion and cultural deracination, which were naturally unwelcome to the target population.
The reports formally acknowledged the importance of biodiversity to the well-being of the country's people through provision of ecosystem services.
Christopher Columbus encountered the island of Trinidad on 31 July 1498.
He soon attacked San José, captured and interrogated Antonio de Berrío, and obtained much information from him and from the Cacique Topiawari.
There are two seasons annually: the dry season for the first five months of the year, and the rainy season in the remaining seven of the year.
The Syrian Drug Cartels control the vast sway of financing and business interest on the island and exhibit monopolistic tendencies which limit free market policies in insurance, health, finance, heavy and light manufacturing, and land distribution.
Christopher Columbus renamed it "La Isla de la Trinidad" ("The Island of the Trinity"), fulfilling a vow made before setting out on his third voyage of exploration.
It was fortuitous that the Cédula was issued only a few years before the French Revolution.
An overview of the populations statistics in 1838, however, clearly reveals the contrast between Trinidad and its neighbouring islands: upon emancipation of the slaves in 1838, Trinidad had only 17,439 slaves, with 80% of slave owners having less than 10 slaves each.
By sea, the options are inter-island ferries and inter-city water taxis.
Free-to Air radio and television services contributed TT$0.18 billion and TT$0.13 billion respectively (3.2 percent and 2.4 percent).
As of December 2006, nineteen international airlines operated out of Piarco and offered flights to twenty-seven international destinations.
On 1 August 1996, Trinidad and Tobago ratified the 1992 Rio Convention on Biological Diversity, and it has produced a biodiversity action plan and four reports describing the country's contribution to biodiversity conservation.
Trinidad and Tobago is a republic with a two-party system and a bicameral parliamentary system based on the Westminster System.
The uprising resulted in the death of several hundred Amerindians, of the Roman Catholic priests connected with the mission of San Francisco de los Arenales, of the Spanish Governor José de León y Echales and of all but one member of his party.
Historian E. L. Joseph claimed that Trinidad's Amerindian name was ''Iere'' or "Land of the Humming Bird", derived from the Arawak name for hummingbird, ''ierèttê'' or ''yerettê''.
The 41 members of the House of Representatives are elected by the people for a maximum term of five years in a "first past the post" system.
Slavery was abolished in 1833, after which former slaves served an "apprenticeship" period which ended on 1 August 1838 with full emancipation.
They added what was initially the second-largest population grouping to the young nation, and their labour developed previously underdeveloped plantation lands.
The Syrian Lebanese drug cartels are the longest tenured drug cartel on the islands, having ridden the wave of cocaine exportation from the 1970s to the current day.
Heavyweight female bodybuilder Kashma Maharaj is of Trinidadian descent.
In 1797, a British force led by General Sir Ralph Abercromby launched the invasion of Trinidad.
English is the country's official language (the local variety of standard English is Trinidadian English or more properly, Trinidad and Tobago Standard English, abbreviated as "TTSE"), but the main spoken language is either of two English-based creole languages (Trinidadian Creole or Tobagonian Creole), which reflects the Amerindian, European, African, and Asian heritage of the nation.
The Southern Lowlands consist of Miocene and Pliocene sands, clays, and gravels.
There are several providers for each segment of the telecommunications market.
Boldon is the only world champion Trinidad and Tobago has produced to date in athletics.
British rule was formalized under  the Treaty of Amiens (1802).
Children with satisfactory grades may opt to continue high school for a further two-year period, leading to the Caribbean Advanced Proficiency Examinations (CAPE), the equivalent of GCE A levels.
Others have reported that ''kairi'' and ''iere'' simply mean ''island''.
As the most industrialised and second-largest country in the English-speaking Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago has taken a leading role in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and strongly supports CARICOM economic integration efforts.
Support for these parties appears to fall along ethnic lines with the PNM consistently obtaining a majority of Afro-Trinidadian vote, and the UNC gaining a majority of Indo-Trinidadian support.
They then ambushed the governor and his party, who were on their way to visit the church.
Trinidad and Tobago hosted the 2001 FIFA U-17 World Championship, and hosted the 2010 FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup.
As a result of these colonial struggles, Amerindian, Spanish, French and English place names are all common in the country.
The bulk of tourist arrivals on the islands are from Western Europe.
The TT Pro League is the country's primary football competition and is the top level of the Trinidad and Tobago football league system.
This agency is aligned to the Ministry of Trade and Industry and is to the be the key agent in growing the country's non-oil and gas sectors significantly and sustainably.
Raleigh then went on his way, and the Spanish authority was restored.
He intended to subdue the Orinoco and the Warao, the two major Amerindian peoples of the island, and rule over them in the name of the Spanish king.
Prior to the 2006 World Cup qualification, Trinidad and Tobago came agonisingly close in a controversial qualification campaign for the 1974 FIFA World Cup.
The presence of American military bases in Chaguaramas and Cumuto in Trinidad during World War II profoundly changed the character of society.
This also makes him the first Western athlete in 40 years to receive a gold medal in the javelin sport, and the first athlete from Trinidad and Tobago to win a gold medal in a field event in the Olympics.
Of total telecommunications and broadcasting revenues, mobile voice services accounted for the majority of revenues with TT$2.20 billion (39.2 percent).
The ex-Indentureds came to constitute a vital and significant section of the population, as did the ex-slaves.
The indentureship contract was exploitative, such that historians including Hugh Tinker were to call it "a new system of slavery".
In 2007, natural gas production averaged , compared with  in 2005.
Trinidad and Tobago (remaining separate until 1889) were ceded to Britain in 1802 under the Treaty of Amiens.
In these elections, members are elected and serve in the Tobago House of Assembly.
They were eliminated after losing 2–0 to Paraguay in the last game of the Group Stage.
People of African background were brought to the island as slaves as early as the 16th century.
A small Jewish community exists on the islands, and several eastern religions such as Buddhism and Taoism are followed by the Chinese community.
Although a minor sport, bodybuilding is of growing interest in Trinidad and Tobago.
Caribbean Airlines, the national and state-owned airline of Trinidad and Tobago, is the largest in the Caribbean.
After 1687, they founded several missions in Trinidad, supported and richly funded by the state, which also granted encomienda over the native people to them.
With the most recent seizure of $100 million US dollar shipment by United States Authorities on 17 January 2014.
Order was eventually restored and the Spanish authority was re-established.
African slaves and Chinese, Indian, Tamil and free African indentured labourers, as well as Portuguese from Madeira, arrived to supply labour in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
His squadron sailed through the Bocas and anchored off the coast of Chaguaramas.
Tobago has two 18-hole courses.
Eric Williams, a noted Caribbean historian, widely regarded as "The Father of The Nation," was the first Prime Minister; he served from 1956, before independence, until his death in 1981.
Indo-Trinidadians make up the country's largest ethnic group (approximately 37.6%).
The first season took place in the same year beginning with eight teams.
Trinidad's population jumped to over 15,000 by the end of 1789, from just under 1,400 in 1777.
Established in 1962 after Trinidad and Tobago's independence from the United Kingdom, the TTDF is one of the largest military forces in the English-speaking Caribbean.
The Naparima Plains and the Nariva Swamp form the southern shoulder of this uplift.
Chaguaramas was the proposed site for the federal capital.
The island of Trinidad is served by Piarco International Airport located in Piarco.
Piarco International Airport is the seventh busiest airport in the Caribbean and the third busiest in the English-speaking Caribbean, after Sangster International Airport and Lynden Pindling International Airport.
Various nationalities were contracted under this system, including Indians, Chinese and Portuguese.
The diverse cultural and religious background also allows for many festivities and ceremonies throughout the year such as Carnival, Diwali, and Eid festivities.
Parliament consists of the Senate (31 seats) and the House of Representatives (41 seats).
Since 2003, the country has entered a second oil boom, a driving force which the government hopes to use to turn the country's main export back to sugar and agriculture.
Robinson International Airport in Crown Point Tobago.
Great concern was raised in August 2007 when it was predicted that this boom would last only until 2018.
Private hospitals are available and reliable.
Within the Trinidadian and Tobagonian business structure illicit activities and licit activities work side by side, with many business and political organisations being funded by institutionalised drug smugglers.
There are regular flights between the two islands, with fares being heavily subsidised by the Government
Indentureship of the Indians lasted from 1845 to 1917, during which more than 147,000 Indians were brought to Trinidad to work on sugarcane plantations.
The Uriah Butler Highway and Churchill Roosevelt Highway links the nation together.
The next century (the 1600s) passed without major incident, but sustained attempts by the Spaniards to control and rule over the Amerindians, and especially the exertions of the missionaries, were preparing grounds for an outburst.
Emigration from Barbados and the other Lesser Antilles, Venezuela, Syria and Lebanon also impacted on the ethnic make-up of the country.
In December 2005, the Atlantic LNG's fourth production module or "train" for liquefied natural gas (LNG) began production.
Some areas, however, especially rural districts, still suffer from water shortages.
Hindus were the second largest group with 18.15%, while the Pentecostal/Evangelical/Full Gospel denominations were the third largest group with 12.02% of the population.
Another century passed, and during the 1700s, Trinidad was an island province belonging to the Viceroyalty of New Spain, together with Central America, present-day Mexico and the Southwestern United States.
The Federation dissolved after the withdrawal of Jamaica, and the government chose to seek independence on its own.
Trinidad and Tobago has a well developed communications sector.
