It also harmonizes well with the doctrine that the Christian's union with the Son in his humanity brings him into union with one who contains in himself, in the Apostle Paul's words, "all the fullness of deity" and not a part.
In explaining why the Bible speaks of the Son as being subordinate to the Father, the great theologian Athanasius argued that scripture gives a "double account" of the son of God—one of his temporal and voluntary subordination in the incarnation, and the other of his eternal divine status.
These controversies took some centuries to be resolved.
Reflection by early Christians on passages such as the Great Commission: "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit" and Paul the Apostle's blessing: "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all", while at the same time the Jewish Shema Yisrael: "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is one" led the early Christians to question how the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are "one".
John Calvin also spoke at length about the doctrine of the Trinity.
There is also debate about whether this verse should be taken literally.
Rather, according to the Christian theology, it "bears witness to" the activity of a God who can only be understood in Trinitarian terms.
Trinitarianism contrasts with nontrinitarian positions which include Binitarianism (one deity in two persons, or two deities), Unitarianism (one deity in one person, analogous to Jewish interpretation of the ''Shema'' and Muslim belief in ''Tawhid''), Oneness Pentecostalism or Modalism (one deity manifested in three separate aspects).
When read in this light, it can be understood as an admonition, "Against the divinization of Jesus that is given elsewhere in the Qur'an and a warning against the virtual divinization of Mary in the declaration of the fifth-century church councils that she is 'God-bearer'."
The usage of the word "paraclete" (Greek: parakletos) for the Holy Spirit in , which can be translated as advocate, intercessor, counsellor or protector, and the Holy Spirit's essence and action characterized by truth, as all three persons of the Trinity are linked with truth (see v. 17), are seen as arguments that he is a divine person; especially that Jesus calls him ''another'' counsellor, in this way expressing that the Holy Spirit is similar to himself in regard to our counsel.
The Christian doctrine of the '''Trinity''' (, from ) holds that God is three consubstantial persons or ''hypostases''—the Father, the Son (Jesus Christ), and the Holy Spirit—as "one God in three Divine Persons".
Following the final victory of orthodoxy at Constantinople in 381, Arianism was driven from the Empire, retaining a foothold amongst the Teutonic tribes.
Nontrinitarian views differ widely on the nature of God, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit.
Constantine later changed his view about the Arians, who opposed the Nicene formula, and supported the bishops who rejected the formula, as did several of his successors, the first emperor to be baptized in the Nicene faith being Theodosius the Great, emperor from 379 to 395.
The Eastern Orthodox Churches object to the Filioque clause on ecclesiological and theological grounds, holding that "from the Father" means "from the Father alone".
Christianity, having emerged from Judaism, is a monotheistic religion.
From the Old Testament the early church retained the conviction that God is one.
For them, the formula in the Book of Acts defines and affirms that all other considerations, alike, are to be used in the name of Jesus Christ.
File:MurilloTrinity.jpg|God the Father (top), the Holy Spirit (a dove), and child Jesus, painting by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo (d. 1682)
Like Athanasius and Augustine before him, he concluded that  prescribed how scripture was to be read correctly.
The Gospel of John ends with Thomas's declaration that he believed Jesus was God, "My Lord and my God!"
Although there is much debate as to whether the beliefs of the Apostles were merely articulated and explained in the Trinitarian Creeds, or were corrupted and replaced with new beliefs, all scholars recognize that the Creeds themselves were created in reaction to disagreements over the nature of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Athanasius (293–373), who was present at the Council as one of the Bishop of Alexandria's assistants, stated that the bishops were forced to use this terminology, which is not found in Scripture, because the biblical phrases that they would have preferred to use were claimed by the Arians to be capable of being interpreted in what the bishops considered to be a heretical sense.
and describes how the Trinity operates within history in terms of the roles or functions performed by each person of the Trinity—God's relationship with creation.
Justin Martyr, and John Calvin similarly, interpreted it such that Abraham was visited by God, who was accompanied by two angels.
Painting by Francesco Albani (d. 1660)
Augustine also rejected an economic hierarchy within the Trinity.
The ontological (or essential or immanent) Trinity speaks of the interior life of the Trinity—the reciprocal relationships of Father, Son, and Spirit to each other without reference to God's relationship with creation.
The creed used the term ''homoousios'' (of one substance) to define the relationship between the Father and the Son.
There are also a few possible biblical supports for the divinity of Jesus found in the Synoptic Gospels.
Augustine, in contrast, held that the three visitors to Abraham were the three persons of the Trinity.
Whatever his influence on the later fully formed doctrine may have been, however, Valentinus' school is rejected as heretical by orthodox Christians.
In Christianity, statements about a single God are intended to distinguish the Hebraic understanding from the polytheistic view, which see divine power as shared by several beings, beings which can and do disagree and have conflicts with each other.
Do not then let us understand by what is called a 'commandment' a peremptory mandate delivered by organs of speech, and giving orders to the Son, as to a subordinate, concerning what He ought to do.
After more than fifty years of debate, ''homoousios'' was recognised as the hallmark of orthodoxy, and was further developed into the formula of "three persons, one being".
The economic Trinity refers to the acts of the triune God with respect to the creation, history, salvation, the formation of the Church, the daily lives of believers, etc.
Trinitarians view these as elements of the codified doctrine.
The simplest outline of the doctrine was formulated in the 4th century, largely in terms of rejection of what was considered not to be consonant with general Christian belief.
He defended and refined the Nicene formula.
Further elaboration continued in the succeeding centuries.
This is similar to John, who wrote that Jesus said, "All that the Father has is mine."
Nontrinitarian groups, such as Oneness Pentecostals, demur from the Trinitarian view on baptism.
They also combined "the servant does not know what his master is doing" with 1 Corinthians 2:11 in an attempt to show that the Holy Spirit is not the slave of God, and therefore his equal.
He may be represented by a symbol—typically the Lamb (''agnus dei'') or a cross—or on a crucifix, so that the Father is the only human figure shown at full size.
* The first of the Ten Commandments—"Thou shalt have no other gods before me."
For this view Sabellius was excommunicated for heresy in Rome c. 220.
This interpretation is found in Christianity as early as Justin Martyr and Melito of Sardis, and reflects ideas that were already present in Philo.
Perichoresis effectively excludes the idea that God has parts, but rather is a simple being.
File:Baptism-of-Christ-xx-Francesco-Alban.JPG|God the Father (top), and the Holy Spirit (represented by a dove) depicted above Jesus.
Feast Days were not instituted until 1091 at Cluny and 1162 at Canterbury and papal resistance continued until 1331.
As stated in the Athanasian Creed, the Father is uncreated, the Son is uncreated, and the Holy Spirit is uncreated, and all three are eternal without beginning.
The Cappadocian Fathers also quoted, "Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells in you?"
The God of the Old Testament is still the same as the God of the New.
However, Church Fathers such as Augustine of Hippo argued this statement was to be understood as Jesus speaking in the form of a man.
may be taken to indicate that baptism was associated with this formula from the earliest decades of the Church's existence.
For Athanasius, the Son is eternally one in being with the Father, temporally and voluntarily subordinate in his incarnate ministry.
They have but one will as they have but one being.
1:21, and 2&#32;John 1:13.
Some have suggested that John presents a hierarchy when he quotes Jesus as saying, "The Father is greater than I", a statement which was appealed to by nontrinitarian groups such as Arianism.
Adoptionism was the belief that Jesus was an ordinary man, born of Joseph and Mary, who became the Christ and Son of God at his baptism.
The concept was expressed in early writings from the beginning of the 2nd century forward, and other scholars hold that the way the New Testament repeatedly speaks of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is such as to require one to accept a Trinitarian understanding.
That one being is represented is indicated by the fact that they are referred to in the singular as Jehovah and Lord.
For him the Son's obedience is limited to the incarnation and is indicative of his true humanity assumed for human salvation.
The Son is generated ("born" or "begotten"), and the Spirit proceeds, eternally.
Expressions also in the Pauline epistles have been interpreted as attributing divinity to Jesus.
Basil likewise, in the evening lighting of lamps.
They cannot be separate from one another.
The three persons of the Trinity always work inseparably, for their work is always the work of the one God.
in effect arguing that the Holy Spirit is no different from other created angelic spirits.
Yet another argument from the Cappadocian Fathers to prove that the Holy Spirit is of the same nature as the Father and Son comes from "For who knows a person's thoughts except the spirit of that person, which is in him?
When the Father is depicted in art, he is sometimes shown with a halo shaped like an equilateral triangle, instead of a circle.
In 325, the Council of Nicaea adopted the Nicene Creed which described Christ as "God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father".
Perichoresis (from Greek, "going around", "envelopment") is a term used by some theologians to describe the relationship among the members of the Trinity.
In this context, a "nature" is ''what'' one is, whereas a "person" is ''who'' one is.
6:11 and 12:4ff., Gal.
As Basil wrote: "We perceive the operation of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to be one and the same, in no respect showing differences or variation; from this identity of operation we necessarily infer the unity of nature."
Modern nontrinitarian groups or denominations include Christadelphians, Christian Scientists, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Dawn Bible Students, Friends General Conference, Iglesia ni Cristo, Jehovah's Witnesses, Living Church of God, Members Church of God International, Oneness Pentecostals, the Seventh Day Church of God, Unitarian Universalist Christians, United Church of God, The Shepherd's Chapel and Spiritism.
For Trinitarians, emphasis in Genesis 1:26 is on the plurality in the Deity, and in 1:27 on the unity of the divine Essence.
The central and crucial affirmation of Christian faith is that there is one savior, God, and one salvation, manifest in Jesus Christ, to which there is access only because of the Holy Spirit.
During the intervening period, various tentative solutions, some more and some less satisfactory, were proposed.
The highly allegorical exegesis of the Valentinian school inclined it to interpret the relevant scriptural passages as affirming a Divinity that, in some manner, is threefold.
File:Lucas Cranach d. Ä.
The three persons are distinct, yet are one "substance, essence or nature" (homoousios).
So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God."
Therefore, Orthodox theologians also see the marriage relationship between a man and a woman to be an example of this sacred union.
Accordingly, the whole work of creation and grace is seen as a single operation common to all three divine persons, in which each shows forth what is proper to him in the Trinity, so that all things are "from the Father", "through the Son" and "in the Holy Spirit".
By the end of the 15th century, larger representations, other than the Throne of Mercy, became effectively standardised, showing an older figure in plain robes for the Father, Christ with his torso partly bare to display the wounds of his Passion, and the dove above or around them.
These verses have been quoted to defend the omnipotence of Christ, having all power, as well as the omniscience of Christ, having all wisdom.
Although the main text used in defense of the deity of the Holy Spirit was Matthew 28:19, Cappadocian Fathers such as Basil the Great argued from other verses such as "But Peter said, 'Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back for yourself part of the proceeds of the land?
Those who place great emphasis on the baptisms in Acts often likewise question the authenticity of  in its present form.
The Son is often shown at the Father's right hand.
Augustine saw that Lot could address them as one because they had a single substance, despite the plurality of persons.
The interplay between Abraham on the one hand and the Lord/three men/the two angels on the other was an intriguing text for those who believed in a single God in three persons.
The argument over whether the Spirit proceeds from the Father alone, or from the Father and the Son, was one of the catalysts of the Great Schism, in this case concerning the Western addition of the Filioque clause to the Nicene Creed.
The members of the Trinity are co-equal and co-eternal, one in essence, nature, power, action, and will.
Justin Martyr (AD 100–c.
The Ante-Nicene Fathers asserted Christ's deity and spoke of "Father, Son and Holy Spirit", even though their language is not that of the traditional doctrine as formalised in the fourth century.
John also portrays Jesus as the agent of creation of the universe.
They include: "For by him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him" and "For in Christ all the fullness of the Deity lives in bodily form", and in Paul the Apostle's claim to have been "sent not from men nor by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father".
Nontrinitarianism (or antitrinitarianism) refers to Christian belief systems that reject the doctrine of the Trinity as not having scriptural origin.
Tertullian, a Latin theologian who wrote in the early 3rd century, is credited as being the first to use the Latin words "Trinity", "person" and "substance" to explain that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are "one in essence—not one in Person".
The Confession of the Council of Nicaea said little about the Holy Spirit.
And since, according to them, because only the holy God can create holy beings such as the angels, the Son and Holy Spirit must be God.
In the Old Testament, Swedenborg finds the earliest direct reference to a Trine in the Divinity in the account of Moses' encounter with the Lord in Exodus which states, "And Jehovah passed by upon his face, and called, Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and gracious."
In this style, the Father (sometimes seated on a throne) is shown supporting either a crucifix or, later, a slumped crucified Son, similar to the Pietà (this type is distinguished in German as the ''Not Gottes'') in his outstretched arms, while the Dove hovers above or in between them.
According to this central mystery of most Christian faiths, there is only one God in three persons: while distinct from one another in their relations of origin (as the Fourth Lateran Council declared, "it is the Father who generates, the Son who is begotten, and the Holy Spirit who proceeds") and in their relations with one another, they are stated to be one in all else, co-equal, co-eternal and consubstantial, and each is God, whole and entire".
Let us rather, in a sense befitting the Godhead, perceive a transmission of will, like the reflexion of an object in a mirror, passing without note of time from Father to Son."
In the Trinitarian view, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit share the one essence, substance or being.
In earlier representations both Father, especially, and Son often wear elaborate robes and crowns.
And the fourth is the type of man, who needs light, that so there may be God, the Word, wisdom, man.
According to this Faith there is one Godhead, Power, and Being of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit."
He claimed that the three persons of the Trinity "share the inseparable equality one substance present in divine unity".
They reasoned that this passage proves that the Holy Spirit has the same relationship to God as the spirit within us has to us.
He defines the Trinity as God, His Word (''Logos'') and His Wisdom (''Sophia'') in the context of a discussion of the first three days of creation.
However, in Eastern Orthodoxy the Ancient of Days is usually understood to be God the Son, not God the Father (see below)—early Byzantine images show Christ as the Ancient of Days, but this iconography became rare.
For this reason, they often focus on the baptisms in Acts.
Reflection, proclamation and dialogue led to the formulation of the doctrine that was felt to correspond to the data in the Bible.
Thy today is eternity; therefore Thou begat the Co-eternal, to whom Thou saidst, 'This day have I begotten Thee.'"
This is so, according to the theory of perichoresis, because the persons of the Trinity "reciprocally contain one another, so that one permanently envelopes and is permanently enveloped by, the other whom he yet envelopes".
His going to the Father, he says, is for their sake; so that he might come to them when the "other comforter" is given to them.
(''See also: Divinization (Christian)'').
The First Council of Constantinople (381) also says, "This is the Faith of our baptism that teaches us to believe in the Name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.
The corresponding word in Greek is , meaning "a set of three" or "the number three".
Gregory of Nazianzus would say of the Trinity, "No sooner do I conceive of the One than I am illumined by the splendour of the Three; no sooner do I distinguish Three than I am carried back into the One.
Catholic theologian Karl Rahner went so far as to say:The "economic" Trinity is the "immanent" Trinity and the "immanent" Trinity is the "economic" Trinity.
While the Fathers of the Church saw even Old Testament elements such as the appearance of three men to Abraham in Book of Genesis, chapter 18, as foreshadowings of the Trinity, it was the New Testament that they saw as a basis for developing the concept of the Trinity.
Never in the New Testament does the Trinitarian concept become a "tritheism" (three Gods) nor even two.
The usual depiction of the Father as an older man with a white beard may derive from the biblical Ancient of Days, which is often cited in defense of this sometimes controversial representation.
Later, the diverse references to God, Jesus, and the Spirit found in the New Testament were systematized into a Trinity—one God subsisting in three persons and one substance—to combat heretical tendencies of how the three are related and to defend the church against charges of worshiping two or three gods.
The narrative has the Lord appearing to Abraham, who was visited by three men.
According to the words of Jesus, married persons are in some sense no longer two but are joined into one.
Judaism traditionally maintains a tradition of monotheism to the exclusion of the possibility of a Trinity.
In Trinitarian doctrine, God exists as three persons or hypostases, but is one being, having a single divine nature.
And after it was sold, was it not at your disposal?
Justin appropriated the God who visited Abraham to Jesus, the second person of the Trinity.
Passages which refer to the Godhead with a threefold pattern include Matt.
File:Llanbeblig Hours (f.
Genesis 18–19 has been interpreted by Christians as a Trinitarian text.
"The Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit" are not names for different parts of God, but one name for God because three persons exist in God as one entity.
Basil observes "When then He says, 'I have not spoken of myself', and again, 'As the Father said unto me, so I speak', and 'The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me', and in another place, 'As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do', it is not because He lacks deliberate purpose or power of initiation, nor yet because He has to wait for the preconcerted key-note, that he employs language of this kind.
* In the New Testament: "The  our God is one."
Like Athanasius, the Cappadocian Fathers also insisted there was no economic inequality present within the Trinity.
Some Christians interpret the theophanies or appearances of the Angel of the Lord as revelations of a person distinct from God, who is nonetheless called God.
The Father and the Son are usually differentiated by age, and later by dress, but this too is not always the case.
Most scholars of New Testament textual criticism accept the authenticity of the passage, since there are no variant manuscripts regarding the formula, and the extant form of the passage is attested in the Didache and other patristic works of the 1st and 2nd centuries: Ignatius, Tertullian, Hippolytus, Cyprian, and Gregory Thaumaturgus.
4:14, Galatians 1:1, Eph.
Baptism is generally conferred with the Trinitarian formula, "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit".
The reason why only two of the angels went to visit Sodom and Gomorrah is that they represent the Divine Human and the Divine Proceeding, and to those aspects of the Divine belongs judgment, as Jesus declared that all judgment was entrusted by the Father to the Son.
and reasoned that it would be blasphemous for an inferior being to take up residence in a temple of God, thus proving that the Holy Spirit is equal with the Father and the Son.
The form is first found in the baptismal formula in ; Did., 7.
Augustine of Hippo explains, "Thy years are one day, and Thy day is not daily, but today; because Thy today yields not to tomorrow, for neither does it follow yesterday.
Then in , "the two angels" visited Lot at Sodom.
When I think of any of the Three, I think of Him as the Whole, and my eyes are filled, and the greater part of what I am thinking escapes me.
All three are said to be "almighty" and "Lord" (no subordination in authority; "none is before or after another" (no hierarchical ordering); and "none is greater, or less than another" (no subordination in being or nature)).
God, The Holy Spirit, and Christ Crucified.jpg|Father, The Holy Spirit, and Christ Crucified, depicted in a Welsh manuscript.
1 and 3....It is self-evident that Father, Son and Spirit are here linked in an indissoluble threefold relationship.
The ancient Nicene theologians argued that everything the Trinity does is done by Father, Son, and Spirit working in unity with one will.
According to their understanding, because "breath" and "spirit" in Hebrew are both "רוּחַ" ("ruach"), Psalm 33:6 is revealing the roles of the Son and Holy Spirit as co-creators.
Perichoresis provides an intuitive figure of what this might mean.
This concept refers for its basis to , where Jesus is instructing the disciples concerning the meaning of his departure.
In the fourth century, Arius, as traditionally understood,  taught that the Father existed prior to the Son who was not, by nature, God but rather a changeable creature who was granted the dignity of becoming "Son of God".
Sometimes the Father alone wears a crown, or even a papal tiara.
According to Eusebius, Constantine suggested the term ''homoousios'' at the Council of Nicaea, though most scholars have doubted that Constantine had such knowledge and have thought that most likely Hosius had suggested the term to him.
What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder."
He explicitly defined the Trinity as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and defended the Trinitarian theology against the "Praxean" heresy.
The Comma Johanneum, , is a disputed text which states: "For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one."
Then, he says, his disciples will dwell in him, as he dwells in the Father, and the Father dwells in him, and the Father will dwell in them.
10:29, and 1&#32;Pet.
Ignatius of Antioch provides early support for the Trinity around 110, exhorting obedience to "Christ, and to the Father, and to the Spirit".
The New Testament does not use the word ''Τριάς'' (Trinity) nor explicitly teach the Nicene Trinitarian doctrine, but it contains several passages that use twofold and threefold patterns to speak of God.
Another passage the Cappadocian Fathers quoted from was "By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the breath of his mouth all their host."
His object is to make it plain that His own will is connected in indissoluble union with the Father.
For this reason, it is an impossibility for Augustine to speak of the Father commanding and the Son obeying as if there could be a conflict of wills within the eternal Trinity.
Moreover, the meanings of "''ousia''" and "''hypostasis''" overlapped then, so that "''hypostasis''" for some meant "''essence''" and for others "''person''".
In early medieval art, the Father may be represented by a hand appearing from a cloud in a blessing gesture, for example in scenes of the Baptism of Christ.
Various nontrinitarian views, such as Adoptionism, Monarchianism and Arianism existed prior to the formal definition of the Trinity doctrine in AD 325, 360, and 431, at the Councils of Nicaea, Constantinople, and Ephesus, respectively.
Its controversial use is addressed in several confessions: the Westminster Confession 2:3, the London Baptist Confession 2:3, and the Lutheran Augsburg Confession 1:1–6.
The Pneumatomachi contradicted the Cappadocian Fathers by quoting, "Are they not all ministering spirits sent out to serve for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation?"
There is no significant tendency among modern scholars to deny that John 1:1 and John 20:28 identify Jesus with God.
You have not lied to men but to God.'"
The Latin equivalent for this term is circumincessio.
The Valentinian Gospel of Phillip, which dates to approximately the time of Tertullian, upholds the Trinitarian formula.
In like manner also the three days which were before the luminaries, are types of the Trinity , of God, and His Word, and His wisdom.
Devotion to the Trinity centered in the French monasteries at Tours and Aniane where Saint Benedict dedicated the abbey church to the Trinity in 872.
Another early, and already more philosophic, formulation of the Trinity (again without usage of that term) is attributed to the Gnostic teacher Valentinus (lived c.100 – c.160), who according to the fourth century theologian Marcellus of Ancyra, was “the first to devise the notion of three subsistent entities (hypostases), in a work that he entitled ''On the Three Natures''”.
Such human traits, he argued, were not to be read back into the eternal Trinity.
The doctrine of the divinity and personality of the Holy Spirit was developed by Athanasius in the last decades of his life.
165) also writes, "in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit".
The Church Fathers disagreed, saying that the Holy Spirit is greater than the angels, since the Holy Spirit is the one who grants the foreknowledge for prophecy so that the angels could announce events to come.
By the end of the 4th century, under the leadership of Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nyssa, and Gregory of Nazianzus (the Cappadocian Fathers), the doctrine had reached substantially its current form.
Some scholars dispute the idea that support for the Trinity can be found in the Bible, and argue that the doctrine is the result of theological interpretations rather than sound exegesis of scripture.
Justin supposed that the God who visited Abraham was distinguishable from the God who remains in the heavens, but was nevertheless identified as the (monotheistic) God.
Because the three persons are one in their inner life, this means that for Augustine their works in the world are one.
Each person is understood as having the identical essence or nature, not merely similar natures.
"Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh."
A possible interpretation of Genesis 1:26 is that God's relationships in the Trinity are mirrored in man by the ideal relationship between husband and wife, two persons becoming one flesh, as described in Eve's creation later in the next chapter.
Why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart?
File:Fridolin Leiber - Holy Trinity.jpg|Atypical depiction.
The Old Testament theophanies were thus seen as Christophanies, each a "preincarnate appearance of the Messiah".
The first of the early church fathers to be recorded using the word "Trinity" was Theophilus of Antioch writing in the late 2nd century.
