Despite adopting such anti-artistic principles, Richter argues, Tzara, like many of his fellow Dadaists, did not initially discard the mission of "furthening the cause of art."
The poems he had written before, which were the result of poetic dialogues between him and his friend, were left in Vinea's care.
Bernard Gendron describes these soirées as marked by "heterogeneity and eclecticism", and Richter notes that the songs, often punctuated by loud shrieks or other unsettling sounds, built on the legacy of noise music and Futurist compositions.
His role was notably played by David Westhead in the 1993 British production, and by Tom Hewitt in the 2005 American version.
The imagined episode also inspired much of Tom Stoppard's 1974 play ''Travesties'', which also depicts conversations between Tzara, Lenin, and the Irish modernist author James Joyce (who is also known to have resided in Zürich after 1915).
Tzara was openly attacked by Breton in a February 1922 article for ''Le Journal de Peuple'', where the Romanian writer was denounced as "an impostor" avid for "publicity".
Tristan Tzara was an influential author and performer, whose contribution is credited with having created a connection from Cubism and Futurism to the Beat Generation, Situationism and various currents in rock music.
Cardinal notes: "In retrospect, harmony and contact had been Tzara's goals all along."
After July 1922, Marcel Janco rallied with Vinea in editing ''Contimporanul'', which published some of Tzara's earliest poems but never offered space to any Dadaist manifesto.
Tzara the Dadaist was inspired by the contributions of his experimental modernist predecessors.
Traditionalist historian Nicolae Iorga, Symbolist promoter Ovid Densusianu, the more reserved modernists Camil Petrescu and Benjamin Fondane all refused to accept it as a valid artistic manifestation.
He was also in touch with ''Nord-Sud'', the magazine of French poet Pierre Reverdy (who sought to unify all avant-garde trends), and contributed articles on African art to both ''Nord-Sud'' and Pierre Albert-Birot's ''SIC'' magazine.
He was soon after involved in Tzara's "simultaneist verse" performance, "the first in Zürich and in the world", also including renditions of poems by two promoters of Cubism, Fernand Divoire and Henri Barzun.
Although they are noted for their radical break with the traditional form of Romanian verse, Ball's diary entry of February 5, 1916, indicates that Tzara's works were still "conservative in style".
It was in this milieu that Dada was born, at some point before May 1916, when a publication of the same name first saw print.
He also translated into French some poems by Hikmet and the Hungarian author Attila József.
Dada's vaudeville declined in importance and disappeared altogether after that date.
Although the poet was moving away from Surrealism, his adherence to strict Marxism-Leninism was reportedly questioned by both the PCF and the Soviet Union.
Dada Dada Dada Dada."
Tzara continued to write, becoming more seriously interested in the theater.
In parallel, the short-lived magazine ''Integral'', where Ilarie Voronca and Ion Călugăru were the main animators, took significant interest in Tzara's work.
In its 1925 edition, ''Handkerchief of Clouds'' featured etchings by Juan Gris, while his late writings ''Parler seul'', ''Le Signe de vie'', ''De mémoire d'homme'', ''Le Temps naissant'', and ''Le Fruit permis'' were illustrated with works by, respectively, Joan Miró, Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, Nejad Devrim and Sonia Delaunay.
Vinea's similar poem, written in Tuzla and named after that village, reads:
He was in Marseille in late 1940-early 1941, joining the group of anti-fascist and Jewish refugees who, protected by American diplomat Varian Fry, were seeking to escape Nazi-occupied Europe.
In a 1927 interview with the publication, he voiced his opposition to the Surrealist group's adoption of communism, indicating that such politics could only result in a "new bourgeoisie" being created, and explaining that he had opted for a personal "permanent revolution", which would preserve "the holiness of the ego".
In September of the same year, he was present at the conference of the pro-communist International Union of Students (where he was a guest of the French-based Union of Communist Students, and met with similar organizations from Romania and other countries).
His return to France coincided with the outbreak of the Hungarian Revolution, which ended with a Soviet military intervention.
Several of Tzara's Dadaist editions had illustrations by Picabia, Janco and Hans Arp.
Tzara's poetry influenced Samuel Beckett (who translated some of it into English); the Irish author's 1972 play ''Not I'' shares some elements with ''The Gas Heart''.
The critic also remarks: "Tzara arrived at a mature style of transparent simplicity, in which disparate entities could be held together in a unifying vision."
Vinea also stated that Tzara wanted to keep ''Tristan'' as his adopted first name, and that this choice had later attracted him the "infamous pun" ''Triste Âne Tzara'' (French for "Sad Donkey Tzara").
The movement subsequently organized its last major Swiss show, held at the Saal zur Kaufleutern, with choreography by Susanne Perrottet, Sophie Taeuber-Arp, and with the participation of Käthe Wulff, Hans Heusser, Tzara, Hans Richter and Walter Serner.
This perspective was deplored early on by the modernist critic Perpessicius.
In October 1956, Tzara visited the People's Republic of Hungary, where the government of Imre Nagy was coming into conflict with the Soviet Union.
Attached to Symbolist musicality at that stage, he was indebted to his ''Simbolul'' colleague Ion Minulescu and the Belgian Maurice Maeterlinck.
The poet became involved in further developing Surrealist techniques, and, together with Breton and Valentine Hugo, drew one of the better-known examples of "exquisite corpses".
Among the Italian authors supporting Dadaist manifestos and rallying with the Dada group was the poet, painter and in the future a fascist racial theorist Julius Evola, who became a personal friend of Tzara.
T. Stamatiad, Eugeniu Ștefănescu-Est, Constantin T. Stoika, as well as the journalist and lawyer Poldi Chapier.
After 1929, with the adoption of Surrealism, Tzara's literary works discard much of their satirical purpose, and begin to explore universal themes relating to the human condition.
The friend and collaborator of many modernist figures, he was the lover of dancer Maja Kruscek in his early youth and was later married to Swedish artist and poet Greta Knutson.
The same artist also completed his schematic portrait, which showed a series of circles connected by two perpendicular arrows.
During the 1910s, Samyro experimented with Symbolist imagery, in particular with the "hanged man" motif, which served as the basis for his poem ''Se spânzură un om'' ("A Man Hangs Himself"), and which built on the legacy of similar pieces authored by Christian Morgenstern and Jules Laforgue.
Tzara's career changed course between 1914 and 1916, during a period when the Romanian Kingdom kept out of World War I.
While maintaining some of Tzara's preoccupation with language experimentation, it is mainly a study in social alienation and the search for an escape.
The play ends with a dance performance that recalls similar devices used by the proto-Dadaist Alfred Jarry.
Despite their young age, the three editors were able to attract collaborations from established Symbolist authors, active within Romania's own Symbolist movement.
Literary historian Paul Cernat sees ''Simbolul'' as a main stage in Romania's modernism, and credits it with having brought about the first changes from Symbolism to the radical avant-garde.
In late March, Ball recounted, the group was joined by German writer and drummer Richard Huelsenbeck.
However, Cernat believes, the young poet was by then already breaking with the syntax of conventional poetry, and that, in subsequent experimental pieces, he progressively stripped his style of its Symbolist elements.
According to Ball, among the performances of songs mimicking or taking inspiration from various national folklores, "Herr Tristan Tzara recited Rumanian poetry."
The Romanian writer also spent the Dada period issuing a long series of manifestos, which were often authored as prose poetry, and, according to Cardinal, were characterized by "rumbustious tomfoolery and astringent wit", which reflected "the language of a sophisticated savage".
Beat writer Allen Ginsberg, who made his acquaintance in Paris, cites him among the Europeans who influenced him and William S. Burroughs.
Beitchman notes that, throughout his life, Tzara used Symbolist elements against the doctrines of Symbolism.
According to Cardinal, the period also signified the definitive move from "a studied inconsequentiality" and "unreadable gibberish" to "a seductive and fertile surrealist idiom."
However, unlike much of Hungarian public opinion, the poet did not recommend emancipation from Soviet control, and described the independence demanded by local writers as "an abstract notion".
Hans Richter speaks of a "pleasure of letting fly at the bourgeois, which in Tristan Tzara took the form of coldly (or hotly) calculated insolence" (''see Épater la bourgeoisie'').
The complete text of ''Furtuna și cântecul dezertorului'' was published at a later stage, after the missing text was discovered by Pană.
He was involved in the major polemics which led to Dada's split, defending his principles against André Breton and Francis Picabia, and, in Romania, against the eclectic modernism of Vinea and Janco.
Among the people present there were the anti-totalitarian socialist Victor Serge, anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, playwright Arthur Adamov, philosopher and poet René Daumal, and several prominent Surrealists: Breton, Char, and Benjamin Péret, as well as artists Max Ernst, André Masson, Wifredo Lam, Jacques Hérold, Victor Brauner and Óscar Domínguez.
Tzara also prefaced a 1934 collection of Surrealist poems by his friend René Char, and the following year he and Greta Knutson visited Char in L'Isle-sur-la-Sorgue.
Tzara was receptive of the Hungarians' demand for liberalization, contacted the anti-Stalinist and former Dadaist Lajos Kassák, and deemed the anti-Soviet movement "revolutionary".
Gysin, who conversed with Tzara in the late 1950s, records the latter's indignation that Beat poets were "going back over the ground we Dadaists covered in 1920", and accuses Tzara of having consumed his creative energies into becoming a "Communist Party bureaucrat".
According to Paul Cernat, ''Aliluia'', one of the few avant-garde texts authored by Ion Vinea features a "transparent allusion" to Tristan Tzara.
By then, it was also announced that Tzara had started work on a screenplay.
Cernat believes that the first Dadaist performance took place as early as February, when the nineteen-year-old Tzara, wearing a monocle, entered the Cabaret Voltaire stage singing sentimental melodies and handing paper wads to his "scandalized spectators", leaving the stage to allow room for masked actors on stilts, and returning in clown attire.
The controversy regarding Tzara's role as a founder of Dada extended into several milieus, and continued long after the writer died.
While active as a promoter, Tzara also published his first volume of collected poetry, the 1918 ''Vingt-cinq poèmes'' ("Twenty-five Poems").
However, others note that the former Dadaist leader would often show himself a follower of political guidelines.
The influence of French Symbolists on the young Samyro was particularly important, and surfaced in both his lyric and prose poems.
In another instance, Tzara and his associates lectured at the ''Université populaire'' in front of industrial workers, who were reportedly less than impressed.
In its inaugural issue, the journal even printed a poem by one of the leading figures in Romanian Symbolism, Alexandru Macedonski.
Under the influence of Adrian Maniu, the adolescent Tzara became interested in Symbolism and co-founded the magazine ''Simbolul'' with Ion Vinea (with whom he also wrote experimental poetry) and painter Marcel Janco.
Richter dismisses this account, indicating that Tzara actually walked from Gare de l'Est to Picabia's home, without anyone expecting him to arrive.
According to the same author, two important elements in this process were "a maternal attachment and a break with paternal authority", an "Oedipus complex" which he also argued was evident in the biographies of other Symbolist and avant-garde Romanian authors, from Urmuz to Mateiu Caragiale.
The performances staged by Dada were often meant to popularize its principles, and Dada continued to draw attention on itself by hoaxes and false advertising, announcing that the Hollywood film star Charlie Chaplin was going to appear on stage at its show, or that its members were going to have their heads shaved or their hair cut off on stage.
Richter believes that, ideologically, Tzara was still in tribute to Picabia's nihilistic and anarchic views (which made the Dadaists attack all political and cultural ideologies), but that this also implied a measure of sympathy for the working class.
Richter notes that, by then, Dada had replaced Futurism as the leader of modernism, while continuing to build on its influence: "we had swallowed Futurism—bones, feathers and all.
The post-World War II volumes in the series focus on political subjects related to the conflict.
Years before their split, Francis Picabia used Tzara's calligraphed name in ''Moléculaire'' ("Molecular"), a composition printed on the cover of ''391''.
He was targeted by the Berlin-based Dadaists, in particular by Huelsenbeck and Serner, the former of whom was also involved in a conflict with Raoul Hausmann over leadership status.
After moving to Paris in 1919, Tzara, by then one of the "presidents of Dada", joined the staff of ''Littérature'' magazine, which marked the first step in the movement's evolution toward Surrealism.
His Dada manifesto of 1918 stated: "Dada means nothing", adding "Thought is produced in the mouth."
During an associated soirée, ''Evening of the Bearded Heart'', which began on 6 July 1923, Tzara presented a re-staging of his play ''The Gas Heart'' (which had been first performed two years earlier to howls of derision from its audience), for which Sonia Delaunay designed the costumes.
Early on, Ball referred to him and the Janco brothers as "Orientals".
Vinea's fragment speaks of "the Wandering Jew", a character whom people notice because he sings ''La moară la Hârța'', "a suspicious song from Greater Romania."
In 1949, he introduced Picasso to art dealer Heinz Berggruen (thus helping start their lifelong partnership), and, in 1951, wrote the catalog for an exhibit of works by his friend Max Ernst; the text celebrated the artist's "free use of stimuli" and "his discovery of a new kind of humor."
In the United States, the Romanian author is cited as an influence on Beat Generation members.
It was there that Serner read from his 1918 essay, whose very title advocated ''Letzte Lockerung'' ("Final Dissolution"): this part is believed to have caused the subsequent mêlée, during which the public attacked the performers and succeeded in interrupting, but not canceling, the show.
Between 1913 and 1915, they were frequently vacationing together, either on the Black Sea coast or at the Rosenstock family property in Gârceni, Vaslui County; during this time, Vinea and Samyro wrote poems with similar themes and alluding to one another.
Some of them had previously been printed in the brochure ''Les poètes du monde défendent le peuple espagnol'' ("The Poets of the World Defend the Spanish People", 1937), which was edited by two prominent authors and activists, Nancy Cunard and the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda.
Hikmet was eventually released in July 1950, and publicly thanked Tzara during his subsequent visit to Paris.
Breton interrupted its performance and reportedly fought with several of his former associates and broke furniture, prompting a theatre riot that only the intervention of the police halted.
Tzara indicated: "I am against systems; the most acceptable system is on principle to have none."
This followed an invitation on the part of Hungarian writer Gyula Illyés, who wanted his colleague to be present at ceremonies marking the rehabilitation of László Rajk (a local communist leader whose prosecution had been ordered by Joseph Stalin).
Some time after his stay in Marseille, Tzara joined the French Resistance, rallying with the Maquis.
In the United States, Picabia, Man Ray and Marcel Duchamp had earlier set up their own version of Dada.
In June 1916, he began editing and managing the periodical ''Dada'' as a successor of the short-lived magazine ''Cabaret Voltaire''—Richter describes his "energy, passion and talent for the job", which he claims satisfied all Dadaists.
A secondary point of contention between the founders of Dada regarded the paternity for the movement's name, which, according to visual artist and essayist Hans Richter, was first adopted in print in June 1916.
An immediate precursor of Absurdism, he was acknowledged as a mentor by Eugène Ionesco, who developed on his principles for his early essays of literary and social criticism, as well as in tragic farces such as ''The Bald Soprano''.
Salomon Schulman, a Swedish researcher of Yiddish literature, argues that the combined influence of Yiddish folklore and Hasidic philosophy shaped European modernism in general and Tzara's style in particular, while American poet Andrei Codrescu speaks of Tzara as one in a Balkan line of "absurdist writing", which also includes the Romanians Urmuz, Eugène Ionesco and Emil Cioran.
Although he was sympathetic to its goals, treasured Hugo Ball and Hennings and promised to adapt his own writings to its requirements, Vinea cautioned Tzara and the Jancos in favor of lucidity.
In 1930, he directed and produced a cinematic version of ''Le Cœur à barbe'', starring Breton and other leading Surrealists.
There was no alternative institution or site that could disentangle 'pure' dada from its mere accompaniment ... nor was any such site desired."
The Gârceni pieces were treasured by the moderate wing of the Romanian avant-garde movement.
With Breton, Soupault and Aragon, Tzara traveled Cologne, where he became familiarized with the elaborate collage works of Schwitters and Max Ernst, which he showed to his colleagues in Switzerland.
In 1925, Tristan Tzara was in Stockholm, where he married Greta Knutson, with whom he had a son, Christophe (born 1927).
In 1917, he was in correspondence with both Apollinaire and Marinetti.
In 1922, Tzara himself wrote: "As early as 1914, I tried to strip the words of their proper meaning and use them in such a way as to give the verse a completely new, general, meaning ...."
Reportedly, Dada mythology had it that he entered the French capital in a snow-white or lilac-colored car, passing down Boulevard Raspail through a triumphal arch made from his own pamphlets, being greeted by cheering crowds and a fireworks display.
The many polemics which surrounded Tzara in his lifetime left traces after his death, and determine contemporary perceptions of his work.
Tzara's wife was also affiliated with the Surrealist group at around the same time.
At the time, the young poet and many of his friends were adherents of an anti-war and anti-nationalist current, which progressively accommodated anti-establishment messages.
According to Hans Richter, the main part of this took place in Weimar, where the Dadaists attended a festival of the Bauhaus art school, during which Tzara proclaimed the elusive nature of his art: "Dada is useless, like everything else in life.
Before the end of the war, Tzara had assumed a position as Dada's main promoter and manager, helping the Swiss group establish branches in other European countries.
In 1977, literary historian Edgar Papu, whose controversial theories were linked to "protochronism", which presumes that Romanians took precedence in various areas of world culture, mentioned Tzara, Urmuz, Ionesco and Isou as representatives of "Romanian initiatives" and "road openers at a universal level."
Tzara chaired the Committee for the Liberation of Nazım Hikmet, which issued petitions to national governments and commissioned works in honor of Hikmet (including musical pieces by Louis Durey and Serge Nigg).
During World War I, after briefly collaborating on Vinea's ''Chemarea'', he joined Janco in Switzerland.
In 1961, as recognition for his work as a poet, Tzara was awarded the prestigious Taormina Prize.
Călinescu proposed that Tzara willingly limited the impact of chance: taking as his example a short parody piece which depicts the love affair between cyclist and a Dadaist, which ends with their decapitation by a jealous husband, the critic notes that Tzara transparently intended to "shock the bourgeois".
Among the late 20th-century writers who acknowledged Tzara as an inspiration are Jerome Rothenberg, Isidore Isou and Andrei Codrescu.
Historian Irina Livezeanu notes that Tzara, who agreed with Stalinism and shunned Trotskyism, submitted to the PCF cultural demands during the writers' congress of 1935, even when his friend Crevel committed suicide to protest the adoption of socialist realism.
Writing in 1925, Fondane rendered a pronouncement by Jean Cocteau, who, while commenting that Tzara was one of his "most beloved" writers and a "great poet", argued: "''Handkerchief of Clouds'' was poetry, and great poetry for that matter—but not theater."
Although the magazine ceased print in December 1912, it played an important part in shaping Romanian literature of the period.
Tzara's melody, ''Vaseline symphonique'' ("Symphonic Vaseline"), which required ten or twenty people to shout "cra" and "cri" on a rising scale, was also performed.
During the months spent together, and before some of them received permission to leave for America, they invented a new card game, on which traditional card imagery was replaced with Surrealist symbols.
The Dada shows themselves were by then such common occurrences that audiences expected to be insulted by the performers.
A forerunner of automatist techniques, Tzara eventually aligned himself with Breton's Surrealism, and under its influence wrote his celebrated utopian poem ''The Approximate Man''.
As a result, Minister of Culture André Malraux announced that his cabinet would not subsidize any films to which Tzara and the others may contribute, and the signatories could no longer appear on stations managed by the state-owned French Broadcasting Service.
''Simbolul'' also featured illustrations by Maniu, Millian and Iosif Iser.
Alarmed by the establishment of Adolf Hitler's Nazi regime, which also signified the end of Berlin's avant-garde, he merged his activities as an art promoter with the cause of anti-fascism, and was close to the French Communist Party (PCF).
The latter also mentioned Tzara's use of chance in writing poetry as an early example of what became the cut-up technique, adopted by Brion Gysin and Burroughs himself.
The next objective of the artists who are assembled here is to publish a ''revue internationale'' French for "international magazine"."
Over the following decade, Tzara lent his support to political causes.
In autumn 1915, he left Romania for Zürich, in neutral Switzerland.
He depicted Dadaists as "Judaeo-Bolsheviks" who corrupted Romanian culture, and included Tzara among the main proponents of "literary anarchism".
In October 1912, when Tzara was aged sixteen, he joined his friends Vinea and Marcel Janco in editing ''Simbolul''.
While Richter himself recorded the incidental proximity of Lenin's lodging to the Dadaist milieu, no record exists of an actual conversation between the two figures.
Huelsenbeck nonetheless declined to Schwitters membership in Berlin Dada.
At the time, he became interested in the free verse work of the American Walt Whitman, and his translation of Whitman's epic poem ''Song of Myself'', probably completed before World War I, was published by Alfred Hefter-Hidalgo in his magazine ''Versuri și Proză'' (1915).
This period also saw the first conflict within the group: citing irreconcilable differences with Tzara, Ball left the group.
''Se spânzură un om'' was also in many ways similar to ones authored by his collaborators Adrian Maniu (''Balada spânzuratului'', "The Hanged Man's Ballad") and Vinea (''Visul spânzuratului'', "The Hanged Man's Dream"): all three poets, who were all in the process of discarding Symbolism, interpreted the theme from a tragicomic and iconoclastic perspective.
It was in Zürich that the Romanian group met with the German Hugo Ball, an anarchist poet and pianist, and his young wife Emmy Hennings, a music hall performer.
According to Beitchman, Tzara uses the Symbolist message, "the birthright of humans has been sold for a mess of porridge", taking it "into the streets, cabarets and trains where he denounces the deal and asks for his birthright back."
Tzara's apparent dissidence and the crisis he helped provoke within the Communist Party were celebrated by Breton, who had adopted a pro-Hungarian stance, and who defined his friend and rival as "the first spokesman of the Hungarian demand."
They avoided each other for the rest of their lives and Tzara even struck out the dedications to Janco from his early poems.
Tzara, who may have applied for the Faculty of Philosophy at the local university, shared lodging with Marcel Janco, who was a student at the ''Technische Hochschule'', in the Altinger Guest House (by 1918, Tzara had moved to the Limmatquai Hotel).
He is often described as the main figure in the ''Littérature'' circle, and credited with having more firmly set its artistic principles in the line of Dada.
In Călinescu's view, they announce Dadaism, given that "bypassing the relations which lead to a realistic vision, the poet associates unimaginably dissipated images that will surprise consciousness."
Despite Dada's condemnation of Futurism, various authors note the influence Filippo Tommaso Marinetti and his circle exercised on Tzara's group.
This personal vision on art defined his Dadaist plays ''The Gas Heart'' (1921) and ''Handkerchief of Clouds'' (1924).
The speeches he and Sașa Pană gave on the occasion, published by ''Orizont'' journal, were noted for condoning official positions of the PCF and the Romanian Communist Party, and are credited by Irina Livezeanu with causing a rift between Tzara and young Romanian avant-gardists such as Victor Brauner and Gherasim Luca (who rejected communism and were alarmed by the Iron Curtain having fallen over Europe).
In 1924, he published and staged the play ''Handkerchief of Clouds'', which was soon included in the repertoire of Serge Diaghilev's ''Ballets Russes''.
Tzara also visited Czechoslovakia, where he reportedly hoped to gain adherents to his cause.
It was Loos' only major contribution in his Parisian years.
He called some of his own poems ''lampisteries'', from a French word designating storage areas for light fixtures.
In the 1940s, Richard Huelsenbeck alleged that his former colleague had always been separated from other Dadaists by his failure to appreciate the legacy of "German humanism", and that, compared to his German colleagues, he was "a barbarian".
Although Maniu parted with the group and sought a change in style which brought him closer to traditionalist tenets, Tzara, Janco and Vinea continued their collaboration.
With his departure, Gendron argues, Tzara was able to move Dada vaudeville-like performances into more of "an incendiary and yet jocularly provocative theater."
The world imagined by Tzara abandons symbols of the past, from literature to public transportation and currency, while, like psychologists Sigmund Freud and Wilhelm Reich, the poet depicts violence as a natural means of human expression.
In 1936, Richter recalled, he published a series of photographs secretly taken by Kurt Schwitters in Hanover, works which documented the destruction of Nazi propaganda by the locals, ration stamp with reduced quantities of food, and other hidden aspects of Hitler's rule.
After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, he briefly left France and joined the Republican forces.
Eugène Ionesco argued that "before Dadaism there was Urmuzianism", and, after World War II, sought to popularize Urmuz's work among aficionados of Dada.
With time, Tristan Tzara merged his performances and his literature, taking part in developing Dada's "simultaneist poetry", which was meant to be read out loud and involved a collaborative effort, being, according to Hans Arp, the first instance of Surrealist automatism.
Breton marked the end of Dada in 1924, when he issued the first ''Surrealist Manifesto''.
In late 1919, Tristan Tzara left Switzerland to join Breton, Soupault and Claude Rivière in editing the Paris-based magazine ''Littérature''.
Pursuing his interest in primitivism, he became a critic of the Fourth Republic's colonial policy, and joined his voice to those who supported decolonization.
When Picabia began publishing a new series of ''391'' in Paris, Tzara seconded him and, Richter says, produced issues of the magazine "decked out ... in all the colors of Dada."
A more radical questioning of Tzara's influence came from Romanian essayist Petre Pandrea.
Hugo Ball recorded this period, noting that Tzara and Marcel Janco, like Hans Arp, Arthur Segal, Otto van Rees, Max Oppenheimer, and Marcel Słodki, "readily agreed to take part in the cabaret."
The same year, he issued the poetry book ''De nos oiseaux'' ("Of Our Birds").
Himself an adherent to communism, Pandrea grew disillusioned with the ideology, and later became a political prisoner in Communist Romania.
He is often credited with having inspired many young modernist authors from outside Switzerland to affiliate with the group, in particular the Frenchmen Louis Aragon, André Breton, Paul Éluard, Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes and Philippe Soupault.
One of the appeals in the text reads:
The series is seen by Cernat as "the general rehearsal for the Dada adventure."
1915 and thus sought to legitimize his own modernist vision, also saw Urmuz as the ignored precursor of radical modernism, from Dada to Surrealism.
During the period, Tzara's works were sporadically published in Hefter-Hidalgo's ''Versuri și Proză'', and, in June 1915, Constantin Rădulescu-Motru's ''Noua Revistă Română'' published Samyro's known poem ''Verișoară, fată de pension'' ("Little Cousin, Boarding School Girl").
Thus, he argues, the poet did not cultivate a memory of historical events, "since it deludes man into thinking that there was something when there was nothing."
In Romania, similar debates often involved the supposed founding role of Urmuz, who wrote his avant-garde texts before World War I, and Tzara's status as a communicator between Romania and the rest of Europe.
According to Richter, tensions between Breton and Tzara had surfaced in 1920, when Breton first made known his wish to do away with musical performances altogether and alleged that the Romanian was merely repeating himself.
Upon the end of the war and the restoration of French independence, Tzara was naturalized a French citizen.
In 1923, he and a few other former Dadaists collaborated with Richter and the Constructivist artist El Lissitzky on the magazine ''G'', and, the following year, he wrote pieces for the Yugoslav-Slovenian magazine ''Tank'' (edited by Ferdinand Delak).
In 1949-1950, Tzara answered Aragon's call and become active in the international campaign to liberate Nazım Hikmet, a Turkish poet whose 1938 arrest for communist activities had created a ''cause célèbre'' for the pro-Soviet public opinion.
In his last writings, Tzara toned down experimentation, exercising more control over the lyrical aspects.
The rigidly functionalist ''Maison Tristan Tzara'', built in Montmartre, was designed following Tzara's specific requirements and decorated with samples of African art.
In October 1919, Tzara, Arp and Otto Flake began publishing ''Der Zeltweg'', a journal aimed at further popularizing Dada in a post-war world were the borders were again accessible.
Brater describes ''The Gas Heart'' as a "parody of theatrical conventions".
In 1947, he became a full member of the PCF (according to some sources, he had been one since 1934).
His earliest poems depict provincial Moldavia as a desolate and unsettling place.
Like in the cases of Eugène Ionesco and Fondane, Cernat proposes, Samyro sought self-exile to Western Europe as a "modern, voluntarist" means of breaking with "the peripheral condition", which may also serve to explain the pun he selected for a pseudonym.
Nevertheless, he was appointed cultural ambassador of the Republic by the Paul Ramadier cabinet.
I. Emilian, the first Romanian to write an academic study on the avant-garde, attacked him from a conservative and antisemitic position.
Largely through exchanges between commentators who act as third parties, the text presents the tribulations of a love triangle (a poet, a bored woman, and her banker husband, whose character traits borrow the clichés of conventional drama), and in part reproduces settings and lines from ''Hamlet''.
He lived in Aix-en-Provence, then in Souillac, and ultimately in Toulouse.
Samyro'', a partial anagram of ''Samy Rosenstock'', was used by Tzara from his debut and throughout the early 1910s.
A more serious crisis occurred in May, when Dada organized a mock trial of Maurice Barrès, whose early affiliation with the Symbolists had been shadowed by his antisemitism and reactionary stance: Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes was the prosecutor, Aragon and Soupault the defense attorneys, with Tzara, Ungaretti, Benjamin Péret and others as witnesses (a mannequin stood in for Barrès).
Around the same period, with funds from Knutson's inheritance, Tzara commissioned Austrian architect Adolf Loos, a former representative of the Vienna Secession whom he had met in Zürich, to build him a house in Paris.
Upon his return, he published the collection of poems ''Midis gagnés'' ("Conquered Southern Regions").
His poems of the period blend a humanist vision with communist theses.
After settling in Switzerland, the young poet almost completely discarded Romanian as his language of expression, writing most of his subsequent works in French.
During the same season, Breton, Arp, Ernst, Maja Kruschek and Tzara were in Austria, at Imst, where they published their last manifesto as a group, ''Dada au grand air'' ("Dada in the Open Air") or ''Der Sängerkrieg in Tirol'' ("The Battle of the Singers in Tyrol").
