This concerns especially breeding sites, which are lost through the upscaling and intensification of agriculture, drainage, urban sprawl, and artificial flooding regimes (affecting in particular the Danube crested newt).
NRBV = number of rib-bearing vertebrae, values from Wielstra & Arntzen (2011).
Dark brown with black spots, heavy white stippling, white markings on cheeks
Populations have been affected more heavily in some countries and species are listed in some national red lists.
Apart from the obvious colour differences between crested and marbled newts, species in the genus also have different body forms.
The northern crested newt and the marbled newt are the only species in the genus with a considerable range overlap (in western France).
Pheromones are used to attract females, and once a male has found one he will pursue her and position himself in front of her.
Overall, viability is reduced in these hybrids and they rarely backcross with their parent species.
A genetic particularity in the genus causes 50% of the embryos to die: their development is arrested when they do not possess two different variants of chromosome 1 (i.e., when they are homozygous for that chromosome).
These types were first noted by herpetologist Willy Wolterstorff, who used the ratio of forelimb length to distance between fore- and hindlimbs to distinguish subspecies of the crested newt (now full species); this index however sometimes leads to misidentifications.
''(northern or great crested newt)
Crested newts are dark brown, with black spots on the sides, and white stippling in some species.
Paedomophic adults, retaining their gills and staying aquatic, have occasionally been observed in several crested newt species.
The EU habitats directive is also the basis for the Natura 2000 protected areas, several of which have been designated for the crested newts.
Females usually engage with several males over a breeding season.
macedonicus''), respectively, as sister species, but analysis of nuclear DNA gave some conflicting results regarding those divergences.
Dark-spotted, reticulate or marbled on green background; females often with orange-red line from back to tail
In the southern marbled newt, courtship is somewhat different from the larger species in that it does not seem to involve male "cat buckles" and "whiplashes", but instead slower tail fanning and undulating of the tail tip (presumably to mimic a prey animal and lure the female).
Marbled newts owe their name to their green–black, marbled colour pattern.
Although not immediately threatened, crested and marbled newts suffer from population declines, caused mainly by habitat loss and fragmentation.
In that area, they have patchy, mosaic-like distributions and in general prefer different habitats.
The two marbled newts are readily distinguished by size and colouration.
They were thus affected by the cycles of expansion and retreat of cold, inhospitable regions, which shaped their distribution.
From there, they recolonised the northern parts after glacial retreat.
Larvae, depending on their size, eat small invertebrates and tadpoles, and also smaller larvae of their own species.
The closest relatives of ''Triturus'' are the European brook newts (''Calotriton'').
In such a posture, the newts typically roll up and secrete a milky substance.
''Marbled newts'' have two species, the marbled newt (''T.
ivanbureschi'' and ''T.
The northern crested newt is the most widespread species, while the others are confined to smaller regions, e.g.
The time adults spend in water differs among species and correlates with body shape: while it is only about three months in the marbled newts, it is six months in the Danube crested newt, whose slender body is best adapted to swimming.
Unlike smaller newts, ''Triturus'' larvae are mostly nektonic, swimming freely in the water column.
Finally, the genus is potentially susceptible to the highly pathogenic fungus ''Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans'', introduced to Europe from Asia.
The ritual ends with the male guiding the female over the spermatophore, which she then takes up with her cloaca.
dobrogicus''), as well as the Italian (''T.
Up to 17&nbsp;cm (females); medium build, legs large
Hybrids made up 3–7% of the adult populations in different studies.
Their belly is yellow to orange with black blotches, forming a pattern characteristic for individuals.
Examples of other suitable secondary habitats are ditches, channels, gravel pit lakes, garden ponds, or (in the Italian crested newt) rice paddies.
In some cases, entire populations have been moved when threatened by development projects, but such translocations need to be carefully planned to be successful.
This usually occurs in March for most species, but can be much earlier in the southern parts of the distribution range.
Occasionally, they even bite each other; marbled newts seem more aggressive than crested newts.
15–16&nbsp;cm; moderately slender, legs medium-sized
''(Macedonian crested newt)
''Triturus'' is a genus of rather large-bodied newts.
Alternatively, the complex geological history of the Balkan peninsula may have further separated populations there, with subsequent allopatric speciation and the spread of species into their current ranges.
After this period, they begin to ingest small invertebrates, and actively forage about ten days after hatching.
14–16&nbsp;cm; medium build, legs large
They range from stocky with sturdy limbs in the Anatolian, Balkan and the southern crested newt as well as the marbled newts, to very slender with short legs in the Danube crested newt.
This includes preservation of natural water bodies, reduction of fertiliser and pesticide use, control or eradication of introduced predatory fish, and the connection of habitats through sufficiently wide corridors of uncultivated land.
Strict protection of the northern crested newt in the United Kingdom has created conflicts with local development projects; at the same time, the charismatic crested newts are seen as flagship species, whose conservation also benefits a range of other amphibians.
A study using environmental niche modelling and phylogeography showed that during the Last Glacial Maximum, around 21,000 years ago, crested and marbled newts likely survived in warmer refugia mainly in southern Europe.
In the first days after hatching, they live on their remaining embryonic yolk supply and are not able to swim, but attach to plants or the egg capsule with two balancers, adhesive organs on their head.
An age calibration study based on this and other fossils places that divergence much earlier, at around 39 mya in the Eocene, with an uncertainty range of 47 to 34 mya.
marmoratus'', respectively.
Like other newts, ''Triturus'' species are carnivorous and feed mainly on invertebrates.
At the onset of the Quaternary glacial cycles, around 2.6 mya, the extant ''Triturus'' species had already emerged.
Survival of larvae from hatching to metamorphosis has been estimated at a mean of roughly 4% for the northern crested newt, which is comparable to other newts.
Adults generally avoid predators through their hidden lifestyle but are sometimes eaten by herons and other birds, snakes such as the grass snake, and mammals such as shrews, badgers and hedgehogs.
A 2011 phylogeny based on complete mitochondrial DNA resolved all divergences with high statistical support.
Orange to red with small to medium-sized, well defined black blotches
The crest of male marbled newts is smaller and fleshier than that of the crested newts and not indented, but marbled newt males also have a whitish tail band at breeding time.
Activity is highest on wet nights; the newts usually stay hidden during daytime.
karelinii'' are cryptic species and have only been separated through genetic analysis.
The possibility of hybridisation, especially in the crested newts, means that native species can be genetically polluted through the introduction of close species, as it is the case with the Italian crested newt introduced in the range of the northern crested newt.
When they encounter other males, they use the same postures as described below for courting to impress their counterpart.
Their limited dispersal makes the newts especially vulnerable to fragmentation, i.e.
Juveniles often disperse to new breeding sites, while the adults in general move back to the same breeding sites each year.
The larvae are themselves eaten by various animals such as carnivorous invertebrates and water birds, and are especially vulnerable to predatory fish.
A network of aquatic habitats in proximity is important to sustain populations, and the creation of new breeding ponds is in general very effective as they are rapidly colonised when other habitats are nearby.
Males court females with a ritualised display, ending in the deposition of a spermatophore that is picked up by the female.
''(southern or pygmy marbled newt)
the southwestern Iberian Peninsula in the southern marbled newt, and the Danube basin and some of its tributaries in the Danube crested newt.
During the breeding season, they prey on various aquatic invertebrates, and also tadpoles of other amphibians such as the common frog or common toad, and smaller newts.
All species are legally protected in Europe, and some of their habitats have been designated as special reserves.
Fleshy, with vertical black bars
Typical examples are larger ponds, which need not be of natural origin; indeed, most ponds inhabited by the northern crested newt in the UK are human-made.
Based on the books of Griffiths (1996) and Jehle ''et al.''
Courtship display serves to emphasise the male's body and crest size and to waft pheromones towards the female.
Based on this estimation, authors have investigated diversification within the genus and related it to paleogeography: The crested and marbled newts split between 30 and 24 mya, and the two species of marbled newts have been separated for 4.7–6.8 million years.
During breeding phase, crested newts change in appearance, most markedly the males.
Very high (up to 1.5&nbsp;cm)  and jagged
Historically, most European newts were included in the genus, but taxonomists have split off the alpine newts (''Ichthyosaura''), the small-bodied newts (''Lissotriton'') and the banded newts (''Ommatotriton'') as separate genera.
ivanbureschi'' is sister to the remaining species, results consistent with other studies.
cristatus'') and the Danube crested newt (''T.
After larval development in the first year, juveniles pass another year or two before reaching maturity; in the north and at higher elevations, this can take longer.
Size depends on sex and the environment: females are slightly larger and have a proportionally longer tail than males in most species, and the Italian crested newt seems to be larger in colder parts of its range.
The study also showed that species range boundaries shifted, with some species replacing others during recolonisation, for example the southern marbled newt which expanded northwards and replaced the marbled newt.
The southern marbled newt is typically found in Mediterranean oak forests.
Individuals resulting from the cross of a crested newt male with a marbled newt female had mistakenly been described as distinct species ''Triton blasii'' de l'Isle 1862, and the reverse hybrids as ''Triton trouessarti'' Peracca 1886.
''Triturus'' species usually live at low elevation; the Danube crested newt for example is confined to lowlands up to  above sea level.
Females and juveniles of some species have a yellow line running down their back and tail.
''Triturus'' included most European newt species until the end of the 20th century, but was substantially revised after it was shown to be polyphyletic.
marmoratus'') and the southern marbled newt (''T.
The first type is much rarer due to increased mortality of the larvae and consists only of males, while in the second, males have lower survival rates than females.
There are seven species of ''crested newts'': Anatolian crested newt (''Triturus anatolicus''), Balkan crested newt (''T.
In their southern range, they may instead sometimes aestivate during the dry months of summer.
ivanbureschi''), Danube crested newt (''T.
Dark brown with black spots, dense white stippling on sides
''(Danube crested newt)
The crested newts are believed to have originated in the Balkans and radiated in a brief time interval between 11.5 and 8 mya: First, the Balkan–Asian group (the Anatolian, Balkan and southern crested newt) branched off from the other crested newts, probably in a vicariance event caused by the separation of the Balkan and Anatolian land masses.
The newts do not migrate very far: they may cover around  in one night and rarely disperse much farther than .
It ranges from 12 in the marbled newts to 16–17 in the Danube crested newt and is usually observed through radiography on dead or sedated specimens.
They secrete the poison tetrodotoxin from their skin, albeit much less than for example the North American Pacific newts (''Taricha'').
macedonicus''), northern crested newt (''T.
The origin of current-day species is not fully understood so far, but one hypothesis suggests that ecological differences, notably in the adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle, may have evolved between populations and led to parapatric speciation.
Since the newts in general stay very close to their aquatic breeding sites, the quality of the surrounding terrestrial habitat largely determines whether an otherwise suitable water body will be colonised.
The Danube crested newt and the southern marbled newt are considered "near threatened" because populations have declined significantly.
Their ranges are largely contiguous but where they do overlap, hybridisation may take place.
Yellow or orange, black blotches with sharp edges
cristatus''), and southern crested newt (''T.
10–12&nbsp;cm; stocky
After this first ''orientation'' phase, courtship proceeds with ''display'' and ''spermatophore transfer''.
Warmer and wetter winters due to global warming may increase newt mortality by disturbing their hibernation and forcing them to expend more energy.
Most of the crested and marbled newts are listed as species of "least concern" by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, but population declines have been registered in all assessed species.
carnifex'') and the Macedonian crested newt (''T.
The eggs are fertilised internally in the oviduct.
Southern marbled newts mainly breed from January to early March and may already enter ponds in autumn.
When the female touches his tail with her snout, he deposits a packet of sperm (a spermatophore) on the ground.
As in all salamanders and newts, forelimbs—already present as stumps at hatching—develop first, followed later by the backlegs.
Three separate genera now accommodate former members of the genus: the small-bodied newts (''Lissotriton''), the banded newts (''Ommatotriton''), and the alpine newt (''Ichthyosaura'').
The crested newts are listed in Berne Convention Appendix II as "strictly protected", and the marbled newts in Appendix III as "protected".
Adults spend one half to three quarters of the year on land, depending on the species, and thus depend on both suitable aquatic breeding sites and terrestrial habitats.
Other threats include illegal collection for pet trade, which concerns mainly the southern crested newt, and the northern crested newt in its eastern range.
Especially in the southern ranges, exploitation of groundwater and decreasing spring rain, possibly caused by global warming, threaten breeding ponds.
''(Italian or alpine crested newt)
For orientation, the newts likely use a combination of cues including odour and the calls of other amphibians, and orientation by the night sky has been demonstrated in the marbled newt.
Males also frequently disturb the courting of other males and try to guide the female away from their rival.
''Triturus anatolicus'', ''T.
When they do occur in the same breeding ponds, they can form hybrids, which have intermediate characteristics.
Orange with numerous black spots, also on throat; tail underside bright orange
Land habitats, equally important for newt populations, are lost through the replacement of natural forests by plantations or clear-cutting (especially in the northern range), and the conversion of structure-rich landscapes into uniform farmland.
Yellow or orange with some large, round, grey to black, blurred spots
The bright yellow or orange underside of crested newts is a warning coloration which can be presented in case of perceived danger.
(2011), with additions from articles on recently recognised species.
After fertilisation, a female lays 200–400 eggs, folding them individually into leaves of water plants.
In a case study in the Netherlands, genes of the introduced Italian crested newt were found to introgress into the gene pool of the native northern crested newt.
A position characteristic for the large ''Triturus'' species is the "cat buckle", where the male's body is kinked and often rests only on the forelegs ("hand stand").
'' (southern or Persian crested newt)
The larval and juvenile stages are the riskiest for the newts, while survival is higher in adults.
Today's most widespread species, the northern crested newt, was likely confined to a small refugial region in the Carpathian Basin during the last glaciation, and from there expanded its range north-, east- and westwards when the climate rewarmed.
Metamorphosis takes place two to four months after hatching, but the duration of all stages of larval development varies with temperature.
As with other newts, they occasionally have to move to the surface to breathe air.
Dark brown with black spots and white stippling
They typically have a total length of between , with some crested newts of up to  described.
As of 2016, the genus contains nine accepted species.
Other ''Triturus'' species only meet at narrow zones on their range borders.
A 24-million-year-old fossil belonging to ''Triturus'', perhaps a marbled newt, shows that the genus already existed at that time and contradicts the earlier estimate of 8.3 million years ago (mya) for the split between the crested and marbled newts and their sister genus, the European brook newts (''Calotriton'').
Two species of marbled newts and seven species of crested newts are accepted, of which the Anatolian crested newt was only described in 2016.
Larvae hatch after two to five weeks, depending largely on temperature.
Like other newts, ''Triturus'' species develop in the water as larvae, and return to it each year for breeding.
Aquatic habitats are also degraded through pollution with agricultural pesticides and fertiliser.
These develop a skin seam running along their back and tail; this crest is the namesake feature of the crested newts and can be up to 1.5&nbsp;cm high and very jagged in the northern crested newt.
Introduction of crayfish and predatory fish threatens larval development; the Chinese sleeper has been a major concern in Eastern Europe.
The female deposits them individually on leaves of aquatic plants, such as water cress or floating sweetgrass, usually close to the surface, and, using her hindlegs, folds the leaf around the eggs as protection from predators and radiation.
Males are territorial and use leks, or courtship arenas, small patches of clear ground where they display and attract females.
The two marbled newt species can be found in proximity in a narrow area in central Portugal and Spain, but they usually breed in separate ponds, and individuals in that area could be clearly identified as one of the two species.
carnifex''), Macedonian crested newt (''T.
dobrogicus''), Italian crested newt (''T.
In the absence of forests, other cover-rich habitats, as for example hedgerows, scrub, swampy meadows, or quarries, can be inhabited.
Once the risky stages passed, adult newts usually attain an age of seven to nine years, although individuals of the northern crested newts have reached 17 years in the wild.
marmoratus'') can lay up to 400.
Other newts that can be found in syntopy with ''Triturus'' species include the smooth, the palmate, the Carpathian, and the alpine newt.
Deciduous woodlands or groves are in general preferred, but conifer woods are also accepted, especially in the far northern and southern ranges.
The Italian crested newt (''T.
In the northern Balkans, four species of crested newt occur in close vicinity, and may sometimes even co-exist.
Substantial genetic differences between subspecies were, however, noted and eventually led to their recognition as full species, with the crested newts often collectively referred to as "''T.
Yellow-cream with large black and smaller white spots
In females, an orange-red line runs down back and tail.
The Anatolian, Balkan, and southern crested newt however are cryptic, morphologically indistinguishable species.
the loss of connections for exchange between suitable habitats.
Fleshy, with vertical black bars
cristatus'' superspecies".
The precise requirements of most species are still poorly known, as the newts are much more difficult to detect and observe on land.
Crested newt females usually lay around 200 eggs per season, while the marbled newt (''T.
If the female shows interest, the ritual enters the third phase, where the male creeps away from her, his tail quivering.
Crested and marbled newts live and breed in vegetation-rich ponds or similar aquatic habitats for two to six months and usually spend the rest of the year in shady, protection-rich land habitats close to their breeding sites.
Blackish with fine white spots, but no yellow markings
''Triturus'' newts occupy distinct geographical regions (see ''Distribution''), but hybrid forms occur at range borders between some species and have intermediate characteristics (see ''Hybridisation and introgression'').
Habitat protection and management is seen as the most important element for the conservation of ''Triturus'' newts.
Exotic plants can also degrade habitats: the swamp stonecrop replaces natural vegetation and overshadows waterbodies in the United Kingdom, and its hard leaves are unsuitable for egg-laying to crested newts.
In the northern crested newt, a female takes around five minutes for the deposition of one egg.
He will also lean towards the female ("lean-in"), rock his body, and flap his tail towards her, sometimes lashing it violently ("whiplash").
Adult newts begin moving to their breeding sites in spring when temperatures stay above .
''Triturus'' embryos are usually light-coloured, 1.8–2&nbsp;mm in diameter with a 6&nbsp;mm jelly capsule, which distinguishes them from eggs of other co-existing newt species that are smaller and darker-coloured.
13–15&nbsp;cm; slender, legs short
Dark brown with black spots, no or little white stippling; females and juveniles often with yellow or greenish dorsal line
10–13 cm, exceptionally up to 18&nbsp;cm; stocky
Dark brown with black spots and white stippling
Very high and jagged, starting between eyes and nostrils
Both the crested and the marbled newts were long considered as single species, ''Triturus cristatus'' and ''T.
Dark-spotted, reticulate or marbled on green background; sometimes fine white stippling on flanks; females often with orange-red line from back to tail
Just before the transition to land, the larvae resorb their external gills; they can at this stage reach a size of  in the larger species.
In unfavourable conditions, larvae may delay their development and overwinter in water, although this seems to be less common than in the small-bodied newts.
The aquatic phase serves not only for reproduction, but also offers the animals more abundant prey, and immature crested newts frequently return to the water in spring even if they do not breed.
The Anatolian, Balkan and the Macedonian crested newt, recognised only recently, have not yet been evaluated separately for conservation status.
The mitochondrial analysis also supports the northern (''T.
carnifex'') has been introduced outside its native range in some European countries and the Azores.
Over most of their range, they hibernate in winter, using mainly subterranean hiding places, where many individuals will often congregate.
However, they do occur at higher altitudes towards the south of their range: the Italian crested newt is found up to  in the Apennine Mountains, the southern crested newt up to  in the southern Caucausus, and the marbled newt up to around  in central Spain.
