By far the most famous and influential served the Duke of Burgundy.
The mouthpiece is a separate part of the trombone and can be interchanged with similarly sized trombones from different manufacturers.
Prime examples of early trombone soloists are Jack Teagarden and J.J. Johnson.
The joint connecting the slide and bell sections is furnished with a ferrule to secure the connection of the two parts of the instrument, though older models from the early 20th century and before were usually equipped with friction joints and no ancillary mechanism to tighten the joint.
These trombonists were, however, often viewed separately from the more highly skilled trombonists who played in groups such as the alta capella wind ensembles as well as the first "orchestra"-type ensembles that performed in religious settings such as St Mark's Basilica in Venice in the early 17th century.
For that reason, closed-wrap tubing remains more popular in trombones used in marching bands or other ensembles where the trombone may be more prone to damage.
(Company bands used B and E treble clef notation for many instruments in the band to allow players to more easily switch instruments when personnel changed.)
Contrabass trombones in the key of F typically have two valves tuned to C and D respectively.
It was first described by Andre Braun circa 1795.
It was not until the "big band" era of swing came about in the mid-1920s that the trombone began to be used as a solo instrument.
In the 21st century, leading mainstream manufacturers of trombones include F.E.
Since the mid 20th century, modern instruments use a trigger to engage the valve while playing.
The bore expands through the backbore to the bell, which is typically between 7" and 8½".
The most common material is yellow brass (70% copper, 30% zinc), but other materials include rose brass (85% copper, 15% zinc) and red brass (90% copper, 10% zinc).
Thus, the most convincing trills tend to be above the first octave and a half of the tenor's range.
French tenor trombones were built in both C and B, altos in D, sopranos in F, piccolos in high B, basses in G and E, contrabasses in B.
The most frequently encountered trombones are the tenor trombone and bass trombone.
Handel used it in the ''Death March'' from ''Saul'', ''Samson'', and ''Israel in Egypt'', all of which were examples of a new oratorio style, popular during the early 18th century.
The size of a trombone choir can vary greatly from five or six to twenty or more members.
Pieces such as Edgard Varèse's ''Octandre'', Paul Hindemith's ''Sonata'', Charles Wuorinen's ''Trombone Trio'' and Luciano Berio's ''Sequenza V'' led the way for lesser-known composers to build a wider repertoire.
The design of these tapers affects the intonation of the instrument.
Later, the Paris Conservatory and its yearly concours would also contribute to trombone education.
A similar design ''("Preacher model")'' was marketed by C.G.
These different wind bands all played a limited repertoire with few original compositions that consisted mainly of orchestral transcriptions, arrangements of popular and patriotic tunes, and feature pieces for soloists (usually cornetists, singers, and violinists).
Bass trombone bells can be as large as 10½" or more, though usually either 9½ in or 10 in diameter.
As officials, these trombonists were often relegated to standing watch in the city towers but would also herald the arrival of important people to the city.
It should be noted that though much of Western music has adopted the even-tempered scale, it has been the practice in Germany and Austria to play these notes in position, where they will have just intonation (see harmonic seventh as well for A4).
This part of the slide must be lubricated frequently.
Especially with the ophicleide, or later the tuba subjoined to the trombone trio during the 19th century, parts scored for the bass trombone rarely descended as low as parts scored before the addition of either of these new low brass instruments.
French orchestras did the same in the 1960s.
Famous composers writing for the trombone in this period include Giovanni Gabrieli and his uncle Andrea Gabrieli, Claudio Monteverdi and Heinrich Schütz.
The slide may also be built with a ''dual bore'' configuration, in which the bore of the second leg of the slide is slightly larger than the bore of the first leg, producing a step-wise conical effect.
Beethoven also used trombones in his Symphony No.
The trombone retained its traditional associations with the opera house and the Church during the 18th century and was usually employed in the usual alto/tenor/bass trio to support the lower voices of the chorus, though Viennese court orchestra ''Kapellmeister'' Johann Joseph Fux rejected an application from a bass trombonist in 1726 and restricted the use of trombones to alto and tenor only, which remained the case almost until the turn of the 19th century in Vienna, after which time a second tenor trombone was added when necessary.
There are other configurations other than the G-attachment however.
White Company, J.W.
The rare exceptions are in contemporary works intended for high-level wind bands.
The composer typically credited with the trombone's introduction into the symphony orchestra, however, was Ludwig van Beethoven, who used it in the last movement of his Symphony No.
Like all brass instruments, sound is produced when the player’s vibrating lips (embouchure) cause the air column inside the instrument to vibrate.
Tenor trombones commonly have valve attachments, the most common being the F-attachment, which changes the pitch of the instrument from B to F, increasing the range of the instrument downward and allowing alternate slide positions for notes in 6th or 7th position.
Further, for certain compositions, these choices between two such performers could easily be reversed.
Trills tend to be easiest and most effective higher in the harmonic series because the distance between notes is much smaller and slide movement is minimal.
In other words, it means "big trumpet."
The normal instrumentation for these early wind bands was two shawms and a trumpet.
The first use of the trombone as an independent instrument in a symphony was in the Symphony in E (1807) by the Swedish composer Joachim Nicolas Eggert.
F4 marks the sixth partial, or the fifth overtone.
The next higher partials—B4 (a major second higher), C5 (a major second higher), D5 (a major second higher)—do not require much adjustment for even-tempered intonation, but E (a minor second higher)is almost exactly a quarter tone higher than it would be in twelve-tone equal temperament.
When the sackbut returned to common use again in England in the 18th century, Italian music was so influential that the instrument became known as the "trombone", although in some countries the same name has been applied throughout its history, viz.
The trombone began to be taught at the new Musikhochschule founded by Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy.
The Germans and Austrians held on to the alto trombone somewhat longer than the French, who came to prefer a section of three tenor trombones until after the Second World War.
"Trombone" is apparently the first word that explicitly means a slide instrument.
The second trigger facilitates playing the otherwise problematic low B.
Some trombones have valves instead of a slide (see valve trombone).
Bell sizes remain very large in all sizes of German trombone and a bass trombone bell may exceed 10" in diameter.
Many modern trombone models also utilize a rotary valve as a means to lower pitch of the instrument.
A variety of mutes can be used with the trombone to alter its timbre.
For example, a trill on B3-C4 is virtually impossible as the slide must move two positions (either 1st-to-3rd or 5th-to-3rd), however at an octave higher (B4-C5) the notes can both be achieved in 1st position as a lip trill.
Double rotor dependent valve bass trombones were created in the late 1950s, and double rotor independent valve bass trombones were created in the late 1960s/early 1970s.
The note E1 (or the lowest E on a standard 88-key piano keyboard) is the lowest attainable note on a 9' B tenor trombone, requiring a full 2.24 m of tubing.
1 (1990) is called ''Motorbike Odyssey'' or ''Motorbike Concerto''.
Many of these new trombone valve designs have enjoyed great success on the market, but the standard rotary valve remains the most common for trombone valve attachments.
Jan Sandström composed two concertos to be performed by Christian Lindberg, his Trombone Concerto No.
Many are held in place with the use of cork grips, including the straight, cup, harmon and pixie mutes.
The traditional German ''Konzertposaune'' can differ substantially from American designs in many aspects.
The bands needed an improvement.
Today, the trombone can be found in wind ensembles/concert bands, symphony orchestras, marching bands, military bands, brass bands, and brass choirs.
British orchestras abandoned the use of small bore tenors and G basses in favor of an American/German approach of large bore tenors and B basses in the 1940s.
The modern system has seven chromatic slide positions on a tenor trombone in B.
The sackbut was used extensively across Europe from its appearance in the 15th century to a decline in most places by the mid-late 17th century.
During the Renaissance, the equivalent English term was "sackbut."
Unlike most other brass instruments in an orchestral setting, the trombone is not usually considered a transposing instrument.
Before 1850, bass trombone parts were mostly played on a slightly longer F-bass trombone (a fourth lower).
Experiments with different constitutions of the trombone section during the 19th and early 20th centuries, including Richard Wagner's addition of a contrabass trombone in ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'' and Gustav Mahler's and Richard Strauss' occasional augmentation by adding a second bass trombone to the usual trio of two tenor trombones and one bass trombone, have not had any lasting effect; the majority of orchestral works are still scored for the usual mid- to late-19th-century low brass section of two tenor trombones, one bass trombone and one tuba.
Olds, Vincent Bach, King Musical Instruments, Conn, F.A.
Some manufacturers offer interchangeable bells.
This puts the notes in exactly the same staff position as they would be if the music were written in a (non-transposing) tenor clef, although the key signature and some accidentals must be adjusted.
The fundamental note of the unenhanced length is C, but the short valved attachment that puts the instrument in B is ''open'' when the trigger is ''not'' depressed.
An accomplished performer today is expected to be proficient in reading parts notated in bass clef, tenor clef, alto clef, and (more rarely) treble clef in C, with the British brass-band performer expected to handle treble clef in B as well.
Several composers penned works for Quiesser, including Ferdinand David (Mendelssohn's concertmaster) who wrote in 1837 the ''Concertino for Trombone and Orchestra'', Ernst Sachse and Friedrich August Belcke, whose solo works all remain popular today in Germany.
The adjustment of intonation is most often accomplished with a tuning slide that is a short slide between the neckpipe and the bell incorporating the bell bow (U-bend); this device was designed by the French maker François Riedlocker during the early 19th century and applied to French and British designs and later in the century to German and American models, though German trombones were built without tuning slides well into the 20th century.
With the rise of recorded music and music schools, orchestral trombone sections around the world began to have a more consistent idea of a standard trombone sound.
Eventually, in the early 20th century, musicians decided to replace the tenor clef with the transposing B treble clef to aid new starters to integrate more quickly and effectively into the brass band—though the bass trombone, then in G, remained notated in concert pitch bass clef.
6 in F major ("Pastoral") and Symphony No.
Nowadays, the stockings are incorporated into the manufacturing process of the inner slide tubes and represent a fractional widening of the tube to accommodate the necessary method of alleviating friction.
To compare between the two styles the chart below may be helpful (take note for example, in the old system contemporary 1st-position was considered "drawn past" then current 1st).
As with other brass instruments, sound is produced by blowing air through pursed lips producing a vibration that creates a standing wave in the instrument.
While such instruments have no seventh slide position, C and B natural may be comfortably accessed on the first and second positions by using the trigger.
As the alto trombone declined in popularity during the 19th century, this practice was gradually abandoned and first trombone parts came to be notated in the tenor or bass clef.
Dependent means that the second valve only works when used in combination with the first, as it is located directly on the F- or E-Attachment tubing.
Some trombones are tuned through a mechanism in the slide section rather than via a separate tuning slide in the bell section.
The length of the trombone's tube was not necessarily longer than that of the trumpet, but it could be made longer by means of the slide.
The inspiration for many of these works is thought due to the virtuosic players in the courts at Vienna and Salzburg, including Thomas Gschladt and several members of a family named Christian.
Despite the universal switch to a larger sized horn though, many European trombone makers still tend to prefer a slightly smaller bore than their American counterparts.
The valves follow the same schema as other valved instruments-the first valve lowers the pitch by 1 step, the second valve by 1/2 step, and the third valve by 1-1/2 steps.
Valve trombones use three valves (singly or in combination) instead of the slide.
This allows the instrument to reach notes that are otherwise not possible without the valve as well as play other notes in alternate positions.
Shawm technique underwent a dramatic improvement in the middle of the 14th century.
Rather than being completely cylindrical from end to end, the tube is a complex series of tapers with the smallest at the mouthpiece receiver and the largest just before the bell flare.
In the second half of the century, new composers began giving back to the trombone a level of importance in solo and chamber music.
Occasionally, trombone bells are made from solid sterling silver.
Variants such as the valve trombone and superbone have three valves like those on the trumpet.
For the brass bands of the late 19th and early 20th century, prominent American manufacturers included Graves and Sons, E.G.
The higher in the harmonic series any two successive notes are, the closer they tend to be (as evidenced by the progressively smaller intervals noted above).
French music, therefore, usually employed a section of three tenor trombones up to the mid–20th century.
These are some of the players that brought jazz trombone into the spotlight as an instrument of soulful expression, but also one of technical skill.
The pedal tone on B is frequently seen in commercial scoring but much less often in symphonic music while notes below that are called for only rarely as they "become increasingly difficult to produce and insecure in quality" with A or G being the bottom limit for most trombonists.
Prior to the invention of valve systems, most brass instruments were limited to playing one overtone series at a time; altering the pitch of the instrument required manually replacing a section of tubing (called a "crook") or picking up an instrument of different length.
Every pitch in a glissando must have the same harmonic number, and a tritone is the largest interval that can be performed as a glissando.
The most common second valve attachment is the G-attachment, which changes the instrument's key to D when used in combination with the F-Attachment (or D if used with the less common E-attachment).
Contrabass trombones also can have valve attachments.
As an example, F4 (at the bottom of the treble clef) may be played in first, fourth or sixth position on a B trombone.
The word first appears in court records in 1495 as "shakbusshe" at about the time King Henry VII married a Portuguese princess who brought some musicians with her.
A wide variety of valve attachments and combinations are available.
However, orchestral musicians adopted the trombone version with the widest range that they could easily apply to any of the three trombone parts that typically appeared in scores—the tenor trombone.
Trombones have been a part of the large wind band since its inception as an ensemble during the French Revolution of 1791.
While open-wrap tubing does offer a more open sound, the tubing sticks out from behind the bell and is more vulnerable to damage.
These are usually rotary valves, or piston valves.
Mouthpiece selection is a highly personal decision.
Their parts were transposed according to which crook or length-of-instrument they used at any given time, so that a particular note on the staff always corresponded to a particular partial on the instrument.
Mozart also used trombones in several of his operas.
However, as 20th century composers such as Mahler became more popular, tenor trombone parts began to extend down into lower ranges that necessitated the use of a trigger.
It is rare on the alto, but when the instrument does have it, the valve attachment changes the key of the instrument from E to B, allowing the alto trombone to play in the tenor trombone range.
All the way through the mid-20th century it was common to see orchestral trombone players using instruments that did not include the trigger mostly because of a lack of a need for one.
E and F5 (a major second higher) at the next partial are very high notes; a very skilled player with a highly developed facial musculature and diaphragm can go even higher to G5, A5, B5 and beyond.
However, many bass trombones have a second valve attachment instead, which increases their range downward even more.
Bach used it in some of his cantatas, even having written for four trombones (with the extremely rare soprano trombone playing the cantus firmus, which normally would be played on cornett).
The German "Posaune" long predates the invention of the slide and could refer to a natural trumpet as late as the early fifteenth century.
Examples of this practice are evident in scores by Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich.
The word ''trombone'' derives from Italian ''tromba'' (trumpet) and ''-one'' (a suffix meaning "large"), so the name means "large trumpet".
He championed and popularised Christian Friedrich Sattler's new tenorbass trombone during the 1840s, leading to its widespread use in orchestras throughout Germany and Austria.
Valve attachment tubing usually incorporates a small tuning slide so that the attachment tubing can be tuned separately from the rest of the instrument.
The '''trombone''' is a musical instrument in the brass family.
The appearance of valve trombones in the mid-19th century did little to alter the make-up of the orchestral trombone section; though it was ousted from orchestras in Germany and France, the valve trombone remained popular almost entirely to the exclusion of the slide instrument in countries such as Italy and Bohemia, and composers such as Giuseppe Verdi, Giacomo Puccini, Bedřich Smetana, and Antonín Dvořák scored for a valve trombone section.
Trombone parts in band music are nearly exclusively notated in bass clef.
Trombone parts may contain both bass and tenor clef or bass and alto clef sections.
Trombones are usually constructed with a slide that is used to change the pitch.
The trombone was further improved in the 19th century with the addition of "stockings" at the end of the inner slide to reduce friction, the development of the water key to expel condensation from the horn, and the occasional addition of a valve that, intentionally, only was to be set on or off, but later was to become the now regular F-valve.
Additional tubing connects the slide to the bell of the instrument through a neckpipe, and bell or back bow (U-bend).
Many trombones have valve attachments to aid in increasing the range of the instrument while also allowing alternate slide positions for difficult music passages.
The most notable was Arthur Pryor, who played with the Sousa Band and later formed his own.
Popular choices for recital music today include Stjepan Sulek's ''Vox Gabrieli'', Jacques Casterède's ''Sonatine'' and Jean Michel Defaye's ''Deux Danses''.
Handel, for instance, had to import trombones to England from a Royal court in Hanover, Germany in order to perform one of his larger compositions.
A person who plays the trombone is called a trombonist or trombone player.
Also, it was quite common for trombones to double choir parts; reading in concert pitch meant there was no need for dedicated trombone parts.
During the later Baroque period, Johann Sebastian Bach and George Friderich Handel used trombones on a few occasions.
In 1995-6, Johan de Meij wrote his T-Bone Concerto for trombone and concert band.
Currently, B/C trombones are available from many manufacturers, including German makers Günter Frost, Thein and Helmut Voigt, as well as the Yamaha Corporation.
Italian ''trombone'' and German ''''Posaune''.
The French equivalent "saqueboute" appears a little earlier, in 1466.
Some slide trombones have one or (less frequently) two rotary valves operated by a left-hand thumb trigger.
By the time the trombone gained a footing in the orchestra and opera, trombonists were no longer usually employed by a cathedral or court orchestra, and so were expected to provide their own instrument.
Bass trombones also very commonly have F-attachments, which serve exactly the same function as on the tenor trombone.
On trombones without an F attachment, there is a gap between B1 (the fundamental in first position) and E2 (the first harmonic in seventh position).
Some say that materials affect tone quality and timbre.
The ''Solo For Sliding Trombone'' is one of the parts for John Cage's ''Concert For Piano And Orchestra'' (1958).
The first valve was simply a fourth-valve, or in German "Quart-ventil", built onto a B tenor trombone, to allow playing in low F. This valve was first built without a return spring, and was only intended to set the instrument in B or F for extended passages.
Manufacturers now produce large bore models with triggers as well as smaller alto models.
In brass-band music, the tenor trombone is treated as a transposing instrument in B and reads the treble clef (while the bass trombone uses the bass clef in concert pitch, as in orchestral and concert-band music).
The construction of the trombone changed relatively little between the Baroque and Classical periods with the most obvious feature being the slightly more flared bell.
The bell may be constructed out of two separate brass sheets or out of one single piece of metal and hammered on a mandrel until the part is shaped correctly.
Since around 1925, when Jazz.music became popular, Germany has been selling "American trombones" as well.
Common and popular bore sizes for trombone slides are 0.500", 0.508", 0.525" and 0.547" for tenor trombones, and 0.562" for bass trombones.
The edge of the bell may be finished with or without a piece of bell wire to secure it, which also affects the tone quality; most bells are built with bell wire.
The trumpet could play too few notes to keep up.
Whereas older instruments fitted with valve attachments usually had the tubing coiled rather tightly in the bell section (''closed wrap '' or ''traditional wrap''), modern instruments usually have the tubing kept as free as possible of tight bends in the tubing (''open wrap''), resulting in a freer response with the valve attachment tubing engaged.
This method preserves a smoother expansion from the start of the bell section to the bell flare.
Newer bass trombones have independent (in-line) valves instead, meaning that the second valve is located on the neckpipe of the instrument and can therefore operate independently of the other.
Wright and Company, The Boston Musical Instrument Company, E.A.
First trumpet makers rediscovered the ancient technique of bending brass tubes.
valve trombone), allows the player to extend the length of the air column, lowering the pitch.
While their bore sizes were considered large in the 19th century, German trombones have altered very little over the last 150 years and are now typically somewhat smaller than their American counterparts.
While some trombonists still prefer "straight" trombone models that do not have triggers, most have adopted the new standard for its convenience and general versatility.
Tenor trombones typically have a bore of 0.450" (small bore) to 0.547" (large or ''orchestral'' bore) after the leadpipe and through the slide.
For example, second position "A" is not in exactly the same place on the slide as second position "E." Many types of trombone also include one or more rotary valves used to increase the length of the instrument (and therefore lower its pitch) by directing the air flow through additional tubing.
Trills are most commonly found in early Baroque and Classical music for the trombone as a means of ornamentation, however, some more modern pieces will call for trills as well.
The smallest sizes are found in small jazz trombones and older narrow-bore instruments, while the larger sizes are common in orchestral models.
Therefore, trombone parts were rather seldom given "solo" roles that were not substitutable with other instruments.
Some of these groups, especially military bands in Europe, made use of rear-facing trombones, where the bell section pointed behind the player's left shoulder.
A4 in particular, which is at the seventh partial (sixth overtone) is nearly always 31 cents, or about one third of a semitone, flat of the minor seventh.
Trombone music, along with music for euphonium and tuba, is typically written in concert pitch in either bass or tenor clef, although exceptions do occur, notably in almost all brass-band music where tenor trombone is presented as a B transposing instrument, written in treble clef.
To prevent friction from slowing the action of the slide, additional sleeves were developed during the Renaissance, and these ''stockings'' were soldered onto the ends of the inner slide tubes.
Some trombones have piston valves used instead of rotary valves for valve attachments, but it is very rare and is today considered unconventional.
The most common ''dual bore'' combinations are 0.481"-0.491", 0.500"-0.508", 0.508"-0.525", 0.525"-0.547", 0.547"-0.562" for tenor trombones, and 0.562"-0.578" for bass trombones.
Along with trumpeters, trombonists in German city-states were even occasionally employed as civil officials.
A byproduct of this is the relatively few motions needed to move between notes in the higher ranges of the trombone.
The most common type of valve seen for valve attachments is the rotary valve.
Many variations of the rotary valve have been invented in the past half-century such as the Thayer Valve or Axial-Flow Valve, the Hagmann valve, the Greenhoe rotor, and several others, all of which were designed to give the trombone a more open, free sound than a conventional rotary valve would allow.
While originally seen as a gimmick, these plastic models have found increasing popularity of the last decade and are now viewed as practice tools that make for more convenient travel as well as a cheaper option for beginning players not looking to invest so much in a trombone right away.
Two bent sections connecting three straight tubes can result either in an S-shaped instrument, or with more stability, a loop.
The introduction of the trombones into the orchestra, however, allied them more closely with the trumpets and it did not take long for an additional tenor trombone to replace the alto.
In the modern system, each successive position outward (approximately 3.25") will produce a note which is one semitone lower when played in the same partial.
The addition of an F attachment allows for intermediate notes to be played with more clarity.
The 'slide', the most distinctive feature of the trombone (cf.
Trombone parts are typically notated in bass clef, though sometimes also written in tenor clef or alto clef.
The two valves on a bass trombone can either be independent or dependent.
Conn in the 1920s, also under the Wurlitzer label.
There are also some solo pieces written specifically for trombone in the early 17th century.
Nearly all trombones have a telescoping slide mechanism that varies the length of the instrument to change the pitch.
In chamber music, it is used in brass quintets, quartets, or trios, or trombone trios, quartets, or choirs.
The 19th century also saw the erosion of the traditional alto/tenor/bass trombone trio in the orchestra.
