The medieval ''jongleur/joglar'' is really a minstrel.
Almost half of all troubadour works that survive are from the period 1180–1220.
He was followed immediately by two poets of unknown origins, known only by their sobriquets, Cercamon and Marcabru, and by a member of the princely class, Jaufre Rudel.
Under Marxist influence, Erich Köhler, Marc Bloch, and Georges Duby have suggested that the "essential hegemony" in the castle of the lord's wife during his absence was a driving force.
It has also been pointed out that the concepts of "finding", "music", "love", and "ardour"—the precise semantic field attached to the word troubadour—are allied in Arabic under a single root (WJD) that plays a major role in Sufic discussions of music, and that the word troubadour may in part reflect this.
Among the more than one hundred works of Cerverí de Girona are many songs with unique labels, which may correspond more to "titles" than "genres", but that is debatable: ''peguesca'' (nonsense), ''espingadura'' (flageolet song), ''libel'' (legal petition), ''esdemessa'' (leap), ''somni'' (dream), ''acuyndamen'' (challenge), ''desirança'' (nostalgia), ''aniversari'' (anniversary), ''serena'' (serene).
To such a strong and multi-faceted tradition of love literature and song nearby must be added the presence of the Toledo School of Translators starting in 1126.
:''Afollon drutz e molhers et espos,''
Chronologically, however, this hypothesis is hard to sustain (the forces believed to have given rise to the phenomenon arrived later than it).
*''Alba'' (morning song)— the song of a lover as dawn approaches, often with a watchman warning of the approach of a lady's jealous husband
Many troubadours are described in their ''vidas'' as poor knights.
Fewer than 300 melodies out of an estimated 2500 survive.
In French, the ''alba'' became the ''aubade'', the ''pastorela'' the ''pastourelle'', and the ''partimen'' the ''jeu parti''.
*''Descort''— a song heavily discordant in verse form and/or feeling
Sometime in the middle of the 12th century, however, a distinction was definitely being made between an inventor of original verse and the performers of others'.
*''Estampida''— a dance-like song
Most were metaphysical, intellectual, and formulaic.
Peter Dronke, author of ''The Medieval Lyric'', however, believes that "his songs represent not the beginnings of a tradition but summits of achievement in that tradition."
Later troubadours especially could belong to lower classes, ranging from the middle class of merchants and "burgers" (persons of urban standing) to tradesmen and others who worked with their hands.
The ''trobairitz'' were the female troubadours, the first female composers of secular music in the Western tradition.
According to them, the Arabic word ''ṭaraba'' “song" (from the triliteral root Ṭ-R-B “provoke emotion, excitement, agitation; make music, entertain by singing") could partly be the etymon of the verb ''trobar''.
When a writer seeks to avoid using unglossed Occitan, the incipit of the song may be given in translation instead or a title may even be invented to reflect the theme of the work.
The term was used mostly for poetry only and in more careful works, like the ''vidas'', is not generally applied to the composition of music or to singing, though the troubadour's poetry itself is not so careful.
Many troubadours also possessed a clerical education.
Out of a total of about 450 troubadours and 2,500 troubadour works, the trobairitz and their corpus form a minor but interesting and informative portion.
This poem was originally inserted in a serial of modulations ending a liturgic song.
The use of feudal terminology in troubadour poems is seen as evidence.
Jongleurs (performers) and ''cantaires'' (singers) also performed troubadours' songs.
One ''salut d'amor'', by a woman (Azalais d'Altier) to a woman (Clara d'Anduza) is also extant and one anonymous ''planh'' is usually assigned a female authorship.
According to Riquier, every vocation deserved a name of its own and the sloppy usage of ''joglar'' assured that it covered a multitude of activities, some, no doubt, with which Riquier did not wish to be associated.
metaphor and metonymy.
The classical period came to be seen by later generations, especially in the 14th and 15th centuries and outside of Occitania, as representing the high point of lyric poetry and models to be emulated.
The French word is borrowed itself from the Occitan word ''trobador''.
Arnaut's ''joglar et cantaire'', probably both a singer and a messenger, who carried his love songs to his lady, was Pistoleta.
Arnaut de Mareuil is specified in his ''vida'' as coming from a poor family, but whether this family was poor by noble standards or more global ones is not apparent.
The ''vidas'' are important early works of vernacular prose nonfiction.
Most of the ''vidas'' were composed in Italy in the 1220s, many by Uc de Saint Circ.
In total, moreover, there are over 2,500 troubadour lyrics available to be studied as lingusitic artifacts (Akehurst, 23).
The "ennobling effects of love" in specific have been identified as Neoplatonic.
Troubadours, at least after their style became established, usually followed some set of "rules", like those of the ''Leys d'amors'' (compiled between 1328 and 1337).
The ''sestina'' became popular in Italian literature.
Most were composed by the troubadours themselves.
The most famous poet of the ''trobar leu'' was Bernart de Ventadorn.
#('''Crypto-''')'''Cathar'''According to this thesis, troubadour poetry is a reflection of Cathar religious doctrine.
They entertain the possibility that the nearly homophonous Ḍ-R-B root may have contributed to the sense of the newly coined Romance verb ''trobar''.
He was highly regarded by his contemporaries, as were Giraut de Bornelh, reputed by his biographer to be the greatest composer of melodies to ever live, and Bertran de Born, the master of the ''sirventes'', or political song, which became increasingly popular in this period.
These terms are debated, however, since the adjective ''joglaresc'' would seem to imply "in the manner of the ''jongleurs''".
The ''maldit'' and the ''comiat'' were often connected as a ''maldit-comiat'' and they could be used to attack and renounce a figure other than a lady or a lover, like a commanding officer (when combined, in a way, with the ''sirventes'').
In archaic and classical troubadour poetry, the word is only used in a mocking sense, having more or less the meaning of "somebody who makes things up".
*''Escondig''— a lover's apology
The trobairitz came almost to a woman from Occitania.
There were also female counterparts to the ''joglars'': the ''joglaresas''.
The ''vidas'' of the following troubadours note their clerical status: Aimeric de Belenoi, Folquet de Marselha (who became a bishop), Gui d'Ussel, Guillem Ramon de Gironella, Jofre de Foixà (who became an abbot), Peire de Bussignac, Peire Rogier, Raimon de Cornet, Uc Brunet, and Uc de Saint Circ.
While the theory is supported by the traditional and near-universal account of the decline of the troubadours coinciding with the suppression of Catharism during the Albigensian Crusade (first half of the 13th century), support for it has come in waves.
All three were supporters of the French king Louis IX and the French aristocracy against the native Occitan nobility.
It is viewed either as a strength or weakness that this theory requires a second theory about how the Neoplatonism was transmitted to the troubadours; perhaps it can be coupled with one of the other origins stories or perhaps it is just peripheral.
At its height it had become popular in Languedoc and the regions of Rouergue, Toulouse, and Quercy (c. 1200).
*Sonnet (''sonet'')— an Italian genre imported into Occitan verse in the 13th century
Most "Crusading songs" are classified either as ''cansos'' or ''sirventes'' but sometimes separately.
*''Dansa'' or ''balada''— a lively dance song with a refrain
Only one melody composed by a trobairitz (the Comtessa de Dia) survives.
His name has been preserved because he was the Duke of Aquitaine, but his work plays with already established structures; Eble II of Ventadorn is often credited as a predecessor, though none of his work survives.
#'''Liturgical'''The troubadour lyric may be a development of the Christian liturgy and hymnody.
Latin ''sapere'' > ''savoir'').
*''Serena''— the song of a lover waiting impatiently for the evening (to consummate his love)
Troubadour songs are still performed and recorded today, albeit rarely.
Especially in translations designed for a popular audience, such as Ezra Pound's, English titles are commonly invented by the translator/editor.
Some troubadours, like Arnaut de Maruelh, had their own jongleurs who were dedicated to singing their patron's work.
This theory has been developed away from sociological towards psychological explanation.
This style of poetry seems to be attached to early troubadours from Gascony and was characterised by references to nature: leaves, flowers, birds, and their songs.
The word ''trobairitz'' was first used in the 13th-century ''Romance of Flamenca'' and its derivation is the same as that of ''trobaire'' but in feminine form.
The influence of the Song of Songs has even been suggested.
The hypothesis that the troubadour tradition was created, more or less, by William after his experience of Moorish arts while fighting with the Reconquista in Spain was also championed by Ramón Menéndez Pidal in the early 20th century, but its origins go back to the  ''Cinquecento'' and Giammaria Barbieri (died 1575) and Juan Andrés (died 1822).
During the classical period the "rules" of poetic composition had first become standardised and written down, first by Raimon Vidal and then by Uc Faidit.
About 1022, the Muslim Cordoban Ibn Hazm published ''The Ring of the Dove'', a literary work in Arabic devoted to narrating anecdotes of love affairs drawn mainly from his own contemporary society of Spain/al-Andalus; the plight of unrequited love, secret love, and love against many obstacles are recurring themes; while ancient Platonic views of love are cited and rejected, Ibn Hazm adds a long didactic exhortation to observing restraint and moral-religious boundaries at the end of the work.
He was a patron as well as a composer of Occitan lyric.
There are representatives from the Auvergne, Provence, Languedoc, the Dauphiné, Toulousain, and the Limousin.
#'''Neoplatonic'''This theory is one of the more intellectualising.
Among the non-Genoese ''podestà''-troubadours was Alberico da Romano, a nobleman of high rank who governed Vicenza and Treviso as variously a Ghibelline and a Guelph.
The trobairitz were in most respects as varied a lot as their male counterparts, with the general exceptions of their poetic style and their provenance.
They aspired to high culture and though, unlike the nobility, they were not patrons of literature, they were its disseminators and its readers.
The Occitan words ''trobador'' and ''trobaire'' are relatively rare compared with the verb ''trobar'' (compose, invent), which was usually applied to the writing of poetry.
*''Planh''— a lament, especially on the death of some important figure
The influence of late 11th-century poets of the "Loire school", such as Marbod of Rennes and Hildebert of Lavardin, is stressed in this connexion by Brinkmann.
In his study, Lévi-Provençal is said to have found four Arabo-Hispanic verses nearly or completely recopied in William's manuscript.
Competitions were held from an early date.
B Intervocal Latin p shifted regularly to b in Occitan (cf.
According to historical sources, William VIII, the father of William, brought to Poitiers hundreds of Muslim prisoners, and may have imported singers, male and female, from the luxurious Muslim-ruled kingdoms over the Pyrenees in Iberia, who would naturally have been trained in the genre of love songs popular in the courts of in al-Andalus in that era.
Mario Casella and Leo Spitzer have added "Augustinian" influence to it.
::(These troubadours, between truth and lies/corrupt lovers, women and husbands,/ and keep saying that Love proceeds obliquely).
*''Comiat''— a song renouncing a lover
The ''clus'' style was invented early by Marcabru but only favoured by a few masters thereafter.
The word ''vida'' means "life" in Occitan.
Orderic also provides us (1135) with what may be the first description of a troubadour performance: an eyewitness account of William of Aquitaine.
According to the ''vida'' of the Monge de Montaudon, he received a sparrow hawk, a prized hunting bird, for his poetry from the ''cour du Puy'', some sort of poetry society associated with the court of Alfonso II of Aragon.
#'''Medieval Latin''' or '''Mediolatin''' ('''Goliardic''')Hans Spanke analysed the intertextual connexion between vernacular and medieval Latin (such as Goliardic) songs.
For some this was their springboard to composition, since their clerical education equipped them with an understanding of musical and poetic forms as well as vocal training.
The most famous names among the ranks of troubadours belong to this period.
The existence of pre-Christian matriarchy has usually been treated with scepticism as has the persistence of underlying paganism in high medieval Europe.
The English word ''troubadour'' is an exact rendition from a French word first recorded in 1575 in an historical context to mean "langue d'oc poet at the court in the 12th and 13th century" (Jean de Nostredame, ''Vies des anciens Poètes provençaux'', p.&nbsp;14 in Gdf.
''Picauensis uero dux ... miserias captiuitatis suae ... coram regibus et magnatis atque Christianis coetibus multotiens retulit rythmicis uersibus cum facetis modulationibus''.
The ''trobar clus'' regularly escapes modern scholarly interpretation.
*''Torneyamen''— a poetical debate between three or more persons, often with a judge (like a tournament)
There are examples, however, of troubadour songs given Occitan titles in the manuscripts, such as an anonymous ''pastorela'' that begins ''Mentre per una ribeira'', which is entitled ''Porquieira''.
"Para-liturgical" tropes were in use there in the era preceding the troubadours' appearance.
The language of the classic poets, its grammar and vocabulary, their style and themes, were the ideal to which poets of the troubadour revival in Toulouse and their Catalan and Castilian contemporaries aspired.
#'''Folklore''' or '''Spring Folk Ritual'''According to María Rosa Menocal, Alfred Jeanroy first suggested that folklore and oral tradition gave rise to troubadour poetry in 1883.
This recreated form is deduced from the Latin root ''tropus'', meaning a trope and the various meanings of the Old Occitan related words.
There is no preceding Latin poetry resembling that of the troubadours.
Another Arabic root had already been proposed before : Ḍ-R-B “strike", by extension “play a musical instrument".
The Latin suffix ''-ātor'', ''-atōris'' explains the Occitan suffix, according to its declension and accentuation : Gallo-Romance *TROPĀTOR > Occitan ''trobaire'' (subject case) and *TROPATŌRE > Occitan ''trobador'' « troubadour » (oblique case).
*''Desdansa''— a dance designed for sad occasions
Rambertino, a Guelph, served at one time or another as ''podestà'' of Brescia, Milan, Parma, Mantua, and Verona.
They made their living in a variety of ways, lived and travelled in many different places, and were actors in many types of social context.
That many troubadours received their grammatical training in Latin through the Church (from ''clerici'', clerics) and that many were trained musically by the Church is well-attested.
The classical period of troubadour activity lasted from about 1170 until about 1213.
*''Viadeira''— a traveller's complaint
It is more a methodological approach to the question than a theory; it asks not from where the content or form of the lyric came but rather in what situation/circumstances did it arise.
They wrote almost entirely within the ''trobar leu'' style; only two poems, one by Lombarda and another Alais, Yselda, and Carenza, are usually considered to belong to the more demanding ''trobar clus''.
But the influence of Bernardine and Marian theology can be retained without the origins theory.
A ''razo'' normally introduced the poem it explained; it might, however, share some of the characteristics of a ''vida''.
Only two have left us more than one piece: the Comtessa de Dia, with four, and Castelloza, with three or four.
Among the earliest is a school of followers of Marcabru, sometimes called the "Marcabrunian school": Bernart Marti, Bernart de Venzac, Gavaudan, and Peire d'Alvernhe.
It signified that a poem was original to an author (''trobador'') and was not merely sung or played by one.
Despite the distinctions noted, many troubadours were also known as jongleurs, either before they began composing or alongside.
*''Sestina''— highly structured verse form
This Gascon "literary fad" was unpopular in Provence in the early 13th century, harming the reputation of the poets associated with it.
:''E van dizen qu'Amors vay en biays''
The first was by far the most common: the wording is straightforward and relatively simple compared to the ''ric'' and literary devices are less common than in the ''clus''.
A ''razo'' (from Occitan for "reason") was a similar short piece of Occitan prose detailing the circumstances of a particular composition.
A ''tenso'' could be "invented" by a single poet; an ''alba'' or ''canso'' could be written with religious significance, addressed to God or the Virgin; and a ''sirventes'' may be nothing more than a political attack.
Troubadours performed their own songs.
In the end Riquier argued—and Alfonso X seems to agree, though his "response" was probably penned by Riquier—that a ''joglar'' was a courtly entertainer (as opposed to popular or low-class one) and a troubadour was a poet and composer.
Salh d'Escola and Elias de Barjols were described as the sons of merchants and Elias Fonsalada was the son of a burger and jongleur.
The texts of troubadour songs deal mainly with themes of chivalry and courtly love.
Joan Esteve and Bernart both composed in support of the French in the Aragonese Crusade.
All three were natives of Béziers and lived there.
They are, therefore, quite well studied.
Likewise there were many genres, the most popular being the ''canso'', but ''sirventes'' and ''tensos'' were especially popular in the post-classical period, in Italy and among the female troubadours, the trobairitz.
Words are commonly used metaphorically and symbolically and what a poem appears to be about on its surface is rarely what is intended by the poet or understood by audiences "in the know".
*''Salut d'amor''— a love letter addressed to another, not always one's lover
At the height of troubadour poetry (the "classical period"), troubadours are often found attacking ''jongleurs'' and at least two small genres arose around the theme: the ''ensenhamen joglaresc'' and the ''sirventes joglaresc''.
It was one of the most common descriptors of status: Berenguier de Palazol, Gausbert Amiel, Guilhem Ademar, Guiraudo lo Ros, Marcabru, Peire de Maensac, Peirol, Raimon de Miraval, Rigaut de Berbezilh, and Uc de Pena.
The Béziers are a shining example of the transformation of Occitania in the aftermath of the Albigensian Crusade, but also of the ability of troubadours to survive it.
When referring to themselves seriously, troubadours almost invariably use the word "chantaire" (singer).
Albertet de Sestaro is described as the son of a noble jongleur, presumably a petty noble lineage.
Today, one can distinguish at least eleven competing theories (the adjectives used below are a blend from the Grove Dictionary of Music and Roger Boase's ''The Origins and Meaning of Courtly Love''):
Certainly "a body of song of comparable intensity, profanity and eroticism existed in Arabic from the second half of the 9th century onwards," and a body of song and poetry on themes of secular love flourished intensely in the 10th and 11th centuries in the multi-lingual societies of al-Andalus not far from the southern border of Occitan.
*''Tenso''— a poetical debate which was usually an exchange between two poets, but could be fictional
According to F. M. Warren, it was Gaston Paris, Jeanroy's reviewer, in 1891 who first located troubadour origins in the festive dances of women hearkening the spring in the Loire Valley.
All three were members of the urban middle class and no courtesans: Miralhas was possibly a potter and Bernart was a ''mayestre'' (teacher).
Three poets epitomise this "school": Bernart d'Auriac, Joan Esteve, Joan Miralhas, and Raimon Gaucelm.
Meg Bogin, American translator of the trobairitz, held this hypothesis.
The explicitly Catholic meaning of many early troubadour works also works against the theory.
#'''Celtic''' or '''Chivalric-Matriarchal'''The survival of pre-Christian sexual ''mores'' and warrior codes from matriarchal societies, be they Celtic, Germanic, or Pictish, among the aristocracy of Europe can account for the idea (fusion) of "courtly love".
The first ''podestà''-troubadour was Rambertino Buvalelli, possibly the first native Italian troubadour, who was ''podestà'' of Genoa between 1218 and 1221.
They have been described as "Gallicised".
Finally, in the early 13th century it began to spread into first Italy and then Catalonia, whence to the rest of Spain and to Portugal.
*''Ensenhamen''— a long didactic poem, usually not divided into stanzas, teaching a moral or practical lesson
In the chansonniers, the manuscript collections of medieval troubadour poetry, the works of a particular author are often accompanied by a short prose biography.
Then the Poitevin duke ... the miseries of his captivity ... before kings, magnates, and Christian assemblies many times related with rhythmic verses and witty measures.
Peire d'Alvernha also begins his famous mockery of contemporary authors ''cantarai d'aquest trobadors'', after which he proceeds to explain why none of them is worth anything.
This development has been called the ''rayonnement des troubadours'' ().
A phenomenon arose in Italy, recognised around the turn of the 20th century by Giulio Bertoni, of men serving in several cities as ''podestàs'' on behalf of either the Guelph or Ghibelline party and writing political verse in Occitan rhyme.
During this period the lyric art of the troubadours reached the height of its popularity and the number of surviving poems is greatest from this period.
*''Maldit''— a song complaining about a lady's behaviour and character
A few troubadour songs are known by "nicknames", thus ''D'un sirventes far'' by Guilhem Figueira is commonly called the ''Sirventes contra Roma''.
*''Partimen''— a poetical exchange between two or more poets in which one is presented with a dilemma by another and responds
*Crusade song (''canso de crozada'')— a song about the Crusades, usually encouraging them
Three main styles of Occitan lyric poetry have been identified: the ''trobar leu'' (light), ''trobar ric'' (rich), and ''trobar clus'' (closed, hermetic).
:''Ist trobador, entre ver e mentir,''
Trend admitted that the troubadours derived their sense of form and even the subject matter of their poetry from the Andalusian Muslims.
Dante Alighieri in his ''De vulgari eloquentia'' defined the troubadour lyric as ''fictio rethorica musicaque poita'': rhetorical, musical, and poetical fiction.
The known genres are:
Raimon Gaucelm supported the Eighth Crusade and even wrote a ''planh'', the only known one of its kind, to a burgher of Béziers.
Raimbaut de Vaqueyras wrote his ''Kalenda maya'' ("The Calends of May") to music composed by jongleurs at Montferrat.
Typically, they stayed in one place for a lengthy period of time under the patronage of a wealthy nobleman or woman.
They wrote predominantly ''cansos'' and ''tensos''; only one ''sirventes'' by a named woman, Gormonda de Monpeslier, survives (though two anonymous ones are attributed to women).
These poets favoured the ''trobar clus'' or ''ric'' or a hybrid of the two.
Court songs could be used not only as entertainment but also as propaganda, praising the patron, mocking his enemies, encouraging his wars, teaching ethics and etiquette, and maintaining religious unity.
Many did travel extensively, however, sojourning at one court and then another.
These last were called ''joglars'', from the Latin ''ioculatores'', giving rise also to the French ''jongleur'', Castilian ''juglar'', and English juggler, which has come to refer to a more specific breed of performer.
One of the known trobairitz, Gaudairença, wrote a song entitled ''Coblas e dansas'', which has not survived; no other piece of hers has either.
A troubadour often stayed with a noble patron of his own and entertained his court with his songs.
Then the trope became an autonomous piece organized in stanza form.
*''Arlabecca''— a song defined by poetic metre, but perhaps once related to the rebec
Cercamon was said by his biographer to have composed in the "old style" (''la uzansa antiga'') and Guiraut's songs were ''d'aquella saison'' ("of that time").
#'''Classical Latin'''The classical Latin theory emphasises parallels between Ovid, especially his ''Amores'' and ''Ars amatoria'', and the lyric of courtly love.
The earliest troubadour, the Duke of Aquitaine, came from the high nobility.
#'''Bernardine-Marianist''' or '''Christian'''According to this theory, it was the theology espoused by Bernard of Clairvaux and the increasingly important Mariology that most strongly influenced the development of the troubadour genre.
Cerverí's ''mig'' (or ''meig'') ''vers e miga canço'' was a ''vers'' in the new sense (a moralising song) that was also highly critical and thus combined the ''canso'' and the ''sirventes''.
Many are likewise the work of Uc de Saint Circ.
If this is long, or after it has already been mentioned, an abbreviation of the incipit may be used for convenience.
Works can be grouped into three styles: the ''trobar leu'' (light), ''trobar ric'' (rich), and ''trobar clus'' (closed).
All these genres were highly fluid.
*''Plazer''— a poem expressing pleasure
Modern scholars recognise several "schools" in the troubadour tradition.
The earliest troubadour whose work survives is Guilhèm de Peitieus, better known as Duke William IX of Aquitaine (1071–1126).
Troubadour songs were usually monophonic.
Inevitably, however, pieces of said genres are verbal attacks at ''jongleurs'', in general and in specific, with named individuals being called out.
