* '''dummy book''' – a pamphlet or brochure explaining truck-driver slang, usually distributed at truck stops in the 70s and 80s and in a few bookstores (this list would be called a "dummy book")
was a fictionalized account of the unionization of the trucking industry in the earlier 20th century, while the future of truck driving was speculated on in the 1996 film ''Space Truckers'' in which trucking has gone beyond planetary loads to interplanetary ones.
Truckers in the US smoke at twice the rate of other working adults; 51% of truckers reported that they smoked in a 2010 survey.
*4.7% have severe sleep apnea
Companies such as Dupré Logistics, that traditionally paid by the mile have switched to hourly wages.
Another issue is the pattern of extensive and irregular snacking while on the road and consumption of one large meal at the end of day.
Additionally the driver may receive 100 percent of fuel surcharges and fees for extra pickups or drops or for tarping loads.
For the most part loading/unloading times have fallen into a window of 2–4 hours although longer times are still endured.
*17.6% have mild sleep apnea
Percentage of load is the simplest way of calculating what a driver and his/her truck will earn.
* '''bull wagon''' – truck and trailer hauling live stock
The UK logistics industry is currently 45,000 lorry drivers short but there are only 20,000 new drivers coming into the industry each year.
* N – Tank Vehicle (Knowledge Test only)
The daily meal is often high in calories and may be the highlight of the trucker’s day.
Alternatively, a driver can split a regular daily rest period into two periods.
Where the rest period is interrupted in this way, the total accumulated rest period must still be 11 hours.
Emergency services drivers can exceed work hours when attending priority calls.
Cycle 1 is 70 hours in a 7-day period, and cycle 2 is 120 hours in a 14-day period.
As a result, the height of most trucks range between 13' and 14'.
This 14 hours includes a maximum of 13 hours driving time.
* '''Smokey Bear''' – a police officer, used because of the resemblance between police officer's campaign hat, and that of the Forest Service's Smokey Bear mascot, commonly just referred to as a bear
Or a shorter version is to simply extend the fingers while still keeping the palm in contact with the steering wheel.
New HOS (Hours of service) regulations came into effect on 1 July 2013.
* '''parking lot''' – an auto-transport truck, usually referred to as a "portable parking lot"
If a driver either fails the air brake component of the general knowledge test or performs the skills test in a vehicle not equipped with air brakes, the driver is issued an air brake restriction, restricting the driver from operating a CMV equipped with air brakes.
A series of rapid flashes generally means "You're doing something stupid and/or dangerous" as in "Do not move in front, trailer not clear!"
Drivers must note all the reasons for doing so on the back of their tachograph record sheets (if using an analogue tachograph) or on a printout or temporary sheet (if using a digital tachograph) at the latest on reaching the suitable stopping place (see relevant sections covering manual entries).
The Department of Transportation has Convenient Care Clinics across the U.S., but those are hard to find and are few and far between.
* P – Passenger (Knowledge test; skills test may be required for some operations.
Traffic fatalities are high and many of them are due to driver fatigue.
"Smokey" and/or "bear" are still used to refer to police officers, especially state patrolmen, and sometimes "diesel bear" for a DOT officer, though many new-school drivers merely say "police," "policeman" and "cop."
This allows for a vehicle to be driven on to a ferry and off again at the end of the crossing.
The weekly driving time may not exceed 56 hours.
It creates strong incentives for drivers for agreeing to pull especially difficult loads; i.e.
A major problem for the long-haul trucking industry is that a large percentage of these drivers are aging, and are expected to retire.
A shortage of truck drivers has been reported in the United States.
Others, such as driver/sales workers, are also responsible for sales and customer service.
There is no federal height limit, and states may set their own limits which range from 13 feet 6&nbsp;inches to 14 feet.
Three years later, in 1978, a film was released with the same name.
* '''lot lizard''' – a prostitute, especially one that frequents truck stops
Truck drivers often spend their nights parked at a truck stop, rest area, or on the shoulder of a freeway ramp.
Several companies such as Avatar Management Services of Macedonia, Ohio  and DriverSheets.com  have devoted themselves to developing successful safety training programs for truck drivers.
This compensation cannot be taken in several smaller periods.
However, there are two sets of hours of service rules, one for above 60th parallel north, and one for below.
This allows for a vehicle to depart from its operating centre and collect a second driver along the way, providing that this is done within 1 hour of the first driver starting work.
Many major trucking companies require driver applicants to be at least 23 years of age, with a year of experience, while others will hire and train new drivers as long as they have a clean driving history.
Driver fatigue is a contributing factor in 12% of all crashes and 10% of all near crashes.
In the European Union, drivers' working hours are regulated by EU regulation (EC) No 561/2006 which entered into force on April 11, 2007.
Currently, within the long-haul sector, there is an estimated shortage of 20,000 drivers.
However, the few drivers who are hired to drive only within urban areas do not have this advantage of spending more time away from toxic emissions that is enjoyed by over-the-road drivers.
* Class B – Any single vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 or more pounds, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR.
After 4.5 hours of driving the driver must take a break period of at least 45 minutes.
Many companies today utilize some type of satellite vehicle tracking or trailer tracking to assist in fleet management.
Therein, if you ask many drivers, lies the inherent unfairness of HHG-based mileage pay; miles are driven point-to-point, not from "city" to "zip code" or "highway junction".
A driver's licence in Canada, including commercial vehicle licences, are issued and regulated provincially.
These endorsements are noted on the CDL and often appear in advertisements outlining the requirements for employment.
Long haul drivers have tight schedules, so they tend to drive longer and get less sleep.
Another was ''Movin' On'', starring Claude Akins and Frank Converse.
Moreover, truckers have difficulties making an appointment on the road and often do not know where to stop for assistance.
Drivers must maintain a daily 24-hour logbook Record of Duty Status documenting all work and rest periods.
A driver may reduce his daily rest period to no less than 9 continuous hours, but this can be done no more than three times between any two weekly rest periods; no compensation for the reduction is required.
According to a 2007 study in the Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 86% of the estimated 3.2 million truck drivers in the United States are overweight or obese.
The daily driving time may be extended to at most 10 hours not more than twice during the week.
Employee turnover within the long-haul trucking industry is notorious for being extremely high.
*5.8% have moderate sleep apnea
By 2009, truck drivers accounted for 16.8% of transportation-related deaths.
The purpose of the survey was to get the drivers opinions about the HGV driver shortage.
Truck drivers are also sensitive to sleep disorders because of the long hours required at the wheel and, in many cases, the lack of adequate rest.
It also discourages drivers and owner-operators from agreeing to move "cheap freight."
Truck drivers have also been villainously portrayed in such films as ''Duel'', ''Joy Ride'', ''The Transporter'', ''Breakdown'', ''The Hitcher'', ''Thelma & Louise'' and ''Supergirl''.
* H – Hazardous Materials (Knowledge Test only, also requires fingerprint and background check since the 9/11 terrorist attacks)
There are macros for each stage of the loading and unloading process, such as "loaded and leaving shipper" and "arrived at final destination."
Truck drivers are even a high-risk group for HIV-infection in those countries.
Required for bus drivers.)
The daily driving time shall not exceed 9 hours.
'''''Excerpt of Reagan's Executive Order 12564''' September 15, 1986''
There is now an 11-hour-per-day limit with 10 hours off required after the weekly shift.
A special location tracking device also known as tracker or an AVL unit is installed on a truck and automatically determines its position in real-time and sends it to a remote computer database for visualizing and analysis.
Regarding CDL (commercial drivers licences), there is no standardization between provinces and territories.
In the United States there is a lot of unpaid time, usually at a Shipper or Receiver where the truck is idle awaiting loading or unloading.
An actual working week starts at the end of a weekly rest period, and finishes when another weekly rest period is commenced, which may mean that weekly rest is taken in the middle of a fixed (Monday–Sunday) week.
The findings of the survey showed that, in the opinion of the drivers, the three main contributing factors to the driver shortage are 1) Poor wages, 2) Poor driver facilities and 3) The way drivers are treated.
Commercial motor vehicle (CMV) drivers are limited to 11 cumulative hours driving in a 14-hour period, following a rest period of no less than 10 consecutive hours.
Regional and local drivers are usually paid by the hour.
National statistics on accidents published in the  FMCSA Analysis and Information online website provides the key driver OOS categories for year 2009 nationally: 17.6% are log entry violations, 12.6% are speeding violations, 12.5% drivers record of duty not current, and 6.5% requiring driver to drive more than 14 hours on duty.
This is largely determined by long work hours and tight deadlines, the adoption of a sedentary lifestyle and a lack of a place to exercise.
Journeys involving ferry or train transport
* '''taking pictures''' – a law-enforcement officer using any speed-detection device or radar gun, but most commonly when using a camera radar.
Whether these second drivers could claim the multi-manning concession in these circumstances would depend on their other duties.
During the day time, the latter is sometimes accompanied by the signaling driver making a circle with both hands (as if holding a tachograph ring).
Some drivers are responsible for unloading their cargo, which can lead to many back strains and sprains due to overexertion and improper lifting techniques.
* '''in the face''' – associated with a police pointing your direction (shooting you) using radar
* '''piggy bank/cash box''' – a toll plaza
* '''kitty smirk''' – when a female truck driver flirts with a male truck driver
A daily rest that is less than 11 hours but at least 9 hours long is called a reduced daily rest period.
For example, where a driver reduces a weekly rest period to 33 hours in week 1, he must compensate for this by attaching a 12-hour period of rest to another rest period of at least 9 hours before the end of week 4.
A bunk or couchette must be available during the rest period.
Among other things, a truck driver’s DAC Report contains the driver’s identification (Name, DOB, SSN), the name and address of the contributing trucking company, the driver’s dates of employment with that company, the driver’s reason for leaving that company, whether the driver is eligible for rehire, and comments about the driver’s work record (e.g.
Those are usually seen in the specialized and household moving segments, where the load is either permitted for overweight or oversize, or is very light yet bulky.
Trucking companies practice this method in order to attract and retain veteran drivers.
Specifically, the five-axle tractor-semitrailer combination that is most commonly associated with the word "truck" requires a Class A CDL to drive.
"Hammer" refers to the accelerator pedal, and "hammer lane" the left lane or passing lane on a freeway, in which traffic generally travels faster.
As cars would normally use the hazard-warning lights for "thanks", in trucks distinction is necessary.
One form of unspoken communication between drivers is to flash headlights on or off once or twice to indicate that a passing truck has cleared the passed vehicle and may safely change lanes in front of the signaling vehicle.
This accrues to a set maximum usually 6 or 7 days.
Even the 1974 nationwide speed-limit reduction to 55&nbsp;mph, which merely slowed the movement of merchandise, was followed by the recession of the late 1970s.
A person must be at least 18 years of age to obtain a CDL.
*Whether there is a shortage and the extent it is affecting the industry
Also, most of the foods carried by drivers in their trucks, whether or not stored in a refrigerator, are purchased from truck stops.
Vocational and Local drivers are usually home every night or every other night.
These short miles rarely reflect the actual miles that must be driven in order to pickup and deliver freight, but they will be used to calculate what the driver will earn.
a 45-hour weekly rest followed by 24 hours), provided that the driver does not exceed 144 hours’ work either before or after the rest period in question.
The truck blocks the view of drivers behind it, hence a distinction must be made between "Thanks for letting me pass" and "Danger in front, I may brake hard!"
* Class A – Any combination of vehicles with a GVWR (gross vehicle weight rating) of 26,001 or more pounds provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds.
Drivers under age 21 are limited to operating within their state of licensing (intrastate operation).
For the average large company driver in the United States 6 weeks is the average, with each week out garnering the driver one day off.
The short routing however would believe the distance to be only 750, as though the truck could drive across the Gulf of Mexico.
* T – Double/Triple Trailers (Knowledge test only)
In a November 2005 FMCSA report to Congress,  the data for 33 months of large truck crashes was analyzed.
Though some fitness resources are available for truckers, most are scarce.
Truck drivers on the road between 0400 and 0600, 0000 and 0200, and 1400-1600 are at the highest risk of a sleep-related accident.
While there are larger sleepers that get up to 144" in length, these are not seen in the mainline segment of trucking.
With the average age of lorry drivers in the UK being 53 and not enough younger drivers joining the industry it is predicted that if nothing is done by 2020 the industry will be 60,000 lorry drivers short.
Drivers of trucks towing flatbed trailers are responsible for securing and strapping down their cargo (which often involves climbing onto the cargo itself), and if the load requires tarping necessitates climbing on the load to spread out tarps.
In May 2013 the BLS reported a mean average hourly pay of from $12.21 (bottom 10%) to $28.66 per hour (top 10%).
"Handle", meaning a nickname, was once exclusively truck-driver slang, but has now passed into common use by the public, especially for pseudonyms used on Internet forums.
In 2009 there were 3380 fatalities involving large trucks, of which 2470 were attributed to combination unit trucks (defined as any number of trailers behind a tractor).
Truck drivers must complete a logbook documenting hours and kilometres spent driving.
Over a third of all drivers who participated in the survey felt that they were not being treated well by the companies they drove for.
Studies have found the risk of obesity increases in high demand, low control jobs, and more so in jobs with long work hours; the truck driving industry falls under these categories.
Calculations are generally limited to no more than 3-5% above the estimates of mileage by the carrier before red flags appear, depending on the generosity of the carrier or how it rates the mileage estimation capabilities of the software used.
* '''six wheeler''' – any vehicle with single rear axle with dual tires
the duration of the first driver’s shift but could in principle be any number of drivers as long as the conditions are met.
Company drivers often have issues with insurance, such as necessary pre-approval if out of network.
Health care costs are substantially higher for overweight and obese individuals, so obesity in the truck driver population puts a greater financial demand on the industry.
The second must be at least 9 hours of uninterrupted rest, giving a total minimum rest of 12 hours.
* '''the zipper''' – the dashed lane markings
In order to address the hazards relative to driver fatigue, many countries have laws limiting the amount of time truck drivers can work.
That shortage is expected to increase to 111,000 by 2014.
The aim was to establish whether the results of the drivers survey could help the industry and government understand the issues that the drivers are currently facing.
In the 4th quarter of 2005, turnover within the largest carriers in the industry reached a record 136%, meaning a carrier that employed 100 drivers would lose an average of 136 drivers each year.
Continual flashing of headlights or high beams after emerging from around a corner beside a high wall or from any roadway out of sight to oncoming traffic will alert a truck driver in the oncoming lanes to an accident or other obstruction ahead, and will warn him to reduce speed or to proceed with caution.
* '''full grown''' – state trooper or DMV officer
Some trucking companies have tried to alleviate some of these discrepancies by paying their drivers according to "practical miles."
The compensating rest must be attached to a period of rest of at least 9 hours – in effect either a weekly or a daily rest period.
*The role of the government in recruiting and supporting a diverse workforce
Trucking (especially the long-haul sector) is also facing an image crisis due to the long working hours, long periods of time away from home, the dangerous nature of the work, the relatively low pay (compared to hours worked), and a "driver last" mentality that is common throughout the industry.
Cycle 2 is 72 hours off duty before being allowed to start again.
This will help drivers comply with this new law and can also help deliver quick, accurate medical assistance if and when needed.
The 1978 film ''F.I.S.T.''
An "in cab" communication device AVL unit often allows a driver to communicate with their dispatcher, who is normally responsible for determining and informing the driver of their pick-up and drop-off locations.
If a truck is stopped by a law enforcement agent or at an inspection station, information on the truck is complied and OOS violations are logged.
* '''tanker yanker''' – a tanker rig or its driver
*The role of Driver CPC in improving industry employees; skills and professionalism
Often older truck drivers speaking over their CB radios are frustrated at new-school truck drivers' lack of understanding of the trucking slang of the '60s, '70s and '80s, and grudgingly resort to standard English when communicating with them.
In March 2014, Payscale.com published that the entry-level truck driver ranged from $11.82 to $20.22 an hour and the average hourly rate was reported as $15.53 an hour.
Making sudden great changes in the infrastructures of huge economies and the industries crucial to them always entails risks, the greater the change, the larger the degree.
A '''truck driver'''  (commonly referred to as a '''trucker''', '''teamster''' or '''driver''' in the United States and Canada; a '''truckie''' in Australia and New Zealand; a '''lorry driver''', or '''driver''' in Ireland, the United Kingdom, India and Pakistan) is a person who earns a living as the driver of a truck (usually a semi truck, box truck or dump truck).
Truck drivers are also responsible for inspecting their vehicles for mechanical items or issues relating to safe operation.
Many underdeveloped countries either lack such laws or do not enforce them.
Instead of keeping track of working hours on a traditional pen and paper based logbook, the driver informs the company of his status using a macro.
Most of the "ten codes" have fallen nearly or completely into disuse, except "10/4," meaning "message received," "affirmative," "okay," "understood," and occasionally "10/20," referring to the driver's location, (e.g., "What's your 20?")
Many of the largest long haul trucking companies in the United States pay their drivers according to short miles.
Certain special industry driving jobs such as oilfield services like vacuum, dry bulk, and winch truck drivers, can receive a $22.00 or higher hourly wage.
The FMCSA is considering making EOBRs mandatory for all motor carriers.
There are additional HOS regulations for California.
Retention rates are low.
Werner Enterprises, a U.S. company based in Omaha, Nebraska, has utilized this system to implement a "paperless log" system.
Eighty percent of truckers have unhealthful eating patterns as a result of poor food choices and food availability at truck stops is partially to blame.
For the first hour of multi-manning the presence of another driver or drivers is optional, but for the remainder of the period it is compulsory.
* '''kosher pickle park''' – a state highway rest area blessed by a rabbi
A survey conducted in 2010 showed that 69% of American truck drivers met their criteria for obesity, twice the percentage of the adult working population in the US.
or "I'm overtaking, move aside".
A CDL can also contain separate endorsements required to operate certain trailers or to haul certain cargo.
Where a driver accompanies a vehicle that is being transported by ferry or train, the daily rest requirements are more flexible.
On 12/10/2015, The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) asked the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) to draft a proposed plan to address the use of synthetic drugs among truckers.
The main character of "Convoy" was a truck driver known only by his CB handle (C.B.
Truck drivers have been the subject of many films, such as ''They Drive by Night'' (1940), but they became an especially popular topic in popular culture in the mid-1970s, following the release of ''White Line Fever'', and the hit song "Convoy" by C. W. McCall, both in 1975.
*Aspects of government policies which may deter potential recruits
After the 1929 stock-market crash, for example, the chain reaction of reduction in sales due to consumers' prioritizing and reducing purchases of luxury items, with companies responding by reducing production and increasing unemployment, exacerbating the cycle of reduction or elimination of production, sales and employment, had the ultimate result of plunging the nation's economy into the Great Depression.
Truck drivers are five times more likely to die in a work-related accident than the average worker.
In the U.S., for example, it is common for truck drivers while passing to greet one another by lifting a hand off the steering wheel, backhand facing the other driver, with the index and middle fingers extended (similar to the "peace sign" or V sign, only reversed).
* '''Freightshaker''' – Freightliner Trucks
A violation out of service is defined by federal code as an imminent hazard under 49 U.S.C.
These routes will largely follow the Interstate Highway system but will sometimes require the driver to use state and U.S. highways and toll roads.
In any 7 day period, a driver must spend 24 hours away from his/her vehicle.
* '''in the middle''' – parked on the median, usually the location of a speed trap or broken-down vehicle
The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration says that as many 28 percent of commercial driver's license holders have sleep apnea.
Under current law, drivers need to be 21 to haul freight across state lines, which the industry wants to lower to 18 years old.
pieces that are especially heavy or large, that require tarping, pieces that are being shipped or received along treacherous routes far from the interstates.
The options at truck stops are generally high calorie and high fat foods available through restaurants, fast-food, diners and vending machines.
On a multi-manning operation the first 45 minutes of a period of availability will be considered to be a break, so long as the co-driver does no work.
Hub miles, or odometer miles ("hub" refers to hubometer, a mechanical odometer mounted to an axle), pay the driver for every mile.
However, this can be split into 2 breaks, the first being at least 15 minutes, and the second being at least 30 minutes in length.
Drivers with obstructive sleep apnea have a sevenfold increased risk of being involved in a motor vehicle crash.
Organising drivers’ duties in such a fashion enables a crew’s duties to be spread over 21 hours.
The DAC report is as critical to the livelihood of a professional truck driver as the credit report is to a consumer.
If the AVL unit is connected to a Mobile data terminal or a computer it also allows the driver to input the information from a bill of lading (BOL) into a simple dot matrix display screen (commonly called a "Qualcomm" for that company's ubiquitous OmniTRACS system).
* '''big sign''' – the "Closed" sign for weigh stations
Drivers employed by carriers in "daily operation" may not work more than 70 hours within any period of 8 consecutive days.
