About 25% of people may not have any symptoms (i.e.
In 2007, the country with the highest estimated incidence rate of TB was Swaziland, with 1,200 cases per 100,000 people.
In nature, the bacterium can grow only within the cells of a host organism, but ''M.
Latent TB treatment usually employs a single antibiotic, while active TB disease is best treated with combinations of several antibiotics to reduce the risk of the bacteria developing antibiotic resistance.
The phagosome then combines with a lysosome to create a phagolysosome.
The subspecies ''Mycobacterium tuberculosis'', though, is rarely present in wild animals.
Extensively drug-resistant TB is also resistant to three or more of the six classes of second-line drugs.
In 15–20% of active cases, the infection spreads outside the lungs, causing other kinds of TB.
The report cites among others Lucica Ditui "TB is like an orphan.
India had the largest total incidence, with an estimated 2.0 million new cases.
Before the Industrial Revolution, folklore often associated tuberculosis with vampires.
A chest X-ray and multiple sputum cultures for acid-fast bacilli are typically part of the initial evaluation.
Koch announced a glycerine extract of the tubercle bacilli as a "remedy" for tuberculosis in 1890, calling it "tuberculin".
In 2014, there were 9.6 million cases of active TB which resulted in 1.5&nbsp;million deaths.
tuberculosis'' strains have shown reinfection contributes more substantially to recurrent TB than previously thought, with estimates that it might account for more than 50% of reactivated cases in areas where TB is common.
Because of the emergence of MDR-TB, surgery has been re-introduced as an option within the generally accepted standard of care in treating TB infections.
In 2010, 8.8 million new cases of TB were diagnosed, and 1.20–1.45 million deaths occurred, most of these occurring in developing countries.
Costs of the disease, as calculated by the World Bank in 2009 may exceed 150 billion USD per year in "high burden" countries.
If someone does become infected, it typically takes three to four weeks before the newly infected person becomes infectious enough to transmit the disease to others.
In The Life and Death of Mr. Badman by John Bunyan, the author calls consumption "the captain of all these men of death."
Later, the risk of transmission from this source was dramatically reduced by the invention of the pasteurization process.
The subsequent resurgence of tuberculosis resulted in the declaration of a global health emergency by the World Health Organization in 1993.
MTB can withstand weak disinfectants and survive in a dry state for weeks.
The bacillus causing tuberculosis, ''M.
Of people without HIV who are infected with tuberculosis, about 5–10% develop active disease during their lifetimes; in contrast, 30% of those coinfected with HIV develop the active disease.
The high lipid content of this pathogen accounts for many of its unique clinical characteristics.
tuberculosis'', with new infections occurring in about 1% of the population each year.
The upper lung lobes are more frequently affected by tuberculosis than the lower ones.
Tuberculosis is spread through the air when people who have active TB in their lungs cough, spit, speak, or sneeze.
"Consumption" was the most common nineteenth century English word for the disease.
Genetic studies suggest TB was present in the Americas from about 100 AD.
It was not named "tuberculosis" until 1839, by J. L. Schönlein.
XDR-TB is a term sometimes used to define ''extensively resistant'' TB, and constitutes one in ten cases of MDR-TB.
Current surgical interventions involve removal of pathological chest cavities ("bullae") in the lungs to reduce the number of bacteria and to increase the exposure of the remaining bacteria to drugs in the bloodstream, thereby simultaneously reducing the total bacterial load and increasing the effectiveness of systemic antibiotic therapy.
When people with active pulmonary TB cough, sneeze, speak, sing, or spit, they expel infectious aerosol droplets 0.5 to 5.0 µm in diameter.
, tuberculosis appears to be widespread among captive elephants in the US.
Several international organizations are pushing for more transparency in treatment, and more countries are implementing mandatory reporting of cases to the government, although adherence is often sketchy.
The number of new cases has declined by 17% between 2004–2014.
This is a particular problem in sub-Saharan Africa, where rates of HIV are high.
Commercial treatment providers may at times overprescribe second-line drugs as well as supplementary treatment, promoting demands for further regulations.
In 1815, one in four deaths in England was due to "consumption".
Where resistance to isoniazid is high, ethambutol may be added for the last four months as an alternative.
Sometimes, bursting of a tubercular abscess through skin results in tuberculous ulcer.
However, in the majority of cases, a latent infection occurs with no obvious symptoms.
A number of potential candidates are currently in phase I and II clinical trials.
Effective TB treatment is difficult, due to the unusual structure and chemical composition of the mycobacterial cell wall, which hinders the entry of drugs and makes many antibiotics ineffective.
Miliary TB makes up about 10% of extrapulmonary cases.
Tuberculosis is the second-most common cause of death from infectious disease (after those due to HIV/AIDS).
The rates of TB varies with age.
About 80% of people in many Asian and African countries test positive while 5–10% of people in the United States population tests positive by the tuberculin test.
However, existing data suggest that patients taking bedaquiline in addition to standard TB therapy are five times more likely to die than those without the new drug, which has resulted in medical journal articles raising health policy questions about why the FDA approved the drug and whether financial ties to the company making bedaquiline influenced physicians' support for its use
Hopes of completely eliminating TB (''cf.''
The chance of death from a case of tuberculosis is about 4% as of 2008, down from 8% in 1995.
The World Health Organization declared TB a "global health emergency" in 1993, and in 2006, the Stop TB Partnership developed a Global Plan to Stop Tuberculosis that aimed to save 14 million lives between its launch and 2015.
Of these 1.45 million deaths, about 0.35&nbsp;million occur in those also infected with HIV.
Notable extrapulmonary infection sites include the pleura (in tuberculous pleurisy), the central nervous system (in tuberculous meningitis), the lymphatic system (in scrofula of the neck), the genitourinary system (in urogenital tuberculosis), and the bones and joints (in Pott disease of the spine), among others.
A person with fully susceptible MTB may develop secondary (acquired) resistance during therapy because of inadequate treatment, not taking the prescribed regimen appropriately (lack of compliance), or using low-quality medication.
Both strains of the tuberculosis bacteria share a common ancestor, which could have infected humans even before the Neolithic Revolution.
Totally drug-resistant TB is resistant to all currently used drugs.
However, more recent evidence suggests that the bacteria use the granulomas to avoid destruction by the host's immune system.
Vaccines are hoped to play a significant role in treatment of both latent and active disease.
The BCG vaccine was first used on humans in 1921 in France, but received widespread acceptance in the US, Great Britain, and Germany only after World War II.
tuberculosis'' strain, the level of immunity in the uninfected person, and others.
In developed countries, tuberculosis is less common and is found mainly in urban areas.
Since MTB retains certain stains even after being treated with acidic solution, it is classified as an acid-fast bacillus.
A comparison of the genes of ''M.
If multiple drug-resistant TB is detected, treatment with at least four effective antibiotics for 18 to 24&nbsp;months is recommended.
In those with HIV, the risk of developing active TB increases to nearly 10% a year.
It was first observed in 2003 in Italy, but not widely reported until 2012, and has also been found in Iran and India.
Each one of these droplets may transmit the disease, since the infectious dose of tuberculosis is very small (the inhalation of fewer than 10 bacteria may cause an infection).
Hermann Brehmer opened the first TB sanatorium in 1859 in Görbersdorf (now Sokołowsko), Silesia.
Upon cure, affected areas are eventually replaced by scar tissue.
The safety and effectiveness of these new agents are still uncertain, because they are based on the results of a relatively small studies.
China has achieved particularly dramatic progress, with about an 80% reduction in its TB mortality rate between 1990 and 2010.
People with latent infections are also treated to prevent them from progressing to active TB disease later in life.
A number of targets they set were not achieved by 2015, mostly due to the increase in HIV-associated tuberculosis and the emergence of multiple drug-resistant tuberculosis.
If a tuberculosis infection does become active, it most commonly involves the lungs (in about 90% of cases).
At odds is Russia, where stigma was associated with increased treatment compliance.
Slow progress has led to frustration, expressed by the executive director of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria – Mark Dybul: "we have the tools to end TB as a pandemic and public health threat on the planet, but we are not doing it."
A tuberculosis classification system developed by the American Thoracic Society is used primarily in public health programs.
The evidence to support this practice over people simply taking their medications independently is poor.
In Africa, it primarily affects adolescents and young adults.
NTM cause neither TB nor leprosy, but they do cause pulmonary diseases that resemble TB.
A number of factors make people more susceptible to TB infections.
To encourage further discovery, researchers and policymakers are promoting new economic models of vaccine development, including prizes, tax incentives, and advance market commitments.
Tuberculosis prevention and control efforts rely primarily on the vaccination of infants and the detection and appropriate treatment of active cases.
tuberculosis'' involves evidence of the disease in the remains of bison in Wyoming dated to around 17,000 years ago.
tuberculosis'' and HIV, the risk of reactivation increases to 10% per year.
One way to decrease stigma may be through the promotion of "TB clubs", where those infected may share experiences and offer support, or through counseling.
Lack of progress eradicating the disease may also be due to lack of patient follow-up – as among the 250M rural migrants in China.
Diagnosis of latent TB relies on the tuberculin skin test (TST) or blood tests.
The Latin root "con" meaning "completely" is linked to "sumere" meaning "to take up from under."
The most important risk factor globally is HIV; 13% of all people with TB are infected by the virus.
In many people, the infection waxes and wanes.
Silicosis increases the risk about 30-fold.
Auramine-rhodamine staining and fluorescence microscopy are also used.
These are not affected by immunization or most environmental mycobacteria, so they generate fewer false-positive results.
Two main approaches are being used to attempt to improve the efficacy of available vaccines.
By 1918, one in six deaths in France was still caused by TB.
The probability of transmission from one person to another depends upon several factors, including the number of infectious droplets expelled by the carrier, the effectiveness of ventilation, the duration of exposure, the virulence of the ''M.
Tuberculosis may become a chronic illness and cause extensive scarring in the upper lobes of the lungs.
It may be due either to better air flow, or to poor lymph drainage within the upper lungs.
Tuberculosis has been present in humans since antiquity.
tuberculosis'' do not cause TB disease, and 90–95% of infections remain asymptomatic.
During this process, the bacterium is enveloped by the macrophage and stored temporarily in a membrane-bound vesicle called a phagosome.
A 2014 the EIU-healthcare report that the need to address apathy and urging for increased funding.
tuberculosis'' complex (MTBC) includes four other TB-causing mycobacteria: ''M.
This is known as a Simon focus and is typically found in the top of the lung.
Occasionally, people may cough up blood in small amounts, and in very rare cases, the infection may erode into the pulmonary artery or a Rasmussen's aneurysm, resulting in massive bleeding.
If TB bacteria gain entry to the blood stream from an area of damaged tissue, they can spread throughout the body and set up many foci of infection, all appearing as tiny, white tubercles in the tissues.
Diagnosing active tuberculosis based only on signs and symptoms is difficult, as is diagnosing the disease in those who are immunosuppressed.
After about two weeks of effective treatment, subjects with nonresistant active infections generally do not remain contagious to others.
canetti'' is rare and seems to be limited to the Horn of Africa, although a few cases have been seen in African emigrants.
Whatever the (purported) benefits of the "fresh air" and labor in the sanatoria, even under the best conditions, 50% of those who entered died within five years (''circa'' 1916).
As tuberculosis is uncommon in most of Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States, BCG is administered only to those people at high risk.
Improvements in public health began significantly reducing rates of tuberculosis even before the arrival of streptomycin and other antibiotics, although the disease remained a significant threat to public health such that when the Medical Research Council was formed in Britain in 1913, its initial focus was tuberculosis research.
TB stigma also affects socially marginalized individuals to a greater degree and varies between regions.
However, whether tuberculosis originated in bovines, then was transferred to humans, or whether it diverged from a common ancestor, is currently unclear.
Mycobacteria infect many different animals, including birds, rodents, and reptiles.
In the phagolysosome, the cell attempts to use reactive oxygen species and acid to kill the bacterium.
The test may be falsely negative in those with sarcoidosis, Hodgkin's lymphoma, malnutrition, and most notably, active tuberculosis.
When it spreads to the bones, it is also known as "osseous tuberculosis", a form of osteomyelitis.
Progression from TB infection to overt TB disease occurs when the bacilli overcome the immune system defenses and begin to multiply.
Directly observed therapy, i.e., having a health care provider watch the person take their medications, is recommended by the WHO in an effort to reduce the number of people not appropriately taking antibiotics.
The government of Brazil provides universal TB-care, which reduces this problem.
Tuberculosis of the lungs may also occur via infection from the blood stream.
An ulcer originating from nearby infected lymph nodes is painless, slowly enlarging and has an appearance of "wash leather".
More than 95% of deaths occurred in developing countries.
Infection of other organs can cause a wide range of symptoms.
Among these, the Aeras Global TB Vaccine Foundation received a gift of more than $280 million (US) from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to develop and license an improved vaccine against tuberculosis for use in high burden countries.
In the United States Native Americans have a fivefold greater mortality from TB, and racial and ethnic minorities accounted for 84% of all reported TB cases.
Treatment requires the use of multiple antibiotics over a long period of time.
The Mantoux tuberculin skin test is often used to screen people at high risk for TB.
Prior to the introduction of this drug, the only treatment (except sanatoria) was surgical intervention, including the "pneumothorax technique", which involved collapsing an infected lung to "rest" it and allow tuberculous lesions to heal.
The two antibiotics most commonly used are isoniazid and rifampicin, and treatments can be prolonged, taking several months.
These are collectively denoted as "extrapulmonary tuberculosis".
While it was not effective, it was later successfully adapted as a screening test for the presence of pre-symptomatic tuberculosis.
However, they are affected by ''M.
All parts of the body can be affected by the disease, though for unknown reasons it rarely affects the heart, skeletal muscles, pancreas, or thyroid.
smallpox) from the population were dashed after the rise of drug-resistant strains in the 1980s.
It contains living bacteria, so can spread the infection.
Primary resistance occurs when a person becomes infected with a resistant strain of TB.
A potentially more serious, widespread form of TB is called "disseminated tuberculosis", also known as miliary tuberculosis.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends screening people who are at high risk for latent tuberculosis with either tuberculin skin tests or interferon-gamma release assays.
The cascade of person-to-person spread can be circumvented by segregating those with active ("overt") TB and putting them on anti-TB drug regimens.
Antibiotic resistance is a growing problem with increasing rates of multiple drug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB).
tuberculosis'' have asymptomatic, latent TB infections (sometimes called LTBI), with only a 10% lifetime chance that the latent infection will progress to overt, active tuberculous disease.
It has been neglected even in countries with a high burden and often forgotten by donors and those investing in health interventions."
India had the highest total number of TB cases worldwide in 2010, in part due to poor disease management within the private and public health care sector.
Tissue destruction and necrosis are often balanced by healing and fibrosis.
The granuloma may prevent dissemination of the mycobacteria and provide a local environment for interaction of cells of the immune system.
Stigma may be due to the fear of transmission from affected individuals.
Genetic susceptibility also exists, for which the overall importance remains undefined.
Using histological stains on expectorated samples from phlegm (also called "sputum"), scientists can identify MTB under a  microscope.
Roughly one-third of the world's population has been infected with ''M.
Other known pathogenic mycobacteria include ''M.
tuberculosis'' complex (MTBC) in humans to MTBC in animals suggests humans did not acquire MTBC from animals during animal domestication, as was previously believed.
He received the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine in 1905 for this discovery.
Interferon-γ release assays and tuberculin skin tests are of little use in the developing world.
marinum'', and ''M.
If a Gram stain is performed, MTB either stains very weakly "Gram-positive" or does not retain dye as a result of the high lipid and mycolic acid content of its cell wall.
Symptoms may include chest pain and a prolonged cough producing sputum.
The earliest unambiguous detection of ''M.
About 10% of latent infections progress to active disease which, if left untreated, kills about half of those infected.
Interferon gamma release assays (IGRAs), on a blood sample, are recommended in those who are positive to the Mantoux test.
In addition to being fast-acting, the test can determine if there is resistance to the antibiotic rifampicin which may indicate multi-drug resistant tuberculosis and is accurate in those who are also infected with HIV.
A diagnosis of TB should, however, be considered in those with signs of lung disease or constitutional symptoms lasting longer than two weeks.
Tuberculosis is more common in developing countries; about 80% of the population in many Asian and African countries test positive in tuberculin tests, while only 5–10% of the US population test positive.
However, most infections with ''M.
Koch did not believe the bovine (cattle) and human tuberculosis diseases were similar, which delayed the recognition of infected milk as a source of infection.
Diagnosis of active TB is based on chest X-rays, as well as microscopic examination and culture of body fluids.
Those at high risk thus include: people who inject illicit drugs, inhabitants and employees of locales where vulnerable people gather (e.g.
Efforts in Great Britain have been less successful.
However, the difficult culture process for this slow-growing organism can take two to six weeks for blood or sputum culture.
Certain medications, such as corticosteroids and infliximab (an anti-αTNF monoclonal antibody), are becoming increasingly important risk factors, especially in the developed world.
Bacteria inside the granuloma can become dormant, resulting in latent infection.
It was called bacille Calmette–Guérin (BCG).
Affected tissue is replaced by scarring and cavities filled with caseous necrotic material.
In Canada and Australia, tuberculosis is many times more common among the aboriginal peoples, especially in remote areas.
In 2012, an estimated 8.6 million chronic cases were active.
Chronic lung disease is another significant risk factor.
Treatment with appropriate antibiotics kills bacteria and allows healing to take place.
tuberculosis'' has a thick, waxy mycolic acid capsule that protects it from these toxic substances.
In primary TB disease (some 1–5% of cases), this occurs soon after the initial infection.
Blood tests to detect antibodies are not specific or sensitive, so they are not recommended.
Those who have been previously immunized may have a false-positive test result.
The World Tuberculosis Day was established on 24 March for this reason.
A person with active but untreated tuberculosis may infect 10–15 (or more) other people per year.
During 1838–1845, Dr. John Croghan, the owner of Mammoth Cave, brought a number of people with tuberculosis into the cave in the hope of curing the disease with the constant temperature and purity of the cave air; they died within a year.
About 90% of those infected with ''M.
IGRAs may increase sensitivity when used in addition to the skin test, but may be less sensitive than the skin test when used alone.
The reason for this difference is not clear.
tuberculosis'', was identified and described on 24 March 1882 by Robert Koch.
Bedaquiline received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval in late 2012.
Active infection occurs more often in people with HIV/AIDS and in those who smoke.
MVA85A, an example of a subunit vaccine, currently in trials in South Africa, is based on a genetically modified vaccinia virus.
People with this disseminated TB have a high fatality rate even with treatment (about 30%).
During active disease, some of these cavities are joined to the air passages bronchi and this material can be coughed up.
Some have claimed the stigma to be worse than the disease, and healthcare providers may unintentionally reinforce stigma, as those with TB are often perceived as difficult or otherwise undesirable.
The classic symptoms of active TB are a chronic cough with blood-containing sputum, fever, night sweats, and weight loss.
