The Tunisia national football team, also known as "The Eagles of Carthage," won the 2004 African Cup of Nations (ACN), which was held in Tunisia.
The city will consist of residential, medical, financial, industrial, entertainment and touristic buildings as well as a port zone for a total cost of US$80 Billion.
After conquering Cairo, the Fatimids abandoned Tunisia and parts of Eastern Algeria to the local Zirids (972–1148).
Tunisia's climate is Mediterranean in the north, with mild rainy winters and hot, dry summers.
It has a high human development index.
Most programs are in Arabic but some are in French.
Pierre Boucherle was its main instigator, along with Yahia Turki, Abdelaziz Gorgi, Moses Levy, Ammar Farhat, and Jules Lellouche.
Arabic literature dates back to the 7th century with the arrival of Arab civilization in the region.
Critical approach to the activities of the president, government and the Constitutional Democratic Rally Party (then in power) were suppressed.
After the Roman conquest, the region became one of the main granaries of Rome and was fully Latinized.
The project is financed by Tunisian and foreign enterprises.
The Constitution of Tunisia, adopted 26 January 2014, guarantees rights for women and states that the President's religion "shall be Islam".
The country voted for parliament again on 26 October 2014, and for President on 23 November 2014.
Tunisia's military spending was 1.6% of GDP .
It has also made room for the rise of fundamentalist groups such as the Salafists, who call for a strict interpretation of Sharia law.
Ben Ali's son-in-law Sakher El Materi was rumoured as being primed to eventually take over the country.
French also plays a major role in Tunisian society, despite having no official status.
The airport is located north of Sousse at Enfidha and is to mainly serve the resorts of Hamammet and Port El Kantaoui, together with inland cities such as Kairouan.
The south is semiarid, and merges into the Sahara.
On 7 November 2006, President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali announced the demerger of the business, which became effective on 31 August 2007.
Though it is relatively small in size, Tunisia has great environmental diversity due to its north-south extent.
This was the reason or pretext for French forces to establish a Protectorate in 1881.
An abrupt southward turn of the Mediterranean coast in northern Tunisia gives the country two distinctive Mediterranean coasts, west-east in the north, and north-south in the east.
The Almohads initially ruled over Tunisia through a governor, usually a near relative of the Caliph.
The word ''Tunisia'' is derived from Tunis; a central urban hub and the capital of modern-day Tunisia.
Called the ''Granary of the Empire'', the area of actual Tunisia and coastal Tripolitania, according to one estimate, produced one million tons of cereals each year, one-quarter of which was exported to the Empire.
The national bibliography lists 1249 non-school books published in 2002 in Tunisia, with 885 titles in Arabic.
Tunisia was suspended from Davis Cup play for the year 2014, because the Tunisian Tennis Federation was found to have ordered Malek Jaziri not to compete against an Israeli tennis player, Amir Weintraub.
During the reign of the Hafsid dynasty, fruitful commercial relationships were established with several Christian Mediterranean states.
Around 1200 they succeeded in extending their rule over the whole of Tunisia, until they were crushed by Almohad troops in 1207.
The founders of Carthage also established a Tophet, which was altered in Roman times.
Anger and violence intensified following Bouazizi's death on 4 January 2011, ultimately leading longtime President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to resign and flee the country on 14 January 2011, after 23 years in power.
The institution did not take long to assemble an elite group of musicians and poets and scholars.
, Tunisia has abandoned these plans.
The region was easily reconquered in 533–534 AD, during the rule of Emperor Justinian I,  by the Eastern Romans led by General Belisarius.
The Romans, who would occupy Tunisia for most of the next eight hundred years, introduced Christianity and left architectural legacies like the El Djem amphitheater.
In boxing, Victor Perez ("Young") was world champion in the flyweight weight class in 1931 and 1932.
The Medes settled and were known as Mauri, later Moors.
The government believed the hijab is a "garment of foreign origin having a partisan connotation".
The settlers of Carthage brought their culture and religion from the Phoenicians.
During the 5th and 6th centuries (from 430 to 533 AD), the Germanic Vandals invaded and ruled over a kingdom in North Africa that included present-day Tripoli.
The Ottomans held sway for over three hundred years.
They founded the first Islamic city in North Africa, Kairouan.
Geographically, Tunisia contains the eastern end of the Atlas Mountains and the northern reaches of the Sahara desert.
The Tunis area is served by a Light rail network named ''Metro Leger'' which is managed by Transtu.
In 1869, Tunisia declared itself bankrupt and an international financial commission took control over its economy.
Tunisia finalised the tariffs dismantling for industrial products in 2008 and therefore was the first Mediterranean country to enter in a free trade area with EU.
This evolution of status was from time to time challenged without success by Algiers.
Both facilities are projected to produce 900–1000 MW.
The team won the 2011 Afrobasket and hosted Africa's top basketball event in 1965, 1987 and 2015.
One-third of the Jewish population lives in and around the capital.
A major mercantile power and a military rival of the Roman Republic, Carthage was defeated by the Romans in 146 BC.
Nonetheless, the current regulatory framework and social and political culture mean that the future of press and media freedom is still unclear.
Tunisian literature exists in two forms: Arabic and French.
In the 2011 constituent assembly, women held between 24% and 31% of all seats.
Eventually the new government gave in to the demands.
The Tunisia national handball team has participated in several handball world championships.
In 1948 the Jewish population was an estimated 105,000, but by 2013 only about 900 remained.
The army is responsible for national defence and also internal security.
Tunisia is one of the European Union's most established trading partners in the Mediterranean region and ranks as the EU's 30th largest trading partner.
During the Roman period the area of what is now Tunisia enjoyed a huge development.
The TV media has long remained under the domination of the Establishment of the Broadcasting Authority Tunisia (ERTT) and its predecessor, the Tunisian Radio and Television, founded in 1957.
The remainder lives on the island of Djerba with 39 synagogues where the Jewish community dates back 2,500 years, on Sfax and Hammam-Lif.
Many Jews consider it a pilgrimage site, with celebrations taking place there once every year due to its age and the legend that the synagogue was built using stones from Solomon's temple.
The First Lady Leila Ben Ali was described as an "unabashed shopaholic" who used the state airplane to make frequent unofficial trips to Europe's fashion capitals.
Tunis Sports City is an entire sports city currently being constructed in Tunis, Tunisia.
Tunisia is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
It lies between latitudes 30° and 38°N, and longitudes 7° and 12°E.
There are now over 100 legal parties, including several that existed under the former regime.
Its northernmost point, Cape Angela, is the northernmost point on the African continent.
Among Tunisia's tourist attractions are its cosmopolitan capital city of Tunis, the ancient ruins of Carthage, the Muslim and Jewish quarters of Jerba, and coastal resorts outside of Monastir.
Protests continued for banning of the ruling party and the eviction of all its members from the transitional government formed by Mohammed Ghannouchi.
In 2010, there were 6,639,000 French-speakers in Tunisia, or about 64% of the population.
Much of the southern region is semi-arid and desert.
The south of the country is desert.
Berber Christians continued to live in Tunisia up until the early 15th century.
Tunisia remained part of the Almohad state, until 1230 when the son of Abu Hafs declared himself independent.
From the age of 8, they are taught French while English is introduced at the age of 10.
The Tunisian regime has been criticised for its draconian policy on recreational drug use, for instance automatic 1-year prison sentences for consuming cannabis.
According to The New York Times, Tunisia is "known for its golden beaches, sunny weather and affordable luxuries."
Tunisia is an export-oriented country in the process of liberalizing and privatizing an economy that, while averaging 5% GDP growth since the early 1990s, has suffered from corruption benefiting politically connected elites.
Tunisia's population was estimated to be just under 11 million in 2014.
Despite the prestige of the new masters, the country was still unruly, with continuous rioting and fighting between the townsfolk and wandering Arabs and Turks, the latter being subjects of the Muslim Armenian adventurer Karakush.
There is also a small purely Berber (1% at most) population located in the Dahar mountains and on the island of Djerba in the south-east and in the Khroumire mountainous region in the north-west.
Tunisia is subdivided into 24 governorates, which are further divided into 264 "delegations" or "districts" (''mutamadiyat''), and further subdivided into municipalities (''shaykhats'') and sectors (''imadats'').
Under its Turkish governors, the Beys, Tunisia attained virtual independence.
Sadok Gmech draws his inspiration from national wealth while Moncef Ben Amor turns to fantasy.
It was founded in 1949 and brings together French and Tunisian Muslims, Christians and Jews.
Tunisia has a sizable Christian community of around over 25,000 adherents, mainly Catholics (22,000) and to a lesser degree Protestants.
The antisemitic Statut of the Jews enacted by the Vichy was also implemented in Vichy North Africa, and overseas French territories.
According to Matthew Carr, "As many as eighty thousand Moriscos settled in Tunisia, most of them in and around the capital, Tunis, which still contains a quarter known as Zuqaq al-Andalus, or Andalusia Alley."
The catalyst for mass demonstrations was the death of Mohamed Bouazizi, a 26-year-old Tunisian street vendor, who set himself afire on 17 December 2010 in protest at the confiscation of his wares and the humiliation inflicted on him by a municipal official.
The total adult literacy rate in 2008 was 78% and this rate goes up to 97.3% when considering only people from 15 to 24 years old.
Some independent organizations, such as the Tunisian Association of Democratic Women, the Association of Tunisian Women for Research and Development, and the Bar Association also remain active.
The number of legalized political parties in Tunisia has grown considerably since the revolution.
, Tunisia had an army of 27,000 personnel equipped with 84 main battle tanks and 48 light tanks.
The military has historically played a professional, apolitical role in defending the country from external threats.
Tunisia's population was estimated to be just under 10.8 million in 2013.
Given its doctrine, some members have therefore turned to the sources of aesthetic Arab-Muslim art: such as miniature Islamic architecture, etc.
The Tunisian legal system is heavily influenced by French civil law, while the Law of Personal Status is based on Islamic law.
There were reports that the Tunisian police harassed men with "Islamic" appearance (such as those with beards), detained them, and sometimes compelled men to shave their beards off.
After the series of wars with Greek city-states of Sicily in the 5th century BC, Carthage rose to power and eventually became the dominant civilization in the Western Mediterranean.
As for poetry, Tunisian poetry typically opts for nonconformity and innovation with poets such as Aboul-Qacem Echebbi.
In 1881, using the pretext of a Tunisian incursion into Algeria, the French invaded with an army of about 36,000 and forced the Bey to agree to the terms of the 1881 Treaty of Bardo (Al Qasr as Sa'id).
In the 19th century, the rulers of Tunisia became aware of the ongoing efforts at political and social reform in the Ottoman capital.
Its coast was settled by Phoenicians starting as early as the 12th century BC (Bizerte, Utica).
The ITF Board decided to send a strong message to the Tunisian Tennis Federation that this kind of action will not be tolerated."
Tunisia has managed to attract many international companies such as Airbus and Hewlett-Packard.
In 2006 this figure had increased to 1,500 and 1,700 in 2007.
With this treaty, Tunisia was officially made a French protectorate, over the objections of Italy.
Before long, however, Tunisia became in effect an autonomous province, under the local Bey.
The population of Tunisia, from a sociological, historical and genealogical standpoint, is made up of mainly Arabs, Berbers and Turks.
In addition, Tunisia is also a member state of the United Nations and a state party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
This has changed since, as the media censorship by the authorities have been largely abolished, and self-censorship has significantly decreased.
The Enseignement secondaire is divided into two stages: general academic and specialized.
Nazi collaborator In 1942–1943, Tunisia was the scene of the Tunisia Campaign, a series of battles between the Axis and Allied forces.
SS Walter Rauff continued to implement the Final Solution there.
Individual Tunisians are tolerant of religious freedom and generally do not inquire about a person's personal beliefs.
Since the revolution, some non-governmental organizations have reconstituted themselves and hundreds of new ones have emerged.
Tunisia's name is derived from its capital city, Tunis, which is located on Tunisia's northeast coast.
A Code of Personal Status was adopted shortly after independence in 1956, which, among other things, gave women full legal status (allowing them to run and own businesses, have bank accounts, and seek passports under their own authority).
Following a report by Amnesty International, The Guardian called Tunisia "one of the most modern but repressive countries in the Arab world."
However, the Turks brought with them the teaching of the Hanafi School during the Ottoman rule, which still survives among the Turkish descended families today, and their mosques traditionally have octagonal minarets.
In the 2012 Summer Olympics, he won a bronze medal in the 1500m freestyle and a gold medal in the 15&nbsp;km marathon.
After several attempts starting in 647, the Arabs conquered the whole of Tunisia by 697, followed by the Ottomans between 1534 and 1574.
Tunisia was in 2009 ranked the most competitive economy in Africa and the 40th in the world by the World Economic Forum.
In the late 16th century the coast became a pirate stronghold (see: Barbary States).
The fall in favour of the moderate Islamist government of Ennahdha was partly due to that, modern Tunisian governments intelligence objectives are to suppress fundamentalist groups before they can pass to act.
Nearly a third of the books are published for children.
Inland from the Sahel, between the Dorsal and a range of hills south of Gafsa, are the Steppes.
Among the literary figures include Ali Douagi, who has produced more than 150 radio stories, over 500 poems and folk songs and nearly 15 plays, Khraief Bashir, an Arabic novelist who published many notable books in the 1930s and which caused a scandal because the dialogues were written in Tunisian dialect, and others such as Moncef Ghachem, Mohamed Salah Ben Mrad, or Mahmoud Messaadi.
The higher education system in Tunisia has experienced a rapid expansion and the number of students has more than tripled over the past 10 years from approximately 102,000 in 1995 to 365,000 in 2005.The gross enrollment rate at the tertiary level in 2007 was 31 percent, with gender parity index of GER of 1.5.
In this case, the same name is used for both country and city, as with the Arabic , and only by context can one tell the difference.
Since January 2011 and at the direction of the executive branch, the military has taken on increasing responsibility for domestic security and humanitarian crisis response.
Prisons are overcrowded and drug offenders represent nearly a third of the prison population.
Following the Battle of Carthage in 149 BC, Carthage was conquered by Rome.
On 3 March 2011, the president announced that elections to a Constituent Assembly would be held on 23 October 2011. International and internal observers declared the vote free and fair.
There are 29 airports in Tunisia, with Tunis Carthage International Airport and Djerba–Zarzis International Airport being the most important ones.
In 2011, the Tunisian Revolution resulted in the overthrow of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, followed by parliamentary elections.
Nonetheless, by 1870 the distinction between the Arabic-speaking mass and the Turkish elite had blurred and today the overwhelming majority, of about 98%, simply identify themselves as Arabs.,.
Also Tunisia was occupied by Ayyubids between 1182 and 1183 and again between 1184 and 1187.
The greatest threat to Almohad rule in Tunisia was the Banu Ghaniya, relatives of the Almoravids, who from their base in Mallorca tried to restore Almoravid rule over the Maghreb.
While children generally acquire Tunisian Arabic at home, when they enter school at age 6, they are taught to read and write in Standard Arabic.
In another development, Youssef Rekik reused the technique of painting on glass and founded Nja Mahdaoui calligraphy with its mystical dimension.
The city that will consist of apartment buildings as well as several sports facilities will be built by the Bukhatir Group at a cost of $5 Billion.
The Numidians and Moors belonged to the race from which the Berbers are descended.
A basic education for children between the ages of 6 and 16 has been compulsory since 1991.
From the conclusion of the Second Punic War in 202 BC, Carthage functioned as a client state of the Roman Republic for another 50 years.
United Nations peacekeeping deployments for the Tunisian armed forces have been in Cambodia (UNTAC), Namibia (UNTAG), Somalia, Rwanda, Burundi, Western Sahara (MINURSO) and the 1960s mission in the Congo, ONUC.
The rate of non-revenue water is the lowest in the region at 21% in 2012.
On 23 November 2014 Tunisia held its first Presidential Election following the Arab Spring in 2011.
Under the Ottoman Empire, the boundaries of Tunisia contracted; it lost territory to the west (Constantine) and to the east (Tripoli).
A decree by the minister of the interior banned the "political police", special forces which were used to intimidate and persecute political activists.
The founding in 1934 of a musical school help revive Arab Andalusian music largely to a social and cultural revival led by the elite of the time who became aware of the risks of loss of the musical heritage and which they believed threatened the foundations of Tunisian national identity.
The battle opened with initial success by the German and Italian forces, but the massive supply and numerical superiority of the Allies led to the Axis's surrender on 13 May 1943.
From independence in 1956 until the 2011 revolution, the government and the Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD), formerly Neo Destour and the Socialist Destourian Party, were effectively one.
There was even a huge production of mosaics and ceramics, exported mainly to Italy, in the central area of El Djem (where there was the second biggest amphitheater in the Roman Empire).
In 2008, in terms of Press freedom, Tunisia was ranked 143rd out of 173.
Tunisia has participated in peacekeeping efforts in the DROC and Ethiopia/Eritrea.
Growth in private sector radio and television broadcasting has seen the creation of numerous operations including Radio Mosaique FM, Jawhara FM, Zaytuna FM, Hannibal TV, Ettounsiya TV, and Nessma TV.
In November 1987, doctors declared Bourguiba unfit to rule and, in a bloodless coup d'état, Prime Minister Zine El Abidine Ben Ali assumed the presidency in accordance with Article 57 of the Tunisian constitution.
The bulk of Tunisians belong to the Maliki School of Sunni Islam and their mosques are easily recognizable by square minarets.
It was believed in ancient times that Africa was originally populated by Gaetulians and Libyans, both nomadic peoples.
Differences in Tunisia, like the rest of the Maghreb, are largely north-south environmental differences defined by sharply decreasing rainfall southward from any point.
Phoenician immigration began in the 12th century BC; these immigrants founded Carthage.
In 1930 "The Rachidia" was founded well known thanks to artists from the Jewish community.
He was consistently re-elected with enormous majorities every five years (well over 80 percent of the vote), the last being 25 October 2009, until he fled the country amid popular unrest in January 2011.
The agricultural sector accounts for 11.6% of the GDP, industry 25.7%, and services 62.8%.
The Tunisian Air Force has 154 aircraft and 4 UAVs.
Tunisia was classified 14th on the Paralympics medal table and 5th in Athletics.
Football is the most popular sport in Tunisia.
Ennahda's stance on the issue was criticized by hardline Islamists, who wanted strict sharia, but was welcomed by secular parties.
Shop signs, menus and road signs in Tunisia are generally written in both Arabic and French.
Much of the rest of the country's land is fertile soil.
North of the Dorsal is the Tell, a region characterized by low, rolling hills and plains, again an extension of mountains to the west in Algeria.
After the Reconquista and expulsion of non-Christians and Moriscos from Spain, many Spanish Muslims and Jews also arrived.
It has an association agreement with the European Union; is a member of La Francophonie, the Union for the Mediterranean, the Arab Maghreb Union, the Arab League, the OIC, the Greater Arab Free Trade Area, the Community of Sahel-Saharan States, the African Union, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77; and has obtained the status of major non-NATO ally of the United States.
In addition to the cultivations and the capture and transporting of exotic wild animals from the western mountains, the principal production and exports included the textiles, marble, wine, timber, livestock, pottery such as African Red Slip, and wool.
Although Tunisia managed an average 5% growth over the last decade it continues to suffer from a high unemployment especially among youth.
During the pre-revolution era there were at some point restrictions in the wearing of Islamic head scarves (hijab) in government offices and on public streets and public gatherings.
In October 2014 Tunisia held its first elections under the new constitution following the Arab Spring.
Tunisia was hit by two terror attacks on foreign tourists in 2015, first killing 22 people at the Bardo National Museum, and later killing 38 people at the Sousse beachfront.
While some older parties are well-established and can draw on previous party structures, many of the 100-plus parties extant as of February 2012 are small.
Additional crops included beans, figs, grapes, and other fruits.
The culture of Tunisia is mixed due to its long established history of outside influence from people ‒ such as Phoenicians, Romans, Vandals, Byzantines, Arabs, Turks, Italians, Spaniards, and the French ‒ who all left their mark on the country.
The translated meaning of Numidian is Nomad and indeed the people were semi-nomadic until the reign of Masinissa of the Massyli tribe.
Tunisia refused a French request for the extradition of two of the President's nephews, from Leila's side, who were accused by the French State prosecutor of having stolen two mega-yachts from a French marina.
The Code of Personal Status remains one of the most progressive civil codes in the North Africa and the Muslim world.
After the revolution however, a moderate Islamist government was elected leading to more freedom in the practice of religion.
The Bey of Tunis then, by his own lights but informed by the Turkish example, attempted to effect a modernizing reform of institutions and the economy.
Independent human rights groups, such as Amnesty International, Freedom House, and Protection International, documented that basic human and political rights were not respected.
The European Union remains Tunisia's first trading partner, currently accounting for 72.5% of Tunisian imports and 75% of Tunisian exports.
The economy, mainly during the Empire, boomed: the prosperity of the area depended on agriculture.
Italian is understood and spoken by a small part of the Tunisian population.
During this era the governing councils controlling Tunisia remained largely composed of a foreign elite who continued to conduct state business in the Turkish language.
Paramilitary forces consisted of a 12,000-member national guard.
The industrial sector is mainly made up of clothing and footwear manufacturing, production of car parts, and electric machinery.
Tunisia is a unitary semi-presidential representative democratic republic.
A Carthaginian invasion of Italy led by Hannibal during the Second Punic War, one of a series of wars with Rome, nearly crippled the rise of Roman power.
Until then, ERTT managed all public television stations (Télévision Tunisienne 1 as well as Télévision Tunisienne 2 which had replaced the defunct RTT 2) and four national radio stations (Radio Tunis, Tunisia Radio Culture, Youth and Radio RTCI) and five regional Sfax, Monastir, Gafsa, Le Kef and Tataouine.
