Because of population pressure and the rate of migration to the capital, the city continued to grow, even with the creation of new districts in the suburbs.
Championshipsof Football
The growing metropolitan area is served by an extensive network of public transportation including buses, an above-ground light rail system (le Metro), as well a regional train line (the TGM) that links the city centre to its closest northern suburbs.
In the middle there is a square where the former slave market stood until the middle of the 19th century.
From the 12th century to the 16th century, the old city was controlled by the Almohad and the Hafsid Berber dynasties.
The city expanded and created new boulevards and neighborhoods.
At the same time, an active policy of industrialization is developing the municipal economy.
At its core lies its antic medina, a world heritage site.
These ancient buildings include:
Some scholars relate it to the Phoenician goddess ''Tanith'' ('Tanit or Tanut), as many ancient cities were named after patron deities.
Located near the Bab Souika, the neighborhood of Halfaouine which gained international attention through the dissemination of the film ''Halfaouine, l'enfant des terrasses''.
Among the places of worship are Beit Yaacouv Synagogue and especially the Great Synagogue of Tunis, built at the end of the 1940s to replace the former Great Synagogue which was demolished as part of the Jewish redevelopment area, the Hara.
The city of Tunis is built on a hill slope down to the lake of Tunis.
Another possibility is that it was derived from the Berber verbal root ''ens'' which means "to lie down" or "to pass the night".
The Palestine Liberation Organization also had its headquarters in Tunis, from the 1970s to 2003.
After independence, in the 1960s the National Board of Seaports, which supports all ports in the country, modernized the infrastructure of the port of Tunis.
North of it, is the long avenue Mohamed V, which leads to the Boulevard of 7 November through the neighborhood of the big banks where there are hotels and Abu Nawas Lake and the headquarters of the ruling party of Tunisia.
The Medina also has a social sectorization: with the neighborhood of El Bey Tourbet and the Kasbah district being aristocratic, with a population of judges and politicians, while the streets of Pacha often being military and bourgeois.
On the stage of this theater, many performances are regularly given by Tunisian, Arabic and international actors.
Charles, suffering losses from the corsairs operating out of Djerba, Tunis, and Algiers, agreed to reinstate Mulai Hassan in exchange for his acceptance of Spanish suzerainty.
The Arab League was headquartered in Tunis from 1979 to 1990.
The south of Tunis is made up of disadvantaged neighborhoods, especially due to the strong industry in this part of the metropolis.
Situated on a large Mediterranean Sea gulf (the Gulf of Tunis), behind the Lake of Tunis and the port of La Goulette (Ḥalq il-Wād), the city extends along the coastal plain and the hills that surround it.
The city rapidly spread out of its fortifications: it divided into a traditional Arab-populated old city, and a new city populated by immigrants, with a different structure from that of the traditional medina.
The incident has been treated as a terrorist attack.
In total the governorate of Tunis registered 24,095 licences for various clubs in the municipal area in 2007.
There is much diversification in the municipality of Tunis, with Durum grown in Manouba, Olives and olive oil in Ariana and Mornag, wine (Mornag), and fruit, vegetable and legumes are grown in all regions.
Practicing the Maliki rite as the vast majority of Tunisia's Mosques.
The Al Hamra theater was the second theater to be opened in Tunis, situated on El Jazira Road.
In 2007 that increased to 6 million passengers with a rise in tourism to the city.
This is the RTS (rapid rail network), the local equivalent of the Paris RER, which will carry tens of thousands of travellers from the distant suburbs of Tunis to the centre by using either existing tracks or new tracks yet to be built.
Other arts are also represented in the capital.
Tunis is a center of Tunisian culture.
Between 1928 and 1955 the city competed for nine editions of the Grand Prix of Tunis, where notable drivers such as Marcel Lehoux, Achille Varzi, Tazio Nuvolari and Rudolf Caracciola took part.
North of the Bourguiba Avenue is the district of La Fayette, which is still home to the Great Synagogue of Tunis and the Habib Thameur Gardens, built on the site of the ancient Jewish cemetery which lies outside the walls.
File:Panorama-tunis01.JPG|Panorama
Souk El Berka leads to Souk El Leffa, a souk that sells all kinds of carpets, blankets and other weavings, and extends with the Souk Es Sarragine, built in the early 18th century and specializing in leather.
Winter is the wettest season of the year, when more than a third of the annual rainfall falls during this period, raining on average every two or three days.
The city is the largest financial center in the country hosting the headquarters of 65% of financial companies - while the industrial sectors are gradually declining in importance.
The expansion of the Tunisian economy in recent decades is reflected in the booming development of the outer city where one can see clearly the social challenges brought about by rapid modernization in Tunisia.
In 1270 the city was taken briefly by Louis IX of France, who was hoping to convert the Hafsid sovereign to Christianity.
The project hopes to boost the economy of Tunisia as well as increase the number of tourist visiting Tunisia annually.
The main roads to other Tunisian cities include: Autoroute A1, Tunis-Sfax; Autoroute A3, Tunis-Oued Zarga; and Autoroute A4, Tunis-Bizerte.
Southwest of the Medina, on the crest of the hills across the Isthmus of Tunis, is the Montfleury district then on down to the foothills of Séjoumi, the poor neighborhood of Mellassine.
The city further put itself onto the international basketball map as it hosted the FIBA Africa Championship 1965 and the FIBA Africa Championship 1987.
.The main cemetery in Tunis, the Djellaz Cemetery dominates this part of town, perched on the slopes of a rocky outcrop.
Confronting the difficulties previously encountered, the Ottoman Uluç Ali Reis, at the head of an army of janissaries and Kabyles, retook Tunis in 1569.
Taking advantage of divisions within the ruling house, Algerians captured Tunis in 1756 and put the country under supervision.
Primary industry such as agriculture, however, is active in specialized agricultural areas on the suburbs, particularly in the wine and olive oil industries.
It worked on promoting Arab music, on music education and training, and on cooperation with various partners both in Tunisia and abroad.
( the malouf music)
Compared to the ancient ruins of Carthage, the ruins of ancient Tunis are not as large.
The isthmus between them is what geologists call the "Tunis dome", which includes hills of limestone and sediments.
The Métro léger de Tunis network has extended gradually since then to reach the suburbs.
The Arab geographer El Yacoubi has written that in the 9th century Tunis was surrounded by a wall of brick and clay except the side of the sea where it was stone.
From this souk, there is a street leading to the Souk Ech-Chaouachine (chechia).
During the later 19th century, Tunis became increasingly populated by Europeans, particularly the French, and immigration dramatically increased the size of the city.
File:Tunis.png|A summer night in Tunis
The main conflicts and potentially destructive human behavior has been experienced in the city occurred relatively recently following the country's independence which it why it made into a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1979.
These writers belonged to peoples in competition, and often in conflict, with Carthage.
Tunis is the central point in which the main roads and all highways that serve different parts of the country of Tunis originate.
These hills contain the places, Notre-Dame de Tunis, Ras Tabia, La Rabta, La Kasbah, Montfleury and La Manoubia with altitudes beyond just .
The architectural heritage is also omnipresent in the homes of individuals and small palace officials as well as in the palace of the sovereign of Kasbah.
According to Strabo, it was destroyed by the Romans during the Third Punic War.
A great fusion of influences can be seen blending Andalusian styles with eastern influences, and Roman or Byzantine columns, and typical Arab architecture, characterized by the archways.
Among the priorities are the following: Tunis-Borj Cédria (23&nbsp;km) where modernization and electrification are already planned; Tunis-Mohamedia-Fouchana (19.4&nbsp;km); Tunis-Manouba-Mnihla (19.2&nbsp;km); Tunis-Ezzouhour-Sidi Hassine Séjoumi (13.9&nbsp;km).
If we add the mosques and oratories (about 200), the madrasahs (El Bachia, Slimania, El Achouria, Bir El Ahjar, Ennakhla, etc..), The zaouias (Mahrez Sidi Sidi Ali Azouz, Sidi Abdel Kader, etc.)
Five Japanese, two Colombians, and visitors from Italy, Poland, and Spain were among the dead.
The terminal had 4.4 million passengers (35.98% of total airport traffic in the country) in 2006.
In addition, various small theatres and cultural centres are scattered throughout the city and display various artistic performances.
Built in 1692, it resembles the Ottoman Süleymaniye Mosque in Istanbul.
The main and oldest of them, is the Al-Zaytuna Mosque, founded in 698 and built in 732 and is in the heart of the Medina.
To the west of the park lies the district of El Omrane which holds the main Muslim cemetery in the capital and the warehouses of public transport.
The number of people living below the poverty line, falling at the national level, remains higher in urban areas.
Bab Cartagena gave access to Carthage, important for bringing in construction materials needed for the city.
While there are a few ancient translations of Punic texts into Greek and Latin, as well as inscriptions on monuments and buildings discovered in North Africa, the main sources are Greek and Roman historians, including Livy, Polybius, Appian, Cornelius Nepos, Silius Italicus, Plutarch, Dio Cassius, and Herodotus.
Also, as part of the major infrastructure project, the city's traffic lights were increased from 5,000 to 7,500.
However education is only exceeded by the neighbouring governorate of Ariana which has many institutions of education.
In 1990, Ferid Boughedir shot the notable film ''Halfaouine, l'enfant des terrasses'' in Halfaouine district.
* Aghlabid Al-Zaytouna Mosque ("Mosque of the Olive") built in 723 by Obeid Allah Ibn-al-Habhab to celebrate the new capital.
In Greater Tunis, the proportion of young unemployed is at 35%.
Unlike other mayors in Tunisia, the mayor of Tunis is appointed by decree of the President of the Republic from among the members of the City Council.
File:Tunis 0253 2013.jpg|Carthage 2013
The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria also maintains jurisdiction in Tunisia .
But east of the original nucleus, first with the construction of the French Consulate, the modern city was built gradually with the introduction of the French protectorate at the end of the 19th century, on open land between the city and the lake.
As the capital city of the country, Tunis is the focus of Tunisian political and administrative life; it is also the centre of the country's commercial activity.
Given the variations of the precise meaning over time and space, the term ''Tunis'' can possibly mean "camp at night", "camp", or "stop".
File:Porte-de-france.jpg|Bab el Bhar - Porte De France
Local opposition to the authorities began to intensify in September 945, when the Kharijite insurgents occupied Tunis, resulting in general pillaging.
Such an operation would require the upgrading of the docks' TGM stations so that they becone suitable for light rail trains.
The planning of the Medina of Tunis has the distinction of not grid lines or formal geometric compositions.
It took some time to run properly but soon organized meetings between the teams in schools.
Under the rule of deys and Moorish beys, the capital sprang into new life.
It will be divided into lines whose priority will be based on certain criteria such as population density and the lack of coverage for a given area.
At the periphery are the souks Et Trouk, El Blat, El Blaghgia, El Kébabgia, En Nhas (copper), Es Sabbaghine (dyeing) and El Grana that sell clothing and blankets and was occupied by Jewish merchants.
In those years there were huge European colonies (like the Tunisian Italians) in Tunis; half the population was European in origin.
Given the valuable items it sells, it is the only souk whose doors are closed and guarded during the night.
Domestic architecture (palaces and townhouses), official and civilian (libraries and administrations), religious (mosques and zaouïas) and services (commercial and fondouks) are located in the Medina.
Under Articles 43 and 24 of the Constitution of 1959, Tunis and its suburbs host the national institutions: the Presidential Palace, which is known as Carthage Palace, residence of the President of Tunisia, the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Advisors and parliament, the Constitutional Council and the main judicial institutions, the Bardo National Museum and various other government departments and public bodies.
For its part, the south light-rail line was extended in November 2008 to El Mourouj with a length of .
Exposed to violence from the hostile tribes that settled around the city, the population of Tunis repudiated the authority of the Zirids and swore allegiance to the Hammadid prince El Nacer ibn Alennas, who was based in Béjaïa, in 1059.
Indeed, thanks to a generally flat terrain and the two main rivers in Tunisia, the Medjerda to the north and the Milian to the south, soils are fertile.
With an area of 270 hectares (over 29 hectares for the Kasbah)  and more than 100,000 people, the Medina comprises one-tenth of the population of Tunis.
Practicing the Hanafi rite since 1584, it is recognisable mainly by the dome as well as its minaret, similar to the Koutoubia in Marrakesh and is the highest in the city.
Not surprisingly, their accounts of Carthage are extremely hostile; while there are a few Greek authors who took a favourable view, these works have been lost.
The Association of Arab Orchestra of the City of Tunis began its activities at the end of April 1982, as a workshop linked to the cultural center of the city.
In addition, groundwater is easily accessible through the drilling of deep wells, providing water for the different agriculture crops.
During World War II, Tunis was held by Axis forces from November 1942 to May 1943.
The municipality of Tunis is divided into 15 municipal districts:  These include El Bab Bhar, Bab Souika, Cité El Khadra, Jelloud Jebel El Kabaria, El Menzah, El Ouardia, Ettahrir, Ezzouhour, Hraïria, Medina, El Omrane, El Omrane Higher Séjoumi, Sidi El-Bashir and Sidi Hassine.
Among other projects are a line to the city of Ennasr (8.4&nbsp;km) and the extension of the Tunis-Ettadhamen to Mnihla (1.7&nbsp;km).
The Ottoman Empire took nominal control of Tunis in 1534 when Barbarossa Hayreddin captured it from the Hafsid Sultan Mulai Hassan, who fled to the court of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain.
The city is mentioned in the Tabula Peutingeriana as ''Thuni''.
Some of the fortifications have now largely disappeared around it, and it is flanked by the two suburbs of Bab Souika to the north and Bab El Jazira to the south.
The city has, as of the beginning of the 21st century, a public transportation system developed under the management of the Société des transports de Tunis (STT).
In the years following independence, the population of the metropolitan area continues to grow: the increase of 21.1% from 1956 to 1966 and by 28.5% from 1966 to 1975 (55.6% between 1956 and 1975).
Various sources estimate the 19th-century population to have ranged from 90,000 to 110,000 inhabitants.
Tunis attracts foreign investors (33% of companies, 26% of investments and 27% of employment), excluding several areas due to economic imbalances.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the city of Tunis exceeds 2,000,000 inhabitants.
Championshipsof volleyball
One should also note the El Teatro and Étoile du Nord theater groups.
The Saheb Ettabaâ Mosque, built between 1808 and 1814 was the last mosque built by the Tunis Husseinites before the French occupation.
The French occupied the city from 1881 to 1956, having established a protectorate system of administration that recognized the nominal authority of local government.
In 2008, the government announced the start of construction of a large sports complex that will include several sports academies, a 20,000-seat stadium, and a swimming centre.
File:Tunis 0306 2013.jpg|Medina 2013
The governor appointed by Béjaïa, having reestablished order in the country, did not hesitate to free himself from the Hammadids to found the Khourassanid dynasty with Tunis as its capital.
The new building contains a reading room, conference room, laboratories, an exhibition gallery, a block of technical and administrative services, a restaurant, a parking and green space areas.
Both gunmen were killed by Tunisian police.
The capital is home to a large number of mosques in various architectural styles, signs of construction of their respective eras.
On the expenditure side, provision is made for the consolidation of hygiene and cleanliness, the state of the environment and urban design, infrastructure maintenance, rehabilitation and renovation of facilities, and strengthening the logistics and means of work and transport.
The Musical Troupe of the City of Tunis was created in 1954 by Salah El Mahdi.
It is known for its essences and perfumes.
The EST is supported by the majority of the masses, while the CA, a poorer club, is supported by the others.
Beyond that, several kilometers north-east, on the road to La Marsa,  the Berges du Lac was built on land reclaimed from the north shore of the lake near the airport, which has holds offices of Tunisian and foreign companies, many embassies as well as shops.
The Arab League, which represents 22 Arab nations, transferred its headquarters to Tunis in 1979 because of Egypt's peace with Israel but has been headquartered back in Egypt since 1990.
North of the Al-Zaytuna Mosque is the Souk El Attarine, built in the early 18th century.
King Louis easily captured Carthage, but his army soon fell victim to an outbreak of dysentery.
The first took place on 9 June 1907, between teams from Lycée Alaoui and Lycée Carnot (1–1).
Built in the 17th century, the Dar Ben Achour also contains a library.
* The Great Mosque (including the Muslim University and library)
In 1985, the PLO's headquarters was bombed by the Israeli Air Force (F-15), killing approximately 60 people.
In the Ottoman period, four new gates were established: Bab Laassal, Bab Sidi Abdesselam, Bab El Bab Gorjani and Sidi Kacem.
Having previously played a minor role behind Kairouan and Mahdia, Tunis was promoted to the rank of provincial capital.
Currently the project is going through planning.
In March temperatures may vary between  and , and between  and  in May.
Still further north of the Belvedere Park, behind the Boulevard of 7 November are the neighborhoods of El Menzah and El Manar now reaching the peaks of the hills overlooking the north of the town .
After independence, the Tunisian government implemented a plan to cope with population growth of the city and country, a system of family planning, to attempt to lower the rate of population growth.
File:Gulf of Tunis at sunrise.jpg|Tunis bay at sunrise
Indeed, the first animated film was shown in Tunis by the Lumiere brothers as early as 1896.
Stade Chedli Zouiten
In 1905 the Muslim Association of Tunisia brought together students from Lycée Alaoui and Sadiki College to organize gymnastics.
The total length of the network will eventually be in the range of .
The Almohad conquest marked the beginning of the dominance of the city in Tunisia.
The Théâtre municipal de Tunis, upon creation on 20 November 1902, showcases opera, ballet, symphonic concerts, drama, etc.
It is now the subject of a redevelopment project including the construction of the twin towers.
The largest Park, Belvédère Park, was founded in 1892 overlooks Lake Tunis.
However, between 1994 and 2004, the population of the governorate of Tunis grew more than 1.03% per annum.
The city became the capital of a Hafsid kingdom stretching towards Tripoli and Fez.
The gaps created by their departure are abundantly filled by Tunisians who are emigrating to Tunis from other parts of the country.
The National School of Circus Arts was founded following a meeting between the Director of the National Theater and the Director General of the National Center for Arts of Châlons-en-Champagne (France) in 1998.
The city spilled outside the area of the earlier town and the banks of the lake, and the new districts were modernised with running water (1860), lighting gas (1872), roads, waste collection (1873), and communication with adjacent suburbs and the city centre.
Al Hambra was one of the most famous theaters in the capital during the 1930s and 1940s.
Following the Second World War, suburbs grew up quickly around Tunis to facilitate rapid industrialization.
At midday on 20 May 1943, the Allies held a victory parade on Avenue Maréchal Galliéni and Avenue Jules Ferry to signal the end of fighting in North Africa.
However, it is common for temperatures to soar even as early as April with record temperatures reaching .
Frosts are rare or non existent.
Tunis has several large plains, the most productive are in Ariana and La Soukra (north), the plain of Manouba (west) and the plain of Mornag (south).
The council's regulatory responsibilities include the municipal budget, building development, and actions to be undertaken under the National Development Plan.
Championshipsof handball
In addition to the municipal institutions, each of the fifteen districts has a municipal council meeting each month in the presence of elected officials and representatives of the administrations, to address the issues of the day.
As for El Bab Bhar, it allowed access to some fondouks where Christian merchants lived in Tunis.
After the war, the city faced new transformations as the modern portion grew in importance and extended its network of boulevards and streets in all directions.
Bab El-Jazeera, perhaps the oldest gate of the south wall, opened onto the southern road.
A legacy of the French presence in the country remains, and the city retains many French schools, the most important being the Lycée Pierre Mendes-France at Mutuelleville.
Under the Aghlabids, the people of Tunis revolted numerous times, but the city profited from economic improvements and quickly became the second most important in the kingdom.
Tunis has been the capital of Tunisia since 1159.
This includes a network of Catholic buildings, including the Church of St. Joan of Arc, but also with the Protestant Reformed Church and the Anglican church Saint-Georges.
A regional gymnastics competition was held in Tunis in 1912 with the participation of thousands of French gymnasts.
The notion of public space is ambiguous in the case of Medina where the streets are seen as an extension of the houses and subject to social tags.
Youssef Dey Mosque operated primarily as public speaking venue before becoming a real mosque in 1631.
To punish the Zirids, he unleashed the Banu Hilal Arab tribe on Ifriqaya; a large part of the country was put to fire, the Zirid capital Kairouan was razed in 1057, and only a few coastal towns, including Tunis and Mahdia, escaped destruction.
Founded in 698 is the Al-Zaytuna Mosque and the surrounding area which developed throughout the Middle Ages,  dividing Tunis into a main town in two suburbs, in the north (Bab Souika) and the south (Bab El Jazira).
Today, each district has its culture and rivalries can be strong.
Six new gates were built including Bab El Khadra, Bab Saadoun, Bab El Allouj (initially called Bab Er-Rehiba), Khalid or Bab Bab Sidi Abdallah Cherif, Bab El Fellah and Bab Alioua.
In total, there are three Greek Orthodox and two Russian Orthodox parishes in Tunisia.
Northwest of the latter, north of the National Route 3 leading to the west, is the city of Ezzouhour (formerly El Kharrouba), which spans more than  and is divided into five sections.
The A1 motorway connects Tunis with Sfax to the south, and the A3 with Oued Zarga and Béja to the west, while the A4 is the link with Bizerte.
As the city has grown and native Tunisians gradually began to replace the extensive European population, conflict between the Arab city and the European city has gradually decreased with the arabization of the population.
The National Military Museum, opened in 1989 in the suburbs west of the city, holds a collection of 23,000 weapons, 13,000 of which date back to the 19th century, and some of which were used by the Tunisian troops during the Crimean War.
20 civilians and one policeman were killed in the attack, while around 50 others were injured.
Because of the concentration of political command (headquarters of the central government, presidency, parliament, ministries and central government) and culture (festivals and mainstream media), Tunis is the only nationally ranking metropolis.
This is where the Belvedere Park lies, the largest in the city and its zoo and the Pasteur Institute founded by Adrien Loir in 1893.
It was completely rebuilt in 864 and is a prestigious place of worship, and was long an important place of culture and knowledge with the University of Ez-Zitouna on the premises until the independence of Tunisia.
It belongs to Patriarchate of Alexandria and All Africa and its Cathedral, small school and other buildings are in Central Tunis.
The city had the natural advantage of coastal access, via the Mediterranean, to the major ports of southern Europe.
They support a range of residential and commercial buildings.
The small Orthodox community is centred around the Greek Orthodox Church (1862), managed by the Greek Embassy and the Russian Orthodox Church (1957), reflecting the presence in Tunisia of a small colony of white Russian refugees and immigrants.
At the beginning of the 20th century a number of sports institutions were established in Tunis, particularly in school and college settings.
On 18 March 2015, two gunmen attacked the Bardo National Museum and held hostages.
In April 1655 the English admiral Robert Blake was sent to the Mediterranean to extract compensation from states that had been attacking English shipping.
File:Tunisia330.jpg|Bab El Bhar located  above sea level
