Its architecture stands in the main sight of the city, as characterised by four large towers –  high – topped by four onion-shaped domes.
Thanks to the vicinity to the city centre, the park is very popular among the local people, during the day but also at night, because of the several bars and nightclubs placed here.
By the Treaty of Utrecht the Duchy of Savoy acquired part of the former Duchy of Milan, including Turin, and the architect Filippo Juvarra began a major redesign of the city.
Artists  born in Turin include the sculptor Umberto Mastroianni and the architect Carlo Mollino.
Turin chocolate firms, aside from many kinds of chocolate, produce a typical chocolate called ''Gianduiotto'', named after Gianduja, a local Commedia dell'arte mask.
In recent years, another trademark drink of the city is ''MoleCola'', an Italian Coca-Cola that entered production in 2012 and quickly spread both in Italy and outside its native country.
Perhaps, because of this, in 1615 Marino left Turin and moved to France.
The celebrated Parco del Valentino is situated in the east side of San Salvario and, albeit not in downtown, it represents kind of central park of Turin.
North of ''Politecnico'' facilities, the main building of the ''OGR'' former cluster, which consists in three 180-meters long joint parallel buildings, became recently a big open space which hosts temporary exhibitions and during the hot seasons, its external spaces became a fashionable site to have a typical Italian ''aperitivo''.
In recent years some small English language education institutions have been opened (St. John International University, International University College of Turin,  Buddies Elementary School, Turin School of Development).
This gate allowed access from north to the ''cardo maximus'', the typical second main street of a Roman town.
The district is well known for its commercial vocation mainly in its two main streets, ''Via Duchessa Jolanda'' and ''Via Principi d'Acaja'', ideally crossing each other among the gardens ''Giardino Luigi Martini'', locally called ''Piazza Benefica'', which hosts a popular open market.
The complex was built between 1857 and 1869 during the reign of Victor Emmanuel II.
The long population decline of the city has begun to reverse itself only in recent years, as the population grew from 865,000 to slightly over 900,000 by the end of the century.
Turin is home to Palazzo Chiablese, the Royal Armoury, the Royal Library, Palazzo Madama, Palazzo Carignano, Villa della Regina, and the Valentino Castle.
The building is depicted on the Italian 2-cent coin.
What remains of the old medieval and modern fortress of the city, it is a starting point for a tour into the old underground tunnels below the city.
These blocks were built into a reticular system, composed by austere buildings in clear rationalist style, such as the impressive ''Hotel Principi di Piemonte'' and the former ''Hotel Nazionale'' in ''Piazza CLN''.
This project is expected to continue for years and to cover a larger part of the city, but its first phase was finished in time for the 2006 Olympic Games, inaugurated on 4 February 2006 and opened to the public the day after.
The Fascist regime put an end to the social unrest, banning trade unions and jailing socialist leaders, notably Antonio Gramsci.
Whilst the other two cities went ahead with the projects, Turin's local government led by mayor Diego Novelli shelved the proposal as it believed it to be too costly and unnecessary.
This street also hosts the Egyptian Museum of Turin, home to what is regarded as one of the largest collections of Egyptian antiquities outside of Egypt.
In those years there was a strong artistic influence of designer Armando Testa.
North of ''OGR'', a former prison complex called ''Le Nuove'' is a significant example of old European prison building.
A project to build an underground system was ready in the 1970s, with government funding for it and for similar projects in Milan and Rome.
The square also features the Teatro Carignano, a well-conserved Baroque theatre.
With a GDP of $58&nbsp;billion, Turin is the world's 78th richest city by purchasing power, and  has been ranked by GaWC as a Gamma- world city.
Via Lagrange and Via Carlo Alberto cross two significant squares of the city, respectively.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Turin was home to writers such as Guido Gozzano, Edmondo De Amicis, Emilio Salgari and Dino Segre, the latter known by the pseudonym of Pitigrilli.
In addition to the 17th-century Royal Palace, built for Madama Reale Christine Marie of France (the official residence of the Savoys until 1865) there are many palaces, residences and castles in the city centre and in the surrounding towns.
Winters are moderately cold but dry, summers are mild in the hills and quite hot in the plains.
The Turin metropolitan area is estimated by the OECD to have a population of 2.2&nbsp;million.
The City was awarded with the title of European Capital of Sport 2015.
The ceilings of the false upper floors are in ''transalpino'' (i.e.
Turin is sometimes called ''the cradle of Italian liberty'', for having been the birthplace and home of notable politicians and people who contributed to the ''Risorgimento'', such as Cavour.
One of the most famous parks featuring a children's playground is ''Parco della Tesoriera'', which is also home to ''Andrea della Corte Municipal Music Library''; this facility is housed in a villa built in 1715 and was once the Royal Treasurer's residence.
Overall, the main thoroughfares of the West side of Aurora are ''Via Cigna'', which crosses the district from North to South, ''Corso Vercelli'', a historical avenue starting north of the Dora river, and ''Corso Principe Oddone'', part of the long ''Spina Centrale'' boulevard that will be built over the undergrounded Turin-Milan railway.
Next to the Turin Cathedral stand the Palatine Towers, an ancient Roman-medieval structure that served as one of four Roman city gates along the city walls of Turin.
Turin is located in Northwest Italy.
Despite its run down look, the famous Lavazza coffee company, along with ''IAAD'' School of Design, chose this part of the city as the location for their new headquarters, which will be built in a contemporary building dubbed ''Nuvola'' ("Cloud") right at the borders of ''Borgo Rossini''.
The University of Turin was also founded during this period.
West of Borgo Dora stands ''Rione Valdocco'' ("Valdocco neighbourhood"), enclosed by ''Via Cigna'', ''Corso Regina Margherita'', ''Corso Principe Oddone'' and the Dora river.
Across from Cortile del Maglio and Arsenale della Pace stands a wide pedestrian area which features a hot air balloon, a clear allusion to the neighbourhood's old name ''Balon'': recently installed, the balloon is open to public which can now take an interesting view of the city from this new high observation point.
Via Carlo Alberto crosses ''Piazza Carlo Alberto'', a big square hosting the rear façade of Palazzo Carignano, in eclectic style.
Once completed, Aurora district will be connected to Eastern ''San Donato'', thanks to a better connection among the roads of the two adjacent districts (i.e.
The Palatine Towers are among the best preserved Roman remains in northern Italy.
As for the painting and the visual arts, Turin became a point of reference, especially in the 20th century.
Construction began in 1863 as a Jewish synagogue.
Turin, as the former capital of the Kingdom of Sardinia and the Kingdom of Italy, is home of the Savoy Residences.
This neighbourhood hosts the significant architecture of ''Santuario di Maria Ausiliatrice'' ("Maria Ausiliatrice Sanctuary") in the homonymous square and behind the church stands ''San Pietro in Vincoli'' old cemetery.
One is the ''Spina Centrale'' ("Central Spine") project which includes the doubling of a major railway crossing the city, the Turin-Milan railway locally known as ''Passante Ferroviario di Torino'' ("Turin Railway Bypass").
On the northern edge of Via Roma stands ''Piazza Castello'', regarded as the heart of the city.
Between the 1960s and the 1970s, the international centre of Turin (Arte Povera), the presence in the city of artists like Alighiero Boetti, Mario Merz, Giuseppe Penone, Piero Gilardi and Michelangelo Pistoletto.
One of these was Teatro Regio di Torino where Puccini premiered his La Boheme in 1896.
In ''Piazza Castello'' converge some of the main streets of the city centre.
Rain falls mostly during spring and autumn; during the hottest months, otherwise, rains are less frequent but heavier (thunderstorms are frequent).
Artists currently operating in the city include Ugo Nespolo and Carol Rama.
The 1958 building, a  complex, hosts approximately 30,000 students every year and is considered one of the major Institutes of Technology of the country – mainly due to the vocation of the city for the industrialization, pushed by the automotive sector.
Turin also became the capital of the tsar for ''The Demons of St. Petersberg''.
Buildings on the portion between Piazza Carlo Felice and ''Piazza San Carlo'' were designed by rationalist architect Marcello Piacentini.
The section of the street between Piazza San Carlo and Piazza Castello was built in eclectic style, with arcades characterised by Serliana-type arches.
The façade sports the huge coat of arms of the House of Savoy.
Borgo Dora, as many other pockets of Aurora, is characterized by the marked multi-ethnicity of its population, being home to a large community of immigrants from emerging countries.
The city used to be a major European political centre, being Italy's first capital city in 1861 and being home to the House of Savoy, Italy's royal family.
Another building (19th century), now abandoned, is the former Westinghouse factory of train brakes situated in ''Via Borsellino''.
Turin is ranked third in Italy, after Milan and Rome, for economic strength.
It was populated since the medieval era, but becomes bigger during the 19th century, prospering around the canal ''Canale di San Donato'', which does not exist any more, currently replaced by the central street of the district, ''Via San Donato''.
It is possible to access the southern shore of the ''Dora'' river.
Large ''Piazza Statuto'' is another example of Baroque square with arcades.
In 1706, during the Battle of Turin, the French besieged the city for 117 days without conquering it.
Turin reached about 5,000 inhabitants at the time, all living inside the high city walls.
Other large parks are ''Parco della Pellerina'', ''Parco Colletta'', ''Parco Rignon'', ''Parco Colonnetti'' and the University botanical gardens.
This avenue hosts some examples of contemporary art, such as Mario Merz's ''Igloo'' fountain or the Per Kirkeby's ''Opera per Torino'' monument in ''Largo Orbassano''.
In 2009, the city proper had a population of about 910,000, which is a significant increase on the 2001 census figure.
The other major project is the construction of a subway line based on the VAL system, known as Metrotorino.
Works are completed in the western area, where ''Corso Mortara'' has been closed to traffic and moved just a bit northern and covered by an artificial tunnel.
Other significant buildings are the  ''Villa Boringhieri'' in Via San Donato, and other Art Nouveau and Neo-Gothic buildings are situated in ''Via Piffetti ''and ''Via Durandi.''
The area was built between 1903 and 1937 replacing the old parade ground, which was moved in the Southern part of the city.
The International Space Station modules Harmony, Columbus, Tranquility, as well as the Cupola and all MPLMs were produced in Turin.
Turin is well known as the home of the Shroud of Turin, the football teams Juventus F.C.
The median age is 43.7.
The market square also hosts the former washhouse and public baths of the neighbourhood, among the oldest examples of their kind in Turin (1905).
Four major rivers pass through the city: the Po and three of its tributaries, the Dora Riparia (once known as ''Duria Minor'' by the Romans, from the Celtic noun ''duria'' meaning "water"), the Stura di Lanzo and the Sangone.
Industrialization led to consequent population growth in the nearby areas, including ''Cenisia''.
North of this area stands the ''GAM (Galleria d'Arte Moderna)'', one of the two Museum of Modern Arts of the Turin Metro area (the second and largest one is hosted in ''Castello di Rivoli'', a former Savoy Royal castle in the suburbs).
In the centre of the park stands the Castello del Valentino, built in the 17th century.
The city has a rich culture and history, and is known for its numerous art galleries, restaurants, churches, palaces, opera houses, piazzas, parks, gardens, theatres, libraries, museums and other venues.
It is home to what is regarded as one of the largest collections of Egyptian antiquities outside of Egypt.
The future European launcher projects beyond Ariane 5 will also be managed from Turin by the new NGL company, a subsidiary of EADS (70%) and Aircraft Division of Leonardo-Finmeccanica (30%).
Turin had a very important role in Italian literature after World War II.
A literary centre for many centuries, Turin began to attract writers only after the establishment of the court of the Duchy of Savoy.
Another big avenue, which border the district on its East, is ''Corso Principe Oddone'', which in the past was along the railway to Milan.
''Politecnico'' expanded its facilities trough two huge overpass buildings over the avenue, linked to new buildings on the west side.
Via Garibaldi traces the exact path of the Roman city's decumanus which began at the ''Porta Decumani'', later incorporated into the ''Castello'' or ''Palazzo Madama''.
Mainly, in ''San Donato'' the portion reconverted was the one occupied by the plant of Michelin (west of ''Via Livorno'') and FIAT ironwork plants (on the East).
As for the rest of Aurora, the district is crossed by an important thoroughfare named ''Corso Giulio Cesare'', a long boulevard that extends from Porta Palazzo up to Turin-Trieste motorway entrance in the Northern urban fringe of Turin.
After the marriage of Adelaide of Susa with Humbert Biancamano's son Otto, the family of the Counts of Savoy gained control.
One of the main thoroughfares crossing Borgo San Secondo is ''Via Sacchi'', which serves as an ideal gate to the city centre: its Serlian arcades on the west side of the street (the east side is enclosed by ''Porta Nuova'' railway station service buildings) host some significant boutiques and hotels, such as the historic ''Pfatisch'' pastry shop and the ''Turin Palace Hotel'' (totally refurbished and reopened in 2015).
After World War I, harsh conditions brought a wave of strikes and workers' protests.
The building has replaced the ''Clothes Market'', one of the four covered pavilions of Porta Palazzo market, but unfortunately this glass green-shaded building has been highly criticized because of its lack of usability for commercial activities, albeit an example of contemporary architecture.
In the local Piedmontese language has a literary tradition, with names such as Nicoletto da Torino, Ignas Isler, author of epic poems, and Eduard Calv.
A major literary and cultural woman of that time was Olimpia Savio.
The church is hosting the ''Istituto Suore Minime di Nostra Signora del Suffragio'' and it was promoted and designed by Francesco Faà di Bruno.
South of the Park, an interesting architecture of different levels sis hosting a new shopping mall called ''Centro Commerciale Parco Dora''.
Via Roma runs between ''Piazza Carlo Felice'' and ''Piazza Castello'' squares.
West of this area the main building of Polytechnic University of Turin stands along ''Corso Duca Degli Abruzzi''.
In 218 BC, they were attacked by Hannibal as he was allied with their long-standing enemies, the Insubres.
Turin hosted the 2006 Winter Olympics fin February 2006.
The  new and larger passengers building is situated between ''Corso Bolzano'' and ''Corso Inghilterra'' and  is an example of contemporary architecture, being a  and  glass and steel structure.
The remaining part of the district is mainly formed by residential buildings with not significant architectural value.
The city in that period had 250,000 inhabitants.
''San Donato'' district is located between ''Corso Francia'', ''Corso Lecce'', ''Corso Potenza'', ''Via Nole'', the ''Parco Dora'' and ''Corso Principe Oddone''.
Piazza Vittorio features the most fashionable bars and not far from here, along the Po riverfront, the ''Murazzi'' quays used to host several bars and nightclubs open till the morning until a few years ago.
The building's style is quite different from the Baroque style of Piazza Castello.
These avenues feature endless rows of trees which are a symbol of Turin's typical urbanity.
The small building near the church, is what remains of ''Casa Tartaglino'', a small residential building which was also extended and modified by Faa di Bruno.
In 1997 a part of the historical center of Torino was inscribed in the World Heritage List under the name   Residences of the Royal House of Savoy.
The square regularly hosts the main open space events of the city, live concerts included.
The complex of the Residences of the Royal House of Savoy in Turin and in the nearby cities of Rivoli, Moncalieri, Venaria Reale, Agliè, Racconigi, Stupinigi, Pollenzo and Govone was declared a World Heritage Sites by UNESCO in 1997.
In 2006, Turin hosted the Winter Olympic Games.
a bicycle sharing system, the ToBike, is operational.
The population soon reached 1 million in 1960 and peaked at almost 1.2 million in 1971.
Outside the city are: the Basilica of Our Lady, Help of Christians built by St. John Bosco, the Gran Madre built in 1818 on occasion of the return of King Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia and Santa Maria del Monte (1583) on Monte dei Cappuccini.
Around the city, there are several other parks, such as La Mandria Regional Park and the Parco della Palazzina di Caccia di Stupinigi, once hunting grounds of the Savoy, and those situated on the hill of Turin.
In 1230–1235 it was a lordship under the Marquess of Montferrat, styled Lord of Turin.
Another notable example is ''Casa Fenoglio''.
In the following decades, the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia led the struggle towards the unification of Italy.
The ''Porta Palatina'', on the north side of the current city centre, is still preserved in a park near the Cathedral.
Although this activity has increased as a result of the 2006 Winter Olympics, parts of it had long been planned.
Even though much of its political significance and importance had been lost by World War II, it became a major European crossroad for industry, commerce and trade, and currently is one of Italy's main industrial centres, being part of the famous "''industrial triangle''", along with Milan and Genoa.
Emmanuel Philibert, also known under the nickname of ''Iron Head'', made Turin the capital of the Duchy of Savoy in 1563.
The candidature sees the City strongly committed to increasing sports activities.
The company, noted in particular for its historical epics, produced a large number of films until it was dissolved in 1924.
''Corso Ciriè'' will continue in ''Corso Gamba'' and ''Strada del Fortino'' in ''Corso Rosai'').
As such, it forms the birthplace of Italian cinema.
Across from Piazza Carlo Felice stands the monumental façade of Porta Nuova railway station, the central station of the city built between 1861 and 1868 by the architect Alessandro Mazzucchetti.
East of ''Via Livorno'', works are still partially in progress, with the Dora river still to be uncovered by a big slab, on which the FIAT plants where used to stand).
Because of its historic, geographical and cultural proximity to France, Italian filmmakers were naturally influenced by French cinema and the Lumière brothers.
By the time the vanguard of the armoured reconnaissance units of Brazilian Expeditionary Force reached the city, it was already freed by the Italian Partisans, that had begun revolting against the Germans on 25 April 1945.
The street continues in ''Via Cernaia'' up to ''Piazza XXV Dicembre'', which features the former Porta Susa passengers building, relocated in 2012  a little more southward.
In the hills overlooking the city, the Basilica of Superga provides a view of Turin against a backdrop of the snow-capped Alps.
The district features many buildings in Art Nouveau, Art Deco and Neo-Gothic style.
The origins of the shroud and its image are still the subject of intense debate among scientists, theologians, historians and researchers.
Juventus' owned ground, the Juventus Stadium, was inaugurated in 2011.
''stazione della Ciriè-Lanzo''), a former 19th century railway station that marked the terminus of Ciriè-Lanzo railway line until the 1980s.
Among them, one of the most impressive and well-known is the ''Casa Della Vittoria'' (architect ''Gottardo Gussoni'').
Superga can be reached by means of the Superga Rack Railway from Sassi suburb.
The area north of the river features a mix of old residential buildings and remains of former factories and facilities from the 20th century.
Nowadays it houses the National Museum of Cinema and it is believed to be the tallest museum in the world at .
Turin's several monuments and sights make it one of the world's top 250 tourist destinations, and the tenth most visited city in Italy in 2008.
In particular, Via Lagrange has recently increased the presence of luxury boutiques.
Furthermore, an alleged ''Linea 2'' is in the pipeline and it is supposed to cross Turin from North to South.
Another established university in the city is the Polytechnic University of Turin, that ranks among Top 50 universities in the world and #1 in Italy ("Academic Ranking of World Universities" published by the Institute of Higher Education of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, in engineering, technology and computer science fields).
Other important stations are Stura, Rebaudengo, Lingotto and Madonna di Campagna railway stations, though not all of them belong to the layout of the Spina Centrale.
The present church, erected in 1610 to replace the original chapel which stood on the spot, is the work of Ascanio Vitozzi.
Unfortunately, the old rails crossing the district are totally disused and neglected, adding decay to the whole area.
The building is representing the ''post-rationalism Italian architecture'' (same style of the better known Torre Velasca tower in the city of Milan).
At the end of the 13th century, when it was annexed to the Duchy of Savoy, the city already had 20,000 inhabitants.
The circular copper-domed neoclassical monument, surmounted by a Latin cross and surrounded by a large park, was designed by Angelo Dimezzi and completed in 1888.
South of the Quadrilatero Romano stands ''Via Garibaldi'', another popular street of the city.
On the other hand, Benito Mussolini largely subsidised the automotive industry, to provide vehicles to the army.
The business school ESCP Europe, ranked among the 10 best business schools in Europe, also has a campus in Turin.
This castle has a horseshoe shape, with four round towers at each angle, and a wide inner court with a marble pavement.
Northern part of the district was part of the former industrial district of Turin, recently reconverted to a park called ''Parco Dora''.
This result is due to a growing immigration from Southern Italy and abroad.
In 2006 it received more than 500,000 visitors.
An example are the remains of FIAT ''Officine Grandi Motori'' (''OGM'') in Corso Vigevano, an old factory that produced big industrial and automotive Diesel engines, a sort of symbol of the industrial history of Turin.
South of ''Centro'' stands the ''Crocetta'' district, considered one of the most exclusive districts of the city, because of high rated residential buildings.
Going further southwards, it is possible to appreciate an interesting residential cluster of old public housing gravitating around ''Via Arquata''.
''Borgo Rossini'' hosts a number of businesses, for instance the ''Robe di Kappa'' flagship store (Kappa is a noted Italian sportswear brand founded in Turin) and the ''Cineporto'' ("Cineport") a.k.a.
Some of the work sites deal with general roadworks to improve traffic flow, such as underpasses and flyovers, but two projects are of major importance and will radically change the shape of the city.
Parallel to Via Roma, other two popular pedestrian streets, namely ''Via Lagrange'' and ''Via Carlo Alberto'', cross the old town from Via Po to ''Corso Vittorio Emanuele II''.
Like many Northern Italian cities, there is a large proportion of pensioners in comparison to youth.
In the 1st century BC, probably 28 BC, the Romans created a military camp (''Castra Taurinorum''), later dedicated to Augustus (''Augusta Taurinorum'').
Via Po ends in ''Piazza Vittorio Veneto'' (simply called ''Piazza Vittorio'' locally), the largest Baroque square in Europe and today heart of Turin nightlife.
Days later, troops from the US Army's 1st Armored and 92nd Infantry Divisions came to substitute the Brazilians.
Another main street of downtown is ''Via Pietro Micca'', which starts in Piazza Castello and ends in the large ''Piazza Solferino''.
The hub of the Quadrilatero is ''Piazza Emanuele Filiberto''.
Another  cluster of buildings in the park is the ''Borgo Medievale'' (Medieval village), a replica of medieval mountain castles of Piedmont and Aosta Valley, built for the 1884 International Exhibition.
Differently for other portions of ''Parco Dora'', this part has been totally reconverted to park without letting any evidence of the industrial area except for the cooling tower which stands along ''Corso Umbria'' and became a symbol of the park.
The first leg of the subway system linked the nearby town of Collegno with Porta Susa in Turin's city centre.
Another disused facility is ''Astanteria Martini'' ("Martini Emergency Department") in Via Cigna, a former emergency department from the 1920s which has been lying vacant since long.
Nonetheless, it is a symbol of religious devotion and is one of the city's main symbols and tourist attractions.
The Juventus Stadium hosted the 2014 UEFA Europa League Final.
One of the most famous writers of the 17th century was Giambattista Marino, which in 1608 moved to the court of Charles Emmanuel I. Marino suffered an assassination attempt by a rival, Gaspare Murtola, and was later imprisoned for a year because of gossip that he had said and written against the duke.
Designed by the architect Gino Zucchi, this project is still a work in progress but excavations in the area revealed the remains of a medieval cemetery and an early Christian basilica; these findings will be preserved and will be shown to the public.
The huge avenue, made up of ''Corso Mediterraneo'' and ''Corso Castelfidardo'', is part of ''Spina Centrale'' boulevard and was recently built over the old railway (now undergrounded): as a result, the avenue is very large (up to ) and modern, having been rebuilt with valuable materials, including a characteristic lighting system supported by white high poles.
In 1920 the Lingotto Fiat factory was occupied.
Examples include Giovanni Pastrone ''Cabiria'', in 1914, one of the first blockbusters in history.
Another  building is the largest synagogue of the city, located in ''Piazzetta Primo Levi'' square.
The Allied's campaign in Italy started off from the South and slowly moved northwards in the following two years, leaving the northern regions occupied by Germans and collaborationist forces for about a couple of years.
The exceptional growth gains of the city gained it the nickname of ''the Automobile Capital of Italy'' and ''the Detroit of Italy'' (Turin has been "twinned" with Detroit since 1998).
During the 1920s and 30s, Turin hosted a number of film productions and major film studios (''film houses''), such as the Itala film, Aquila and Fert Studios.
Albeit not a road, the Dora river is also a significant element for the whole district, since it completely crosses it from West to East.
The Basilica of Superga was built by Amadeus II of Savoy as an ex voto for the liberation of Turin (1706), and served  as a royal mausoleum since 1772.
A new extension of the so-called ''Linea 1'' ("Line 1") is expected in the near future, reaching both Rivoli (up to Cascine Vica hamlet) in the Western belt of Turin and ''Piazza Bengasi'' in the Southeast side of the city.
The two clubs contest the oldest derby in Italy, the ''Derby della Mole'' or the Turin derby.
Around 18 per cent of the population is under 20 years of age, while 22 per cent is over 65.
West of ''Via Livorno'', the ''Environment Park'' is a research centre for renewable energy.
For the occasion the plan for the new lighting of the park, along with its fountains and paths, was assigned to Guido Chiarelli, the head engineer at the city hall.
