Executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers which make up the government, while the legislative power is vested in the unicameral parliament, the Grand National Assembly of Turkey.
Turkish shipyards are highly regarded both for the production of chemical and oil tankers up to 10,000 dwt and also for their mega yachts.
Since its foundation as a republic in 1923, Turkey has developed a strong tradition of secularism.
In September 2013, Turkey became a member of the Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD).
The largest city in Turkey, Istanbul, is also the largest city in Europe in population, and the third-largest city in Europe in terms of size.
The Turkish government has refused to acknowledge the events as genocide and claims that Armenians were only relocated from the eastern war zone.
Asian Turkey, which includes 97 percent of the country, is separated from European Turkey by the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardanelles.
The settlement of Troy started in the Neolithic Age and continued into the Iron Age.
Ankara, the capital of Turkey, is renowned for the Angora cat, Angora rabbit and Angora goat.
Following the war, the conglomeration of territories and peoples that formerly comprised the Ottoman Empire was divided by the victorious Allied powers into several new states.
By the end of the 16th century, the Ottoman court housed over 1,400 live-in cooks and passed laws regulating the freshness of food.
At sea, the Ottoman Navy contended with several Holy Leagues, such as those in 1538, 1571, 1684 and 1717 (composed primarily of Habsburg Spain, the Republic of Genoa, the Republic of Venice, the Knights of St. John, the Papal States, the Grand Duchy of Tuscany and the Duchy of Savoy), for the control of the Mediterranean Sea.
In 2012, Fitch Group upgraded Turkey's credit rating to investment grade after an 18-year gap; this was followed by a ratings upgrade by Moody's in May 2013, as the service lifted Turkey's government bond ratings to the lowest investment grade Baa3.
The first recorded use of the term "Türk" or "Türük" as an autonym is contained in the Old Turkic inscriptions of the Göktürks (''Celestial Turks'') of Central Asia (c. 8th century).
In the mid 14th century the Ottomans started uniting Anatolia and created an empire encompassing much of Southeastern Europe, Western Asia and North Africa, becoming a major power in Eurasia and Africa during the early modern period.
hovering around 50% and to expand access to adequate sanitation in
The Seljuk Turks began migrating into the area in the 11th century, starting the process of Turkification, which was accelerated by the Seljuk victory over the Byzantines at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071.
Turkey also contains the Sea of Marmara in the northwest.
New undersea pipeline, with an annual capacity around 63 billion cubic metres (bcm), will allow Turkey to resell Russian gas to Europe.
Following the Armistice of Mudros on 30 October 1918, the victorious Allied Powers sought to partition the Ottoman state through the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres.
The Young Turk Revolution in 1908 restored the Ottoman constitution and parliament 30 years after their suspension by Sultan Abdülhamid II in 1878, but the 1913 Ottoman coup d'état effectively put the country under the control of the Three Pashas.
The Portuguese presence in the Indian Ocean was perceived as a threat for the Ottoman monopoly over the ancient trading routes between East Asia and Western Europe (later collectively named the Silk Road).
As a result, an estimated 800,000 to 1,500,000 Armenians were killed.
TAEK is the official nuclear energy institution of Turkey.
Turkey's human rights record continues to be a significant obstacle to future membership of the EU.
In 2009, after only four years in circulation, the ''Turkish new lira'' was renamed back to the Turkish lira with the introduction of new banknotes and coins (and the withdrawal of the ''Turkish new lira'' banknotes and coins that were introduced in 2005), but the ISO 4217 code of the ''Turkish new lira'' (TRY) remains in use for the current ''Turkish lira'' in the foreign exchange market.
Galatasaray won the 2015–16 Eurocup, while in the same season, Fenerbahçe finished second in the 2015–16 Euroleague.
Every fit male Turkish citizen otherwise not barred is required to serve in the military for a period ranging from three weeks to a year, dependent on education and job location.
In Northwest Turkey, the most significant tribal group in Thrace was the Odyrisians, founded by Teres I.
Turkey is divided into seven geographical regions: Marmara, Aegean, Black Sea, Central Anatolia, Eastern Anatolia, Southeastern Anatolia and the Mediterranean.
Turkey maintains 36,000 troops in Northern Cyprus, though their presence is controversial, and assists Iraqi Kurdistan with security.
In 1243, the Seljuk armies were defeated by the Mongols, causing the Seljuk Empire's power to slowly disintegrate.
Winters on the eastern part of the plateau are especially severe.
Minorities other than the three officially recognized ones do not have any minority rights.
Other issues, such as Kurdish rights, women's rights, LGBT rights, and press freedom, have also attracted controversy.
Although minorities are not recognised, state-run Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) broadcasts television and radio programs in minority languages.
The Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) is the government body overseeing the broadcast media.
According to the 2011 estimate, the population is increasing by 1.35 percent each year.
The region is home to Eurasian wildlife such as the Eurasian sparrowhawk, golden eagle, eastern imperial eagle, lesser spotted eagle, Caucasian black grouse, red-fronted serin, and wallcreeper.
Basic education in Turkey is considered to lag behind other OECD countries, with significant differences between high and low performers.
of Turkey and cost recovery has been increased, thus providing the
Other notable Turkish scientists include physician Hulusi Behçet who discovered Behçet's disease, and mathematician Cahit Arf  who defined the Arf invariant.
The Ottoman wars with Persia continued as the Zand, Afsharid, and Qajar dynasties succeeded the Safavids in Iran, until the first half of the 19th century.
The Eurasian lynx and the European wildcat are other felid species which are currently found in the forests of Turkey.
Turkey has a unitary structure in terms of administration and this aspect is one of the most important factors shaping the Turkish public administration.
Since the liberalization of the Turkish economy during the 1980s, the country has enjoyed stronger economic growth and greater political stability.
Turkey's location between Europe and Asia has retained its geopolitical and strategic importance throughout history.
The EU – Turkey Customs Union in 1995 led to an extensive liberalization of tariff rates, and forms one of the most important pillars of Turkey's foreign trade policy.
Turkey has a very diverse culture that is a blend of various elements of the Oğuz Turkic, Anatolian, Ottoman (which was itself a continuation of both Greco-Roman and Islamic cultures) and Western culture and traditions, which started with the Westernisation of the Ottoman Empire and still continues today.
Turkey has gradually opened up its markets through economic reforms by reducing government controls on foreign trade and investment and the privatization of publicly owned industries, and the liberalization of many sectors to private and foreign participation has continued amid political debate.
Turkey's extraordinary ecosystem and habitat diversity has produced considerable species diversity.
Temperatures of  can occur in eastern Anatolia.
Water supply and sanitation in Turkey is characterized by achievements and challenges.
Hundreds of television channels, thousands of local and national radio stations, several dozen newspapers, a productive and profitable national cinema and a rapid growth of broadband internet use all make up a very vibrant media industry in Turkey.
Subsequently, a competition started between the Ottoman and Portuguese empires to become the dominant sea power in the Indian Ocean, with a number of naval battles in the Red Sea, the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf.
, Istanbul Atatürk Airport is the 11th busiest airport in the world, serving 31,833,324 passengers between January and July 2014, according to Airports Council International.
Starting around 1200 BC, the coast of Anatolia was heavily settled by Aeolian and Ionian Greeks.
11.97 percent of the population speaks the Kurmanji dialect of Kurdish as mother tongue.
Fenerbahçe won the 2010 FIVB Women's Club World Championship and the 2012 CEV Women's Champions League.
Its objectives include academic research in nuclear energy, and the development and implementation of peaceful nuclear tools.
Turkish shipbuilding exports were worth US$1.2 billion in 2011.
Turkish television dramas are increasingly becoming popular beyond Turkey's borders and are among the country's most vital exports, both in terms of profit and public relations.
Turkey is a transcontinental Eurasian country.
Another national cat breed of Turkey is the Van cat.
The Bosphorus Bridge (1973), Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge (1988) and Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge (2016) are the three suspension bridges connecting the European and Asian shores of the Bosphorus strait.
Turkey has a 'Not Free' rating by Freedom House.
However, in the period between the 1920s and 1950s, a new generation of Turkish entrepreneurs such as Nuri Demirağ, Vehbi Koç, Hacı Ömer Sabancı and Nejat Eczacıbaşı began to establish privately owned factories, some of which evolved into the largest industrial conglomerates that dominate the Turkish economy today, such as Koç Holding, Sabancı Holding and Eczacıbaşı Holding.
The independence of the Turkic states of the Soviet Union in 1991, with which Turkey shares a common cultural and linguistic heritage, allowed Turkey to extend its economic and political relations deep into Central Asia, thus enabling the completion of a multi-billion-dollar oil and natural gas pipeline from Baku in Azerbaijan to the port of Ceyhan in Turkey.
The movement was also labelled ''Turkish Neoclassical'' or the ''National Architectural Renaissance''.
The Chief of the General Staff is appointed by the President and is responsible to the Prime Minister.
The eastern part of that coast averages  annually which is the highest precipitation in the country.
Anatolia is the homeland of many plants that have been cultivated for food since the advent of agriculture, and the wild ancestors of many plants that now provide staples for humankind still grow in Turkey.
A large number of journalists have been arrested using charges of "terrorism" and "anti-state activities" such as the Ergenekon and Balyoz cases, while thousands have been investigated on charges such as "denigrating Turkishness" or "insulting Islam" in an effort to sow self-censorship.
The first radical step of innovation in 20th century Turkish poetry was taken by Nâzım Hikmet, who introduced the free verse style.
The First National Architectural Movement (''Birinci Ulusal Mimarlık Akımı'') in the early 20th century sought to create a new architecture, which was based on motifs from Seljuk and Ottoman architecture.
There are 40 national parks, 189 nature parks, 31 nature preserve areas, 80 wildlife protection areas and 109 nature monuments in Turkey such as Gallipoli Peninsula Historical National Park, Mount Nemrut National Park, Ancient Troya National Park, Ölüdeniz Nature Park and Polonezköy Nature Park.
During the first six decades of the republic, between 1923 and 1983, Turkey generally adhered to a quasi-statist approach with strict government planning of the budget and government-imposed limitations over foreign trade, flow of foreign currency, foreign direct investment and private sector participation in certain fields (such as broadcasting, telecommunications, energy, mining, etc.).
Turkey is a unitary not a federal system, and the provinces are subordinated to the centre.
Following a decade of Cypriot intercommunal violence and the coup in Cyprus on 15 July 1974 staged by the EOKA B paramilitary organization, which overthrew President Makarios and installed the pro-Enosis (union with Greece) Nikos Sampson as dictator, Turkey invaded Cyprus on 20 July 1974.
The reforms, combined with unprecedented amounts of funding from foreign loans, spurred rapid economic growth; but this growth was punctuated by sharp recessions and financial crises in 1994, 1999 (following the earthquake of that year), and 2001; resulting in an average of 4 percent GDP growth per annum between 1981 and 2003.
Southeastern Turkey is located within the northern plains of Upper Mesopotamia.
Starting from 714&nbsp;BC, Urartu shared the same fate and dissolved in 590 BC, when it was conquered by the Medes.
Other important movements in Turkish painting were the "Yeniler Grubu" (The Newcomers Group) of the late 1930s; the "On'lar Grubu" (Group of Ten) of the 1940s; the "Yeni Dal Grubu" (New Branch Group) of the 1950s; and the "Siyah Kalem Grubu" (Black Pen Group) of the 1960s.
In line with this principle, judicial power is exercised by independent courts on behalf of the Turkish nation.
According to Article 142 of the Turkish Constitution, the organization, duties and jurisdiction of the courts, their functions and the trial procedures are regulated by law.
Turkey's constitution governs the legal framework of the country.
In 1514, Sultan Selim I (1512–1520) successfully expanded the empire's southern and eastern borders by defeating Shah Ismail I of the Safavid dynasty in the Battle of Chaldiran.
Turkish Statistical Institute announced that 76.3 billion TL was spent for healthcare in 2012; 79.6 percent of which was covered by the Social Security Institution and 15.4 percent of which was paid directly by the patients.
The majority of the audiences are shared among public broadcaster TRT and the network-style channels such as Kanal D, Show TV, ATV and Star TV.
This important monopoly was increasingly compromised following the discovery of a sea route around Africa by Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias in 1488, which had a considerable impact on the Ottoman economy.
to foreign countries (mostly in Europe and the Americas) that actually began in the late 19th century and gained pace in the first quarter of the 20th century, especially during World War I and after the Turkish War of Independence.
In 2013, widespread protests erupted in many Turkish provinces, sparked by a plan to demolish Gezi Park but growing into general anti-government dissent.
Other ethnic groups include legally recognized (Armenians, Greeks, Jews) and unrecognized (Kurds, Circassians, Arabs, Albanians, Bosniaks, Georgians, etc.)
The president is elected for a five-year term by direct elections and Tayyip Erdoğan is the first president elected by direct voting.
Turkish literature was heavily influenced by Persian and Arabic literature during most of the Ottoman era.
The three "Non-Muslim" minority groups claimed to be officially recognized in the Treaty of Lausanne are Armenians, Greeks and Jews.
The single-party period ended in 1945.
The Bosphorus and the Dardanelles owe their existence to the fault lines running through Turkey that led to the creation of the Black Sea.
The Final of the 2013–14 EuroLeague Women basketball championship was played between two Turkish teams, Galatasaray and Fenerbahçe, and won by Galatasaray.
According to figures released by the Justice Ministry, there are 100,000 people in Turkish prisons as of November 2008, a doubling since 2000.
The Administrative Law bears similarities with its French counterpart, and the Penal Code with its Italian counterpart.
Turkey hosts two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World: the Mausoleum in Halicarnassus and the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus.
Between the 18th and the early 20th centuries, the Ottoman, Persian and Russian empires were neighbouring rivals of each other.
The transition from Seljuk architecture to Ottoman architecture is most visible in Bursa, which was the capital of the Ottoman State between 1335 and 1413.
Turkey is a parliamentary representative democracy.
Supporters of Atatürk's reforms are called Kemalists, as distinguished from Islamists, representing two extremes on a continuum of beliefs about the proper role of religion in public life.
Peace talks were launched in 2012, but hostilities restarted in 2015 following the Suruc bombing.
The earliest recorded inhabitants of Anatolia were the Hattians and Hurrians, non-Indo-European peoples who inhabited central and eastern Anatolia, respectively, as early as ca.
Turkey is a secular state with no official state religion; the Turkish Constitution provides for freedom of religion and conscience.
There are about 26,000 people who are Jewish, the vast majority of whom are Sephardi.
Universal suffrage for both sexes has been applied throughout Turkey since 1933, and every Turkish citizen who has turned 18 years of age has the right to vote.
The young Turkish artists sent to Europe in 1926 came back inspired by contemporary trends such as Fauvism, Cubism and even Expressionism, still very influential in Europe.
Turkey was a member of the United Nations Security Council in 1951–1952, 1954–1955, 1961 and 2009–2010.
Opened in 2013, the Marmaray tunnel under the Bosphorus connects the railway and metro lines of Istanbul's European and Asian sides; while the nearby Eurasia Tunnel will provide an undersea road connection for motor vehicles.
The diversity of Turkey's fauna is even greater than that of its flora.
The country is encircled by seas on three sides: the Aegean Sea to the west, the Black Sea to the north and the Mediterranean to the south.
Eastern Turkey, located within the western plateau of the Armenian Highlands, has a more mountainous landscape and is home to the sources of rivers such as the Euphrates, Tigris and Aras, and contains Mount Ararat, Turkey's highest point at , and Lake Van, the largest lake in the country.
Turkey is also subdivided into 7 regions and 21 subregions for geographic, demographic and economic purposes; this does not refer to an administrative division.
It sets out the main principles of government and establishes Turkey as a unitary centralized state.
Turkish brands like Beko and Vestel are among the largest producers of consumer electronics and home appliances in Europe, and invest a substantial amount of funds for research and development in new technologies related to these fields.
The other defining aspect of Turkey's foreign policy was the country's long-standing strategic alliance with the United States.
Since the 1980s, a rise in income inequality and class distinction has given rise to Islamic populism, a movement that in theory supports obligation to authority, communal solidarity and social justice, though what that entails in practice is often contested.
The Osman Gazi Bridge (2016) connects the northern and southern shores of the Gulf of İzmit.
Most of the roots of modern Turkish literature were formed between the years 1896 and 1923.
Other key sectors of the Turkish economy are banking, construction, home appliances, electronics, textiles, oil refining, petrochemical products, food, mining, iron and steel, and machine industry.
Local administrations were established to provide services in place and the government is represented by the governors and city governors.
A former U.S. State Department spokesman, Philip J. Crowley, said that the United States had "broad concerns about trends involving intimidation of journalists in Turkey."
The Blue Stream, a major trans-Black Sea gas pipeline, delivers natural gas from Russia to Turkey.
Lack of additional fiscal reforms, combined with large and growing public sector deficits and widespread corruption, resulted in high inflation, a weak banking sector and increased macroeconomic volatility.
On 26 June 1945, Turkey became a charter member of the United Nations.
which was common in many cities, has become less frequent.
In 2008,  of natural gas pipelines and  of petroleum pipelines spanned the country's territory.
Despite emigration during the 20th century, modern-day Turkey continues to have a small Jewish population.
The coastal areas bordering the Sea of Marmara, which connects the Aegean Sea and the Black Sea, have a transitional climate between a temperate Mediterranean climate and a temperate oceanic climate with warm to hot, moderately dry summers and cool to cold, wet winters.
Mountains close to the coast prevent Mediterranean influences from extending inland, giving the central Anatolian plateau of the interior of Turkey a continental climate with sharply contrasting seasons.
In 2013 there were 98 airports in Turkey, including 22 international airports.
Suspended by Sultan Abdülhamid II in 1878, the Ottoman constitution and parliament were restored with the Young Turk Revolution in 1908.
In 2015, Aziz Sancar, a Turkish professor at the University of North Carolina, won the Nobel Chemistry Prize along with Tomas Lindahl and Paul Modrich, for their work on how cells repair damaged DNA.
After participating with the United Nations forces in the Korean War, Turkey joined NATO in 1952, becoming a bulwark against Soviet expansion into the Mediterranean.
Arabic and Zaza are the mother tongues of 2.39 percent of the population, and several other languages are the mother tongues of smaller parts of the population.
The total length of the rail network was 10,991&nbsp;km in 2008, including  of electrified and  of high-speed track.
Also, some minority language classes can be chosen in elementary schools.
Göbekli Tepe is the site of the oldest known man-made religious structure, a temple dating to 10,000 BC, while Çatalhöyük is a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic settlement in southern Anatolia, which existed from approximately 7500 BC to 5700 BC.
The percentage of non-Muslims in Turkey fell from 19 percent in 1914 to 2.5 percent in 1927, due to events which had a significant impact on the country's demographic structure, such as the Armenian Genocide, the population exchange between Greece and Turkey, and the emigration of non-Muslims (such as Levantines, Greeks, Armenians, Jews, etc.)
Between 1998 and 2008 the European Court of Human Rights made more than 1,600 judgements against Turkey for human rights violations, particularly regarding the right to life, and freedom from torture.
The Greco-Persian Wars started when the Greek city states on the coast of Anatolia rebelled against Persian rule in 499 BC.
The decline of the Ottoman Empire led to a rise in nationalist sentiment among the various subject peoples, leading to increased ethnic tensions which occasionally burst into violence, such as the Hamidian massacres of Armenians.
The Aegean Sea is to the west, the Black Sea to the north, and the Mediterranean Sea to the south.
The uneven north Anatolian terrain running along the Black Sea resembles a long, narrow belt.
Since the fall of the empire in World War I (1914–1918) and the establishment of the Turkish Republic in 1923, foreign food such as French hollandaise sauce and western fast food have made their way into the modern Turkish diet.
In the early years of the 21st century, the chronically high inflation was brought under control; this led to the launch of a new currency, the Turkish new lira (''Yeni Türk Lirası'') in 2005, to cement the acquisition of the economic reforms and erase the vestiges of an unstable economy.
Following the death of Theodosius I in 395 and the permanent division of the Roman Empire between his two sons, the city, which would popularly come to be known as Constantinople, became the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire.
In the east, the Ottomans were often at war with Safavid Persia over conflicts stemming from territorial disputes or religious differences between the 16th and 18th centuries.
Turkey is one of five NATO member states which are part of the nuclear sharing policy of the alliance, together with Belgium, Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands.
Turkey has been inhabited since the Paleolithic by various ancient Anatolian civilizations, as well as Assyrians, Greeks, Thracians, Phrygians, Urartians and Armenians.
Remaining challenges include the need to further increase wastewater treatment, to reduce the high level of non-revenue water
Turkey has an average population density of 97 people per km².
Annual precipitation averages about 400 millimetres (15&nbsp;in), with actual amounts determined by elevation.
, Turkey doesn't have an ambassador in Syria and Egypt.
Currently there are 236 churches open for worship in Turkey.
The slow transition from a predominantly Christian and Greek-speaking Anatolia to a predominantly Muslim and Turkish-speaking one was underway.
In line with the aforementioned article of the Turkish Constitution and related laws, the court system in Turkey can be classified under three main categories; which are the Judicial Courts, Administrative Courts and Military Courts.
Each category includes first instance courts and high courts.
It was followed by a tumultuous transition to multiparty democracy over the next few decades, which was interrupted by military coups d'état in 1960, 1971, and 1980, as well as a military memorandum in 1997.
Following the Arab Spring in December 2010, the choices made by the AKP government for supporting certain political opposition groups in the affected countries have led to tensions with some Arab states, such as Turkey's neighbour Syria since the start of the Syrian civil war, and Egypt after the ousting of President Mohamed Morsi.
Turkish cuisine was well established by the mid-1400s, the beginning of the Ottoman Empire's six hundred-year reign.
Between 78.1% and 81.3% of the country's citizens identify themselves as ethnic Turks.
For instance, the Turkish Civil Law has been modified by incorporating elements mainly of the Swiss Civil Code, the Code of Obligations and the German Commercial Code.
By 18 September 1922 the occupying armies were expelled, and the Ankara-based Turkish regime, which had declared itself the legitimate government of the country on 23 April 1920, started to formalize the legal transition from the old Ottoman into the new Republican political system.
Freedom House lists Turkey's media as "partly free".
Edirne has hosted the annual Kırkpınar oiled wrestling tournament since 1361. International wrestling styles governed by FILA such as Freestyle wrestling and Greco-Roman wrestling are also popular, with many European, World and Olympic championship titles won by Turkish wrestlers both individually and as a national team.
The Turkish national football team finished 3rd and won the bronze medal at the 2002 FIFA World Cup and at the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup; while also reaching the semi-finals (finishing 3rd by goals difference) at the UEFA Euro 2008.
Both countries were included in the Marshall Plan and OEEC for rebuilding European economies in 1948, and subsequently became founding members of the OECD in 1961.
Mustafa Kemal became the republic's first President and subsequently introduced many radical reforms with the aim of transforming the old religion-based and multi-communal Ottoman state system (constitutional monarchy) into an essentially Turkish nation state (parliamentary republic) with a secular constitution.
The major export markets are Malta, Marshall Islands, Panama and the United Kingdom.
The Tanzimat reforms introduced previously unknown Western genres, primarily the novel and the short story.
The first state that was called Armenia by neighbouring peoples was the state of the Armenian Orontid dynasty, which included parts of eastern Turkey beginning in the 6th century BC.
All of modern-day Turkey was conquered by the Persian Achaemenid Empire during the 6th century BC.
The Turkish women's national volleyball team won the silver medal at the 2003 European Championship, the bronze medal at the 2011 European Championship, and the bronze medal at the 2012 FIVB World Grand Prix.
Various ancient Anatolian populations have lived in Anatolia, from at least the Neolithic period until the Hellenistic period.
The Anatolian peninsula, comprising most of modern Turkey, is one of the oldest permanently settled regions in the world.
Turkish Airlines, flag carrier of Turkey since 1933, was selected by Skytrax as Europe's best airline for five consecutive years in 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.
The empire was often at odds with the Holy Roman Empire in its steady advance towards Central Europe through the Balkans and the southern part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
This made sultans Mehmed V and Mehmed VI largely symbolic figureheads with no real political power.
Turkey has 13 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, such as the "Historic Areas of Istanbul", the "Rock Sites of Cappadocia", the "Neolithic Site of Çatalhöyük", "Hattusa: the Hittite Capital", the "Archaeological Site of Troy", "Pergamon and its Multi-Layered Cultural Landscape", "Hierapolis – Pamukkale", and "Mount Nemrut"; and 51 World Heritage Sites in tentative list, such as the archaeological sites or historic urban centers of Göbekli Tepe, Gordion, Ephesus, Aphrodisias, Perga, Lycia, Sagalassos, Aizanoi, Zeugma, Ani, Harran, Mardin, Konya and Alanya.
The North Anatolian Fault Line runs across the north of the country from west to east, along which major earthquakes took place in history.
sector, especially in wastewater treatment, is estimated to be in the
This indicates that 5% of the population are agnostic with another 1% being explicitly atheist.
In fact, given the antiquity of the Indo-European Hittite and Luwian languages, some scholars have proposed Anatolia as the hypothetical center from which the Indo-European languages radiated.
Turkey has adopted the principle of the separation of powers.
The Kurdish-Turkish conflict to date has claimed over 40,000 lives.
Diplomatic relations with Israel were also severed after the Gaza flotilla raid in 2010, but were normalized following a deal in June 2016.
Interaction between the Ottoman Empire and the Islamic world along with Europe contributed to a blend of Turkic, Islamic and European traditions in modern-day Turkish music and literary arts.
The Persian (Caucasian) leopard is still found in very small numbers in the northeastern and southeastern regions of Turkey.
Minorities besides the Kurds are thought to make up an estimated 7–12 percent of the population.
It lies between latitudes 35° and 43° N, and longitudes 25° and 45° E. Turkey's land area, including lakes, occupies , of which  are in Southwest Asia and  in Europe.
In the west, winter temperatures average below 1&nbsp;°C (34&nbsp;°F).
The Wealth Tax on non-Muslims in 1942, the emigration of a portion of Turkish Jews to Israel after 1948, and the ongoing Cyprus dispute which damaged the relations between Turks and Greeks (culminating in the Istanbul pogrom of 6–7 September 1955) were other important events that contributed to the decline of Turkey's non-Muslim population.
The public debt-to-GDP ratio peaked at 75.9 percent during the recession of 2001, falling to an estimated 26.9 percent by 2013.
Turkey does not recognise conscientious objection and does not offer a civilian alternative to military service.
