Most islands have their own ''fusi'', community owned shops similar to convenience stores, where canned foods and bags of rice can be purchased.
As a result of historical sea level rise, the king tide events lead to flooding of low-lying areas, which is compounded when sea levels are further raised by La Niña effects or local storms and waves.
The Tuvaluan Order 1975, which took effect on 1 October 1975, recognised Tuvalu as a separate British dependency with its own government.
SOPAC ranks the country as extremely vulnerable using the Environmental Vulnerability Index.
The project was carried out in 2015 with 365,000 sqm of sand being dredged from the lagoon to fill the holes and improve living conditions on the island.
The CTCs offer training in basic carpentry, gardening and farming, sewing and cooking.
Banking services are provided by the National Bank of Tuvalu.
There are no formal political parties and election campaigns are largely based on personal/family ties and reputations.
(He also won bronze in the clean and jerk, and obtained the silver medal overall for the combined event.)
Community Training Centres (CTCs) have been established within the primary schools on each atoll.
Traditional sports in the late 19th century were foot racing, lance throwing, quarterstaff fencing and wrestling, although the Christian missionaries disapproved of these activities.
Rainwater harvesting is the principal source of freshwater in Tuvalu.
The Tuvaluan Employment Ordinance of 1966 sets the minimum age for paid employment at 14 years and prohibits children under the age of 15 from performing hazardous work.
Under the Majuro Declaration, which was signed on 5 September 2013, Tuvalu has commitment to implement power generation of 100% renewable energy (between 2013 and 2020), which is proposed to be implemented using Solar PV (95% of demand) and biodiesel (5% of demand).
The Tuvaluan medical staff at PMH in 2011 comprised the Director of Health & Surgeon, the Chief Medical Officer Public Health, an anaesthetist, a paediatric medical officer and an obstetrics and gynaecology medical officer.
From the Court of Appeal there is a right of appeal to Her Majesty in Council, i.e., the Privy Council in London.
In 2013 Tuvalu deferred its graduation from least developed country (LDC) status to a developing country to 2015.
The eastern shoreline of Funafuti Lagoon was modified during World War II when the airfield (what is now Funafuti International Airport) was constructed.
John (also known as Jack) O'Brien was the first European to settle in Tuvalu, he became a trader on Funafuti in the 1850s.
El Niño effects increase the chances of tropical storms and cyclones, while La Niña effects increase the chances of drought.
The CTCs provide vocational training to students who do not progress beyond Class 8 because they failed the entry qualifications for secondary education.
Tuvalu experiences the effects of El Niño and La Niña caused by changes in ocean temperatures in the equatorial and central Pacific.
The value of the Tuvalu Trust Fund is approximately $100 million.
Tuvalu also generates income from stamps by the Tuvalu Philatelic Bureau and income from the Tuvalu Ship Registry.
Ecotourism is a motivation of travellers to Tuvalu.
In 1892 Captain Davis of the  reported on trading activities and traders on each of the islands visited.
This program is required for tertiary education programmes outside of Tuvalu and is available at the University of the South Pacific (USP) Extension Centre in Funafuti.
It is most closely related to the languages spoken on the Polynesian outliers in Micronesia and northern and central Melanesia.
During this time, the greatest number of palagi traders lived on the atolls, acting as agents for the trading companies.
Composting toilets reduce water use by up to 30%.
Each family has its own task, or ''salanga'', to perform for the community, such as fishing, house building or defence.
Some islands would have competing traders while dryer islands might only have a single trader.
Education in Tuvalu is free and compulsory between the ages of 6 and 15 years.
As a consequence of the referendum, separation occurred in two stages.
Keith S. Chambers and Doug Munro (1980) identified Niutao as the island that Francisco Mourelle de la Rúa sailed past on 5 May 1781, thus solving what Europeans had called ''The Mystery of Gran Cocal''.
Approximately 15% of adult males work as seamen on foreign-flagged merchant ships.
The Tuvalu Overseas Seamen's Union (TOSU) is the only registered trade union in Tuvalu.
Tuvalu is working with the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) to implement composting toilets and to improve the treatment of sewage sludge from septic tanks on Fongafale as septic tanks are leaking into the freshwater lens in the sub-surface of the atoll as well as the ocean and lagoon.
In 2013 Enele Sopoaga, the prime minister of Tuvalu, said that relocating Tuvaluans to avoid the impact of sea level rise "should never be an option because it is self defeating in itself.
The United Nations designates Tuvalu as a least developed country (LDC) because of its limited potential for economic development, absence of exploitable resources and its small size and vulnerability to external economic and environmental shocks.
The women of Tuvalu  use cowrie and other shells in traditional handicrafts.
Allied health staff include two radiographers, two pharmacists, three laboratory technicians, two dieticians and 13 nurses with specialised training in fields including surgical nursing, anaesthesia nursing/ICU, paediatric nursing and midwifery.
From 1892 to 1916 the Ellice Islands were administered as a British Protectorate, as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT), by a Resident Commissioner based in the Gilbert Islands.
R/O water is only intended to be produced when storage falls below 30%, however demand to replenish household storage supplies with tanker-delivered water means that the R/O desalination units are continually operating.
The Law of Tuvalu comprises the Acts voted into law by the Parliament of Tuvalu and statutory instruments that become law; certain Acts passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom (during the time Tuvalu was either a British protectorate or British colony); the common law; and customary law (particularly in relation to the ownership of land).
Captain John Byron passed through the islands of Tuvalu in 1764 during his circumnavigation of the globe as captain of the .
The islands came under Britain's sphere of influence in the late 19th century, when each of the Ellice Islands was declared a British Protectorate by Captain Gibson of , between 9 and 16 October 1892.
Several attempts to stabilise the shoreline have not achieved the desired effect.
In 2010, there were 1,918 students who were taught by 109 teachers (98 certified and 11 uncertified).
In December 2009 the islands stalled talks on climate change at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, fearing some other developing countries were not committing fully to binding deals on a reduction in carbon emissions.
Its adherents comprise about 97% of the 10,837 (2012 census) inhabitants of the archipelago.
Football in Tuvalu is played at club and national team level.
The Catholic minority is served by the Mission Sui Iuris of Funafuti.
The Tuvaluan language and English are the national languages of Tuvalu.
The 2015 estimate of the population is 10,869.
Tuvalu first participated in the Pacific Games in 1978 and in the Commonwealth Games in 1998, when a weightlifter attended the games held at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Appeals from the Island Courts and the Lands Courts Appeal Panel are made to the Magistrates Court, which has jurisdiction to hear civil cases involving up to $T10,000.
Tuvalu is a member of the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
In Tuvalu plastic waste is a problem as much imported food and other commodities are supplied in plastic containers or packaging.
Students board at the school during the school term, returning to their home islands each school vacation.
The Congregational Christian Church of Tuvalu, which is part of the Reformed tradition, is the state church of Tuvalu.
In 1894 Count Rudolf Festetics de Tolna, his wife Eila (née Haggin) and her daughter Blanche Haggin visited Funafuti aboard the yacht ''Le Tolna''.
Reverse osmosis (R/O) desalination units supplement rainwater harvesting on Funafuti.
The cuisine of Tuvalu is based on the staple of coconut and the many species of fish found in the ocean and lagoons of the atolls.
Tuvaluans can participate in the Australian ''Pacific Seasonal Worker Program'', which allows Pacific Islanders to obtain seasonal employment in the Australian agriculture industry, in particular cotton and cane operations; fishing industry, in particular aquaculture; and with accommodation providers in the tourism industry.
The origins of the people of Tuvalu are addressed in the theories regarding migration into the Pacific that began about 3000 years ago.
There are about 13,000 Tuvaluan speakers worldwide.
The language has borrowed from the Samoan language, as a consequence of Christian missionaries in the late 19th and early 20th centuries being predominantly Samoan.
''Aganu'' means traditional customs and culture.
A traditional food source is seabirds (''taketake'' or black noddy and ''akiaki'' or white tern), with pork being eaten mostly at ''fateles'' (or parties with dancing to celebrate events).
Toaripi Lauti became the first Prime Minister on 1 October 1978 when Tuvalu became an independent nation.
Tuvalu participates in the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries (EIF), which was established in October 1997 under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation.
However, if the increase in sea level occurs at faster rate as compared to coral growth, or if polyp activity is damaged by ocean acidification, then the resilience of the atolls and reef islands is less certain.
Professor Edgeworth David of the University of Sydney was a member of the 1896 "Funafuti Coral Reef Boring Expedition of the Royal Society", under Professor William Sollas and lead the expedition in 1897.
Sources of drinking water were contaminated as a result of the system's storm surge and the flooding of the sources of fresh water.
Government revenues largely come from sales of fishing licenses, income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund, and from the lease of its highly fortuitous .tv Internet Top Level Domain (TLD).
The Environment Protection (Litter and Waste Control) Regulation 2013 is intended to improve the management of the importation of non-biodegradable materials.
The Church of Tuvalu is the state religion, although in practice this merely entitles it to "the privilege of performing special services on major national events".
Following independence in October 1978 the House of the Assembly was renamed the Parliament of Tuvalu or ''Palamene o Tuvalu''.
From 1947 to 1983 a number of Tuvaluans from Vaitupu migrated to Kioa, an island in Fiji.
It has diplomatic relations with Taiwan; the country maintains the only resident embassy in Tuvalu and has a large assistance programme in the islands.
A. W. Murray of the LMS – a Protestant congregationalist missionary society – arrived as the first European missionary where he too proselytised among the inhabitants of Tuvalu.
The islets that form the atolls are very low lying.
Nukufetau, Vaitupu and Nanumea are the only islands with sustainable groundwater supplies.
Elections to the House of Assembly of the British Colony of Tuvalu were held on 27 August 1977; with Toaripi Lauti being appointed Chief Minister in the House of Assembly of the Colony of Tuvalu on 1 October 1977.
The feasibility of wind power generation will be considered.
Mendaña made contact with the islanders but was unable to land.
The coconut palms were washed away, leaving the islet as a sand bar.
''Fenui – news from Tuvalu'' is a free digital publication of the Tuvalu Media Department that is emailed to subscribers and operates a Facebook page, which publishes news about government activities and news about Tuvaluan events, such as a special edition covering the results of the 2015 general election.
The available bandwidth is only 512 kbit/s uplink, and 1.5 Mbit/s downlink.
Sixth form students who pass their PSSC go on to the Augmented Foundation Programme, funded by the government of Tuvalu.
For less than a year between 1862–63, Peruvian ships, engaged in what became to be called the "blackbirding" trade, combed the smaller islands of Polynesia from Easter Island in the eastern Pacific to Tuvalu and the southern atolls of the Gilbert Islands (now Kiribati), seeking recruits to fill the extreme labour shortage in Peru.
The next European to visit was Arent Schuyler de Peyster, of New York, captain of the armed brigantine or privateer ''Rebecca'', sailing under British colours, which passed through the southern Tuvaluan waters in May 1819; de Peyster sighted Nukufetau and Funafuti, which he named Ellice's Island after an English Politician, Edward Ellice, the Member of Parliament for Coventry and the owner of the Rebecca's cargo.
Tuvaluans also have access to seasonal employment in the horticulture and viticulture industries in New Zealand under the ''Recognised Seasonal Employer'' (RSE) Work Policy introduced in 2007 allowing for employment of up to 5,000 workers from Tuvalu and other Pacific islands.
''Falekaupule'' is also used as the name of the council of elders – the traditional decision making body on each island.
Byron charted the atolls as ''Lagoon Islands''.
The Tuvalu Government carried out assessments of the damage caused by Cyclone Pam to the islands and has provided medical aid, food as well as assistance for the cleaning-up of storm debris.
By 1909 there were no more resident palagi traders representing the trading companies, although both Whibley and Restieaux remained in the islands until their deaths.
Tuvalu consists of three reef islands and six true atolls.
Harry Clifford Fassett, captain's clerk and photographer, recorded people, communities and scenes at Funafuti in 1900 during a visit of USFC ''Albatross'' when the United States Fish Commission was investigating the formation of coral reefs on Pacific atolls.
Tuvalu advocates ratification and implementation of the Kyoto Protocol.
It represents workers on foreign ships.
Funafuti is the only port but there is a deep-water berth in the harbour at Nukufetau.
The streets of Funafuti were paved and lit in mid-2002 but other roads are unpaved.
Like many South Pacific islands obesity is a major health issue where 65% of men and 71% of women are overweight.
The resulting borrow pits impacted the fresh-water aquifer.
Tuvaluans also eat seafood, including coconut crab and fish from the lagoon and ocean.
The United States Marine Corps landed on Funafuti on 2 October 1942 and on Nanumea and Nukufetau in August 1943.
The islands came under Britain's sphere of influence in the late 19th century, when each of the Ellice Islands was declared a British Protectorate by Captain Gibson of  between 9 and 16 October 1892.
Life expectancy for women in Tuvalu is 68.41 years and 64.01 years for men (2015 est.).
While some islanders were voluntary recruits the "blackbirders" were notorious for enticing islanders on to ships with tricks, such as pretending to be Christian missionaries, as well as kidnapping islanders at gun point.
The 2011 report of ''Pacific Climate Change Science Program'' of Australia concludes, in relation to Tuvalu, states the conclusions that over the course of the 21st century:
Government and Non-Government Organisations provided assistance technical, funding and material support to Tuvalu to assist with recovery, including WHO, UNICEF, UNDP, OCHA, World Bank, DFAT, New Zealand Red Cross &  IFRC, Fiji National University and governments of New Zealand, Netherlands, UAE, Taiwan and the United States.
Motufoua Secondary School is located on Vaitupu.
Domain name income paid most of the cost of paving the streets of Funafuti and installing street lighting in mid-2002.
The coral base of the atoll was used as fill to create the runway.
The atolls of Tuvalu acted as staging posts during the preparation for the Battle of Tarawa and the Battle of Makin that commenced on 20 November 1943, which battles were the implementation of "Operation Galvanic".
Two table tennis players attended the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, England; Tuvalu entered competitors in shooting, table tennis and weightlifting at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne, Australia; three athletes participated in the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi, India, entering the discus, shot put and weightlifting events; and a team of 3 weightlifters and 2 table tennis players attended the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow.
In the past, another caste, the priests (tofuga), were also amongst the decision-makers.
("HMTSS" stands for ''His/Her Majesty's Tuvaluan State Ship'' or for ''His/Her Majesty's Tuvalu Surveillance Ship''.)
It is a tarred strip.
* Annual and seasonal mean rainfalls are projected to increase (high confidence).
Tuvalu's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) covers an oceanic area of approximately 900,000&nbsp;km2.
'''Tuvalu''' (  or  ), formerly known as the '''Ellice Islands''', is a Polynesian island nation located in the Pacific Ocean, midway between Hawaii and Australia, lying east-northeast of the Santa Cruz Islands (belonging to the Solomons), southeast of Nauru, south of Kiribati, west of Tokelau, northwest of Samoa and Wallis and Futuna and north of Fiji.
The South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) suggests that, while Tuvalu is vulnerable to climate change, environmental problems such as population growth and poor coastal management also affect sustainable development.
A popular sport specific to Tuvalu is ''Ano'', which is played with two round balls of  diameter.
However the subsequent grant of residence permits to the family was made on grounds unrelated to the refugee claim.
The ministers that form the Cabinet are appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister.
Louis Isidore Duperrey, captain of ''La Coquille'', sailed past Nanumanga in May 1824 during a circumnavigation of the earth (1822–1825).
This project increase the usable land space on Fongafale by eight per cent.
The family was successful in their appeal because, under the relevant immigration legislation, there were "exceptional circumstances of a humanitarian nature" that justified the grant of resident permits as the family was integrated into New Zealand society with a sizeable extended family which had effectively relocated to New Zealand.
Each island has its own high-chief, or ulu-aliki, and several sub-chiefs (alikis).
PMH also employs a dentist.
Of the three northern islands (Nanumanga, Niutao, Nanumea), Nanumanga suffered the most damage, with 60-100 houses flooded, with the waves also causing damage to the health facility.
The police have a Pacific-class patrol boat (HMTSS ''Te Mataili'') provided by Australia in October 1994 under the Pacific Patrol Boat Programme for use in maritime surveillance and fishery patrol and for search-and-rescue missions.
Surveys were carried out in May 2010 of the reef habitats of Nanumea, Nukulaelae and Funafuti and a total of 317 fish species were recorded during this ''Tuvalu Marine Life'' study.
In 1568, Spanish navigator Álvaro de Mendaña was the first European to sail through the archipelago, sighting the island of Nui during his expedition in search of Terra Australis.
The main island of Funafuti is the focus of travellers, since the only airport in Tuvalu is the Funafuti International Airport and the island has hotel facilities.
After the war the military airfield on Funafuti was developed into Funafuti International Airport.
Bananas and breadfruit are supplemental crops.
A shore camp was established on Sakalua islet of Nukufetau, where coal was used to melt down the whale blubber.
Police officers wear British style uniforms.
The ".tv" domain name generates around $2.2 million each year from royalties, which is about ten per cent of the government's total revenue.
Tuvalu is also affected by perigean spring tide events which raise the sea level higher than a normal high tide.
Vasafua islet, part of the Funafuti Conservation Area, was severely damaged by Cyclone Pam.
The net migration rate is estimated at −6.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2015 est.)
Australia and New Zealand continue to contribute capital to the Tuvalu Trust Fund and provide other forms of development assistance.
Cost of production and delivery has been estimated at A$6 per m3, with the difference subsidised by the government.
The total land area of the islands of Tuvalu is .
In 1974 ministerial government was introduced to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony through a change to the Constitution.
A Dutch expedition (the frigate ''Maria Reigersberg'') found Nui on the morning of June 14, 1825 and named the main island (Fenua Tapu) as ''Nederlandsch Eiland''.
From 1996 to 2002, Tuvalu was one of the best-performing Pacific Island economies and achieved an average real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 5.6% per annum.
A reef restoration project has investigated reef restoration techniques; and researchers from Japan have investigated rebuilding the coral reefs through the introduction of foraminifera.
The traditional buildings of Tuvalu used plants and trees from the native broadleaf forest, including timber from:  ''Pouka'', (''Hernandia peltata''); ''Ngia'' or ''Ingia'' bush, (''Pemphis acidula''); ''Miro'', (''Thespesia populnea''); ''Tonga'', (''Rhizophora mucronata''); ''Fau'' or ''Fo fafini'', or woman's fibre tree (''Hibiscus tiliaceus'').
Transport services in Tuvalu are limited.
The participating countries agreed to reduce their carbon output "as soon as possible" and to do their best to keep global warming "to well below 2 degrees C".
Crochet (''kolose'') is one of the art forms practiced by Tuvaluan women.
In 2015 Tuvalu has refused to sell fishing days to certain nations and fleets that have blocked Tuvaluan initiatives to develop and sustain their own fishery.
The popular sports in Tuvalu include ''kilikiti'', ''Ano'', football, futsal, volleyball, handball, basketball and rugby union.
Remittances from Tuvaluans living in Australia and New Zealand, and remittances from Tuvaluan sailors employed on overseas ships are important sources of income for Tuvaluans.
Local government districts consisting of only one island:
Tuvalu is also a member of the Nauru Agreement which addresses the management of tuna purse seine fishing in the tropical western Pacific.
Their chief negotiator stated, "Tuvalu is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change and our future rests on the outcome of this meeting."
Tuvalu and the other members of the Pacific Island Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the United States have settled a tuna fishing deal for 2015; a longer term deal will be negotiated.
Tuvalu has a population of 10,640 (2012 census).
The installation of upgraded transmission equipment allows Radio Tuvalu to be heard on all nine islands of Tuvalu.
''Ano'' is a localised version of volleyball, in which the two hard balls made from pandanus leaves are volleyed at great speed with the team members trying to stop the ''Ano'' hitting the ground.
Cyclone Bebe in 1972 caused severe damage to Funafuti.
Desserts made on the islands include coconut and coconut milk, instead of animal milk.
The threat of global warming in Tuvalu is not yet a dominant motivation for migration as Tuvaluans appear to prefer to continue living on the islands for reasons of lifestyle, culture and identity.
The central Pacific Ocean experiences changes from periods of La Niña to periods of El Niño; In June 2015 the Tuvalu Meteorological Service announced that an El Niño event has arrived in Tuvalu.
The Tuvalu Association of Sports and National Olympic Committee (TASNOC) was recognised as a National Olympic Committee in July 2007.
On the atolls, an annular reef rim surrounds the lagoon with several natural reef channels.
Crime in Tuvalu is not a significant social problem due to an effective criminal justice system, also due to the influence of the ''Falekaupule'' (the traditional assembly of elders of each island) and the central role of religious institutions in the Tuvaluan community.
USN Patrol Torpedo Boats (PTs) were based at Funafuti from 2 November 1942 to 11 May 1944.
We expect growth to rise slowly".
The surveys identified 66 species that had not previously been recorded in Tuvalu, which brings the total number of identified species to 607.
However, in 2011 a weak La Niña effect caused a drought by cooling the surface of the sea around Tuvalu.
Tuvalu has adopted a national plan of action as the observable transformations over the last ten to fifteen years show Tuvaluans that there have been changes to the sea levels.
There are eight Island Courts and Lands Courts; appeals in relation to land disputes are made to the Lands Courts Appeal Panel.
A major international priority for Tuvalu in the UN, at the 2002 Earth Summit in Johannesburg, South Africa and in other international fora, is promoting concern about global warming and the possible sea level rising.
Mourelle's map and journal named the island ''El Gran Cocal'' ('The Great Coconut Plantation'); however, the latitude and longitude was uncertain.
The Waste Operations and Services Act of 2009 provides the legal framework for waste management and pollution control projects funded by the European Union directed at organic waste composting in eco-sanitation systems.
In 2015 an exhibition was held on Funafuti of the art of Tuvalu, with works that addressed climate change through the eyes of artists and the display  of Kope ote olaga (possessions of life), which was a display of the various artefacts of Tuvalu culture.
On Nui the sources of fresh water were destroyed or contaminated.
* The incidence of drought is projected to decrease (moderate confidence).
The Funafuti Conservation Area consists of  of ocean, reef, lagoon, channel and six uninhabited islets.
A traditional sport played in Tuvalu is ''kilikiti'', which is similar to cricket.
Pulaka is the main source for carbohydrates.
In that year a general election was held; and a referendum was held in December 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration.
Following contact with Europeans iron products were used including nails and corrugated iron roofing material.
In 2015 the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) assisted the government of Tuvalu to acquire ''MV Talamoana'', a 30-metre vessel that will be used to implement Tuvalu's National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to transport government officials and project personnel to the outer islands.
New Zealand has an annual quota of 75 Tuvaluans granted work permits under the ''Pacific Access Category'', as announced in 2001.
Tuvalu participates in the operations of the Pacific Island Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC).
Its national police force, the ''Tuvalu Police Force'' headquartered in Funafuti includes a maritime surveillance unit, customs, prisons and immigration.
Tuvaluan athletes have also participated in the men's and women's 100 metre sprints at the
A major sporting event is the "Independence Day Sports Festival" held annually on 1 October.
In recent years New Zealand and Australia are the primary destinations for migration or seasonal work.
Tuvaluans are well known for their seafaring skills, with the Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute on Amatuku motu (island), Funafuti, providing training to approximately 120 marine cadets each year so that they have the skills necessary for employment as seafarers on merchant shipping.
The merchant marine fleet consists of two passenger/cargo ships ''Nivaga III'' and ''Manu Folau''.
