Twitter is also increasingly used for making TV more interactive and social.
Individual tweets can be forwarded by other users to their own feed, a process known as a "retweet".
The group selfie effort was parodied by Lego, and Matt Groening with The Simpsons.
According to Guinness World Records, the fastest pace to a million followers was set by actor Robert Downey Jr. in 23 hours and 22 minutes in April 2014.
On June 7, 2011, Twitter announced that it was rolling out the feature.
Later, when he found it was exploitable again, he created the account 'RainbowTwtr' and used it to post coloured messages.
However, a glitch came about after the page was launched, so the previous "retro" homepage was still in use until the issues were resolved; the new homepage was reintroduced on April 20.
This feature was added onto Twitter so if the viewer doesn't understand what the tweet means, they can click on the sites to read more about what the person is talking about.
Tech writer Bruce Sterling commented in 2007 that using Twitter for "literate communication" is "about as likely as firing up a CB radio and hearing some guy recite the ''Iliad''".
In January 2014, Facebook announced a partnership with UK-based social TV analytics company SecondSync which saw the social network make its social TV available outside the company for the first time.
Jack Dorsey, then an undergraduate student at New York University, introduced the idea of an individual using an SMS service to communicate with a small group.
Since June 2011, Twitter has used its own t.co domain for automatic shortening of all URLs posted on its website, making other link shorteners superfluous for staying within the 140 character limit.
In 2016, it shares rose 20 % after a report that it had received takeover approaches.
Deleted tweets used to be removed in all countries.
The prevalence of African American Twitter usage and in many popular hashtags has been the subject of research studies.
Patches were quickly released, though some iPhone applications had to wait for approval from the App Store.
There was this path of discovery with something like that, where over time you figure out what it is.
On October 29, 2014, Twitter announced a new partnership with IBM.
The people creating the "bots" are often from Eastern Europe and Asia.
On December 18, 2012, Twitter announced it had surpassed 200 million monthly active users.
Users now also have the ability to add pictures to Twitter's search by adding hashtags to the tweet.
The original logo was in use from its launch in March 2006 until September 2010.
The tipping point for Twitter's popularity was the 2007 South by Southwest Interactive (SXSWi) conference.
The acquisition price was reportedly $50 million.
The definition was 'a short burst of inconsequential information,' and 'chirps from birds'.
During the Arab Spring in early 2011, the number of hashtags mentioning the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt increased.
The lawsuit was dismissed by the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, upholding the Section 230 safe harbor which dictates that the operators of an interactive computer service are not liable for the content published by its users.
Twitter cited France and Germany as examples, where pro-Nazi content is illegal.
Through SMS, users can communicate with Twitter through five gateway numbers: short codes for the United States, Canada, India, New Zealand, and an Isle of Man-based number for international use.
In August 2016, Twitter stated that it had banned at least 360,000 accounts in the past year for violating policies banning use of the platform to promote extremism.
Having used the services of third parties TinyURL and bit.ly, Twitter began experimenting with its own URL shortening service for private messages in March 2010 using the twt.tl domain, before it purchased the t.co domain.
Krikorian explained that Twitter achieved this record by blending its homegrown and open source technologies.
In July 2009, some of Twitter's revenue and user growth documents were published on ''TechCrunch'' after being illegally obtained by Hacker Croll.
In June 2011, Twitter announced that it would offer small businesses a self-service advertising system.
On July 11, 2016, Twitter announced a partnership with CBS News to live stream both the 2016 Republican National Convention, July 18–21, and the 2016 Democratic National Convention, July 25–28.
As of April 2016, his successor, Pope Francis, has 9.06 million followers of his Twitter account (@Pontifex).
...we came across the word 'twitter', and it was just perfect.
In July 2014, Twitter announced that it intends to buy a young company called CardSpring for an undisclosed sum.
Twitter referred to this as a breach of their rules and introduced a design update to make this more difficult.
While the technological advances have enabled the ability of successful Human-Computer Interaction, the implications are questioned due to the appearance of both benign and malicious bots in the Twitter realm.
These topics help Twitter and their users to understand what is happening in the world and what people's opinions are about it.
The agreement went into effect in 2012.
As noted on Compete.com, Twitter moved up to the third-highest-ranking social networking site in January 2009 from its previous rank of twenty-second.
According to research published in April 2014, around 44 percent of user accounts have never tweeted.
On October 4, 2010, Williams announced that he was stepping down as CEO.
Users can also "like" (formerly "favorite") individual tweets.
The tweets were set to a largely constrictive 140-character limit for compatibility with SMS messaging, introducing the shorthand notation and slang commonly used in SMS messages.
In 2009, Twitter was mainly used by older adults who might not have used other social sites before Twitter, said Jeremiah Owyang, an industry analyst studying social media.
Twitterbots are capable of influencing public opinion about culture, products and political agendas by automatically generating mass amounts of tweets through imitating human communication.
With Twitterbots, users are able to create the illusion of "buzz" on their site by obtaining followers from services such as Swenzy and underground suppliers who operate bot farms or click farms.
Registered users can read and post tweets, but those who are unregistered can only read them.
A user photo post used to count for about 24 characters.
With the additional analytic tools, Twitter was able to improve the firm's offering to advertisers, allowing them to, for instance, only promote a tweet onto the timelines of users who were watching a certain programme.
The company raised US$200 million in new venture capital in December 2010, at a valuation of approximately US$3.7 billion.
The resulting photo of twelve celebrities broke the previous retweet record within forty minutes, and was retweeted over 1.8 million times in the first hour.
The service was active from 2010 to 2012.
Twitter spun off into its own company in April 2007.
Individual tweets are registered under unique IDs using software called snowflake, and geolocation data is added using 'Rockdove'.
In 2013, it was one of the ten most-visited websites and has been described as "the SMS of the Internet".
Yandex, a Russian search engine, finds value within the partnership due to Twitter's real time news feeds.
In March 2014, ITV became the first major broadcaster in the UK to sign up to Twitter Amplify and Twitter introduced one-tap video playback across its mobile apps to further enhance the consumer experience.
Dick Costolo, formerly Twitter's chief operating officer, became CEO.
By the end of the ceremony it had been retweeted over 2 million times; less than 24 hours later, it had been retweeted over 2.8 million times.
As of April 13, Twitter announced it had already signed up a number of companies wishing to advertise, including Sony Pictures, Red Bull, Best Buy, and Starbucks.
The company experienced rapid initial growth.
Twitter allows users to update their profile via their mobile phone either by text messaging or by apps released for certain smartphones and tablets.
In December 2012, Twitter and Nielsen entered a multi-year agreement to produce social TV ratings, which are expected to be commercially available for the fall 2013 season as the Nielsen Twitter TV Rating.
On October 5, 2012, Twitter acquired a video clip company called Vine that launched in January 2013.
Twitter has been used by Somalia's al-Shabaab rebels, who had their accounts suspended after they used the site to claim responsibility for an attack on the Westgate Shopping Mall in Nairobi in September 2013.
Twitter has altered the trend algorithm in the past to prevent manipulation of this type, with limited success.
Twitter explains on their website not to modify the logo (e.g.
Twitter later reported that numerous small businesses and people who used the self-service tool provided feedback that indicated they were impressed by the feature.
It had 400,000 tweets posted per quarter in 2007.
On February 27, 2012, a tweet from an employee that works on the company's platform and API discussed the evolution of the "Larry the Bird" logo with Twitter's creative director and it was revealed that it was named after Larry Bird of the NBA's Boston Celtics fame.
With more followers, users' profiles gain more attention, thus increasing their popularity.
On April 17, 2012, Twitter announced it would implement an "Innovators Patent Agreement" which would obligate Twitter to only use its patents for defensive purposes.
On December 8, 2011, Twitter overhauled its website once more to feature the "Fly" design, which the service says is easier for new users to follow and promotes advertising.
Williams fired Glass, who was silent about his part in Twitter's startup until 2011.
A February 2009 Compete.com blog entry ranked Twitter as the third most used social network based on their count of 6&nbsp;million unique monthly visitors and 55&nbsp;million monthly visits.
In addition, Twitter has acted as a sensor for automatic response to natural disasters such as bush fires.
Twitter also plans to provide photo galleries designed to gather and syndicate all photos that a user has uploaded on Twitter and third-party services such as TwitPic.
''Time'' magazine acknowledged its growing level of influence in its 2010 Time 100; to determine the influence of people, it used a formula based on famous social networking sites, Twitter and Facebook.
In March 2012, Twitter became available in Arabic, Farsi, Hebrew and Urdu, the first right-to-left language versions of the site.
Potential buyers were Alphabet (parent company of Google), Microsoft, Salesforce.com, Verizon, and the Walt Disney Company.
In August 2012, beta support for Basque, Czech and Greek was added, making the site available in 33 different languages.
In May 2011, a claimant known as "CTB" (subsequently identified as Ryan Giggs) in the case of ''CTB v Twitter Inc., Persons Unknown'' took legal action at the High Court of Justice in London against Twitter, requesting that Twitter release details of account holders.
With Amplify, Twitter runs video highlights from major live broadcasts, with advertisers' names and messages playing before the clip.
With Twitter, it wasn't clear what it was.
When Twitter experiences an outage, users once saw the "fail whale" error message image created by Yiying Lu, illustrating eight orange birds using a net to hoist a whale from the ocean captioned "Too many tweets!
On October 24, 2014, Queen Elizabeth II sent her first tweet to mark the opening of the London Science Museum's Information Age exhibition.
On April 13, 2010, Twitter announced plans to offer paid advertising for companies that would be able to purchase "promoted tweets" to appear in selective search results on the Twitter website, similar to Google Adwords' advertising model.
On February 5, 2014, Twitter published its first results as a public company, showing a net loss of $511 million in the fourth quarter of 2013.
More than twenty Roman Catholic cardinals manage active Twitter accounts, nine of whom were cardinal electors for the 2013 Papal conclave.
A word, phrase or topic that is mentioned at a greater rate than others is said to be a "trending topic".
When American singer Michael Jackson died on June 25, 2009, Twitter servers crashed after users were updating their status to include the words "Michael Jackson" at a rate of 100,000 tweets per hour.
On April 18, 2013, Twitter launched a music app called Twitter Music for the iPhone.
Twitter disputed the claim, stating that "violent threats and the promotion of terrorism deserve no place on Twitter and, like other social networks, our rules make that clear."
It was neither intended nor designed for high performance communication, but the idea that it could be used for emergency communication certainly was not lost on the originators, who knew that the service could have wide-reaching effects early on when the San Francisco company used it to communicate during earthquakes.
The Twitter web interface displays a list of trending topics on a sidebar on the home page, along with sponsored content (see image).
As of March 2016, Twitter has more than 310 million monthly active users.
The council was trying to discover the identity of a blogger called "Mr Monkey" who allegedly posted libellous statements about three local councillors.
Twitter launched the beta version of their "Verified Accounts" service on June 11, 2009, allowing famous or notable people to announce their Twitter account name.
By late November 2010, an average of a dozen updates per day were posted on the astronauts' communal account, @NASA_Astronauts.
On June 10, 2015, Twitter announced its CEO Dick Costolo would resign on July 1, 2015.
It is that, in part, but the insight we eventually came to was Twitter was really more of an information network than it is a social network.
The novelist Rick Moody wrote a short story for Electric Literature called "Some Contemporary Characters," composed entirely of tweets.
The application, now called "Twitter" and distributed free of charge, is the official Twitter client for the iPhone, iPad and Mac.
As of March 2011, that was about 140 million tweets posted daily.
Twitter issued a statement on their status blog at 13:50 UTC that "The exploit is fully patched."
Trending topics are sometimes the result of concerted efforts and manipulations by preteen and teenaged fans of certain celebrities or cultural phenomena, particularly musicians like Lady Gaga (known as Little Monsters), Justin Bieber (Beliebers), Rihanna (Rih Navy) and One Direction (Directioners), and novel series ''Twilight'' (Twihards) and ''Harry Potter'' (Potterheads).
Stability issues resulted in down time or temporary feature removal.
* May 2008: Twitter's new engineering team made architectural changes to deal with the scale of growth.
The company was helping broadcasters and rights holders to share video content both organically across social and via Twitter's Amplify program.
The documents projected 2009 revenues of US$400,000 in the third quarter and US$4&nbsp;million in the fourth quarter along with 25&nbsp;million users by the end of the year.
The first use of the policy was to block the account of German neo-Nazi group  on October 18, 2012.
However, only 30 of these do their own tweeting, more than 80 do not subscribe to other politicians and many do not follow any accounts.
DeGeneres said she wanted to homage Meryl Streep's record 17 Oscar nominations by setting a new record with her, and invited other Oscar celebrities to join them.
According to ''PC Magazine'', Williams was "no longer involved in the day-to-day goings on at the company".
In April 2013, Twitter announced that its Twitter Ads self-service platform, consisting of promoted tweets and promoted accounts, was available to all U.S. users without an invite.
Trending topics become popular either through a concerted effort by users, or because of an event that prompts people to talk about a specific topic.
The popular Twitter Bootstrap web design library was also started at Twitter and is the most popular repository on GitHub.
Vine videos shared on Twitter are visible directly in users' Twitter feeds.
On July 17, Twitter will launch a new way for advertisers to target users that have tweeted with a certain emoji or engaged with tweets with a certain emoji.
This practice of obtaining mass amounts of twitterbots as followers is not permitted on Twitter.
'''Twitter''' () is an online social networking service that enables users to send and read short 140-character messages called "tweets".
The emphasis on followers and likes as a measure of social capital has urged people to extend their circle to weak and latent ties to promote the idea of popularity for celebrities, politicians, musicians, public figures, and companies alike.
US Ambassador to Russia, Michael A. McFaul has been attributed as a pioneer of international Twitter diplomacy.
The URL shortner ''t.co'' then checks for a spam link and shortens the URL.
Despite Jack Dorsey's own open contention that a message on Twitter is "a short burst of inconsequential information", social networking researcher danah boyd responded to the Pear Analytics survey by arguing that what the Pear researchers labelled "pointless babble" is better characterized as "social grooming" and/or "peripheral awareness" (which she justifies as persons "wanting to know what the people around them are thinking and doing and feeling, even when co-presence isn't viable").
Facebook struck the partnership to help marketers understand how people are using the social network to talk about topics such as TV.
While Twitter itself was not affected, some third-party clients could no longer access recent tweets.
The tweets generated vary anywhere from a simple automated response to content creation and information sharing, all of which depends on the intention of the person purchasing or creating the bot.
"Adults are just catching up to what teens have been doing for years," he said.
Twitter's origins lie in a "daylong brainstorming session" held by board members of the podcasting company Odeo.
As of this logo revision, the word "Twitter" and the lowercase letter "t" are no longer used, with the bird becoming the sole symbol for the company's branding.
On June 4, 2014, Twitter announced that it will acquire Namo Media, a technology firm specializing in "native advertising" for mobile devices.
* June 12, 2009: In what was called a potential "Twitpocalypse", the unique numerical identifier associated with each tweet exceeded the limit of 32-bit signed integers (2,147,483,647 total messages).
Sixty-three percent of Twitter users are under thirty-five years old; sixty percent of Twitter users are Caucasian, but a higher than average (compared to other Internet properties) are African American/black (sixteen percent) and Hispanic (eleven percent); fifty-eight percent of Twitter users have a total household income of at least US$60,000.
The developers initially considered "10958" as a short code, but later changed it to "40404" for "ease of use and memorability".
In June 2014, Twitter acquired its Twitter Amplify partner in the U.S., SnappyTV, as part of its ongoing efforts to be the leader in social television.
The policy was used again the following day to remove anti-Semitic French tweets with the hashtag #unbonjuif ("a good Jew").
The "Do Not Track" feature works only on sites that have agreed to the service.
Work on the project started on March 21, 2006, when Dorsey published the first Twitter message at 9:50 PM Pacific Standard Time (PST): "just setting up my twttr".
Polls are open for 24 hours, and voters are not personally identified.
Within a few weeks of this discovery, Twitter introduced an optional personal identification number (PIN) that its users could use to authenticate their SMS-originating messages.
In April 2013, the Associated Press' Twitter account was briefly hacked into, sending out a message that US president Barack Obama had been injured in an attack on the White House.
In a  November 2013 WIRED interview Chris Fry, VP of Engineering at that time, noted that the company had taken the "fail whale" out of production as the platform was now more stable.
The black market for the fake followers, known as "bots", has been linked to "nearly every politically linked account from the White House to Congress to the 2016 campaign trail".
One of the earliest documented forms of celebrity related twitter-like disclosures dates from 1980, when real estate mogul William Desmond Ryan made round the clock press releases about his relationship with comedian Phyllis Diller, even revealing what she was making him for dinner on a nightly basis.
The service was tested on the main site using the accounts @TwitterAPI, @rsarver and @raffi.
* June 21, 2012: The site was down for around one hour and forty minutes, with the cause being described by Twitter as a "cascading bug".
According to Quancast, twenty-seven million people in the US used Twitter as of September 3, 2009.
This was in an episode of her tongue-in-cheek YouTube series ''Between Two Birds''.
According to a study by Sysomos in June 2009, women make up a slightly larger Twitter demographic than men—fifty-three percent over forty-seven percent.
The first Twitter prototype, developed by Dorsey and contractor Florian Weber, was used as an internal service for Odeo employees and the full version was introduced publicly on July 15, 2006.
There is also version of the website for mobile devices, SMS and MMS service.
Twitter also expanded its office in Dublin.
This record was later broken by Caitlyn Jenner, who joined the site on June 1, 2015 and amassed a million followers in just 4 hours and 3 minutes.
On February 9, 2016, Twitter announced the creation of the "Twitter Trust & Safety Council."
Twitter has been compared to a web-based Internet Relay Chat (IRC) client.
Software released as open source by the company includes the Gizzard Scala framework for creating distributed datastores, the distributed graph database FlockDB, the Finagle library for building asynchronous RPC servers and clients, the TwUI user interface framework for iOS, and the Bower client-side package manager.
There is also a short code in the United Kingdom which is only accessible to those on the Vodafone, O2 and Orange networks.
This grew to 100 million tweets posted per quarter in 2008.
In India, since Twitter only supports tweets from Bharti Airtel, an alternative platform called smsTweet was set up by a user to work on all networks.
Twitter stated that the move to OAuth will mean "increased security and a better experience".
They called it a social network, they called it microblogging, but it was hard to define, because it didn't replace anything.
In response, Andy Carvin gave Schorr two examples of breaking news stories that played out on Twitter and said users wanted first-hand accounts and sometimes debunked stories.
comScore confirmed this, stating that Japan is the only country in the world where Twitter leads Facebook.
In an attempt to compete with Twitter's leadership in TV, Facebook introduced a number of features in 2013 to drive conversation around TV including hashtags, verified profiles and embeddable posts.
In April 2015, the Twitter.com desktop homepage changed.
In 2009, Twitter won the "Breakout of the Year" Webby Award.
As of November 1, 2010, the company confirmed that the "New Twitter experience" had been rolled out to all users.
Twitter decided to notify its users and said in a statement, "... it's our policy to notify users about law enforcement and governmental requests for their information, unless we are prevented by law from doing so."
In 2012, the country with the most active users on Twitter was the United States.
Twitter had approximately ninety-eight percent uptime in 2007 (or about six full days of downtime).
It was announced that Twitter aims to return its IM service pending necessary major work.
Twitter hit 100 million monthly active users in September 2011.
comScore attributed this to Twitter's "early adopter period" when the social network first gained popularity in business settings and news outlets attracting primarily older users.
During a February 2009 discussion on National Public Radio's ''Weekend Edition'', the journalist Daniel Schorr stated that Twitter accounts of events lacked rigorous fact-checking and other editorial improvements.
Twitter had annual growth of 1,382 percent, increasing from 475,000 unique visitors in February 2008 to 7 million in February 2009.
On July 31, 2014, Twitter announced that it has acquired a small password-security startup called Mitro.
The governments of Iran and Egypt blocked the service in retaliation.
Information about who has chosen to follow an account and who a user has chosen to follow is also public, though accounts can be changed to "protected" which limits this information (and all tweets) to approved followers.
According to comScore only eleven percent of Twitter's users are aged twelve to seventeen.
CardSpring enables retailers to offer online shoppers coupons that they can automatically sync to their credit cards in order to receive discounts when they shop in physical stores.
Changes included the ability to see pictures and videos without leaving Twitter itself by clicking on individual tweets which contain links to images and clips from a variety of supported websites including YouTube and Flickr, and a complete overhaul of the interface, which shifted links such as '@mentions' and 'Retweets' above the Twitter stream, while 'Messages' and 'Log Out' became accessible via a black bar at the very top of twitter.com.
The same day, Twitter, along with Facebook, Google, and Microsoft, jointly agreed to a European Union code of conduct obligating them to review "the majority of valid notifications for removal of illegal hate speech" posted on their services within 24 hours.
Due to an influx of inappropriate content, it is now rated 17+ in Apple's app store.
In August 2012 it was reported that there is a market in fake Twitter followers that are used to increase politicians' and celebrities' apparent popularity.
rotate the bird, change the logo's color, etc.
At that time he split his schedule with Square (where he is CEO), whose offices are within walking distance of Twitter's in San Francisco.
On November 29, 2009 Twitter was named the Word of the Year by the Global Language Monitor, declaring it "a new form of social interaction".
Twitter staff received the festival's Web Award prize with the remark "we'd like to thank you in 140&nbsp;characters or less.
The U.S. government, seeing social media's role in the 2010 Arab Spring revolts, covertly developed a Cuban alternative to Twitter called ZunZuneo as part of a long-term strategy to "stir unrest".
He said while Twitter would "never lose that  feeling" of speed, users could do more with the text.
The New York Times states, "They have sleep-wake cycles so their fakery is more convincing, making them less prone to repetitive patterns that flag them as mere programs."
In March 2011, 35,000 Twitter shares sold for US$34.50 each on Sharespost, an implied valuation of US$7.8 billion.
Users access Twitter through the website interface, SMS or mobile device app.
Tweets are publicly visible by default, but senders can restrict message delivery to just their followers.
A petition for making the process of complaining about harassment easier had collected over 100,000 signatures.
