Since the ''Triceratops'' wounds healed, it is most likely that the ''Triceratops'' survived the encounter and managed to overcome the ''Tyrannosaurus''.
Another formation with tyrannosaur remains is the Lance Formation of Wyoming.
The abundance of fossil material has allowed significant research into many aspects of its biology, including its life history and biomechanics.
The full binomial therefore translates to "tyrant lizard the king" or "King Tyrant Lizard", emphasizing the animal's size and perceived dominance over other species of the time.
A study by Eric Snively and Anthony P. Russel published in 2003 would also find that the tyrannosaurid arctometatarsals and elastic ligaments worked together in what he called a 'tensile keystone model' to strengthen the feet of ''Tyrannosaurus'', increase the animal's stability and add greater resistance to dissociation over that of other theropod families; while still allowing resiliency that is otherwise reduced in ratites, horses, giraffids and other animals with metapodia to a single element.
'''''Tyrannosaurus''''' ( or , meaning "tyrant lizard", from the Ancient Greek ''tyrannos'' (τύραννος), "tyrant", and ''sauros'' (σαῦρος), "lizard") is a genus of coelurosaurian theropod dinosaur.
It has also been suggested that the forelimbs were used to assist the animal in rising from a prone position.
During this rapid growth phase, a young ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' would gain an average of  a year for the next four years.
Fossils are found in a variety of rock formations dating to the Maastrichtian age of the upper Cretaceous Period, 68 to 66&nbsp;million years ago.
A ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' forearm had a limited range of motion, with the shoulder and elbow joints allowing only 40 and 45 degrees of motion, respectively.
A 2005 study reported that previous claims of sexual dimorphism in crocodile chevron anatomy were in error, casting doubt on the existence of similar dimorphism between ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' sexes.
Relative to its large and powerful hind limbs, ''Tyrannosaurus'' fore limbs were short but unusually powerful for their size and had two clawed digits.
These suggest a highly developed sense of smell which could sniff out carcasses over great distances, as modern vultures do.
* Since at least some of ''Tyrannosaurus''s potential prey could move quickly, evidence that it walked instead of ran could indicate that it was a scavenger.
In the summer of 2000, Jack Horner discovered five ''Tyrannosaurus'' skeletons near the Fort Peck Reservoir in Montana.
In a study by Gregory S. Paul, he would pointed out that the flexed kneed and digitigrade adult ''Tyrannosaurus'' were much better adapted for running than elephants or humans, pointing out that ''Tyrannosaurus'' had a large ilium bone and cnemial crest that would have supported large muscles needed for running.
It is also stated in their study that this may imply, though not demonstrate, that tyrannosaurids such as ''Tyrannosaurus'' had greater agility than other large theropods without an arctometatarsus.
Other scientists have pointed out that the ratio of oxygen isotopes in the fossils today does not necessarily represent the same ratio in the distant past, and may have been altered during or after fossilization (diagenesis).
Currie elaborated that ''Tyrannosaurus'' had a larger brain-to-body-size proportion than crocodiles and three times more than plant eating dinosaurs such as ''Triceratops'' of the same size.
Only a single ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' specimen has been conclusively shown to belong to a specific sex.
According to the study, this is more than the lowest estimates for extant birds (44.6 percent), but still close to the typical ratios of the smallest sexually mature alligators which range from 45.9–47.9 percent.
However, Holtz (1998) noted that tyrannosaurids and some closely related groups had significantly longer distal hindlimb components (shin plus foot plus toes) relative to the femur length than most other theropods, and that tyrannosaurids and their close relatives had a tightly interlocked metatarsus that more effectively transmitted locomotory forces from the foot to the lower leg than in earlier theropods ("metatarsus" means the foot bones, which function as part of the leg in digitigrade animals).
Growth curves indicate that, as in mammals and birds, ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' growth was limited mostly to immature animals, rather than the indeterminate growth seen in most other vertebrates.
To compensate for the immense bulk of the animal, many bones throughout the skeleton were hollow, reducing its weight without significant loss of strength.
If it is found to be original material, any surviving proteins may be used as a means of indirectly guessing some of the DNA content of the dinosaurs involved, because each protein is typically created by a specific gene.
Currie pointed out that a find in South Dakota preserved three ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' skeletons in close proximity to each other.
Its taxonomy is also controversial, as some scientists consider ''Tarbosaurus bataar'' from Asia to be a second ''Tyrannosaurus'' species while others maintain ''Tarbosaurus'' is a separate genus.
Some researchers argue that if ''Tyrannosaurus'' were a scavenger, another dinosaur had to be the top predator in the Amerasian Upper Cretaceous.
Another possibility is that the forelimbs held struggling prey while it was killed by the tyrannosaur's enormous jaws.
The presence of stress fractures and tendon avulsions in general provides evidence for a "very active" predation-based diet rather than obligate scavenging.
Mortality increases again following sexual maturity, partly due to the stresses of reproduction.
Cope believed that they belonged to an "agathaumid" (ceratopsid) dinosaur, and named them ''Manospondylus gigas'', meaning "giant porous vertebra" in reference to the numerous openings for blood vessels he found in the bone.
Although these results were much higher than previous estimations, the authors noted that these results significantly lowered the great difference between its actual growth rate and the one which would be expected of an animal of its size.
They found that proposed top speeds in excess of  were infeasible, because they would require very large leg muscles (more than approximately 40–86%&nbsp;of total body mass).
''Tyrannosaurus'', like most dinosaurs, was long thought to have an ectothermic ("cold-blooded") reptilian metabolism.
gigas'' and ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' as early as 1917.
Designated as the Museum of the Rockies specimen 1125, or MOR 1125, the dinosaur was previously excavated from the Hell Creek Formation.
It is not known what the exact nature of the interaction was, though: either animal could have been the aggressor.
The differences could also be age-related, with 'robust' individuals being older animals.
This has been interpreted as a bayou environment similar to today's Gulf Coast.
* Tyrannosaur arms are short when compared to other known predators.
Hence, the study involved identifying the type of ligaments attached to the metatarsals, then how they functioned together and comparing it to those of other theropods and modern day analogs.
These were judged to represent further remains of the same individual, and to be identical to those of ''Tyrannosaurus rex''.
However, even higher estimates were made by professor Mason B. Meers of the University of Tampa in 2003.
In a fight, they proposed it would be difficult to reach down to bite in the feet of a rival, making it more likely that the bite marks were made in a carcass.
From measurements and based on the positions of the footprints, the animal was believed to be traveling at a walking speed of around 2.8 to 5 miles per hour and was estimated to have a hip height of  to .
because the available prey, such as ''Triceratops'' and ''Ankylosaurus'', were well-armored, and that others were fast-moving, it would have been necessary for ''Tyrannosaurus'' to hunt in groups.
lancensis'') by Charles W. Gilmore in 1946, but was later referred to a new genus, ''Nanotyrannus''.
The ''D''-shaped cross-section, reinforcing ridges and backwards curve reduced the risk that the teeth would snap when ''Tyrannosaurus'' bit and pulled.
Those who argue that ''Tyrannosaurus'' was incapable of running estimate the top speed of ''Tyrannosaurus'' at about .
This, according to Mallison, would have been achievable irrespective of joint strength and lessened the need for additional muscle mass in the legs, particularly at the ankles.
''Manospondylus gigas'' could then be deemed a ''nomen oblitum'' ("forgotten name").
In contrast the hind limbs were among the longest in proportion to body size of any theropod.
However, this rarity may also be due to the incompleteness of the fossil record or to the bias of fossil collectors towards larger, more spectacular specimens.
However, Paul and Christiansen (2000) argued that at least the later ceratopsians had upright forelimbs and the larger species may have been as fast as rhinos.
Switek described the sensational claims provided in press releases and news stories surrounding the ''Dino Gangs'' program as "nauseating hype" and noted that the production company responsible for the program, Atlantic Productions, has a poor record involving exaggerating claims about new fossil discoveries, most notably the controversial claim it published regarding the supposed early human ancestor ''Darwinius'', which soon turned out to be a relative of lemurs instead.
Thomas Holtz Jr. would note that high depth perception of ''Tyrannosaurus'' may have been due to the prey it had to hunt; noting that it had to hunt horned dinosaurs such as ''Triceratops'', armored dinosaurs such as ''Ankylosaurus'' and the duck-billed dinosaurs may have had complex social behaviors.
This ''Tyrannosaurus'', nicknamed Sue in her honor, was the object of a legal battle over its ownership.
In 1941, Brown's 1902 find was sold to the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Gregory S. Paul also writes that ''Tyrannosaurus'' reproduced quickly and died young, but attributes their short life spans to the dangerous lives they lived.
One study in 2011 found that the maximum weight of Sue, the largest ''Tyrannosaurus'', was between , though the authors stated that their upper and lower estimates were based on models with wide error bars and that they "consider them to be too skinny, too fat, or too disproportionate".
Like many bipedal dinosaurs, ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' was historically depicted as a 'living tripod', with the body at 45 degrees or less from the vertical and the tail dragging along the ground, similar to a kangaroo.
He would also mention that Alexander's (1989) formula to calculate speed by bone strength was only partly reliable.
After using CT scanning, Currie stated that ''Tyrannosaurus'' would have been capable of such complex behavior, because its brain size is three times greater than what would be expected for an animal of its size.
Research on some of the tissues involved has suggested that birds are closer relatives to tyrannosaurs than other modern animals.
The tip of the upper jaw was U-shaped (most non-tyrannosauroid carnivores had V-shaped upper jaws), which increased the amount of tissue and bone a tyrannosaur could rip out with one bite, although it also increased the stresses on the front teeth.
Currie believed ''Tyrannosaurus'' to be six times smarter than most dinosaurs and other reptiles.
When examining Sue, paleontologist Pete Larson found a broken and healed fibula and tail vertebrae, scarred facial bones and a tooth from another ''Tyrannosaurus'' embedded in a neck vertebra.
The study also found that theropod skeletons such as those of ''Tyrannosaurus'' had adaptations (such as elevated transverse processes in the tail vertebrae) to enable the growth of larger tail muscles and that ''Tyrannosaurus's'' tail muscle mass may have been underestimated by over 25 percent and perhaps as much as 45 percent.
In contrast, ''Acrocanthosaurus'' had limited depth perception because they hunted large sauropods, which were relatively rare during the time of ''Tyrannosaurus''.
The finished mount was then taken apart, and along with the bones, shipped back to Chicago for the final assembly.
Mallison suggests that the differences between dinosaurs, extant mammals, and birds would also have made equations to calculate speed from stride length inapplicable to dinosaurs.
Subsequent studies in April 2008 confirmed the close connection of ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' to modern birds.
Mass estimates have varied widely over the years, from more than , to less than , with most modern estimates ranging between  and .
The remains of Sue also include complete forelimbs.
The mounted skeleton opened to the public on May 17, 2000 in the great hall (Stanley Field Hall) at the Field Museum of Natural History.
The remaining teeth were robust, like "lethal bananas" rather than daggers, more widely spaced and also had reinforcing ridges.
Scientists who think that ''Tyrannosaurus'' was able to run point out that hollow bones and other features that would have lightened its body may have kept adult weight to a mere  or so, or that other animals like ostriches and horses with long, flexible legs are able to achieve high speeds through slower but longer strides.
Other evidence suggests hunting behavior in ''Tyrannosaurus''.
The shared presence of medullary tissue in birds and theropod dinosaurs is further evidence of the close evolutionary relationship between the two.
Lockley and Hunt suggested that it was very likely the track was made by a ''Tyrannosaurus rex'', which would make it the first known footprint from this species.
The researchers concluded that Sue's tendon avulsion was probably obtained from struggling prey.
Subsequent CT scans of Jane's skull would further confirm the team's hypothesis, showing that the puncture wounds came from a traumatic injury and that there was subsequent healing.
Opinions remain divided on the validity of ''N.
Horner also pointed out that the tyrannosaur lineage had a history of steadily improving binocular vision.
In his study, Meers estimated a possible bite force of around 183,000 to 235,000 Newtons or .
The first named fossil specimen which can be attributed to ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' consists of two partial vertebrae (one of which has been lost) found by Edward Drinker Cope in 1892.
A study of this specimen's fossilized bones showed that Sue reached full size at age 19 and died at age 28, the longest any tyrannosaur is known to have lived.
At 18 years of age, the curve plateaus again, indicating that growth slowed dramatically.
Several other genera of North American tyrannosaurids have also been synonymized with ''Tyrannosaurus''.
Currie compared ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' favorably to related species ''Tarbosaurus bataar'' and ''Albertosaurus sarcophagus'', fossil evidence from which Currie had previously used to suggest that they lived in packs.
Histological evidence of high growth rates in young ''Tyrannosaurus rex'', comparable to those of mammals and birds, may support the hypothesis of a high metabolism.
A ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' growth curve is S-shaped, with juveniles remaining under  until approximately 14 years of age, when body size began to increase dramatically.
''Tyrannosaurus rex'' was one of the largest land carnivores of all time; the largest complete specimen, located at the Field Museum of Natural History under the name FMNH PR2081 and nicknamed Sue, measured  long, and was  tall at the hips.
Lawrence Witmer pointed out that social behavior can't be determined by brain endocasts and the brains of solitary leopards are identical to those of a cooperatively hunting lion; estimated brain sizes only show that an animal ''may'' have hunted in groups.
The region is thought to have been dominated by semi-arid inland plains, following the probable retreat of the Western Interior Seaway as global sea levels fell.
Scientists have produced a wide range of maximum speed estimates, mostly around , but a few as low as , and a few as high as .
Growth curves can be developed when the ages of different specimens are plotted on a graph along with their mass.
Flexible, bifurcating blood vessels and fibrous but elastic bone matrix tissue were recognized.
On the other hand, recent analyses suggest that ''Tyrannosaurus'', while slower than large modern terrestrial predators, may well have been fast enough to prey on large hadrosaurs and ceratopsians.
Other tyrannosaurid fossils found in the same formations as ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' were originally classified as separate taxa, including ''Aublysodon'' and ''Albertosaurus megagracilis'', the latter being named ''Dinotyrannus megagracilis'' in 1995.
Ever since the first discovery of ''Tyrannosaurus'' most scientists have speculated that it was a predator; like modern large predators it would readily scavenge or steal another predator's kill if it had the opportunity.
It was not collected until 1992, as it was mistakenly thought to be a ''Triceratops'' skeleton.
* Tyrannosaur teeth could crush bone, and therefore could extract as much food (bone marrow) as possible from carcass remnants, usually the least nutritious parts.
Other research challenges the identification of soft tissue as biofilm and confirms finding "branching, vessel-like structures" from within fossilized bone.
Teeth from what is now documented as a ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' were found in 1874 by Arthur Lakes near Golden, Colorado.
A set of footprints in Glenrock, Wyoming dating to the Maastrichtian stage of the late cretaceous and hailing from the Lance Formation were recently described by Scott Persons, Phil Currie et al.
It was extremely wide at the rear but had a narrow snout, allowing unusually good binocular vision.
He would also point out that the lowered risk of being wounded in combat may have been worth the risk of ''Tyrannosaurus'' falling while running.
These computer models predict a top speed of  for a  ''Compsognathus'' (probably a juvenile individual).
Like other tyrannosaurids, ''Tyrannosaurus'' was a bipedal carnivore with a massive skull balanced by a long, heavy tail.
On July 23, 2014, evidence, for the first time, in the form of fossilized trackways in Canada, showed that tyrannosaurs may have hunted in groups.
Nevertheless, Horner presented several arguments in the popular literature to support the pure scavenger hypothesis:
The scientists would find that arctometatarsals may have enabled tyrannosaurid feet to absorb forces such as linear deceleration, lateral acceleration and torsion more effectively than those of other theropods.
Recent research has shown that medullary tissue is never found in crocodiles, which are thought to be the closest living relatives of dinosaurs, aside from birds.
Farlow and colleagues (1995) have argued that a ''Tyrannosaurus'' weighing  to  would have been critically or even fatally injured if it had fallen while moving quickly, since its torso would have slammed into the ground at a deceleration of 6&nbsp;''g'' (six times the acceleration due to gravity, or about 60&nbsp;meters/s²) and its tiny arms could not have reduced the impact.
This is based on the presence of enamel, which needs to remain hydrated, an issue not faced by aquatic species like crocodilians or toothless species like birds, which have lipless and toothless beaks.
Dubbed Jane, the find was initially considered the first known skeleton of the pygmy tyrannosaurid ''Nanotyrannus'' but subsequent research has revealed that it is more likely a juvenile ''Tyrannosaurus''.
Robert T. Bakker notes this in ''The Dinosaur Heresies'' and explains that a name like "''Tyrannosaurus rex'' is just irresistible to the tongue."
According to the rules of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN), the system that governs the scientific naming of animals, ''Manospondylus gigas'' should therefore have priority over ''Tyrannosaurus rex'', because it was named first.
''Tyrannosaurus'' remains have been discovered in different ecosystems, including inland and coastal subtropical, and semi-arid plains.
The idea of dinosaur ectothermy was challenged by scientists like Robert T. Bakker and John Ostrom in the early years of the "Dinosaur Renaissance", beginning in the late 1960s.
As one of these morphs was more solidly built, it was termed the 'robust' morph while the other was termed 'gracile'.
This is still faster than its most likely prey species, hadrosaurids and ceratopsians.
The researchers found tendon avulsions only among ''Tyrannosaurus'' and ''Allosaurus''.
As only female birds lay eggs, medullary tissue is only found naturally in females, although males are capable of producing it when injected with female reproductive hormones like estrogen.
By 1970, scientists realized this pose was incorrect and could not have been maintained by a living animal, as it would have resulted in the dislocation or weakening of several joints, including the hips and the articulation between the head and the spinal column.
In the early 1890s, John Bell Hatcher collected postcranial elements in eastern Wyoming.
Many paleontologists consider the skull to belong to a juvenile ''Tyrannosaurus rex''.
Whether an unknown process, distinct from normal fossilization, preserved the material, or the material is original, the researchers do not know, and they are careful not to make any claims about preservation.
It is accepted now that ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' acted as a predator, and scavenged as modern mammalian and avian predators do.
Whether or not the track was made by ''Tyrannosaurus'' is unclear, though ''Tyrannosaurus'' and ''Nanotyrannus'' are the only large theropods known to have existed in the Hell Creek Formation.
Karen Chin and colleagues have found bone fragments in coprolites (fossilized feces) that they attribute to tyrannosaurs, but point out that a tyrannosaur's teeth were not well adapted to systematically chewing bone like hyenas do to extract marrow.
moderate-speed running.
''Tyrannosaurus'' shared this ecosystem with'' Triceratops'', related ceratopsians ''Nedoceratops, Tatankaceratops'' and ''Torosaurus, the harosaurid'' ''Edmontosaurus annectens'' and possibly a species of ''Parasaurolophus,'' the armored dinosaurs ''Denversaurus'', ''Edmontonia'' and ''Ankylosaurus'', the dome headed dinosaurs ''Pachycephalosaurus'', ''Stygimoloch'', ''Sphaerotholus'', and ''Dracorex'', hypsilophodont ''Thescelosaurus'', and the theropods ''Ornithomimus, Struthiomimus, Orcomimus, Acheroraptor'', ''Dakotaraptor, Richardoestesia, Paronychodon, Pectinodon'' and ''Troodon''.
The caudofemoralis muscle would have been a key muscle in femoral retraction; pulling back the leg at the femur.
''Tyrannosaurus'' lived during what is referred to as the Lancian faunal stage (Maastrichtian age) at the end of the Late Cretaceous.
In modern terrestrial animals with bare teeth, the teeth typically lack some or all of the standard amount of tooth enamel.
In the ammonite they found the spheres in a place where the iron they contain could not have had any relationship to the presence of blood.
The researchers found that what previously had been identified as remnants of blood cells, because of the presence of iron, were actually framboids, microscopic mineral spheres bearing iron.
Jane is currently on exhibit at the Burpee Museum of Natural History in Rockford, Illinois.
The species '''''Tyrannosaurus rex''''' (''rex'' meaning "king" in Latin), is one of the most well-represented of the large theropods.
theropods such as T rex had certain muscle arrangements that are different from modern day birds and mammals but with some similarities to modern reptiles.
Two isolated fossilized footprints have been tentatively assigned to ''Tyrannosaurus rex''.
A further study from 2016 by Steve Brusatte, Thomas Carr et al., also indicates ''Tyrannosaurus'' may have been an immigrant from Asia, as well as a possible descendent of ''Tarbosaurus''.
This would also have made the animal less front-heavy, thus reducing rotational inertia.
However, Schweitzer has strongly criticized Kaye's claims and argues that there's no reported evidence that biofilms can produce branching, hollow tubes like those noted in her study.
However, Jack Horner regards ''Tyrannosaurus'' tooth serrations as more like cubes in shape than the serrations on a Komodo monitor's teeth, which are rounded.
A 2012 study by scientists Karl Bates and Peter Falkingham suggested that the bite force of ''Tyrannosaurus'' could have been the strongest of any terrestrial animal that has ever lived.
It is possible that the extent and nature of feather covering in tyrannosauroids may have changed over time in response to body size, a warmer climate, or other factors.
Other tyrannosaurids exhibit extremely similar growth curves, although with lower growth rates corresponding to their lower adult sizes.
The bones were then shipped off to New Jersey where the mount was made.
There are minor differences between the two species, including the higher number of teeth in ''N.
Heinrich Mallison from Berlin's Museum of Natural History would also present a theory in 2011, suggesting that ''Tyrannosaurus'' and many other dinosaurs may have achieved relatively high speeds through short rapid strides instead of the long strides employed by modern birds and mammals when running, likening their movement to power-walking.
The feeding habits, physiology and potential speed of ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' are a few subjects of debate.
Barnum Brown, assistant curator of the American Museum of Natural History, found the first partial skeleton of ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' in eastern Wyoming in 1900.
Even moderately fast speeds would have required large leg muscles.
Oxygen isotope ratios in fossilized bone are sometimes used to determine the temperature at which the bone was deposited, as the ratio between certain isotopes correlates with temperature.
Some experts, however, have suggested the dinosaur was primarily a scavenger.
gigas'' remains were later identified as those of a theropod rather than a ceratopsid, and H.F. Osborn recognized the similarity between ''M.
''Tyrannosaurus'' may have had infectious saliva used to kill its prey.
To support his theory, Mallison assessed the limbs of various dinosaurs and found that they were different from those of modern mammals and birds; having their stride length greatly limited by their skeletons, but also having relatively large muscles at the hindquarters.
Since the first, two more tyrannosaurs and a hadrosaur have also been found to have such tissue-like structures.
The discovery of proteins from a creature tens of millions of years old, along with similar traces the team found in a mastodon bone at least 160,000 years old, upends the conventional view of fossils and may shift paleontologists' focus from bone hunting to biochemistry.
''Tyrannosaurus'' lived throughout what is now western North America, on what was then an island continent known as Laramidia.
The fauna was very similar to Hell Creek, but with ''Struthiomimus'' replacing its relative ''Ornithomimus''.
He would suggest that this made precision more crucial for ''Tyrannosaurus'' enabling it to, "get in, get that blow in and take it down."
Medullary tissue is found only in female birds during ovulation, indicating that B-rex was of reproductive age.
The study would also point out that elastic ligaments in larger vertebrates could store and return relatively more elastic strain energy, which could have improved locomotor efficiency and decrease the strain energy transferred to the bones.
For example, the pelvis of several 'robust' specimens seemed to be wider, perhaps to allow the passage of eggs.
Osborn used the Latin word ''rex'', meaning "king", for the specific name.
In a 2013 lecture, Thomas Holtz Jr. would suggest that dinosaurs "lived fast and died young" because they reproduced quickly whereas mammals have long life spans because they take longer to reproduce.
This was recognized as early as 1906 by Osborn, who speculated that the forelimbs may have been used to grasp a mate during copulation.
(2009) tested dinosaur mass estimation procedures on elephants and concluded that those of dinosaurs are flawed and produce over-estimations; thus, the weight of ''Tyrannosaurus'' could have been much less than previously thought.
However, the bones show large areas for muscle attachment, indicating considerable strength.
Further study indicates an age of 18 for this specimen.
In addition, microstructures resembling blood cells were found inside the matrix and vessels.
Brown's fourth and largest find, also from Hell Creek, is on display in the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
Barrick and Showers have defended their conclusions in subsequent papers, finding similar results in another theropod dinosaur from a different continent and tens of millions of years earlier in time (''Giganotosaurus'').
In 2016, it was finally confirmed by Mary Higby Schweitzer and Lindsay Zanno ''et al'' that the soft tissue within the femur of MOR 1125 was medullary tissue.
Paleontologist Jack Horner has been a major advocate of the idea that ''Tyrannosaurus'' was exclusively a scavenger and did not engage in active hunting at all, though Horner himself has claimed that he never published this idea in the peer-reviewed scientific literature and used it mainly as a tool to teach a popular audience, particularly children, the dangers of making assumptions in science (such as assuming ''T.&nbsp;rex'' was a hunter) without using evidence.
They contend that what was really inside the tyrannosaur bone was slimy biofilm created by bacteria that coated the voids once occupied by blood vessels and cells.
This strongly suggests that B-rex was female, and that she died during ovulation.
The eye sockets of tyrannosaurs are positioned so that the eyes would point forward, giving them binocular vision slightly better than that of modern hawks.
Discovered in the 1960s and only recently reconstructed, the skull measured  long compared to the  of Sue's skull, a difference of 6.5%.
The study would suggest that this mechanism could have worked efficiently in tyrannosaurids as well.
This would have allowed ''Tyrannosaurus'' to discern objects  as far as  away, which is greater than the  that a human can see.
They found similar spheres in a variety of other fossils from various periods, including an ammonite.
He therefore concluded that tyrannosaurids and their close relatives were the fastest large theropods.
Early speculation that Sue may have died from a bite to the back of the head was not confirmed.
the tyrannosaur had attempted active predation.
A recent redescription of the skull of ''Tarbosaurus bataar'' has shown that it was much narrower than that of ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' and that during a bite, the distribution of stress in the skull would have been very different, closer to that of ''Alioramus'', another Asian tyrannosaur.
This concept dates from Joseph Leidy's 1865 reconstruction of ''Hadrosaurus'', the first to depict a dinosaur in a bipedal posture.
An avulsion injury left a divot on the humerus of Sue the ''T.&nbsp;rex'', apparently located at the origin of the deltoid or teres major muscles.
In contrast, the same two joints in ''Deinonychus'' allow up to 88 and 130 degrees of motion, respectively, while a human arm can rotate 360 degrees at the shoulder and move through 165 degrees at the elbow.
The geological context in which those bones are found – the intricate details of ancient environments and the pace of prehistoric time – are essential to investigating the lives and deaths of dinosaurs," and noted that Currie must first describe the geological evidence from other tyrannosaur bonebed sites before jumping to conclusions about social behavior.
This is because ''Tyrannosaurus'' also had additional adaptations to enable large tail muscles; the elongation of its tail's hemal arches.
As the bite marks were made in body parts with relatively scanty amounts of flesh, it is suggested that the ''Tyrannosaurus'' was feeding on a carcass in which the more fleshy parts had already been consumed.
''Tyrannosaurus rex'' arms are very small relative to overall body size, measuring only  long, and some scholars have labelled them as vestigial.
Histology has also allowed the age of other specimens to be determined.
