Poor communication within hospitals, low satisfaction with health services and distance to health service providers undermine the provision of quality health care to people living in Uganda, and particularly for those in poor and elderly-headed households.
In Uganda, the Allied Democratic Forces is considered a violent rebel force that opposes the Ugandan government.
Maternal health in rural Uganda lags behind national policy targets and the Millennium Development Goals, with geographical inaccessibility, lack of transport and financial burdens identified as key demand-side constraints to accessing maternal health services; as such, interventions like intermediate transport mechanisms have been adopted as a means to improve women's access to maternal health care services in rural regions of the country.
There are now 112 districts.
Beginning in 1894, the area was ruled as a protectorate by the British, who established administrative law across the territory.
UPC and KY formed the first post-independence government with Milton Obote as executive prime minister, the Buganda Kabaka (King) Edward Muteesa II holding the largely ceremonial position of president.
Subsequently, some became traders and took control of cotton ginning and sartorial retail.
The remaining members are elected for five-year terms during general elections.
Trafficking of children occurs.
At the 2002 census, Uganda had a literacy rate of 66.8% (76.8% male and 57.7% female).
Uganda's economy generates export income from coffee ($466.6 million annually), tea ($72.1 million), fish ($136.2 million), and other products.
Uganda takes its name from the Buganda kingdom, which encompasses a large portion of the south of the country, including the capital Kampala.
The number of military personnel in Uganda is estimated at 45,000 soldiers on active duty.
These funds were "earmarked as crucial support for rebuilding northern Uganda, ravaged by a 20-year war, and Karamoja, Uganda's poorest region."
The parliament is formed by the National Assembly, which has 332 members.
Aside from his brutalities, he forcibly removed the entrepreneurial Indian minority from Uganda, which left the country's economy in ruins.
Lule was replaced by Godfrey Binaisa in June 1979.
Around 90 percent of the Ugandan Indians reside in Kampala, the capital.
However, there has been a spike in recent years compared to the mid-'90s, especially after a shift in US Aid Policy toward abstinence only campaigns.
In addition to agricultural work, rural women are responsible for the caretaking of their families.
This was causing widespread criticism and protests, including the smuggling of two piglets into the parliament in June 2014 to highlight corruption amongst members of parliament.
Uganda lies almost completely within the Nile basin.
The southern part of the country includes a substantial portion of Lake Victoria, shared with Kenya and Tanzania.
British Anglican missionaries arrived in the kingdom of Buganda in 1877 (a situation which gave rise to the death of the Uganda Martyrs) and were followed by French Catholic missionaries in 1879.
The water and sanitation sector was recognized as a key area under the 2004 Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), Uganda's
Other girls engage in sex work.
The people of Uganda were hunter-gatherers until 1,700 to 2,300 years ago, when Bantu-speaking populations migrated to the southern parts of the country.
English was the only official language until the constitution was amended in 2005.
The next most reported religion of Uganda was Islam, with Muslims representing 12.1 percent of the population.
Ugandan parliamentarians in 2014 were earning 60 times what was being earned by most state employees and they were seeking a major increase.
The prevalence of female genital mutilation (FGM) is low: according to a 2013 UNICEF report, only 1% of women in Uganda have undergone FGM; and the practice is also illegal in the country.
A specific scandal, which had significant international consequences and highlighted the presence of corruption in high-level government offices, was the embezzlement of $12.6 million of donor funds from the Office of the Prime Minister in 2012.
The paper also alleged that homosexuals aimed to recruit Ugandan children.
Despite making enormous progress in reducing the countrywide poverty incidence from 56 percent of the population in 1992 to 24.5 percent in 2009, poverty remains deep-rooted in the country's rural areas, which are home to 84 percent of Ugandans.
In 2012, 37.8 percent of the population lived on less than $1.25 a day.
These rebels are an enemy of the Uganda People's Defence Force and are considered an affiliate of Al-Shabaab.
Uganda is one of the poorest nations in the world.
The British government chartered the Imperial British East Africa Company (IBEAC) to negotiate trade agreements in the region beginning in 1888.
It is bordered to the east by Kenya, to the north by South Sudan, to the west by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the southwest by Rwanda, and to the south by Tanzania.
In 2012, the World Bank  still listed Uganda as on the HIPC list.
In the 1890s, 32,000 labourers from British India were recruited to East Africa under indentured labour contracts to work on the construction of the Uganda Railway.
in Uganda are exposed to health hazards.
As a result, young women tend to have older and more sexually experienced partners and this puts women at a disproportionate risk of getting affected by HIV, accounting for about 57 per cent of all adults living with HIV.
The 2006 Uganda Demographic Health Survey (UDHS) indicated that roughly 6,000 women die each year from pregnancy-related complications.
British commercial interests were ardent to protect the trade route of the Nile, which prompted the British government to annex Buganda and adjoining territories to create the Uganda Protectorate in 1894.
They could not open branches, hold rallies, or field candidates directly (although electoral candidates could belong to political parties).
Amin ruled Uganda as dictator with the support of the military for the next eight years.
Uganda has a very young population; With a median age of 15 years, it is the lowest median age in the world.
According to the official results, Museveni won with 68 percent of the votes.
Museveni ran against several candidates, the most prominent of them being Kizza Besigye.
With respect to the last inter-censal period (September 2002), the population increased by 10.6 million people in the past 12 years.
Heritage Oil discovered one of the largest crude oil finds in Uganda, and continues operations there.
The country has an increasingly successful national basketball team.
The country is located on the East African Plateau, lying mostly between latitudes 4°N and 2°S (a small area is north of 4°), and longitudes 29° and 35°E.
In Uganda, the Uganda People's Defence Force serves as the military.
With the emphasis on Ugandan Film and the UCC regulations favouring Ugandan productions for mainstream television, Ugandan film may become more prominent and successful in the near future.
It is nicknamed ''The Silverbacks'', and made its debut at the 2015 FIBA Africa Championship.
main strategy paper to fight poverty.
He carried out mass killings within the country to maintain his rule.
The Petroleum Bill, passed by parliament in 2012 and touted by the NRM as bringing transparency to the oil sector, has failed to please domestic and international political commentators and economists.
As of January 2014, homosexuality is illegal in Uganda and carries a minimum sentence of two years in prison and a maximum of life.
Amin's reign was ended after the Uganda-Tanzania War in 1979, in which Tanzanian forces aided by Ugandan exiles invaded Uganda.
Children who work on tobacco farms
In the non-party "Movement" system instituted by Museveni, political parties continued to exist, but they could operate only a headquarters office.
Northern Region, including the West Nile sub-region, is predominantly Catholic, while the Iganga District in eastern Uganda has the highest percentage of Muslims.
People in rural areas of Uganda depend on farming as the main source of income and 90 per cent of all rural women work in the agricultural sector.
On 1 August 2014, the Constitutional Court of Uganda ruled the bill invalid as it was not passed with the required quorum.
Without first calling elections, Obote was declared the executive president.
The hacktivist group Anonymous hacked into Ugandan government websites in protest of the bill.
Researchers have found that rates of new infection have stabilised  due to a variety of factors, including increased condom use and sexual health awareness.
The Muslim population is primarily Sunni.
After a military coup on 25 January 1971, Obote was deposed from power and General Idi Amin seized control of the country.
The death penalty was dropped in the final legislation.
Political subdivisions in Uganda are officially served and united by the Uganda Local Governments Association (ULGA), a voluntary and non-profit body which also serves as a forum for support and guidance for Ugandan sub-national governments.
+Administrative units (August 2014)
This scandal prompted the EU, the UK, Germany, Denmark, Ireland, and Norway to suspend aid.
Attacks on political freedom in the country, including the arrest and beating of opposition members of parliament, have led to international criticism, culminating in May 2005 in a decision by the British government to withhold part of its aid to the country.
Many Asians (mostly from India) who were expelled during the regime of Amin have returned to Uganda.
The rest of the country has a mix of religious affiliations.
This policy has been cited as a key factor in helping Uganda achieve its Millennium Development Goals and as an example of the importance of equity in achieving those goals.
Owing to the large number of communities, culture within Uganda is diverse.
According to the census of 2002, Christians made up about 85 percent of Uganda's population.
The government has used the stock market as an avenue for privatisation.
It is developing quickly, but still faces an assortment of challenges.
The law was widely condemned by the international community.
From 1886, there were a series of religious wars in Buganda, initially between Muslims and Christians and then, from 1890, between ba-Ingleza Protestants and ba-Fransa Catholics.
According to government figures, it was 70 percent in rural areas and 81 percent in urban areas in 2011, while according to UN figures it was only 34 percent.
Meanwhile, the practice of abstinence was found to have decreased.
Child labour is common in Uganda.
Uganda is divided into districts.
There were eight physicians per 100,000 persons in the early 2000s.
The December 1980 elections returned Obote to the presidency with Muwanga as vice-president.
To supplement their income, rural women may engage in small-scale entrepreneurial activities such as rearing and selling local breeds of animals.
The Roman Catholic Church had the largest number of adherents (41.9 percent), followed by the Anglican Church of Uganda (35.9 percent).
The US Committee for Refugees and Immigrants reported several violations of refugee rights in 2007, including forcible deportations by the Ugandan government and violence directed against refugees.
In July 2011 Kampala, Uganda qualified for the 2011 Little League World Series in Williamsport, Pennsylvania for the first time, beating Saudi Arabian baseball team Dharan LL, though due to visa complications they were unable to attend the Series.
Despite this policy, many users are denied care if they don't provide their own medical equipment, as happened in the highly publicised case of Jennifer Anguko.
Uganda gained independence from Britain on 9 October 1962.
Efforts have intensified to establish a second access route to the sea via the lakeside ports of Bukasa in Uganda and Musoma in Tanzania, connected by railway to Arusha in the Tanzanian interior and to the port of Tanga on the Indian Ocean.
Economic growth has not always led to poverty reduction.
The Capital Markets Authority has licensed 18 brokers, asset managers and investment advisors including: African Alliance Investment Bank, Baroda Capital Markets Uganda Limited, Crane Financial Services Uganda Limited, Crested Stocks and Securities Limited, Dyer & Blair Investment Bank, Equity Stock Brokers Uganda Limited, Renaissance Capital Investment Bank and UAP Financial Services Limited.
Though Swahili has not been favoured by the Bantu-speaking populations of the south and southwest of the country, it is an important ''lingua franca'' in the northern regions.
As one of the ways of increasing formal domestic savings, pension sector reform is the centre of attention (2007).
On 4 October 2012, the Ministry of Health officially declared the end of the Ebola outbreak that killed at least 16 people.
A constitutional referendum cancelled this nineteen-year ban on multi-party politics in July 2005.
Presidential elections were held in February 2006.
Sodomy laws from the British colonial era are still on the books, and there is an extreme social bias against homosexuality, with the murder rate for LGBT people being significantly higher than other groups.
Also on 9 October 2010, the Ugandan newspaper ''Rolling Stone'' published a front page article titled "100 Pictures of Uganda's Top Homos Leak" that listed the names, addresses, and photographs of 100 homosexuals alongside a yellow banner that read "Hang Them".
Political parties in Uganda were restricted in their activities beginning that year, in a measure ostensibly designed to reduce sectarian violence.
Life expectancy at birth was estimated to be 53.45 years in 2012.
Public spending on education was at 5.2% of the 2002–2005 GDP.
Bantu-speaking populations, who were probably from central Africa, migrated to the southern parts of the country.
and forced labour are prohibited by the Ugandan constitution.
Uganda's population has grown from 9.5 million people in 1969 to 34.9 million in 2014.
Most of the latter came from neighbouring countries in the African Great Lakes region, namely Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya, Rwanda and Sudan.
104 of these members are nominated by interest groups, including women and the army.
Furthermore, 9 more people were killed during the April 2011 "Walk to Work" demonstrations.
Because of civil unrest and financial burdens, IBEAC claimed that it was unable to "maintain their occupation" in the region.
Infection rates of 30 per cent of the population in the 1980s fell to 6.4% by the end of 2008.
The Victoria Nile drains from Lake Victoria into Lake Kyoga and thence into Lake Albert on the Congolese border.
It was announced by the Health Ministry on 16 August 2013, that three people died in northern Uganda from a suspected outbreak of Congo Crimean Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF).
There are a growing number of Presbyterian denominations like the Presbyterian Church in Uganda, the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Uganda and the Evangelical Free Church in Uganda with hundreds of affiliating congregations.
Riots occurred and over 40 people were killed while others remain imprisoned to this date.
They were followed in the 1860s by British explorers searching for the source of the Nile.
Concerning access to improved sanitation, figures have varied widely.
The first are filmmakers who use the Nollywood video film era's guerrilla approach to film making, churning out a picture in around two weeks and screening it in makeshift video halls.
In 1967, a new constitution proclaimed Uganda a republic and abolished the traditional kingdoms.
The status of Swahili has thus alternated with the political group in power.
Bunyoro-Kitara is claimed as the antecedent of the Buganda, Toro, Ankole, and Busoga kingdoms.
The ancestors of the Ugandans were hunter-gatherers until 1,700-2,300 years ago.
It averages about  above sea level, sloping very steadily downwards to the Sudanese Plain to the north.
These amounts combined with the original HIPC debt relief added up to about $2 billion.
With the Uganda securities exchanges established in 1996, several equities have been listed.
The protesters, who were arrested, were using the word "MPigs" to highlight their grievance.
This has highlighted the importance of avoiding jobless growth and is part of the rising awareness in development circles of the need for equitable growth not just in Uganda, but across the developing world.
Indicators of a plan for succession by the president's son, Muhoozi Kainerugaba, have increased tensions.
After Amin's removal, the Uganda National Liberation Front formed an interim government with Yusuf Lule as president.
The official language is English.
As such, women on average work longer hours than men, between 12 and 18 hours per day, with a mean of 15 hours, as compared to men, who work between 8 and 10 hours a day.
British naval ships unknowingly carried rats that contained the bubonic plague.
An area in eastern Uganda is drained by the Suam River, part of the internal drainage basin of Lake Turkana.
The Uganda army is involved in several peacekeeping and combat missions in the region, with commentators noting that only the United States Armed Forces is deployed in more countries.
According to IMF statistics, in 2004 Uganda's GDP per capita reached $300, a much higher level than in the 1980s but still at half the Sub-Saharan African average income of $600 per year.
However, oil was found in the Lake Albert area, totaling an estimated  barrels of crude.
In 2008, Uganda recorded 7 percent growth despite the global downturn and regional instability.
The extreme northeastern part of Uganda drains into the Lotikipi Basin, which is primarily in Kenya.
According to the Humans Rights Watch 2013 World Report on Uganda, the government has failed to investigate the killings associated with both of these events.
As several other territories and chiefdoms were integrated, the final protectorate called Uganda took shape in 1914.
The infant mortality rate was approximately 61 deaths per 1,000 children in 2012.
The period since then has been marked by intermittent conflicts, including a lengthy civil war against the Lord's Resistance Army, which has caused tens of thousands of casualties and displaced more than a million people.
There are also minorities who are Shia (7 percent), Ahmadiyya (4 percent) and those that are non-denominational Muslims, Sufi Muslims.
Arab traders moved inland from the Indian Ocean coast of East Africa in the 1830s.
However, many Indians returned to Uganda after Amin's fall from power in 1979, and the population is now between 15,000 and 25,000.
The Luo invasion is believed to have led to the collapse of the Chwezi Empire.
Total GDP crossed the 8&nbsp;billion dollar mark in the same year.
Uganda is the world's second most populous landlocked country after Ethiopia.
Since 1986, the government (with the support of foreign countries and international agencies) has acted to rehabilitate an economy devastated during the regime of Idi Amin and the subsequent civil war.
Uganda is a member of the East African Community and a potential member of the planned East African Federation.
The Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) is preparing regulations starting in 2014 that require Ugandan television to broadcast 70 percent Ugandan content and of this, 40 percent to be independent productions.
All government treasury issues are listed on the securities exchange.
Uganda also lies within the Nile basin, and has a varied but generally a modified equatorial climate.
A number of districts have been added in the past few years, and eight others were added on 1 July 2006 plus others added in 2010.
Besigye added that the rigged elections would definitely lead to an illegitimate leadership and that it is up to Ugandans to critically analyse this.
Denmark, Netherlands and Sweden said they would withhold aid.
The arrest of the main opposition leader Kizza Besigye and the siege of the High Court during a hearing of Besigye's case by heavily armed security forces – before the February 2006 elections – led to condemnation.
Despite an average annual growth of 2.5 percent between 2000 and 2003, poverty levels increased by 3.8% during that time.
In September 2009 Museveni refused Kabaka Muwenda Mutebi, the Baganda king, permission to visit some areas of Buganda Kingdom, particularly the Kayunga district.
There are no schools in the country dedicated to film, banks do not extend credit to film ventures, and distribution and marketing of movies remains poor.
On 27 January 2011, gay rights activist David Kato was murdered.
It then runs northwards into South Sudan.
However, the electoral process was marred by avoidable administrative and logistical failures that led to an unacceptable number of Ugandan citizens being disfranchised."
Some international donors have threatened to cut financial aid to the country if anti-gay bills continue.
Since August 2012, hacktivist group Anonymous has threatened Ugandan officials and hacked official government websites over its anti-gay bills.
The Ugandan film industry is relatively young.
An estimated 300,000 Ugandans lost their lives during his regime, many of them in the north, which he associated with Obote's loyalists.
Furthermore, some groups attempt to restore Ankole as one of the officially recognised traditional kingdoms, to no avail yet.
Uganda has substantial natural resources, including fertile soils, regular rainfall, and sizeable mineral deposits of copper and cobalt.
Along with technical problems such as refining acting and editing skills, there are issues regarding funding and lack of government support and investment.
The country has commenced economic reforms and growth has been robust.
Women submit to an overall lower social status than men.
What may compound this problem – as it does in many developing nations (Resource curse) – is the availability of oil.
Uganda traditionally depends on Kenya for access to the Indian Ocean port of Mombasa.
Uganda has the fifth highest total fertility rate in the world, at 5.97 children born/woman (2014 estimates).
Conflict in northern Uganda has killed thousands and displaced millions.
The private member's bill was submitted by MP David Bahati in Uganda on 14 October 2009, and was believed to have had widespread support in the Uganda parliament.
The local film industry is polarised between two types of filmmakers.
In the mid-to-late 1990s, Museveni was lauded by western countries as part of a new generation of African leaders.
This marks the year of assent of film in Uganda, a time where many enthusiasts were proud to classify themselves as cinematographers in varied capacities.
Uganda is in the African Great Lakes region.
Parallel with the state administration, five traditional Bantu kingdoms have remained, enjoying some degrees of mainly cultural autonomy.
requiring recommendations from government officials; annual re-registration), unreasonable regulation of operations (i.e.
Over one million people died by the early 1900s.
In 1966, following a power struggle between the Obote-led government and King Muteesa, the UPC-dominated parliament changed the constitution and removed the ceremonial president and vice-president.
Each district is divided into counties, sub-counties, parishes, and villages.
His presidency has been marred, however, by invading and occupying the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the Second Congo War, resulting in an estimated 5.4 million deaths since 1998, and by participating in other conflicts in the Great Lakes region of Africa.
According to the World Bank, Uganda received in 2014 an estimated $994 million in remittances from abroad.
Several other kingdoms and chiefdoms are officially recognized by the government, including the union of Alur chiefdoms, the Iteso paramount chieftaincy, the paramount chieftaincy of Lango and the Padhola state.
He has struggled for years in the civil war against the Lord's Resistance Army, which has been guilty of numerous crimes against humanity, including child slavery, the Atiak massacre, and other mass murders.
In May 1980, Binaisa was removed and the country was ruled by a military commission chaired by Paulo Muwanga.
The districts are subdivided into counties.
