In the mid-17th&nbsp;century, a Cossack military quasi-state, the Zaporozhian Host, was formed by Dnieper Cossacks and by Ruthenian peasants who had fled Polish serfdom.
Although the amount of available information is still very small, a first effort has been made to estimate the number of fungal species endemic to Ukraine, and 2217 such species have been tentatively identified.
Music is a major part of Ukrainian culture, with a long history and many influences.
One 2006 survey put the number of non-religious in Ukraine at approximately 11.1% of the population.
The heads of regional and district administrations are appointed by the President in accordance with the proposals of the Prime Minister.
Ukrainisation was part of the Soviet-wide policy of Korenisation (literally ''indigenisation'').
The wars escalated in intensity with hundreds of thousands of deaths.
File:Крещатик 38 дробь 2 Киев 2012 01.JPG|Central Department store in Kiev, Stalinist architecture example.
On 24 March 2010, President Yanukovych formed an expert group to make recommendations how to "clean up the current mess and adopt a law on court organization".
For most students the government subsidy is not sufficient to cover their basic living expenses.
The hetmanate was abolished in 1764; the Zaporizhska Sich abolished in 1775, as Russia centralised control over its lands.
Petro Poroshenko, running on a pro-European Union platform, won with over fifty percent of the vote, therefore not requiring a run-off election.
In 2007, the country's rate of population decline was the fourth highest in the world.
Literary freedom appeared in late 1980s&nbsp;— early 1990s with the process of collapse of the USSR and reestablishing of Ukrainian independence in 1991.
The last remnant of the Crimean Khanate was finally conquered by the Russian Empire in 1783.
Despite remaining lower than in neighbouring central European countries, the salary income growth in 2008 stood at 36.8%
The parliament is primarily responsible for the formation of the executive branch and the Cabinet of Ministers, headed by the Prime Minister.
The majority of Ukrainian exports are marketed to the European Union and CIS.
Tourism used to be the mainstay of Crimea's economy but there has been a major fall in visitor numbers following the Russian annexation in 2014.
Of the estimated 8.7&nbsp;million Soviet troops who fell in battle against the Nazis, 1.4&nbsp;million were ethnic Ukrainians.
Kiev, the capital of modern Ukraine, became the most important city of the Rus'.
The culture of Ukraine has also been influenced by its eastern and western neighbours, reflected in its architecture, music and art.
Having served as First Secretary of the Communist Party of Ukrainian SSR in 1938–49, Khrushchev was intimately familiar with the republic; after taking power union-wide, he began to emphasize the friendship between the Ukrainian and Russian nations.
On 16 July 1990, the new parliament adopted the Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine.
Many prominent Soviet sports players, scientists, and artists came from Ukraine.
Ukraine has a very large heavy-industry base and is one of the largest refiners of metallurgical products in Eastern Europe.
The total losses inflicted upon the Ukrainian population during the war are estimated at between 5 and 8 million, including an estimated one and a half million Jews killed by the Einsatzgruppen, sometimes with the help of local collaborators.
Its Visiting Nurses Service has 3,200 qualified nurses.
Act Zluky (Unification Act) was an agreement signed on January 22, 1919 by the Ukrainian People's Republic and the West Ukrainian People's Republic on the St. Sophia Square in Kiev.
After a final resurgence under the rule of Vladimir II Monomakh (1113–1125) and his son Mstislav (1125–1132), Kievan Rus' finally disintegrated into separate principalities following Mstislav's death.
At the same time, the Ukrainian Liberation Army, another nationalist movement, fought alongside the Nazis.
Women's rights were greatly increased through new laws.
In the 2000s, the government began leaning towards NATO, and a deeper cooperation with the alliance was set by the NATO-Ukraine Action Plan signed in 2002.
As Uniate religious practices had become more Latinized, Orthodoxy in this region drew even closer into dependence on the Russian Orthodox Church.
National dress is woven and highly decorated.
Analysis of official national statistics and the Ukrainian Reproductive Health Survey show that fertility declined to very low levels without a transition to a later pattern of childbearing.
Ukraine ranks 8th among the world's top ten countries with the fastest Internet access speed.
Recently deposed President Viktor Yanukovych considered the current level of co-operation between Ukraine and NATO sufficient, and was against Ukraine joining NATO.
Ukraine has been a net energy exporting country, for example in 2011, 3.3% of electricity produced were exported, but also one of Europe's largest energy consumers.
By 1950, the republic had fully surpassed pre-war levels of industry and production.
Disputes with Russia briefly stopped all gas supplies to Ukraine in 2006 and again in 2009, leading to gas shortages in other countries.
Despite this, on 30 September 2010 the Constitutional Court ruled that the amendments were null and void, forcing a return to the terms of the 1996 Constitution and again making Ukraine's political system more presidential in character.
Growing sectors of the Ukrainian economy include the information technology (IT) market, which topped all other Central and Eastern European countries in 2007, growing some 40&nbsp;percent.
Russia eventually conquered the south of Ukraine and Crimea, and renamed them as New Russia.
Ukraine's 2010 GDP, as calculated by the World Bank, was around $136&nbsp;billion, 2011 GDP – around $163&nbsp;billion, 2012 – $176.6&nbsp;billion, 2013 – $177.4&nbsp;billion.
Among the most famous writers of the post-Soviet period are Oksana Zabuzhko, Yurii Andrukhovych, , Serhiy Zhadan, Taras Prokhasko, Jaroslav Melnik, , Yuriy Pokalchuk, Yuriy Vynnychuk, Andrey Kurkov.
Local self-government is officially guaranteed.
Much of the concern was based on the fact that neither the Constitution of 1996 nor the Constitution of 2004 provided the ability to "undo the Constitution", as the decision of the Constitutional Court would have it, even though the 2004 constitution arguably has an exhaustive list of possible procedures for constitutional amendments (articles 154–159).
Ukrainian directors Alexander Dovzhenko, often cited as one of the most important early Soviet filmmakers, as well as being a pioneer of Soviet montage theory, Dovzhenko Film Studios, and Sergei Parajanov, Armenian film director and artist who made significant contributions to Ukrainian, Armenian and Georgian cinema.
File:Чернігів.Собор Бориса й Гліба.JPG|The Transfiguration Cathedral in Chernihiv dates to Kievan Rus.
After the war, a new project for the reconstruction of central Kiev transformed Khreshchatyk avenue into a notable example of Stalinism in Architecture.
However, as depicted in the maps here, they have at times extended well into Eurasia and Southeastern Europe.
Ukraine has a mostly temperate climate, with the exception of the southern coast of Crimea which has a subtropical climate.
Following Euromaidan then President Viktor Yanukovich introduced a ban on Rosatom nuclear fuel shipments to Europe via Ukraine, which was in effect from 28 January until 6 March 2014.
Similarly, the Crimean Tatar language (the language of 12&nbsp;percent of population of Crimea) is guaranteed a special state protection as well as the 'languages of other ethnicities'.
Deprived of native protectors among Rus nobility, the commoners (peasants and townspeople) began turning for protection to the emerging Zaporozhian Cossacks, who by the 17th century became devoutly Orthodox.
See: Dmytro Bortniansky, Maksym Berezovsky and Artemiy Vedel.
After it failed, on 24 August 1991 the Ukrainian parliament adopted the Act of Independence.
It was approved in Ukrainian Parliament on 1 July 2014.
Despite all this, Ukraine's economy was still expected to grow by around 3.5% in 2010.
At other times there has been no distinct Ukrainian state, its territories having been annexed by its more powerful neighbours.
The Euro 2012 football tournament, held in Poland and Ukraine as joint hosts, prompted the government to invest heavily in transport infrastructure, and in particular airports.
The landscape of Ukraine consists mostly of fertile plains (or steppes) and plateaus, crossed by rivers such as the Dnieper (), Seversky Donets, Dniester and the Southern Buh as they flow south into the Black Sea and the smaller Sea of Azov.
A significant number of citizens in rural Ukraine survived by growing their own food, often working two or more jobs and buying the basic necessities through the barter economy.
This practice was controversial and was subject to Constitutional Court review.
During the 1980s glasnost (openness) was introduced and Soviet artists and writers again became free to express themselves as they wanted.
Following the 1386 Union of Krewo, a dynastic union between Poland and Lithuania, much of what became northern Ukraine was ruled by the increasingly Slavicised local Lithuanian nobles as part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, and by 1392 the so-called Galicia–Volhynia Wars ended.
With establishment of the Soviet power, Ukraine lost half of its territory to Poland, Belarus and Russia, while on the left bank of Dniester River was created Moldavian autonomy.
Violence escalated after 16 January 2014 when the government accepted new Anti-Protest Laws.
Among the oldest is also the Lviv University, founded in 1661.
Austrian Galicia, under the relatively lenient rule of the Habsburgs, became the centre of the nationalist movement.
In Soviet times, the economy of Ukraine was the second largest in the Soviet Union, being an important industrial and agricultural component of the country's planned economy.
In the encirclement battle of Kiev, the city was acclaimed as a "Hero City", because of its fierce resistance.
A new Constitution of Ukraine was adopted under second President Leonid Kuchma in 1996, which turned Ukraine into a semi-presidential republic and established a stable political system.
As of June, 2014, there were 18.2 million desktop Internet users, which is 56% of the adult population.
Transport by air is developing quickly, with a visa-free programme for EU nationals and citizens of a number of other Western nations, the nation's aviation sector is handling a significantly increased number of travellers.
Military units of other states participate in multinational military exercises with Ukrainian forces in Ukraine regularly, including U.S. military forces.
Net population growth over the first nine months of 2007 was registered in five provinces of the country (out of 24), and population shrinkage was showing signs of stabilising nationwide.
'''Ukraine''' (; , tr.  )
New cities such as Nikolayev, Odessa, Kherson and Sevastopol were founded.
Students that study at state expense receive a standard scholarship if their average marks at the end-of-term exams and differentiated test suffice; this rule may be different in some universities.
From the beginning of the 16th century until the end of the 17th century, Crimean Tatar slave raiding bands exported about 2 million slaves from Russia and Ukraine.
In 2008, Ukraine emerged from lowest-low fertility, and the upward trend has continued since, except for a slight dip in 2010 because of the economic crisis of 2009 (see demographic tables).
As of March 2009 the Ukrainian government is reforming the health care system, by the creation of a national network of family doctors and improvements in the medical emergency services.
File:Лвов Галиција.jpg|Lviv's Old Town; architecture there is much influenced by its history as part of Austria-Hungary and Poland.
The first Ukrainian higher education institution was the Ostrozka School, or Ostrozkiy Greek-Slavic-Latin Collegium, similar to Western European higher education institutions of the time.
Some western Ukrainians, who had only joined the Soviet Union in 1939, hailed the Germans as liberators.
The largest ferry company presently operating these routes is Ukrferry.
Several Ukrainian states briefly emerged: the internationally recognized Ukrainian People's Republic ('''UNR''', the predecessor of modern Ukraine, was declared on 23 June 1917 proclaimed at first as a part of the Russian Republic; after the Bolshevik Revolution, the Ukrainian People's Republic proclaimed its independence on 25 January 1918), the Hetmanate, the Directorate and the pro-Bolshevik Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (or Soviet Ukraine) successively established territories in the former Russian Empire; while the West Ukrainian People's Republic and the Hutsul Republic emerged briefly in the Ukrainian lands of former Austro-Hungarian territory.
Ukraine is currently ranked 35th by number of gold medals won in the All-time Olympic Games medal count, with every country above it, except for Russia, having more appearances.
In 1688, Tatars captured a record number of 60,000 Ukrainians.
The Cossacks did not shy from taking up arms against those they perceived as enemies, including the Polish state and its local representatives.
In 2006, there were an estimated 1.2 million Canadians of Ukrainian ancestry, giving Canada the world's third-largest Ukrainian population behind Ukraine itself and Russia.
The Supreme Court is the main body in the system of courts of general jurisdiction.
They become increasingly salinized to the south as they approach the Black Sea.
Significant natural resources in Ukraine include iron ore, coal, manganese, natural gas, oil, salt, sulphur, graphite, titanium, magnesium, kaolin, nickel, mercury, timber and an abundance of arable land.
Its various regions have diverse geographic features ranging from the highlands to the lowlands.
After the troops entered Crimea, a controversial referendum was held on 16 March 2014 and the official result was that 97 percent wished to join with Russia.
The 24 oblasts and Crimea are subdivided into 490  (districts) and city municipalities of regional significance, or second-level administrative units.
At the end of the century, the majority of Bulgar tribes migrated in different directions, and the Khazars took over much of the land.
As Ukraine became increasingly integrated into the Russian Empire, Russian architects had the opportunity to realise their projects in the picturesque landscape that many Ukrainian cities and regions offered.
Activists of the Orange Revolution were funded and trained in tactics of political organisation and nonviolent resistance by Western pollsters and professional consultants who were partly funded by Western government and non-government agencies but received most of their funding from domestic sources.
Ukraine will be host to the Eurovision Song Contest 2017.
These advances were then set back in the 17th and early 18th&nbsp;centuries, when publishing in the Ukrainian language was outlawed and prohibited.
However, their intensive cultivation, especially on steep slopes, has led to widespread soil erosion and gullying.
According to the ''Primary Chronicle'' the Rus' elite initially consisted of Varangians from Scandinavia.
This became the Ukrainian Galician Army that fought against the Bolsheviks and Poles in the post-World War I period (1919–23).
Court justices are appointed by presidential decree for an initial period of five years, after which Ukraine's Supreme Council confirms their positions for life.
Local councils and city mayors are popularly elected and exercise control over local budgets.
In 1932, Stalin made socialist realism state policy in the Soviet Union when he promulgated the decree "On the Reconstruction of Literary and Art Organisations".
Smaller groups are also present.
Kiev Boryspil is the county's largest international airport; it has three main passenger terminals and is the base for both of Ukraine's national airlines.
He invented his own cinematic style, Ukrainian poetic cinema, which was totally out of step with the guiding principles of socialist realism.
"The Ukraine" now implies disregard for the country's sovereignty, according to U.S. ambassador William Taylor.
Gender roles also tend to be more traditional, and grandparents play a greater role in bringing up children, than in the West.
Ukraine also pursued full nuclear disarmament, giving up the third largest nuclear weapons stockpile in the world and dismantling or removing all strategic bombers on its territory in exchange for various assurances (main article: Nuclear weapons and Ukraine).
Hospitals in Ukraine are organised along the same lines as most European nations, according to the regional administrative structure; as a result most towns have their own hospital ''(Міська Лікарня)'' and many also have district hospitals ''(Районна Лікарня)''.
Significant issues include underdeveloped infrastructure and transportation, corruption and bureaucracy.
''Ukrayinska Pravda''.
Ukraine produces nearly all types of transportation vehicles and spacecraft.
File:Швидка квітнева вода.jpg| Balkhovitin, Zuivskyi regional landscape park, Donetsk Oblast
But after February 2014's Yanukovych ouster and the (denied by Russia) following Russian military intervention in Ukraine Ukraine renewed its drive for NATO membership.
In October 2014, Ukrainians voted to keep Poroshenko in power.
Additionally, the cities of Kiev, the capital, and Sevastopol, both have a special legal status.
By 1988 a number of higher education institutions increased to 146 with over 850,000 students.
Ukraine is home to a very wide range of animals, fungi, microorganisms and plants.
The snow melt from the mountains feeds the rivers, and natural changes in altitude form a sudden drop in elevation and create many opportunities to form waterfalls.
Ukraine's legislative branch includes the 450-seat unicameral parliament, the Verkhovna Rada.
In 1569 the Union of Lublin established the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, and much Ukrainian territory was transferred from Lithuania to the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland, becoming Polish territory de jure.
In 2011, Ukraine's Energy Ministry predicted that the installed capacity of generation from alternative and renewable energy sources would increase to 9% (about 6 GW) of the total electricity production in the country.
The Varangians later assimilated into the Slavic population and became part of the first Rus' dynasty, the Rurik Dynasty.
The results caused a public outcry in support of the opposition candidate, Viktor Yushchenko, who challenged the outcome.
Interspersed in various uplands and along the northern and western perimeters of the deep chernozems are mixtures of gray forest soils and podzolized black-earth soils, which together occupy much of Ukraine's remaining area.
Also, it is common for libraries to supply required books for all registered students.
Defeat came in 1686 as the "Eternal Peace" between Russia and Poland divided the Ukrainian lands between them.
The insurgency was led by Russian emissaries Igor Girkin and Alexander Borodai as well as militants from Russia, such as Arseny Pavlov.
The climate is influenced by moderately warm, humid air coming from the Atlantic Ocean.
The phenomenon of lowest-low fertility, defined as total fertility below 1.3, is emerging throughout Europe and is attributed by many to postponement of the initiation of childbearing.
Ukraine is a unitary republic under a semi-presidential system with separate powers: legislative, executive, and judicial branches.
During the 1920s, under the Ukrainisation policy pursued by the national Communist leadership of Mykola Skrypnyk, Soviet leadership encouraged a national renaissance in the Ukrainian culture and language.
An example of modern Ukrainian architecture is the reconstruction and renewal of the Maidan Nezalezhnosti in central Kiev.
City's significance depends on several factors such as its population, socio-economic and historical importance, infrastructure and others.
Kuchma was, however, criticised by opponents for corruption, electoral fraud, discouraging free speech and concentrating too much power in his office.
Several television channels operate, and many Websites are popular.
Ukraine's 2010 GDP (PPP), as calculated by the CIA, is ranked 38th in the world and estimated at $305.2&nbsp;billion.
Ukraine is the most active member of the Partnership for Peace (PfP).
The Taurida Governorate was formed to govern this territory.
On the other hand, however, it is widely accepted that members of the service provided vital information about government plans to the leaders of the Orange Revolution to prevent the collapse of the movement.
The Association Agreement between Ukraine and the European Union was signed in 2014.
Ukrainian customs are heavily influenced by Christianity, the dominant religion in the country.
The death toll of this famine varies, with even the lowest estimate in the tens of thousands.
Danylo Romanovych (Daniel I of Galicia or Danylo Halytskyi) son of Roman Mstyslavych, re-united all of south-western Rus', including Volhynia, Galicia and Rus' ancient capital of Kiev.
However, in 2004, deputies introduced changes to the Constitution, which tipped the balance of power in favour of a parliamentary system.
In 2011 several large solar power stations were opened in Ukraine, among them Europe's largest solar park in Perovo, (Crimea).
These details result in a significant difference across different survey results, as even a small restating of a question switches responses of a significant group of people.
Previously, the city was seen as only a regional centre, hence received little attention.
Such policies left Ukraine with hundreds of stadia, swimming pools, gymnasia and many other athletic facilities.
Freedom House classifies the Internet in Ukraine as "free" and the press as "partly free".
In the 12th grade, students take Government tests, which are also referred to as school-leaving exams.
Even the St. Sophia Cathedral was under threat.
The total amount of railroad track in Ukraine extends for , of which  is electrified.
Significant migration took place in the first years of Ukrainian independence.
Ukrainian is the official language of Ukraine; its alphabet is Cyrillic.
Ukrainians listen to radio programming, such as Radio Ukraine or Radio Liberty, largely commercial, on average just over two-and-a-half hours a day.
Ukraine is currently in territorial dispute with Russia over the Crimean Peninsula which Russia invaded and annexed in 2014 but which Ukraine and most of the international community recognise as Ukrainian.
Ukraine has a large number of political parties, many of which have tiny memberships and are unknown to the general public.
On 21 February 2014 an agreement between President Viktor Yanukovych and opposition leaders saw the country return to the 2004 Constitution.
Held annually in October.
Historically, Specialist degree (usually 5 years) is still also granted; it was the only degree awarded by universities in the Soviet times.
In 2014, Ukraine was ranked number 19 on the Emerging Market Energy Security Growth Prosperity Index, published by the think tank Bisignis Institute, which ranks emerging market countries using government corruption, GDP growth and oil reserve information.
Judges are largely well protected from dismissal (except in the instance of gross misconduct).
The National Endowment for Democracy has supported democracy-building efforts in Ukraine since 1988.
Ukraine has a number of airlines, the largest of which is the nation's flag carrier, Ukraine International Airlines.
With the dissolution of the Soviet system, the country moved from a planned economy to a market economy.
Since independence, Ukraine has maintained its own space agency, the National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU).
Ukrainian music sometimes presents a perplexing mix of exotic melismatic singing with chordal harmony.
is a sovereign state in Eastern Europe, bordered by Russia to the east and northeast, Belarus to the northwest, Poland and Slovakia to the west, Hungary, Romania, and Moldova to the southwest, and the Black Sea and Sea of Azov to the south and southeast, respectively.
The diversified economy of Ukraine includes a large heavy industry sector, particularly in aerospace and industrial equipment.
Following independence, the government of Ukraine began restoring the image and usage of Ukrainian language through a policy of Ukrainisation.
Beginning in the 19th century, there was migration from Ukraine to distant areas of the Russian Empire.
A report prepared by the International Atomic Energy Agency and World Health Organization attributed 56 direct deaths to the accident and estimated that there may have been 4,000 extra cancer deaths.
Ukraine has a large and steadily growing Internet sector, mostly uninfluenced by the financial crisis of 2007–08.
This severely curtailed literary activity in the area, and Ukrainian writers were forced to either publish their works in Russian or release them in Austrian controlled Galicia.
File:Південне Демерджі на світанку.jpg| Dawn on South Demerdji, Alushta, Crimea
Over time, ''Euromaidan'' came to describe a wave of demonstrations and civil unrest in Ukraine, the scope of which evolved to include calls for the resignation of President Yanukovych and his government.
Although the majority of Ukrainians fought in or alongside the Red Army and Soviet resistance, in Western Ukraine an independent Ukrainian Insurgent Army movement arose (UPA, 1942).
The Jewish population is a tiny fraction of what it was before World War II.
In 1430 Podolia was incorporated under the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland as Podolian Voivodeship.
In central Ukraine, Ukrainian and Russian are both equally used in cities, with Russian being more common in Kiev, while Ukrainian is the dominant language in rural communities.
Other large airports in the country include those in Kharkiv, Lviv and Donetsk (now destroyed), whilst those in Dnipropetrovsk and Odessa have plans for terminal upgrades in the near future.
Antonov Airlines, a subsidiary of the Antonov Aerospace Design Bureau is the only operator of the world's largest fixed wing aircraft, the An-225.
The Kievan Rus' was founded by the Rus' people, who settled around Ladoga and Novgorod, then gradually moved southward eventually reaching Kiev about 880.
When Petro Poroshenko won the presidential election held on 25 May 2014, he vowed to continue the military operations by the Ukrainian government forces to end the armed insurgency.
Free higher education in state and communal educational establishments is provided on a competitive basis.
Ukrainian troops are deployed in Kosovo as part of the Ukrainian-Polish Battalion.
By some estimates, 93% of all German casualties took place there.
These would contain notable examples of Imperial Russian architecture.
According to Macquarie Research, by 2016 Ukraine will construct and commission new solar power stations with a total capacity of 1.8 GW, almost equivalent to the capacity of two nuclear reactors.
The Ukraine publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover.
German armies invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, initiating four years of total war.
