Other than the Metropolitan Central Library, the MLSU has four branch libraries.
The modern history exhibition hall showcases the history of the Mongolian military, starting with the Bogd Khan period /1911¬-1924/ up to Mongolia’s recent military involvement in peacekeeping operations.
There are rail connections to the Trans-Siberian railway via Naushki and to the Chinese railway system via Jining.
The official symbol of Ulaanbaatar is the , a mythical bird in both Buddhist and Hindu scriptures called Khan Garuda or ''Khangar'd'' () by Mongols.
The city's population swelled during the Naadam festival and major religious festivals to more than 100,000.
More came on March 8, and the crowd grew more unruly; seventy people were injured and one killed.
Pre-1778 artifacts that never left the city since its founding include the Vajradhara statue made by Zanabazar himself in 1683 (the city's main deity kept at the Vajradhara temple), an ornate throne presented to Zanabazar by the Kangxi Emperor (before 1723), a sandalwood hat presented to Zanabazar by the Dalai Lama (c. 1663), Zanabazar's large fur coat which was also presented by the Kangxi Emperor and a great number of original statues made by Zanabazar (e.g., the Green Tara).
These were either sent to China or shipped north to Russia via Kyakhta because of legal restrictions and the lack of good trade routes to the west.
Access to the collection does require payment of a 500 Tugrug fee, though materials are available for loan.
The city was founded in 1639 as a nomadic Buddhist monastic centre.
Ulaanbaatar presently has three large cinemas, one modern ski resort, two large indoor stadiums, several large department stores and one large amusement park.
It is a collection of 45 newspaper titles with a particular focus on the years after the fall of communism in Mongolia.
In Europe and North America, Ulaanbaatar continued to be generally known as Urga or Khure until 1924, and Ulan Bator afterwards (a spelling derived from , ''Ulan-Bator'').
During the winter months, smoke regularly obscures vision and can even lead to problems with air traffic at the local airport.
Chinggis Khaan airport is the only airport in Mongolia that offers international flights.
File:Holy Ttinity Church in Ulan Bator.jpg|Holy Trinity Church, built near the old Russian Consulate of 1863.
Additionally, there are many private schools that offer bilingual programs.
It is scheduled to finish in 2018.
''The Metropolitan Central Library of Ulaanbaatar'', sometimes also referred to as the ''Ulaanbaatar Public Library'', is a public library with a collection of about 500,000 items.
Another is the Gandan Monastery, which dates to the 19th century.
In 2008, Ulaanbaatar was the scene of riots after the Mongolian Democratic, Civic Will Party and Republican parties disputed the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party's victory in the parliamentary elections.
Zuu Temple (1869) on left connected by passage built in 1945-1946.
These monasteries are among the very few in Mongolia to escape the wholesale destruction of Mongolian monasteries under Khorloogiin Choibalsan.
Ryskulov, the Soviet representative in Mongolia.
National Sports Stadium is the main sporting venue.
By 1908 there was a Russian quarter with a few hundred merchants and a Russian club and informal Russian mayor.
A secondary transit system of privately owned microbuses (passenger vans) operates alongside these bus lines.
The Zaisan Memorial includes a Soviet tank paid for by the Mongolian people and a circular memorial painting which in the socialist realism style depicts scenes of friendship between the peoples of Soviet Union and Mongolia.
Additionally, Ulaanbaatar has over 4000 taxis.
It had also become Outer Mongolia's commercial center.
Other future skyscrapers are the 34-floor Shangri-La Phase 2 luxury hotel project (construction ongoing and scheduled to finish in 2015)
Dissident leaders demanded free elections and economic reform.
Its goal is to facilitate research between Mongolia and the rest of the world and to foster academic partnerships.
On January 14, 1990 the protesters, having grown from two hundred to over a thousand, met at the Lenin Museum in Ulaanbaatar.
The ''' Mongolia-Japan Center for Human Resources Development''' maintains a library in Ulaanbaatar consisting of about 7,800 items.
It includes a number of periodicals, textbooks, dictionaries and audio-visual materials.
Ulaanbaatar is connected by road to most of the major towns in Mongolia, but most roads in Mongolia are unpaved and unmarked and road travel can be difficult.
Additionally, Ulaanbaatar houses numerous museums, two of the prominent ones being the National Museum of Mongolia and the Zanabazar Fine Arts Museum.
The Gandan Monastery flourished as a center of philosophical studies.
They also exceed the concentrations measured in northern Chinese industrial cities.
In recent years, many of the towerblock's ground floors have been modified and upgraded to small shops, and many new buildings have been erected, some of them illegally (some private companies erect buildings without the legal licenses or in forbidden places).
Owing to its high elevation, its relatively high latitude, its location hundreds of kilometres from any coast, and the effects of the Siberian anticyclone, Ulaanbaatar is the coldest national capital in the world, with a monsoon-influenced, cold semi-arid climate (Köppen ''BSk'', USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 3b) that closely borders a subarctic climate (''Dfc'') and warm-summer humid continental (''Dfb'').
The Chinese equivalent, ''Dà kùlún'' (大庫倫), was rendered into Western languages as "Kulun" or "Kuren."
He was unable to bring the lamas under control and was forced to flee back to his quarters.
This is a project funded by the Zorig Foundation, and the collection is largely based on materials donated by Mongolian National Radio.
Old Ikh Khüree, once the city was set up as a permanent capital, had a number of palaces and noble residences in an area called ''Öndgiin sürgiin nutag''.
In the socialist period, especially following the Second World War, most of the old ger districts were replaced by Soviet-style blocks of flats, often financed by the Soviet Union.
However, in the tripartite Kyakhta agreement of 1915 (between Russia, China, Mongolia), Mongolia's status was changed to mere autonomy.
Manufactured goods still came from Russia but most were now brought from Kalgan by caravan.
There is a '''Speaking Library''' at School 116 for the visually impaired.
It forms the boundary between the steppe zone to the south and the forest-steppe zone to the north.
While a significant portion of this project is supported by outside sources, an important component is to include training of Mongolian staff in order to make it continue in an effective way.
This was the first deadly riot in modern Ulaanbaatar's history.
Important shopping districts include the 3rd Microdistrict Boulevard (simply called ''Khoroolol'' or "the District"), Peace Avenue around the State Department Store (simply called ''Ikh Delguur'' or "Great Store") and the Narantuul "Black Market" area (simply called ''Zakh'' or "the Market").
It also hosts an online library that includes special reference resources and access to  digital databases, including a  digital book collection.
The ICDL effort in Mongolia is part of a larger project funded by the World Bank and administered by the Mongolian Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, called the Rural Education And Development Project (READ).
The city was the seat of the Jebtsundamba Khutugtus, two Qing ambans, and a Chinese trade town grew "four trees" or  east of the city center at the confluence of the Uliastai and Tuul rivers.
The fees may be the result of operating on a budget under $176,000 per year.
With this, Urga became the highest civil authority in the country.
The '''International Children's Digital Library (ICDL)''' is an organization that publishes numerous children's books in different languages on the web in child-friendly formats.
Afterwards, weekend demonstrations in January and February were held accompanied by the forming of Mongolia's first opposition parties.
Concentrations of certain types of particulate matter (PM10) regularly exceed WHO recommended maximum levels by more than a dozen times.
By 1778, Urga may have had around ten thousand monks.
Accessible via paved road.
In the middle of Sükhbaatar Square, there is a statue of Damdin Sükhbaatar on horseback.
It does charge users a registration fee of 3800 to 4250 tugrik, or about USD 3.29 to 3.68.
In the first hall, one can see various tools and weapons from Paleolithic age to the times of Manchu empire.
In 1754, the Erdene Shanzodba Yam  of Urga was given authority to supervise the administrative affairs of the Bogd's subjects.
Since Mongolia's transition to a market economy in 1990, the city has experienced further growth – especially in the ger districts, as construction of new blocks of flats had basically broken down in the 1990s.
The population has more than doubled to over one million inhabitants.
Nature conservation dates back to the twelfth and thirteenth century when the Toorl Khan of Mongolian Ancient Keraite Aimag – who prohibited logging and hunting activities – claimed the Bogd Khan as a holy mountain.
These Upper Paleolithic people hunted mammoth and wooly rhinoceros, the bones of which are found abundantly around Ulaanbaatar.
Although the building's condition is dire, the '''Victims of Political Persecution Memorial Museum''' tells about one of the most tragic history of Mongolia's 20th century.
The city's flag is sky blue with the  arms in the center.
It is a popular ensemble featuring the national string instrument Morin Khuur and performs various domestic and international works.
There is also an Ulaanbaatar trolleybus system.
Upon independence in 1911, with both the secular government and the Bogd Khan's palace present, the city's name changed to ''Niĭslel Khüree'' (Нийслэл Хүрээ, "Capital Camp").
'''The Press Institute in Ulaanbaatar''' oversees the '''Digital Archive of Mongolian Newspapers'''.
One of the earliest Western mentions of Urga is the account of the Scottish traveller John Bell in 1721:
File:Aryabal Meditation Center.jpg|Aryabal Meditation Center at Gorkhi-Terelj National Park.
Bogd Khan mountain is a strictly protected area, with a length of  and width of , covering an area of .
This small amusement park features rides, games and paddle boats.
The Transmongolian Railway, connecting Ulaanbaatar with Moscow and Beijing, was completed in 1956 and cinemas, theaters, museums etc.
File:Chinggis Square.jpg|The Chinggis Square and Mongolian Parliament.
Bogd Khan Uul is a broad, heavily forested mountain rising  to the south of Ulaanbaatar.
File:RussianBldgMgl.JPG|Ulaanbaatar History Museum, built in 1904 by Buryat-Mongol merchant.
In 1758 the Qianlong Emperor appointed the Khalkha Vice General Sanzaidorj as the first Mongol amban of Urga with full authority to "oversee the Khuree and administer well all the Khutugtu's subjects".
Chinggis Square, in the government district, is the center of Ulaanbaatar.
Baron Ungern's capture of Urga was followed by clearing out Mongolia's small gangs of demoralized Chinese soldiers and, at the same time, looting and murder of foreigners, including a vicious pogrom that killed off the  Jewish community.
The route ran south to Urga, southeast across the Gobi to Kalgan and southeast over the mountains to Peking.
The  appears on Ulaanbaatar's emblem.
Ulaanbaatar has been given numerous names in its history.
They also host websites on classical and modern Mongolian literature and food, in addition to providing free Internet access.
File:Dambadarjaalin.jpg|A building of the Dambadarjaalin Monastery (1765) in Sukhbaatar District.
The provisional government announced Mongolia's first free elections, which were held in July.
The Jebtsundamba Khutughtu, who was later crowned Bogd Khan, had four main imperial residences, which were located between the Middle (''Dund gol'') and Tuul rivers.
and the 41-floor Mak Tower being built by South Korean "Lotte Construction and Engineering".
Flights to Ulaanbaatar are available from Tokyo, Seoul, Paris, Berlin, Ulan-Ude, Moscow, Irkutsk, Hong Kong, Beijing, Bishkek and Istanbul.
Among the countries that have diplomatic facilities in Ulaanbaatar are Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India, Japan, Kazakhstan, Laos, Malaysia, Russia, Slovakia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United States and Vietnam.
The capital is governed by a city council (the Citizen's Representatives Hural) with forty members, elected every four years.
It is dedicated to those fallen under the political purge that took the lives of over 32,000 statesmen, herders, scholars, politicians and lamas.
Extreme temperatures in the city range from  to .
The square is  in size.
It lies on roughly the same longitude as Chongqing, Hanoi and Jakarta.
File:UB-Gandan01.jpg|Vajradhara Temple (1841) in the center.
On the 's forehead is the soyombo symbol, which is featured on the flag of Mongolia.
File:Bogd Khan Palace 05.JPG|Winter residence of the Bogd Gegeen, built in 1903.
In 1855 the part of the camp that moved to Tolgoit was brought back to its 1778 location and the 7th Bogd Jebtsundamba returned to the Zuun Khuree.
In July the Communist Soviet-Mongolian army became the second conquering force in six months to enter Urga.
The Moscow trade expedition of the 1910s estimated the population of Urga at 60,000 based on Nikolay Przhevalsky's study in the 1870s.
File:Beatles Monument.jpg|The Beatles monuments is a popular place for the youth of UB to gather around.
It has a total area of 55 hectares with over 100K trees planted.
They are in the Chingeltei District (established in 1946), in the Han-Uul District (established in 1948), in the Bayanzurkh District (established in 1968) and in the Songino-Hairkhan District (established in 1991).
The Mongolian Theatre Museum presents the history of the performing arts in Mongolia.
It was fortified in 1900 and briefly occupied by troops during the Boxer Rebellion.
'''Morin Khuur Ensemble''' of Mongolia is part of the Mongolian State Philharmonic located at the Chinggis Khan Square.
The forests of the mountains surrounding Ulaanbaatar are composed of evergreen pines, deciduous larches and birches while the riverine forest of the Tuul River is composed of broad-leaved, deciduous poplars, elms and willows.
It is also one of the oldest reserves in the world, being protected by law since the 18th century.
In 1919 the number of monks had reached 20,000, up from 13,000 in 1810.
It has an impressive 232,097 annual users and a total of 497,298 loans per year.
Thousands of supporters joined them.
File:Handdorj's.jpg|Residence of Prince Chin Wang Khanddorj (Minister of Foreign Affairs), built in 1913.
In 1761, a second amban was appointed for the same purpose, a Manchu one.
The project was supported by the British Library's Endangered Archives Programme.
Peace Avenue (''Enkh Taivny Urgon Chuloo''), the main thoroughfare through town, runs along the south side of the square.
Ulaanbaatar has several museums dedicated to Mongolian history and culture.
The city lies in the zone of discontinuous permafrost, which means that building is difficult in sheltered aspects that preclude thawing in the summer, but easier on more exposed ones where soils fully thaw.
The materials in the collection have a strong focus on both aiding Mongolians studying Japanese and books in Japanese about Mongolia.
File:GeserTemple.jpg|West Geser Temple in UB, built in 1919–1920 by Guve Ovogt Zakhar.
The complex includes six temples, many of the Bogd Khan's and his wife's possessions are on display in the main building.
Wang Khan Toghrul of the Keraites, a Nestorian Christian monarch who Marco Polo identified as the legendary Prester John, is said to have had his palace here (the Black Forest of the Tuul River) and forbade hunting in the holy mountain Bogd Uul.
However, under the pressure of the Soviet activist of Communist International, Turar Ryskulov, the city was named ''Ulaanbaatar Khot'' ("City of Red Hero").
"A sizable collection of literature, know-how topics, training materials, music, plays, science broadcasts are now available to the visually impaired at the school."
In recent years, construction of new buildings has gained new momentum, especially in the city center, and apartment prices have skyrocketed.
In its talons it is holding a snake, a symbol of evil of which it is intolerant.
Before that, it changed location twenty-eight times, with each location being chosen ceremonially.
Part of the museum is dedicated to special photo exhibits that change frequently.
In 1910 the ''amban'' Sando went to quell a major fight between Gandan lamas and Chinese traders started by an incident at the Da Yi Yu shop in the Baruun Damnuurchin market district.
In 1786, a decree issued in Peking gave right to the Urga ambans to decide the administrative affairs of Tusheet Khan and Setsen Khan territories.
Mongolian Railway History Museum is an open-air museum that displays 6 types of locomotives used during a 65 year period of Mongolian Railways history.
In 2006 they began service in Mongolia and have made efforts to provide access to the library in rural areas.
In its right hand is a key, a symbol of prosperity and openness, and in its left is a lotus flower, a symbol of peace, equality and purity.
'''The National Park of Mongolia''' opened its doors in the southeastern outskirts of the city in 2009, becoming a popular summer park for the UB goers.
By Zanabazar's death in 1723, Urga was the Mongolia's preeminent monastery in terms of religious authority.
There is a manuscript collection at the Danzan Ravjaa Museum of theological, poetic, medicinal, astrological and theatrical works.
with the large Janraisig statue, the socialist monument complex at Zaisan Memorial with its great view over the city, the Winter Palace of the Bogd Khan, Chinggis Square and the nearby Choijin Lama Temple.
It also served as the city's chief judicial court.
The summer palace was called ''Erdmiin dalai buyan chuulgan süm'' or ''Bogd khaanii serüün ord''.
Interurban and international: Ulaanbaatar is served by the Chinggis Khaan International Airport (formerly Buyant Ukhaa Airport).
'''The Ulaanbaatar City Museum''' offers a brief but insightful view of Ulaanbaatar’s history through old maps and photos.
During the Dzungar wars of the late 17th century, it was even moved to Inner Mongolia.
File:Choijin Lama Temple Museum.jpg|Choijin Lama temple complex, built in 1904-1908.
Urban planning began in the 1950s and most of the city today is the result of construction from 1960 to 1985.
Intra-urban: The national and municipal governments regulate a wide system of private transit providers which operate numerous bus lines around the city.
This causes a number of social, environmental, and transportation problems.
The most interesting item is a huge painting of the capital as it looked in 1912 that shows major landmarks such as Gandan Monastery and the  Winter Palace of the Bogd Khan.
In 1778, the city moved from Khui Mandal and settled for good at its current location, near the confluence of the Selbe and Tuul rivers and beneath Bogd Khan Uul, back then also on the caravan route from Beijing to Kyakhta.
The MPRP won the election and resumed power.
File:UB Food Festival.jpg|International Food Festival held annually in UB in September.
It is also a popular place for youngsters to hang out.
A four-day state of emergency was declared, the capital was placed under a 22:00 to 08:00 curfew, and alcohol sales banned, following which measures rioting did not resume.
Ulaanbaatar has an average annual temperature of .
A council of seven of the highest ranking lamas (''Khamba Nomon Khan'', ''Ded Khamba'' and five ''Tsorj'') made most of the city's religious decisions.
The park is geared towards becoming educational center for healthy responsible living as well as environmental education.
Sources of the pollution are mainly the simple stoves used for heating and cooking in the city's ger districts, but also the local coal-fueled  power plants.
Some of the palaces were also used for religious purposes.
There was a telegraph line north to Kyakhta and southeast to Kalgan and weekly postal service  along these routes.
It consists of literature written and collected by the monk Danzan Ravjaa, who is famous for his poetry.
The project is also designed to show Mongolia's youth that they can take part in the larger digital culture.
Food, entertainment and recreation venues are steadily increasing in variety.
'''Puzzle Toys Museum''' displays a comprehensive collection of complex wooden toys players can assemble.
The city consists of a central district built in Soviet 1940s and 1950s-style architecture, surrounded by and mingled with residential concrete towerblocks and large ger districts.
When his predecessor became prime minister in January 2006, former city manager Gombosuren Monkhbayar was elected mayor.
Ungern and his men rode out in May to meet Red Russian and Red Mongolian troops, but suffered a disastrous defeat in June.
The annual trade was estimated at 25 million rubles, nine tenths in Chinese hands and one tenth Russian.
In 1921 the city changed hands twice.
They were regulated by a monastic rule called the Internal Rule of the Grand Monastery or ''Yeke Kuriyen-u Doto'adu Durem'' (for example, in 1797 a decree of the 4th Jebtsundamba forbade "singing, playing with archery, myagman, chess, usury and smoking").
The Gandan monastery was reopened in 1944 when the U.S. Vice President Henry Wallace asked to see a monastery during his visit to Mongolia.
A demonstration in Sükhbaatar Square on Jan. 21 followed.
In 1911, with the Qing Dynasty in China headed for total collapse, Mongolian leaders in Ikh Khüree for Naadam met in secret on Mount Bogd Khan Uul and resolved to end 220 years of Manchu control of their country.
However, at the same time Baron Ungern was taking control of Urga, a Soviet-supported Communist Mongolian force led by Damdin Sükhbaatar was forming up in Russia, and in March they crossed the border.
Ulaanbaatar is governed as an independent first-level region, separate from the surrounding Töv Aimag.
On December 10, 1989, protesters outside the Youth Culture Centre called for Mongolia to implement perestroika and glasnost in their full sense.
With the growth of Western trade at the Chinese ports the tea trade to Russia declined,some Chinese merchants left and wool became the main export.
It escaped the destruction of Mongolian monasteries when it was turned into a museum in 1942.
The highest recorded precipitation in the city was  at the Khureltogoot Astronomical Observatory on Mount Bogd Khan Uul.
File:ZanabazarMuseum.jpg|Zanabazar's Fine Arts Museum, built in 1905 by Russian merchant Gudvintsal as a trading shop.
A 309m tall tower called the Morin Khuur Tower (Horsehead Fiddle Tower) is planned to be built next to the Central Stadium.
On the north side of Sükhbaatar Square is the Mongolian Parliament building, featuring a large statue of Chinggis Khan at the top of the front steps.
There is also an information retrieval reference service for questions that cannot be answered by their collection.
The Zanabazar Museum of Fine Arts has a large collection of Mongolian art, including works of the 17th century sculptor/artist Zanabazar, as well as Mongolia's most famous painting, ''One Day In Mongolia'' by B. Sharav.
Visitors who make the long climb to the top are rewarded with a panoramic view of the whole city down in the valley.
As a point of reference Ulaanbaatar lies on roughly the same latitude as Vienna, Munich and Orléans.
The palace is said to be where Genghis Khan stayed with Yesui Khatun before attacking the Tangut in 1226.
On the session of the 1st Great People's Khuraldaan of Mongolia in 1924, a majority of delegates expressed their wish to change the capital city's name to ''Baatar Khot'' ("Hero City").
The National Library of Mongolia is located in Ulaanbaatar and includes an extensive historical collection, items in non-Mongolian languages and a special children's collection.
An important resource for academics is the ''' American Center for Mongolian Studies (ACMS)''', also based in Ulaanbaatar.
There is also a Children's Central Library, which was established in 1979.
Air pollution is a serious problem in Ulaanbaatar, especially in winter.
It is  southwest of the city.
