The strongest ultraviolet lines are at 337.1&nbsp;nm and 357.6&nbsp;nm,wavelength.
Living things on dry land would be severely damaged by ultraviolet radiation from the Sun if most of it were not filtered out by the Earth's atmosphere.
UV absorption leads to chain degradation and loss of strength at sensitive points in the chain structure.
UV radiation is often used to excite a given sample where the fluorescent emission is measured with a spectrofluorometer.
Pulsed light works with Xenon flash lamps that can produce flashes several times per second.
The impact of ultraviolet radiation on human health has implications for the risks and benefits of sun exposure, and is also implicated in issues such as fluorescent lamps and health.
A shortwave UV lamp can be made using a fluorescent lamp tube with no phosphor coating.
Digital cameras sensors may have internal filters that block UV to improve color rendition accuracy.
UVB photons can cause direct DNA damage.
By 1903 it was known the most effective wavelengths were around 250&nbsp;nm.
The Sun emits ultraviolet radiation at all wavelengths, including the extreme ultraviolet where it crosses into X-rays at 10&nbsp;nm.
The fraction of UVB which remains in UV radiation after passing through the atmosphere is heavily dependent on cloud cover and atmospheric conditions.
Small high-pressure lamps can have light focused and transmitted to the work area via liquid-filled or fiber-optic light guides.
Once the surface energy of the polymer has been raised, the bond between the adhesive and the polymer is stronger.
Photography with wavelengths shorter than 350&nbsp;nm requires special quartz lenses which do not absorb the radiation.
High blood pressure increases the risk of stroke and heart disease.
UV radiation is present in sunlight.
As a defense against UV radiation, the amount of the brown pigment melanin in the skin increases when exposed to moderate (depending on skin type) levels of radiation; this is commonly known as a sun tan.
After removal of unwanted photoresist, a pattern determined by the mask remains on the sample.
Presently, UV argon-fluoride (ArF) excimer lasers operating at 193&nbsp;nm are routinely used in integrated circuit production by photolithography.
Protective eyewear is beneficial to those exposed to ultraviolet radiation.
They are widely used lasers emitting in ultraviolet and vacuum ultraviolet wavelength ranges.
These dyes may be carried into surface-breaking defects by capillary action (liquid penetrant inspection) or they may be bound to ferrite particles caught in magnetic leakage fields in ferrous materials (magnetic particle inspection).
People with higher levels of vitamin D tend to have lower rates of diabetes, heart disease, and stroke and tend to have lower blood pressure.
Disinfection using UV radiation is commonly used in wastewater treatment applications and is finding an increased usage in municipal drinking water treatment.
Exposure to UVA while the skin is hyper-photosensitive by taking psoralens is an effective treatment for psoriasis.
Spectrometers and radiometers are made for measurement of UV radiation.
Steps may then be taken to "etch" away, deposit on or otherwise modify areas of the sample where no photoresist remains.
They are contrasted with inorganic absorbers/"blockers" of UV radiation such as titanium dioxide and zinc oxide.
However, sunscreen chemicals cannot dissipate the energy of the excited state as efficiently as melanin and therefore the penetration of sunscreen ingredients into the lower layers of the skin increases the amount of reactive oxygen species.
Melanin is an excellent photoprotectant that absorbs both UVB and UVA radiation and dissipates the energy as harmless heat, protecting the skin against both direct and indirect DNA damage.
The phenyl and indole chemical moieties in proteins absorb UV, and are made visible by blocking the fluorescence of the material beneath them—often UV brighteners in fabrics.
The purpose of melanin is to absorb UV radiation and dissipate the energy as harmless heat, blocking the UV from damaging skin tissue.
In pollution control applications, ultraviolet analyzers are used to detect emissions of nitrogen oxides, sulfur compounds, mercury and ammonia, for example in the flue gas of fossil fired power plants.
Many museums place black curtains over watercolour paintings and ancient textiles, for example.
Butterflies use ultraviolet as a communication system for sex recognition and mating behavior.
The amount of sunscreen which penetrates through the stratum corneum may or may not be large enough to cause damage.
For example, in the ''Colias eurytheme'' butterfly, males rely on visual cues to locate and identify females.
Other applications include authentication of various collectibles and art, and detecting counterfeit currency.
UV lamps radiating at 184 and 254&nbsp;nm can remove low concentrations of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide, if the air is recycled between the room and the lamp chamber.
Very hot objects emit UV radiation (see Black-body radiation).
The simpler term "chemical rays" was adopted shortly thereafter, and it remained popular throughout the 19th century, although there were those who held that these were an entirely different sort of radiation from light (notably John William Draper, who named them "tithonic rays").
This rating, however, offers no data about important protection against UVA, which does not primarily cause sunburn but is still harmful, since it causes indirect DNA damage and is also considered carcinogenic.
Other practical UV sources with more continuous emission spectra include xenon arc lamps (commonly used as sunlight simulators), deuterium arc lamps, mercury-xenon arc lamps, metal-halide arc lamps, and tungsten-halogen incandescent lamps.
Evolution of early reproductive proteins and enzymes is attributed in modern models of evolutionary theory to ultraviolet radiation.
Many bottlers of spring water use UV disinfection equipment to sterilize their water.
The discovery of the ultraviolet radiation below 200&nbsp;nm, named vacuum ultraviolet because it is strongly absorbed by air, was made in 1893 by the German physicist Victor Schumann.
It has been found that ultraviolet radiation (even UVA) produces nitric oxide (NO) in the skin, and nitric oxide can lower blood pressure.
In "ABS" or alkylbenzenesulfonate detergents, the substituted benzine absorbs UV.
Detergents are easily detected using UV inspection.
Extreme UV (EUV or sometimes XUV) is characterized by a transition in the physics of interaction with matter.
Wood's glass is a nickel-bearing form of glass with a deep blue-purple color that blocks most visible light and passes ultraviolet.
A burning hydrogen flame, for instance, radiates strongly in the 185- to 260-nanometer range and only very weakly in the IR region, whereas a coal fire emits very weakly in the UV band yet very strongly at IR wavelengths; thus, a fire detector that operates using both UV and IR detectors is more reliable than one with a UV detector alone.
UVB causes thymine base pairs next to each other in genetic sequences to bond together into thymine dimers, a disruption in the strand that reproductive enzymes cannot copy.
Silicon detectors are used across the spectrum.
Pulsed light (PL) is a technique of killing microorganisms on surfaces using pulses of an intense broad spectrum, rich in UV-C between 200 and 280 nm.
A black light may also be formed, very inefficiently, by using a layer of Wood's glass in the envelope for an incandescent bulb.
Lasers have been used to indirectly generate non-coherent extreme UV (EUV) radiation at 13.5&nbsp;nm for extreme ultraviolet lithography.
UVA is immunosuppressive for the entire body (accounting for a large part of the immunosuppressive effects of sunlight exposure), and is mutagenic for basal cell keratinocytes in skin.
The impact of UV on polymers is used for modification of the (roughness and hydrophobicity) of polymer surfaces.
Mountaineers are exposed to higher-than-ordinary levels of UV radiation, both because there is less atmospheric filtering and because of reflection from snow and ice.
Such LED arrays are beginning to be used for UV curing applications, and are already successful in digital print applications and inert UV curing environments.
Photolithography processes used to fabricate electronic integrated circuits presently use 193&nbsp;nm UV, and are experimentally using 13.5&nbsp;nm UV for extreme ultraviolet lithography.
This arrangement prevents the introduction of ozone into the treated air.
UV has also been shown to reduce gaseous contaminants such as carbon monoxide and VOCs.
The EUV is not emitted by the laser, but rather by electron transitions in an extremely hot tin or xenon plasma, which is excited by an excimer laser.
The nitrogen gas laser uses electronic excitation of nitrogen molecules to emit a beam that is mostly UV.
UV at these germicidal wavelengths damage a microorganism's DNA so that it cannot reproduce, making it harmless, (even though the organism may not be killed).
Thus, the optimum spectral portion can be found for distinguishing ink from paper on the papyrus surface.
To a lesser extent, UVB in sunlight from 310–280&nbsp;nm also causes photokeratitis ("snow blindness"), and the cornea, the lens, and the retina can be damaged.
A local ultraviolet emitter will normally disrupt the navigation process and will eventually attract the flying insect.
The absorbers can themselves degrade over time, so monitoring of absorber levels in weathered materials is necessary.
In the first 20 minutes the film of sunscreen had a protective effect and the number of ROS species was smaller.
The exposure causes chemical reactions to occur in the photoresist.
Various forms of picture framing glass, including acrylics (plexiglass), laminates, and coatings, offer different degrees of UV (and visible light) protection.
Consequently, biological effects of UV are greater than simple heating effects, and many practical applications of UV radiation derive from its interactions with organic molecules.
After 60 minutes, however, the amount of absorbed sunscreen was so high that the amount of ROS was higher in the sunscreen treated skin than in the untreated skin.
The light from a mercury lamp is predominantly at discrete wavelengths.
Virtually all fires emit some radiation in the UVC band, whereas the Sun's radiation at this band is absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere.
Sensitive polymers include thermoplastics and speciality fibers like aramids.
Technology for VUV instrumentation was largely driven by solar astronomy for many decades.
A few cameras are designed for use in the UV.
Disinfection robots use pulsed UV
Under some conditions, children and young adults can see ultraviolet down to wavelengths of about 310&nbsp;nm, and people with aphakia (missing lens) or replacement lens can also see some UV wavelengths.
This should be combined with the provision of heat for basking, either by the same lamp or another.
Many enzymes and proteins involved in modern mitosis and meiosis are similar to repair enzymes, and are believed to be evolved modifications of the enzymes originally used to overcome DNA damages caused by UV.
The eye is most sensitive to damage by UV in the lower UVC band at 265–275&nbsp;nm.
Exposure to these can cause "welder's flash" or "arc eye" (photokeratitis), and can lead to cataracts, pterygium, and pinguecula formation.
Thick clouds block UVB effectively; but in "partly cloudy" days, patches of blue sky showing between clouds are also sources of (scattered) UVA and UVB, which are produced by Rayleigh scattering in the same way as the visible blue light from those parts of the sky.
This technique does not require a synchrotron, yet can produce UV at the edge of the X-ray spectrum.
Different designs of ultraviolet radiation traps are also used by entomologists for collecting nocturnal insects during faunistic survey studies.
The generation is generally done in gasses (e.g.
A variety of solid-state and vacuum devices have been explored for use in different parts of the UV spectrum.
These are often the emitting sources in UV spectroscopy equipment for chemical analysis.
Lower-power fluorescent lamps and LEDs can be used for static applications.
Fast processes such as flexo or offset printing require high-intensity light focused via reflectors onto a moving substrate and medium so high-pressure Hg (mercury) or Fe (iron, doped)-based bulbs are used, energized with electric arcs or microwaves.
Ultraviolet can be detected by suitable photodiodes and photocathodes, which can be tailored to be sensitive to different parts of the UV spectrum.
Likewise, the presence of an oil mist in the air or an oil film on the detector window will have the same effect.
Due to the potential of psoralens to cause damage to the liver, PUVA therapy may be used only a limited number of times over a patient's lifetime.
UVA/UVB emitting bulbs are also sold for other special purposes, such as tanning lamps and reptile-keeping.
Short-wave ultraviolet radiation can destroy DNA in living microorganisms.
Significant examples include 193&nbsp;nm photolithography equipment (for semiconductor manufacturing) and circular dichroism spectrometers.
It is also produced by electric arcs and specialized lights such as mercury-vapor lamps, tanning lamps, and black lights.
Black lights are used in applications in which extraneous visible light must be minimized; mainly to observe ''fluorescence'', the colored glow that many substances give off when exposed to UV light.
UVC is the highest-energy, most-dangerous type of ultraviolet radiation, and causes adverse effects that can variously be mutagenic or carcinogenic.
It has the advantages of high-intensity, high efficiency, and operation at a variety of wavelength bands into the vacuum ultraviolet.
In some types of nondestructive testing UV stimulates fluorescent dyes to highlight defects in a broad range of materials.
Ultraviolet radiation can detect thin sheens of spilled oil on water, either by the high reflectivity of oil films at UV wavelengths, fluorescence of compounds in oil, or by absorbing of UV created by Raman scattering in water.
The presence of UV-absorbing gases and vapors will attenuate the UV radiation from a fire, adversely affecting the ability of the detector to detect flames.
The terms chemical and heat rays were eventually dropped in favour of ultraviolet and infrared radiation, respectively.
In particular, difference frequency mixing two photons of an ArF (193&nbsp;nm) excimer laser with a tunable visible or near IR laser in hydrogen or krypton provides resonantly enhanced tunable VUV covering from 100&nbsp;nm to 200&nbsp;nm.
Photography of the fluorescence produced by ultraviolet illumination uses visible wavelengths of light.
However, at ground level sunlight is 44% visible light, 3% ultraviolet (with the Sun at its zenith), and the remainder infrared.
Ultraviolet lamps are used to sterilize workspaces and tools used in biology laboratories and medical facilities.
UVB yields a tan that takes roughly 2 days to develop because it stimulates the body to produce more melanin.
Since microorganisms can be shielded from ultraviolet rays in small cracks and other shaded areas, these lamps are used only as a supplement to other sterilization techniques.
The WHO-standard ultraviolet index is a widely publicized measurement of total strength of UV wavelengths that cause sunburn on human skin, by weighting UV exposure for action spectrum effects at a given time and location.
UV radiation was discovered in 1801 when the German physicist Johann Wilhelm Ritter observed that invisible rays just beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum darkened silver chloride-soaked paper more quickly than violet light itself.
A ''black light'' lamp emits long-wave UVA radiation and little visible light.
The shorter bands of UVC, as well as even more-energetic UV radiation produced by the Sun, are absorbed by oxygen and generate the ozone in the ozone layer when single oxygen atoms produced by UV photolysis of dioxygen react with more dioxygen.
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can be manufactured to emit radiation in the ultraviolet range, although practical LED arrays are very limited below 365&nbsp;nm.
Most plastic lenses give more protection than glass lenses, because, as noted above, glass is transparent to UVA and the common acrylic plastic used for lenses is less so.
Likewise, air may be treated by passing by a single UV source operating at 184&nbsp;nm and passed over iron pentaoxide to remove the ozone produced by the UV lamp.
Synchrotron light sources can also produce all wavelengths of UV, including those at the boundary of the UV and X-ray spectra at 10&nbsp;nm.
UVA gives a quick tan that lasts for days by oxidizing melanin that was already present and triggers the release of the melanin from melanocytes.
to absorb UV rays to reduce the UV degradation (photo-oxidation) of a material.
Since light can reach the eyes from the sides, full-coverage eye protection is usually warranted if there is an increased risk of exposure, as in high-altitude mountaineering.
Certain inks, coatings, and adhesives are formulated with photoinitiators and resins.
Reptiles need UVB for synthesis of vitamin D, which in turn is needed to metabolize calcium for bone and egg production.
Those pyrimidine dimers that escape this repair process can induce a form of programmed cell death (apoptosis) or can cause DNA replication errors leading to mutation.
Most ultraviolet rays are invisible to most humans: the lens on a human eye ordinarily filters out UVB frequencies or lower, and humans lack color receptor adaptations for ultraviolet rays, so humans don’t see many of the "light or colours" certain animals see.
These "germicidal" lamps are used extensively for disinfection of surfaces in laboratories and food-processing industries, and for disinfecting water supplies.
that was published in 2006, the amount of harmful reactive oxygen species (ROS) was measured in untreated and in sunscreen treated skin.
Wavelengths shorter than 325&nbsp;nm are commercially generated in diode-pumped solid-state lasers.
Small birds have a fourth color receptor for ultraviolet rays; this gives birds "true" UV vision.
The technique involves taking pictures of the illegible document using different filters in the infrared or ultraviolet range, finely tuned to capture certain wavelengths of light.
Radiation of this wavelength is almost absent from sunlight, but is found in welder's arc lights and other artificial sources.
Urine trails of rodents can be detected by pest control technicians for proper treatment of infested dwellings.
The current wavelength limit of production of coherent UV is about 126&nbsp;nm, characteristic of the Ar2* excimer laser.
The DNA damage caused indirectly to skin by UVA consists mostly of single-strand breaks in DNA, while the damage caused by UVB includes direct formation of thymine dimers or other pyrimidine dimers, and double-strand DNA breakage.
Ultraviolet is also responsible for the formation of bone-strengthening vitamin D in most land vertebrates, including humans.
For photography in the near UV, special filters may be used.
In 1960, the effect of ultraviolet radiation on DNA was established.
Common soda lime glass is partially transparent to UVA but is opaque to shorter wavelengths, whereas fused quartz glass, depending on quality, can be transparent even to vacuum UV wavelengths.
Many hospitality industries use UV lamps to inspect for unsanitary bedding to determine life-cycle for mattress restoration, as well as general performance of the cleaning staff.
Photographic film responds to ultraviolet radiation but the glass lenses of cameras usually block radiation shorter than 350&nbsp;nm.
The amount of sunscreen that penetrates into the lower layers of the skin may be large enough to cause damage.
Most of these products contain an SPF rating to show how well they block UVB rays.
UVA  can generate highly reactive chemical intermediates, such as hydroxyl and oxygen radicals, which in turn can damage DNA.
Ultraviolet lasers can also be made by applying frequency conversion to lower-frequency lasers.
Extremely hot stars emit proportionally more UV radiation than the Sun.
UV degradation is one form of polymer degradation that affects plastics exposed to sunlight.
Before formation of the UV-blocking ozone layer, when early prokaryotes approached the surface of the ocean, they almost invariably died out.
People who don't have lenses often report seeing ultraviolet radiation that looks "whitish blue" or "whitish violet".
In ultraviolet astronomy, measurements are used to discern the chemical composition of the interstellar medium, and the temperature and composition of stars.
This happens because our three color receptors (red, green and blue) are all sensitive to ultraviolet, so the rays comes in as a mixture of the three receptors, with a slight nod to the blue side of the spectrum.
UV detectors are sensitive to most fires, including hydrocarbons, metals, sulfur, hydrogen, hydrazine, and ammonia.
However, some sunscreen chemicals produce potentially harmful substances if they are illuminated while in contact with living cells.
The SPF rating, however, offers no data about UVA protection.
Reindeer use near-UV radiation to see polar bears, who are poorly visible in regular light because they blend in with the snow.
Some animals, including birds, reptiles, and insects such as bees, can see near-ultraviolet wavelengths.
Fluorescent black light lamps use a phosphor on the inner tube surface, which emits UVA radiation instead of visible light.
SPF is, therefore, also called UVB-PF, for "UVB protection factor".
Ultraviolet traps called bug zappers are used to eliminate various small flying insects.
For example, a poly(methyl methacrylate) surface can be smoothed by vacuum ultraviolet.
In general, ultraviolet detectors use either a solid-state device, such as one based on silicon carbide or aluminium nitride, or a gas-filled tube as the sensing element.
Near-UV radiation is visible to some insects, mammals, and birds.
UV-capable spectrophotometers are common in such laboratories.
Some plastic lens materials, such as polycarbonate, inherently block most UV.
Sometimes these internal filters can be removed, or they may be absent, and an external visible-light filter prepares the camera for near-UV photography.
The result is that the UV detector is "solar blind", meaning it will not cause an alarm in response to radiation from the Sun, so it can easily be used both indoors and outdoors.
More-energetic, shorter-wavelength "extreme" UV below 121&nbsp;nm ionizes air so strongly that it is absorbed before it reaches the ground.
Other UVA blocking compounds found in sunscreen include zinc oxide and avobenzone.
Gas lasers, laser diodes and solid-state lasers can be manufactured to emit ultraviolet rays, and lasers are available which cover the entire UV range.
Practically, the lack of suitable gas/vapor cell window materials above the lithium fluoride cut-off wavelength limit the tuning range to longer than about 110&nbsp;nm, and window-free geometries are needed past this point.
Of the ultraviolet radiation that reaches the Earth's surface, more than 95% is the longer wavelengths of UVA, with the small remainder UVB.
UVC's effectiveness is directly related to intensity and exposure time.
The UV-A irradiation and increased water temperature kill organisms in the water.
The excimer lamp, a UV source developed within the last two decades, is seeing increasing use in scientific fields.
Pet urine deposits in carpeting or other hard surfaces can be detected for accurate treatment and removal of mineral traces and the odor-causing bacteria that feed on proteins in urine.
In an experiment by Hanson et al.
Commercially available low-pressure mercury-vapor lamps emit about 86% of their radiation at 254 nanometers (nm), which is near one of the peaks of the germicidal effectiveness curve.
Sensitive ultraviolet photomultipliers are available.
Many approaches seek to adapt visible light-sensing devices, but these can suffer from unwanted response to visible light and various instabilities.
At still shorter wavelengths of UV, damage continues to happen, but the overt effects are not as great with so little penetrating the atmosphere.
Ultraviolet radiation is used in several food processes to kill unwanted microorganisms.
Slightly yellow UV-blocking filters are often used for outdoor photography to prevent unwanted bluing and overexposure by UV rays.
Another type of high power gas laser is the excimer laser.
Suspended nanoparticles in stained glass prevent UV rays from causing chemical reactions that change image colors.
The long end of the EUV spectrum is set by a prominent He+ spectral line at 30.4&nbsp;nm.
Many substances, such as proteins, have significant light absorption bands in the ultraviolet that are of interest in biochemistry and related fields.
Suntan, freckling and sunburn are familiar effects of over-exposure, along with higher risk of skin cancer.
Nevertheless, the photoreceptors of the retina are sensitive to near-UV, and people lacking a lens (a condition known as aphakia) perceive near-UV as whitish-blue or whitish-violet.
Wavelengths longer than about 30&nbsp;nm interact mainly with the outer valence electrons of atoms, while wavelengths shorter than that interact mainly with inner-shell electrons and nuclei.
Direct UV-emitting laser diodes are available at 375&nbsp;nm.
Ultraviolet lamps are also used in analyzing minerals and gems.
UV sources for UV curing applications include UV lamps, UV LEDs, and Excimer flash lamps.
The action spectrum shows that UVA does not cause immediate reaction, but rather UV begins to cause photokeratitis and skin redness (with Caucasians more sensitive) at wavelengths starting near the beginning of the UVB band at 315&nbsp;nm, and rapidly increasing to 300&nbsp;nm.
Difference frequency mixing (lambda1 + lambda2 − lambda3) has an advantage over sum frequency mixing because the phase matching can be more perfect and provide greater tuning.
Ultraviolet radiation is helpful in the treatment of skin conditions such as psoriasis and vitiligo.
