:''by this we proclaim,
Notwithstanding the critical condition of the woman, he F. W. Clark had the roof taken down to a small bit over the woman's bed."
The cattle are driven into the water, and forced to swim to a small island, there they are allowed to rest for a few minutes and then they are made to complete their swim to Mull.
He was the last minister on the island.
Both the MacCrimmons and the MacArthurs had colleges for piping students; the former on the farm of Boreraig, eight miles 13&nbsp;km south west of Dunvegan Castle on Skye, the latter at Ulva near Mull.
He grew up to be a pirate and eventually took a bloody revenge on Torloisk with the help of MacQuarrie of Ulva.
He wrote a number of short stories, non-fiction and a novella.
Dugald Campbell of Achnaba, and wrote to him:
These were formed when the cooling surface of the mass of hot lava cracked in a hexagonal pattern in a similar way to drying mud cracking as it shrinks, and these cracks gradually extended down into the mass of lava as it cooled and shrank to form the columns which were subsequently exposed by erosion.
There is no hotel on the island, but there is a locked bothy at Cragaig which can be rented and camping is also possible.
:"...Where the old and feeble folk cleared from their crofts were placed by Clark, to exist as best they could on shellfish & seaweed till they died."
:''Now, in my lifetime, I have searched most carefully through all the traditions I could find of our family, and I never could discover that there was a dishonest man among our forefathers.
Our ancestors were Roman Catholics; they were made Protestants by the laird coming round with a man having a yellow staff, which would seem to have attracted more attention than his teaching, for the new religion went long afterward, perhaps it does so still, by the name of “the religion of the yellow stick”.
Its exact date of origin is unknown, but it is reckoned to be 16th or 17th century.
It was the sixteenth of October, a time when it is not convenient to sleep in the Hebrides without a cover, and there was no house within our reach, but that which we had already declined.
In 1787, Macquarie came back to Mull and Ulva, to try to recruit men for the British army.
This event took place at a time when the Highlanders, according to Macaulay, were much like the Cape Caffres ''kaffirs'', and any one, it was said, could escape punishment for cattle-stealing by presenting a share of the plunder to his chieftain.
Off Port a' Bhàta are Geasgill Beag & Geasgill Mòr, between Ulva and Inchkenneth.
Viewed on a large scale, Ulva and its neighbouring island Gometra appear to be a peninsula of the Isle of Mull, as they are separated from one another by narrow straits.
At some point, Ulva was probably a west pointing headland of Mull, connected to Gometra and Eilean Dioghlum off the latter's west coast.
The ruined kiln on the south shore may have been used for this.
The last resident minister, Rev.
Ulva has been populated since the Mesolithic and there are various Neolithic remains on the island.
Mr Francis William Clark bought the island in 1835 and began a brutal clearance of two-thirds of the inhabitants within a few years.
much a man of the world.
The original is now in a museum in Dunoon, and a replica can be seen in Sheila's Cottage on the island.
Johnson heard later on that the island had been sold to Capt.
:''Why sorely complain,
Arguably this is what cost him his job.
Naturally, the locals were slightly upset by this, and the Minister of Ulva, Rev.
It was seasonal work, with collection taking place in the months of May, June and July, when it was considered possible to dry it outdoors.
In evidence to the Napier Commission, Alexander Fletcher recounted that Clark moved people from one piece of land to a small one, repeatedly "then to nothing at all, and when they would not clear off altogether, some of them had the roofs taken off their huts."
It has a neighbour in Beinn Eoligarry whose summit is  above sea level.
More than one building has gone by the name "Ulva House", and the current one was designed by Leslie Grahame-Thomson in the early 1950s.
The English name "Ulva" is from the Scottish Gaelic, ''Ulbha'', but this may have been corruption of Old Norse.
To its west, it is separated from Gometra by Gometra Harbour.
Ulva was anciently part of the border zone of the kingdom of Dál Riata, and during this period the old Gaelic language first came to be spoken here.
resume their real name.
came with their long-boat, and ferried us over.
He has a family of four songs, the youngest of which is three years, and three daughters, of which the youngest is six years of age.
It has even been suggested that he was born on the near section of Mull - at either Oskamull or Lagganulva, but local tradition says he was born at Cùl a' Gheata, which is  south of Ulva House.
From his description of his chamber, it has erroneously been supposed, that his bed being too short for him, his feet, during the night, were in the mire; whereas he has only said, that when he undressed, he felt his feet in the mire: that is, the clay-floor of the room, on which he stood before he went into bed, was wet, in consequence of the windows being broken, which let in the rain.
1 family (Ulva House)
"Grandfather could give particulars of the lives of his ancestors for six generations of the family before him; and the only point of the tradition I feel proud of is this: One of these poor hardy islanders was renowned in the district for great wisdom and prudence; and it is related that, when he was on his death-bed, he called all his children around him and said,
Celtic culture was a major influence during both Pictish and Dalriadan times as well as the post-Norse period when the islands became part of modern Scotland.
The Ulva Brooch was found in a pool of water in a cave in 1998.
The climate is moderated by the Gulf Stream.
However ''ullamhdha'' is not Norse, but appears to be the Scottish Gaelic for "ready for it".
"... a most beautiful islet of the most verdant green, while all the neighbouring shore of Greban, as well as the large islands of Colinsay and Ulva, are as black as heath can make them.
For more details, see the church section.
Captain M'Lure, whom we found here, was of Scotch extraction, and
Saint Columba (Colm Cille) visited Ulva in 563.
The island is in the parish of Kilninian (''Cill Ninein''), which also includes Gometra, Staffa, Little Colonsay and part of the west of Mull.
Fearann Ard-àirigh (Ferinardry)
Curiously, although the main characters of the book are a fox (''tod'') and a badger (''brock''), neither species can be found on Ulva.
Men in boats guide them to the right landing places."
The cave has been excavated since 1987 by archaeologists from the University of Edinburgh.
between Little Colonsay and Ulva, and also Garbh Eilean ("rough island"), Eilean Bàn ("white/fair island"), Eilean an Rìgh ("island of the king"), Eilean na h-Uamh ("island of the cave"), Trealbhan, Sgeir Dhubh, Sgeir Dhubh Bheag, Sgaigean, Bogha Mòr and Eilean Reilean.
Around 60 million years ago, the region was volcanically active, with Ben More on Mull being the remnant of a volcano, and it was in this period that the famous rock formations of Staffa and the basaltic columns of "The Castles" on Ulva came into being.
:"The handsome herds of Ulva were 'floated' across the ferry on their way to the Oban sales...
Bradley's Cave (G 439398) is named for an Irish itinerant who used to visit in the 19th century.
Great though the age of the Macquarries may have been, it appears at this point that they were considering selling it, and that the house was in a state of disrepair, despite the hospitality:
John Walker lamented the lack of commercial fishing, which he thought could provide the islanders with an additional income and food source.
Sàilean Ruadh (Salen)
The cottage contains a box bed, dresser, and a life size model of Sheila herself.
Much of the island is formed from Cenozoic basalt rocks, which is formed into columns in places.
He told me, there was a great number of them
As he proposes to offer his services at some of the cotton-spinning manufactories, he and his wife Mary Morrison, and their family of children is hereby recommended for suitable encouragement.
a bargain, which is a wager of skill between man and man.
Ulva is known for its wildlife, which is usual for many Scottish islands, includes many varieties of seabirds.
Andrew Ross says David Livingstone was the second son of Neil Livingston (known as "Niall Beag", wee Neil, or "Niall MacDhun-lèibhe"), who was born on Ulva in 1788, who was in turn the son of another Neil.
Sark, there are no cars, but quad bikes and tractors are used.
If, therefore, any of you or any of your children should take to dishonest ways, it will not be because it runs in our blood: it does not belong to you.
He was formerly minister in Rothesay.
A sheep has always the same power of supplying human wants, but a crown will bring at one time more, at another less.
(Notes: All information from MacKenzie  (2000).)
:''When I was young in Ulva'')
One room, the "but" was for livestock, and the other, the "ben" was her living space, where all activities took place.
Scott was struck by the contrast between Ulva and the nearby island of Inchkenneth:
Ulva Church is dedicated to St Eòghann of Ardstraw, possibly the same person.
Hogg wrote some graffiti on the wall of Ulva Inn, now lost due to its burning down in 1880:
Ulva Primary School is in fact on Mull at Ulva Ferry.
Boswell and Johnson were not the only famous non-Highland visitors to the island.
1 family (Now a camping bothy)
To Ulva we came in the dark, and left it before noon the next day.
Donald MacKenzie (Dòmhnall MacCoinnich), father of the author of ''As It Was'', was a noted Gaelic-language author in his own right.
Macquarry was used to demand a sheep, for which he now takes a crown, by that inattention to the uncertain proportion between the value and the denomination of money, which has brought much disorder into Europe.
Puffin, black-legged kittiwakes, shag, common and Arctic tern, gannets, eider ducks, oystercatchers, curlews, redshanks, red-breasted mergansers and gulls nest on the island and the surrounding waters provide a livelihood for numerous seabirds.
It is an engraved woman's brooch, for keeping a shawl tied together, and is believed to have been left in the cave after someone sheltered there.
By the time, Scott visited the "mean" house of Boswell's journal was gone, and replaced by one from a design by Robert Adam.
Bradley, or O' Brolligan (as his name is sometimes recorded) was a retired sailor, who took to the roads as a pedlar, and when on Ulva, he was said to live in this cave.
The MacArthurs themselves were said to be amongst the greatest bagpipers to come out of Scotland.
:Mi 'nam shuidhe 'n seo leam fhèin
The captain informed us, he had
The chief religious site may have been on Lismore, later the seat of the High Medieval bishop of Argyll.
In his youth, Alan-a-Sop was treated badly by his stepfather, one Maclean of Torloisk.
There is also the smaller hill of A' Chrannag in the south east at  high.
He also notes that Neil's church on Ulva had given the following letter of recommendation of their parishioner, something no doubt David was proud of.
A small church was built at Ardalum between 1827 and 1828.
Finding I had no success in the Recruiting way in Mull I determined upon setting out for the Low Country without loss of time to Recruit there".
bad situation, had there not fortunately been lying in the little
appearance of the master, whom we found to be intelligent, polite, and
We were in hopes to get to Sir Allan Maclean's at Inchkenneth,
Nonetheless, they are still renowned in their own right.
:"In an era in which large-scale evictions were commonplace — those of Torloisg and Glengorm for example — this Francis William Clark gained a notoriety that matched or exceeded that of the other evicting landlords of his time.
The chief place of the kingdom appears to have been at Dun Ollaigh, near Oban.
It is still used, partly as a community centre, and with a wing for worship.
"Loch na Keal" is ''Loch nan Ceall'', meaning "loch of the culdee cells", and Cille Mhic Eoghainn, which means literally "Monk's cell of the son of Ewan/MacEwan", or less literally "MacEwan's Church".
Baile Ghartan (Ballygarten)
Though his clan is not numerous, he is a very
next get, should be called the Bonnetta.
It was united with Kilmore on Mull, and the minister has traditionally preached in Kilninian and Kilmore on alternate Sundays.
The island's guidebook claims:
This long period, when  Gaelic became the dominant language, was ended by the 19th-century Clearances.
Bracadale Steadings, which includes bits of the old Ulva House which Boswell and Johnson stayed in.
MacKenzie mentions that his name was anglicised in the following widely differing versions - "Dunslavie McVoirich" (either ''MacMhuirich'' (which becomes ''Currie'' or ''MacPherson'') or ''MacMhurchaidh''), "Dulleis MacKwiddy", "Dwnsleif MacKcurra" and "Dwnsleyf MaKwra".
or what degree of confidence should there be to make a bargain be set aside?
The Inn at Ulva was popular with visitors to Staffa.
It is debatable whether the Norse root ''Ulfr'' refers to an individual's name, or to the animal itself (possibly because of the shape of the island).
Another recorded that a woman fetching water at a well was so terrified of him, that she "ran away, and left her kettle at the well, which Mr Clark took hold of and smashed to pieces."
Some say this was deliberate, but according to local folklore, this was due to the "weight of evil on it".
1 family (at Croit Phàraig)
Every eye must look with pain on a Campbell turning the MacQuarries at will out of their ''sedes avitae'', their hereditary island.
When returned home from our explorations, to recount our discoveries, we learned, over the years, that the Ulva of 1827, when the church and the manse were built was very different from the Ulva we came to know a hundred years later."
Their mother Marie was given a medal by King George IV with the slogan ''Màthair nan Gaisgich'' - "mother of heroes" on it.
was so high that the people could not hear him call; and the night so
:"Clark's high hopes for this thriving community were shattered when the kelp market collapsed, and he was left with a great surplus of tenants.
At Ardalum, there is a former shooting lodge, which is now a self-catering unit, and was also workers' accommodation for a while.
Land mammals that can be found on the island, include red deer, rabbits, and mountain hares.
This payment, like others, was, for want of money, made anciently in the produce of the land.
At the turn of the 19th century, the kelp industry supported a large amount of the population.
"Dunslav" was recorded as a forename in Ulva in 1693 as well.
It was transcribed by the Rev.
:''The happy days I had myself
properly a M'Leod, being descended of some of the M'Leods who went
"In another case, there was a very sick woman...
The Laird of M'Leod should go over, and
The dedication says rather cryptically: "FOR FRANCIS WILLIAM OF ULVA — SOMEDAY!"
The Cenél Loairn controlled parts of northern Argyll around the Firth of Lorne, most probably centred on Lorne but perhaps including the Isle of Mull, Morvern and Ardnamurchan, supposedly the descendants of Loarn mac Eirc.
There are at least 43 varieties and/or species of broadleaf trees on the island, and over a dozen types of conifer.
The college at Ulva had four rooms; one for cattle, one for guests to stay, one for practice and one specifically for the use of students.
Much further to the south west is the island of Iona.
English children's writer, Beatrix Potter (1866–1943) also visited Ulva from time to time.
At Baligartan, there is the remains of a kiln for drying grain, and on the south shore, in a gully (GR173378), there is another, which was probably used in the island's old kelp industry.
Cairistiona accused, probably falsely, her sister of stealing a large hunk of cheese, and tried to extract a confession from her, by lowering her off a cliff with a plaid tied round her neck.
It is claimed that in 1847 (''Statistical Account''), everyone on the island attended services in it including one Roman Catholic and one atheist.
Johnson too admired the antiquity of the family, but did not care for the landscape too much:
:"I was equally unsuccessful in the place of my Nativity, and ancient Possessions of my Ancestors, – among my own Clan and Namesakes, the Macquaries of Ulva; where every fair and Lawful Means were used by their old Chief and Master, my Relation the Laird of Macquarie, and myself; but, such is the aversion of these People to become Soldiers or to go abroad, that notwithstanding all the entreaties of their old Chief and Master, not one of his ungrateful Clan, (to whom he had been, in the days of his Prosperity, a most kind and Generous Master,) would enlist or follow me and his own Son Murdoch Macquarie, (a lad about Sixteen years of age) who voluntarily offered to follow my Fortunes, and push his own in India – as a Volunteer.
The ''Senchus fer n-Alban'' lists three main kin groups in Dál Riata in Scotland, with a fourth being added later.
"Sheila's Cottage" is a thatched but-and-ben, which was restored in the 1990s.
Now, how low should a price be?
Our grandmother, too, used to sing Gaelic songs, some of which, as she believed, had been composed by captive islanders languishing hopelessly among the Turks i.e.
Like many Gaels in the 19th century, Livingstone's grandfather was forced to emigrate to the Lowlands for work:
Other industries on the island include sheep and cattle farming, and fish farming (salmon at Soriby Bay).
Cairistiona's Rock near Ormaig has a more gruesome story attached to it.
The Certificate of Complete of the Ulva Church and Manse is dated 14 March 1828, and it was conveyed by Charles MacQuarie.
were so very long, that we did not reach the opposite coast of Mull
Inchkenneth; and a servant was sent forward to the ferry, to secure
There is a licensed restaurant/tea room on the island, "The Boathouse", where locally harvested oysters are sold.
There are ruined school buildings still to be seen at Glac na Gallan and Fearann Àrd-àirigh.
Whales occasionally get beached on the island, more recent examples including 1966 (pilot), 1987 (pilot) and 1991 (two sperm whales).
We were now again at a stop.
M'Quarrie's, in the island of Ulva, which lies between Mull and
There is a dovecot and a pig sty on its gable end.
John MacCormick (; 1870–1947), the author of the first full length Scottish Gaelic novel, ''Dùn Aluinn'' (1912)  was an occasional visitor to the island.
To the south west are the islands of Staffa, of Fingal's Cave fame and Erisgeir.
Many other visitors to neighbouring Staffa stayed at Ulva Inn, this included Keats, Mendelssohn, and William Wordsworth.
Talking of the sale of an estate of an ancient family, which was said to have been purchased much under its value by the confidential lawyer of that family, and it being mentioned that the sale would probably be set aside by a suit in equity, Dr Johnson said, 'I am very willing that this sale should be set aside, but I doubt much whether the suit will be successful; for the argument for avoiding the sale is founded on vague and indeterminate principles, as that the price was too low, and that there was a great degree of confidence placed by the seller in the person who became the purchaser.
named his ship the ''Bonnetta'', out of gratitude to Providence; for once,
Caolas Ulbha (the Sound of Ulva) at the east of the island is a narrow channel a few hundred metres across to Ulva Ferry on Mull.
I said, they should now
Little Colonsay and Inchkenneth (with Samalan Island) are to Ulva's south west and south east respectively.
However, there is no evidence for this.
In 1950, Queen Elizabeth and the royal yacht, ''Britannia'' visited.
Shepherd of Ettrick,
If, indeed, any fraud can be proved, that will do.'
MacKenzie records at Aird Glas, near Ardalum, the now abandoned row of houses was nicknamed "Starvation Terrace":
:"No net or Long Line on the island to catch them fish and none of the inhabitants were acquainted with any kind of fishing, but with the Rod from Sea Rocks".
:''Their hard lands are bare and their havens dull,
the boat for us: but the boat was gone to the Ulva side, and the wind
In 1810 Scott discussed the prospect of a visit, which he describes as a "jaunt":
Ulva's interior is moorland, while the spectacular geological formations of the south coast, have been somewhat overshadowed by those of its neighbour Staffa.
He was born in Lewis, and his ancestors were from Harris, but he spent a number of years in Ulva itself, from June 1918 onwards.
were caught for food; he resolved therefore, that the ship he should
:''I've roamed around the creeks and headlands of Mull,
:"A scout, sent ashore from the longboat is alleged to have reported, "Ullamhdha", Viking for "Nobody home".
Presumably the area formed part of the Pictish lands, but they left little evidence behind.
It reopened, but was finally closed in 1905.
Walter Scott and James Hogg also visited the islands some decades later.
There is some argument as to where exactly he was born - Ormaig is generally stated, because he appears to have come from that branch of the clan.
Grey seals and basking shark also frequent the area.
"Our grandfather was intimately acquainted with all the traditionary legends which that great writer Walter Scott has since made use of in the ''Tales of a Grandfather'' and other works.
1777 and hoped to get his whole Quota of Men among his own Clan; but in this, he was cruelly disappointed, very few indeed, having followed him to the American War: – it would appear he had lost his Power and influence over them, at the same moment he had lost the Estate of his Ancestors.
He thinks however, that the plan may not have been to starve them, but to create fishing stations of the type which Walker lamented the lack of.
"Finding his farm in Ulva insufficient to support a numerous family, my grandfather removed to Blantyre Works, a large cotton manufactory on the beautiful Clyde, above Glasgow; and his sons, having had the best education the Hebrides afforded, were gladly received as clerks by the proprietors, Monteith and Co.
Under the Howards, the population has fluctuated, rather than the continuous fall under the Clarks.
Ulva came into the possession of the Clan MacQuarrie (an anglicised version of the surname ''MacGuaire'' ) family over a thousand years ago, and they controlled it until the mid-19th century.
Uamh (Cave) & Sound Islands
Among all my hopes & fears the uppermost thought is that you will be down this year.
It is pleasant to find ancient customs in old families.
