In 1859, Grant's vote for Buchanan and his political affiliation to his father-in-law cost him an appointment to become county engineer.
Grant believed in peaceful expansion of the nation's borders, and thought acquisition of the majority-black nation would allow new economic opportunities for African Americans in the United States while increasing American naval power in the Caribbean.
Garfield won the popular vote by a narrow margin, but solidly won the Electoral College—214 to 155.
At the war's end, Grant remained commander of the army, with duties that included enforcement of Reconstruction Acts in the former Confederate states and supervision of Indian wars on the western Plains.
Grant's time in the Pacific Northwest followed the Cayuse War; the army was stationed there to keep peace between settlers and Indians, and protect the West Coast.
He debarked in San Francisco during the height of the California Gold Rush.
Grant was lauded as the "Hero of Appomattox" and the Union general who defeated the Confederacy.
Smith argued that the same qualities that made Grant a success as a general carried over to his political life to make him, if not a successful president, then certainly an admirable one.
After crossing over to Japan and meeting the Emperor Meiji, Grant convinced China to accept the Japanese annexation of the islands, and the two nations avoided war.
With the aid of his advocate in Washington, Illinois congressman Elihu B. Washburne, Grant was formally promoted to Colonel on June 14, 1861, and put in charge of disciplining the unruly 21st Illinois Volunteer Infantry Regiment.
11 became an issue during the presidential campaign; he sought to distance himself from the order, saying "I have no prejudice against sect or race, but want each individual to be judged by his own merit."
After touring Spain and revisiting Paris, the Grants returned to England.
The Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site near St. Louis, and several other sites in Ohio and Illinois memorialize Grant's life.
Elihu B. Washburne urged him to run; Grant demurred, saying he would be happy for the Republicans to win with another candidate, though he preferred James G. Blaine to John Sherman.
Grant & Ward pledged that collateral to borrow more money to trade in securities on the firm's own account.
Twain called the ''Memoirs'' a "literary masterpiece."
Belknap, Williams, and Interior Secretary Columbus Delano told Grant a veto would hurt Republicans in the November elections.
The Democrats, seeking to benefit from anti-Grant sentiment, nominated Greeley as well.
Grant believed that Johnson was purposefully agitating conservative opinion to defy Congressional Reconstruction.
For the next year, the family took a small house in St. Louis where he worked with Julia's cousin Harry Boggs as a bill collector, again without success.
On July 19, 1867, Congress, again over Johnson's veto, passed a measure that authorized Grant to have oversight in enforcing congressional Reconstruction, making Southern state governments subordinate to military control.
The "greenback" notes, as they were known, were necessary to pay the unprecedented war debts, but they also caused inflation and forced gold-backed money out of circulation; Grant determined to return the national economy to pre-war monetary standards.
However, she argues:
Emboldened by Lincoln's call for a general advance of all Union forces, Grant ordered an immediate assault on nearby Fort Donelson, which dominated the Cumberland River (this time without Halleck's permission).
The leather shop, "Grant & Perkins", sold harnesses, saddles, and other leather goods, and purchased hides from farmers in the prosperous Galena area.
Custer's death shocked the nation, leading Congress to appropriate funds for more troops, two more Western forts and barred Indians from purchasing weapons.
Supreme Court rulings in the ''Slaughter-House Cases'' (1873) and ''United States v. Cruikshank'' (1875) restricted federal enforcement of civil rights.
When the war ended, the United States demanded restitution, which the British refused to pay.
When the Senate reinstated Stanton, Johnson told Grant to refuse to surrender the office and let the courts resolve the matter.
Historians overwhelmingly agree that his drunkenness, although off duty, at the time was a fact, though there are no eyewitness reports extant.
In November, after Lincoln's preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, Grant ordered units under his command, headed by Chaplain John Eaton, to incorporate contraband slaves into the Union war effort, giving them clothes, shelter, and wages for their services.
On September 20, the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading for ten days.
Grant contacted Lincoln, who agreed to personally meet with the commissioners at Fort Monroe.
Lee and his army surrendered to Grant at Appomattox Court House on April 9, 1865.
According to historian Brooks Simpson, Grant was on "the right side of history".
Grant's management of Reconstruction is still considered controversial today.
Even so, the remaining three Republican governments in the South fell to Redeemers after the 1876 presidential election, and the ensuing Compromise of 1877 marked the end of Reconstruction.
The army captured, tried, and executed the four Modoc warriors responsible for Canby's murder in October 1873.
Grant condemned slavery in Cuba, urging Spain to reform.
When Sheridan removed public officials in Louisiana who impeded Reconstruction, Johnson was displeased and sought Sheridan's removal.
Historian Joan Waugh, in her generally favorable book, says Grant appreciated the beauty of the West, and in 1872 signed the law establishing the country's first national park at Yellowstone.
Grant's great-grandfather fought in the French and Indian War, and his grandfather served in the American Revolution at Bunker Hill.
On April 16, 1863, Grant ordered Admiral David Porter's Union gunboats south under fire from the Vicksburg batteries to meet up with his Union troops who had marched south down the west side of the Mississippi River.
Grant suggested other reforms as well, including a proposal that states should offer free public schooling to all children; he also endorsed the Blaine Amendment, which would have forbidden government aid to schools with religious affiliations.
Grant invested the money in the firm, but it was not enough to save the firm from failure.
To the Liberals' chagrin, Greeley made Grant's Southern policy, rather than reform, the main campaign issue.
On September 14, 1847, Scott's army, including Grant, marched into the city, and the Mexicans agreed to peace soon afterward.
Subsequent ballots followed, with roughly the same result; neither Grant nor Blaine could win.
Grant pardoned some Ring members after a few months in prison, and pardoned Ring founder John McDonald after 17 months in jail.
The book, ''Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant'', was a critical and commercial success.
The Panic of 1873 and the ensuing depression contributed to public fatigue, and the North grew less concerned with Reconstruction.
The rest of the Republican Party nominated Grant for reelection, with Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts replacing Colfax as vice-presidential nominee.
Located on the high bluffs of the Mississippi River, Vicksburg, Mississippi was the last major obstacle to Union control of that river; both Lincoln and Grant saw it as the key to victory in the West and were determined to take the rebel stronghold.
Quiet by nature, he established a few intimate friends, including Frederick Tracy Dent and Rufus Ingalls.
Grant believed the bill would destroy the credit of the nation, and he vetoed it despite their objections.
In 1860, Grant was an open Democrat, favoring Democrat Stephen A. Douglas over Abraham Lincoln, and Lincoln over the Southern Democrat, John C. Breckinridge.
Two years later, he signed a bill ending the Indian treaty system; the law now treated individual Native Americans as wards of the federal government, and no longer dealt with the tribes as sovereign entities.
Grant, seeing that the increase was unnatural, told Boutwell to sell gold, which reduced its price.
Grant urged Chester A. Arthur, who had succeeded Garfield as president in 1881, to negotiate a free trade treaty with Mexico.
Grant told Congress to settle the matter through legislation and assured both sides that he would not use the army to force a result, except to curb violence.
By complying with the Acts and instructing his subordinates to do likewise, Grant further alienated Johnson.
His father initially offered him a place in the Galena, Illinois, branch of the family's tannery and leather goods business, on condition that Julia and the children stay with her parents in Missouri or with the Grants in Kentucky.
Grant believed that, as with the collapse of the Gold Ring in 1869, the panic was merely an economic fluctuation that affected bankers and brokers.
To supplement a military salary which was inadequate to support his family, Grant tried and failed at several business ventures, confirming Jesse Grant's belief that his son had no head for business.
20th century historical evaluations were negative about his presidency before recovering somewhat beginning in the 1980s.
As the scandals increased, Congress, with the House now under Democratic control, began several investigations into corruption in the administration, the most notable of which dealt with profiteering at western trading posts.
Grant's father was a Whig Party supporter with abolitionist sentiments.
After thirty-six ballots, Blaine's delegates deserted him and combined with those of other candidates to nominate a compromise candidate: Representative James A. Garfield of Ohio.
Ward told Grant of the impending failure, but suggested that this was a temporary shortfall.
Congress hoped inflation would stimulate the economy and passed what became known as the Inflation Bill in 1874.
They visited cities throughout the Raj, welcomed by colonial officials.
The passengers and crew, including eight American citizens, were illegally traveling to Cuba to help overthrow the government.
After the Federal army rebuilt the City Point Railroad, Grant was able to use mortars to attack Lee's entrenchments.
In lieu of a court-martial, Buchanan gave Grant an ultimatum to resign; he did so, effective July 31, 1854, without explanation and returned to St. Louis.
Grant began to favor limiting the use of troops, to avoid the impression that he was acting as a military dictator; he was also concerned that increased military pressure in the South might cause conservative whites in the North to bolt the Republican Party.
Grant's second term saw renewed economic turmoil.
On September 19, Grant's army defeated Confederates at the Battle of Iuka, then successfully defended Corinth, inflicting heavy casualties on the enemy.
Dedicated in 1922, it overlooks the Capitol Reflecting Pool and is made of bronze and marble created by sculptor Henry Merwin Shrady and architect Edward Pearce Casey.
Foote's first approach was repulsed, and the Confederates attempted a breakout, pushing Grant's right flank into disorganized retreat.
In the summer of 1884, Grant complained of a soreness in his throat, but put off seeing a doctor until late October where he finally learned it was throat cancer.
Grant responded to charges of corruption in executive offices more than any other 19th Century president.
The Resumption Act required gradual reduction of the amount of greenbacks allowed to circulate and declared that specie payment (i.e., in gold or silver) would resume in 1879.
He believed the trade undermined the Union war effort, funded the Confederacy, and prolonged the war, while Union soldiers died in the fields.
The Liberal Republicans distrusted black suffrage and demanded literacy tests for voting while opposing federal enforcement of equal voting rights in the South.
The Radical Republican-controlled Congress opposed the idea and refused to admit Congressmen from the former Confederate states.
That same year, Grant spoke at Cooper Union in New York, where the ''New York Times'' reported that "...&nbsp;the entranced and bewildered multitude trembled with extraordinary delight."
Given over a century of favorable literary analysis, reviewer Mark Perry states that the ''Memoirs'' are "the most significant work" of American non-fiction.
On August 9, 1864, Grant, who had just arrived at his headquarters in City Point, narrowly escaped death when Confederate spies blew up an ammunition barge in the James River.
Hailed across the North as the winning general in a great war, his nomination as president seemed inevitable.
Grant's first assignment after graduation took him to the Jefferson Barracks near St. Louis, Missouri.
Writing in 2012, historian Jonathan D. Sarna said Grant "issued the most notorious anti-Jewish official order in American history."
He also studied under Romantic artist Robert Walter Weir and produced nine surviving artworks.
Julia hated the rustic house, which she described as an "unattractive cabin".
To quell the public outcry and prevent future fraud, Congress passed the Anti-Moiety Act.
During the election there was a noticeably large number of black citizens in Washington.
Despite his excellent horsemanship, he was not assigned to the cavalry (assignments were determined by class rank, not aptitude), but to the 4th Infantry Regiment.
At Monterrey he demonstrated his equestrian ability, by volunteering to carry a dispatch through sniper-lined streets while hanging off the side of his horse, keeping the animal between him and the enemy.
McClellan refused to meet him, remembering Grant's earlier reputation for drinking while stationed in California.
Grant recommended against the move, in light of the Tenure of Office Act, which required Senate approval for cabinet removals.
That October, on Akerman's recommendation, Grant suspended ''habeas corpus'' in part of South Carolina and sent federal troops to enforce the law there.
Emory peacefully restored Kellogg to office and the following year the parties reached a compromise allowing Democrats to retain control of the Louisiana House.
Halleck ordered McClernand to Memphis, and placed him under Grant's authority.
As the wartime coalition began to fray, Grant's alignment with the party's pro-Reconstruction elements alienated party leaders who favored an end to federal intervention in Southern racial issues.
Boutwell did so the next day, on September 24, 1869, later known as Black Friday.
The Liberal Republicans nominated Horace Greeley, another Republican who had come to dislike Grant and his policies, and Governor Benjamin Gratz Brown of Missouri for Vice President.
The result was a nine-month-long siege of Petersburg, stalling the advance.
Grant left office in 1877 and embarked on a widely praised world tour lasting over two years.
In December, Grant appointed Chester A. Arthur, another Conkling man, to replace Murphy, and administration of the Customs House steadily improved.
Opponents denounced the idea as a violation of the two-term rule that had been the norm since George Washington.
Grant's son Fred assisted with references and proofreading.
Meanwhile, Grant continued serving at the training camps and made a positive impression on the volunteer Union recruits.
Corbin convinced Grant to appoint a Gould associate, Daniel Butterfield, as assistant Treasurer, where he could gather information for the Ring.
Rawlins later became Grant's aide-de-camp and close friend during the war.
In foreign policy, Grant sought to increase American trade and influence, while remaining at peace with the world.
In 1871, Thomas Murphy, the Collector of the Port of New York and a member of New York Senator Roscoe Conkling's political machine, was forced to resign.
Historians' views have grown more favorable since the 1990s, appreciating Grant's protection of African Americans and his peace policy towards Indians, even where those policies failed.
The Republican nomination for 1880 was wide open after Hayes forswore a second term and many Republicans thought that Grant was the man for the job.
In March of the following year, the New York Times finally announced that Grant was dying of cancer and a nationwide public concern for the former president began.
Grant ordered Custer arrested for breach of military protocol and barred him from leading an upcoming campaign against the Sioux.
In 1866, Congress renewed the Freedmen's Bureau over Johnson's vetoes and with Grant's support, and passed the first Civil Rights Act protecting African American civil rights by nullifying black codes.
Hiram Ulysses Grant was born in Point Pleasant, Ohio, on April 27, 1822, to Jesse Root Grant, a tanner, and Hannah (née Simpson) Grant.
Rejecting Johnson's vision for quick reconciliation with former Confederates, Congress passed the Reconstruction Acts, which divided the southern states into five military districts to protect the freedman's constitutional and congressional rights.
Led by Charles Francis Adams of Massachusetts and Senator Carl Schurz of Missouri, they publicly denounced the federal patronage system that Sumner, a Liberal Republican sympathizer, called "Grantism" and demanded amnesty for Confederate soldiers.
On April 14, five days after Grant's victory at Appomattox, he attended a cabinet meeting in Washington.
Their two-year and seven month voyage around the world captured the popular imagination, and Republicans—especially those of the Stalwart faction excluded from the Hayes administration—saw Grant in a new light.
The tomb is the largest mausoleum in North America.
He was made regimental quartermaster, managing supplies and equipment, with the rank of brevet second lieutenant.
Wood, charged uphill and captured the Confederate entrenchments on top of the ridge, forcing the rebels into disorganized retreat.
In trade policy, Grant's administration implemented a gold standard and sought to strengthen the dollar.
In 1880, Grant was unsuccessful in obtaining a Republican presidential nomination for a third term.
Although Grant was upset over Canby's death, he ordered restraint, disregarding Sherman's advice to seek revenge or exterminate the tribe.
Reinforced by 10,000 troops, Grant's army totaled 25,000 troops against 12,000 Confederates.
Even so, Conkling and John A. Logan began to organize delegates in Grant's favor.
Johnson favored a lenient approach to Reconstruction, calling for an immediate return of the former Confederate states into the Union without any guarantee of African American civil rights.
His administration successfully resolved the ''Alabama'' Claims by the Treaty of Washington with Great Britain, ending wartime tensions.
Despite his administration's many scandals, Grant continued to be personally popular.
Grant approached businessman William Henry Vanderbilt, who gave him a personal loan of $150,000.
Secretary of State Hamilton Fish dismissed annexation, seeing the island as politically unstable and troublesome.
In October 1873, a Spanish cruiser took captive a merchant ship, ''Virginius'', flying the U.S. flag, carrying war materials and men to aid the Cuban insurrection.
Continuing eastward, Grant's army captured Port Gibson, Raymond, and Jackson, the state capital and Confederate railroad supply center.
Grant's first post-war assignments took him and Julia to Detroit and then to Sackets Harbor, New York.
Grant removed Richardson from the Treasury appointing him judge of the Court of Claims.
At the convention, Conkling nominated Grant with an elegant speech, the most famous line being: "When asked which state he hails from, our sole reply shall be, he hails from Appomattox and its famous apple tree."
When the Civil War began in 1861, he rejoined the U.S. Army.
Northern resentment grew as the war dragged on, but an indirect benefit of the Petersburg siege was that Lee was forced to entrench and defend Richmond, and was unable to reinforce the Army of the Tennessee.
Sherman was to pursue Joseph E. Johnston's Army of the Tennessee, while Meade would lead the Army of the Potomac, with Grant in camp, to attack Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia.
At day's end, the Confederates captured one Union division, but Grant's army was able to hold the Landing.
Grant ordered Thomas and the Army of the Cumberland to advance when Sherman's army failed to take Missionary Ridge from the northeast.
The Commission, chaired by reformer George William Curtis, proposed certain reform rules and regulations, which Grant implemented by executive order in April 1872, Congress appropriating funds in May.
Grant said nothing publicly, but he wanted the job and encouraged his men.
The news of the attack came as a shock in Galena, and Grant shared his neighbors' mounting concern about the onset of war.
During a period known as the "Whiskey Wars" from 1869 to 1871, the Army raided and destroyed illegal distilleries in New York and Brooklyn.
The memoir has been highly regarded by the public, military historians, and literary critics.
The following year in 1859 Grant freed his only slave Jones, who was 35 years old and worth about $1,500, instead of selling him at a time when Grant desperately needed money.
In September 1873, Jay Cooke & Company, a New York brokerage house, collapsed after it failed to sell all of the bonds issued by Cooke's Northern Pacific Railway.
Grant appointed reformers Edwards Pierrepont and Marshall Jewell as Attorney General and Postmaster General, respectively, who supported Bristow's investigations.
After prosecutions by Akerman and his replacement, George Henry Williams, the Klan's power collapsed; by 1872, elections in the South saw African Americans voting in record numbers.
Although, as biographer Jean Edward Smith wrote, Grant's peace policy was "remarkably progressive and humanitarian" for its time, it ultimately disregarded native cultures, something modern Americans see "as a grave error."
The railroad was similarly unsuccessful, falling into bankruptcy the following year.
On June 3, 1891, a bronze statue of Grant, created by Danish sculptor Johannes Gelert and commissioned by publisher H. H. Kohlsaat, was dedicated at Grant Park in Galena, Illinois.
Throughout the 20th century, historians ranked his presidency near the bottom.
On February 15, Grant and Foote met stiff resistance from Confederate forces under Pillow.
Grant's "Peace Policy" aimed to replace entrepreneurs serving as Indian agents with missionaries.
On December 17, he issued General Order No.
Grant avoided war with Spain over the Virginius Affair, but Congress rejected his attempted annexation of the Dominican Republic.
Grant was distraught over Ward's deception and asked privately how he could ever "trust any human being again."
Over Johnson's vetoes, Congress renewed the Freedmen's Bureau and passed the Civil Rights Act of 1866.
Grant agreed to accept the post temporarily, and Stanton vacated the office until the Senate reconvened.
On October 25, Grant assumed command of the District of the Tennessee.
Even before Grant became president, expansionists in American politics desired control over the Caribbean islands.
They took the camp, but the reinforced Confederates under Brigadier General Gideon J. Pillow forced a retreat to Cairo.
There was further division within the party between the faction most concerned with the plight of the freedmen and that concerned with the growth of industry.
To placate reformers, Grant created a Civil Service Commission authorized by Congress in 1871.
Publicly, Grant attempted to appear loyal to Johnson while not alienating Republican legislators essential to his future political career.
Grant's Civil Service Commission reforms had limited success, as his cabinet implemented a merit system that increased the number of qualified candidates and relied less on Congressional patronage.
Military district governors were to lead transitional state governments in each district.
Regarded as a rising star, Ward, and the firm, Grant & Ward, were initially successful.
Stubbornly protective of corrupt associates, Grant often saw their prosecutions as unjust and shielded them from attack even at the cost of his own reputation, unless evidence of personal misconduct was overwhelming.
Bristow was among the leading candidates to replace him, suggesting that a large faction desired an end to "Grantism" and feared that Grant would run for a third term.
The collapse sent ripples through Wall Street, and other banks and brokerages that owned railroad stocks and bonds were also ruined.
When Sheridan reported suffering attacks by irregular Confederate cavalry under John S. Mosby, Grant recommended rounding up their families for imprisonment as hostages at Fort McHenry.
He opined that the Civil War was punishment inflicted on the nation for its aggression in Mexico.
Grant's popularity increased in the years immediately after his death.
After crossing the James River undetected, Grant and the Army of the Potomac arrived at Petersburg.
Lee had sent General Jubal Early up the Shenandoah Valley to attack the federal capital and draw troops away from the Army of the Potomac, but Sheridan defeated Early, ensuring that Washington would not be endangered.
In May 1871, Grant ordered federal troops to help marshals in arresting Klansmen.
On May 16, 1877, Grant embarked from Philadelphia by ship to England.
His bravery and initiative earned him brevet promotions; he became a temporary captain while his permanent rank was lieutenant.
He appointed Ely S. Parker, a Seneca Indian and member of his wartime staff, as Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
Ordered to Washington, Halleck on July 11 reinstated Grant as field commander of the Army of the Tennessee.
Grant's troops, in close cooperation with Foote's naval forces captured Fort Henry on February 6, 1862.
Grant also appointed four Justices to the Supreme Court: William Strong, Joseph P. Bradley, Ward Hunt and Chief Justice Morrison Waite.
A tactical defeat, the battle nonetheless gave Grant and his volunteers confidence and experience.
In July 1863, after a series of coordinated battles, Grant defeated Confederate armies and seized Vicksburg, giving the Union control of the Mississippi River and dividing the Confederacy in two.
In Oregon, relations were less peaceful, as war with the Modocs erupted in April 1873.
Grant's reputation soared during his well-publicized world tour.
During the battle, Grant attempted to break through Lee's line of defense, resulting in one of the bloodiest assaults of the Civil War, known as the Battle of the Bloody Angle.
In 1823, the family moved to the village of Georgetown in Brown County, Ohio, where five more siblings were born: Simpson, Clara, Orvil, Jennie, and Mary.
Grant was aggravated to learn that Lincoln authorized Major General John A. McClernand to raise a separate army for the purpose.
As Grant continued to push the Union advance westward, Lee's lines became overstretched and undermanned.
