They could be one-piece or two separate garments, one for each leg, attached at the waist with buttons or laces.
Retailers also began selling preshrunk undergarments.
They keep outer garments from being soiled by perspiration, urine, semen, menstrual blood and feces.
Most historians of this period are of the view that a chastity belt was worn to prevent sexual assault and that the woman kept the key.
The 1990s saw the introduction of boxer briefs, which take the longer shape of boxers but maintain the tightness of briefs.
Usually worn with the waistband lower than the wearer's waist, and often at the hips, with the leg bands ending at the groin.
It is worn by pulling it over the head.
A new woven cotton fabric called nainsook gained popularity in the 1920s for its durability.
The union suit was the precursor of long johns, a two-piece garment consisting of a long-sleeved top and long pants possibly named after American boxer John L. Sullivan who wore a similar garment in the ring.
This kind of underwear is worn by Mormons.
Vee-string, V string
* Pouch boxer briefs – these have a pouch for the genitals instead of a fly.
Many women began wearing the strapless bra as well, which gained popularity for its ability to push the breasts up and enhance cleavage.
The ancient Hawaiian ''malo'' was of this form, as are several styles of the Japanese ''fundoshi''.
The other major factor in the corset's demise was the fact that metal was globally in short supply during the First World War.
Though the company was bankrupt by the early 1900s, it had some impact on men's underwear design.
Meanwhile, some women adopted the corset once again, now called the "waspie" for the wasp-shaped waistline it gave the wearer.
The garment lacked the whalebone and metal supports and usually came with a brassiere (now usually called a "bra") and attached garters.
The act of a woman not wearing a bra is sometimes referred to as ''freeboobing''.
Designed by an "apparel engineer" named Arthur Kneibler, briefs dispensed with leg sections and had a Y-shaped overlapping fly.
These were the first true boxer shorts, which were named for their resemblance to the shorts worn by professional fighters.
Henry VIII also wanted a healthy son and may have thought that projecting himself in this way would portray fertility.
The company later introduced seamless pantyhose in 1965, spurred by the popularity of the miniskirt.
'''US''': jockey shorts
Steel-laced corsets were dropped in favour of the brassiere.
Online retailer, Freshpair, emerged in 2000 in New York and in 2008 Abercrombie & Fitch opened a new chain of stores, Gilly Hicks, to compete with other underwear retailers.
The loincloth is the simplest form of underwear; it was probably the first undergarment worn by human beings.
A jockstrap is different from a dance belt that a male dancer wears.
As dancing became a favourite pastime of young flappers, the garter belt was invented to keep stockings from falling.
In the 1920s, manufacturers shifted emphasis from durability to comfort.
By the 1860s, a tiny ("wasp") waist came to be seen as a symbol of beauty, and the corsets were stiffened with whalebone or steel to accomplish this.
Women dressed in crinolines often wore drawers under them for modesty and warmth.
The jockstrap was invented in 1874, by C.F.
* Traditional briefs – these have a Y-shaped fly.
Women's undergarments collectively are called ''lingerie''.
Briefs however remained popular in America from the 1950s (amongst young men) until the mid 1990s and in Australia the brief remains popular today and has become iconic.
'''Temple garments''', and discussing the matter further on the talk page.
This also applies for most clothes worn as nightwear and as swimwear.
A garment covering a person's torso which is usually made without buttons, pockets or a collar, and can have short or long sleeves.
'''Midway briefs'''
The loincloth was replaced by loose, trouser-like clothing called braies, which the wearer stepped into and then laced or tied around the waist and legs at about mid-calf.
Designers such as Calvin Klein began featuring near-naked models in their advertisements for white briefs.
Men are said to have worn loincloths in ancient Greece and Rome, though it is unclear whether Greek women wore undergarments.
Pantalettes were a form of leggings or long drawers.
A type of shorts modeled after what was worn by tap dancers.
Different styles of undergarments are generally worn by females and males.
Très Riches Heures du duc de Berry by Limbourg Brothers or in the Grimani Breviary: The Month of February by Gerard Horenbout.
By the 1880s, the dress reform movement was campaigning against the pain and damage to internal organs and bones caused by tight lacing.
The director of menswear of major British retailer Marks & Spencer (M&S), which sells 40 million pairs of men's underpants a year, was quoted as saying that while boxer shorts were still the most popular at M&S, demand was easing off in favour of hipster trunks similar in design to the swimming trunks worn by actor Daniel Craig in the James Bond film ''Casino Royale'' (2006).
Underwear may also be used to preserve the wearer's modesty – for instance, some women wear camisoles and slips (petticoats) under clothes that are sheer.
Invented in Utica, New York, and patented in 1868, this was a one-piece front-buttoning garment usually made of knitted material with sleeves extending to the wrists and legs down to the ankles.
The bustle, a frame or pad worn over the buttocks to enhance their shape, had been used off and on by women for two centuries, but reached the height of its popularity in the later 1880s, and went out of fashion for good in the 1890s.
Undergarments commonly worn by females today include bras and panties (known in the United Kingdom as knickers), while males often wear briefs, boxer briefs or boxer shorts.
In most ancient civilizations, this was the only undergarment available.
Archaeologists have found the remains of such loincloths made of leather dating back 7,000 years.
There is a myth that Crusaders, worried about the fidelity of their wives, forced them to wear chastity belts.
In 1928, Maidenform, a company operated by Ida Rosenthal, a Russian immigrant, developed the brassiere and introduced modern cup sizes for bras.
Rayon garments also became widely available in the post-war period.
'''Worn by women'''
Underwear is worn for a variety of reasons.
Jacob began making brassieres for her family and friends, and news of the garment soon spread by word of mouth.
Codpieces were sometimes used as a pocket for holding small items.
Underwear advertising first made an appearance in the 1910s.
Women's panties became more colourful and decorative, and by the mid-1960s were available in two abbreviated styles called the hip-hugger and the bikini (named after the Pacific Ocean island of that name), frequently in sheer nylon fabric.
It has been speculated that the King may have had the sexually transmitted disease syphilis, and his large codpiece may have included a bandage soaked in medication to relieve its symptoms.
Henry VIII of England began padding his codpiece, which caused a spiralling trend of larger and larger codpieces that only ended by the end of the 16th century.
''Underclothes'', ''underclothing''  and ''underwear'' are formal terms, while undergarments may be more casually called, in Australia, ''Reg Grundys'' (rhyming slang for ''undies'') and ''Reginalds'', and, in the United Kingdom, ''smalls'' (from the earlier ''smallclothes'') and (historically) ''unmentionables''.
Manufacturers also experimented with rayon and newer fabrics like Dacron, nylon and Spandex.
Only the upper classes could have afforded imported silk.
Chausses were also giving way to form-fitting hose, which covered the legs and feet.
Tight lacing of a corset sometimes led to a woman needing to retire to the fainting room.
In 1897 Bennett's newly formed Bike Web Company patented and began mass-producing the Bike Jockey Strap.
It had a buttoned flap (known colloquially as the "access hatch", "drop seat" or "fireman's flap") in the back to ease visits to the toilet.
It was the flappers who ushered in the era of lingerie.
A loincloth may take three major forms.
In the United States, women's underwear may be known as ''delicates'' due to the recommended washing machine cycle or because they are, simply put, delicate.
As skirts became fuller from the 1830s, women wore many petticoats to achieve a fashionable bell shape.
Hip hop stars popularized "sagging", in which loosely fitting jeans or shorts were allowed to droop below the waist, exposing the waistband or a greater portion of boxer shorts, briefs, or boxer briefs worn underneath.
Although women had worn brassiere-like garments in years past, Jacob's was the first to be successfully marketed and widely adopted.
An undershirt (''vest'' in the United Kingdom) is a piece of underwear covering the torso, while underpants (often ''pants'' in the United Kingdom), drawers, and shorts cover the genitals and buttocks.
A type of thong which is as narrow as a G-string, but without the supporting "string" around the wearer's hips/panty line, leaving just a sideways C shaped piece between the legs.
These were not the small-waisted, curved corsets familiar from the Victorian era, but straight-lined stays that flattened the bust.
They also are called ''intimate clothing'' and ''intimates''.
The shorter bloomers became looser and less supportive as the boyish flapper look came into fashion.
Also in the 1920s, as hemlines of women's dresses rose, women began to wear stockings to cover the exposed legs.
By the end of the decade, the girdle had fallen out of favour as women chose sexier and lighter alternatives.
The chiseled muscularity of Mark Wahlberg (then known as Marky Mark) in a series of 1990s underwear advertisements for Calvin Klein briefs led to his success as a white hip hop star and a Hollywood actor.
During World War II, elastic waistbands and metal snaps gave way once again to button fasteners due to rubber and metal shortages.
* High cut (French cut) panties.
The emancipation or liberty bodice offered an alternative to constricting corsets, and in Australia and the UK the liberty bodice became a standard item for girls as well as women.
The invention of new, flexible but supportive materials allowed whalebone and steel bones to be removed.
They were worn for the increased flexibility they afforded.
* Pouch midway briefs – these have a pouch for the genitals.
The forerunner of the modern-day shirt, the chemise was tucked into a man's braies, under his outer clothing.
Has a narrow strip of material along the centre of the garment's rear which sits between the wearer's buttocks and connects the front or pouch to the waistband behind the wearer.
By the end of the decade, trouser-like "bloomers", which were popularized by Amelia Jenks Bloomer (1818–1894) but invented by Elizabeth Smith Miller, gained popularity with the so-called Gibson Girls who enjoyed pursuits such as cycling and tennis.
These usually have an elastic waistband, a crotch to cover the genital area which is usually lined with absorbent material such as cotton, and a pair of leg openings which are often also elasticized.
Early underwear advertisements emphasised durability and comfort, and fashion was not regarded as a selling point.
Fit tends to be more comfortable than that of a plain thong or G-string and is often more embellished.
Skirt styles became shorter and long drawers called pantalettes or pantaloons kept the legs covered.
Women's brassieres provide support for the breasts, and men's briefs serve the same function for the male genitalia.
There is some speculation that only slaves wore loincloths and that citizens did not wear undergarments beneath their chitons.
Special types of undergarments have religious significance.
The increased sexual awareness of the flapper also made underwear sexier than ever before.
In 2012, findings in Lengberg Castle showed that lace and linen brassiere-like garments, one of which greatly resembled the modern bra, date back to hundreds of years before it was thought to exist.
By the time of the Renaissance, braies had become shorter to accommodate longer styles of chausses.
This was a petticoat stiffened with reed or willow rods so that it stood out from a woman's body like a cone extending from the waist.
* Control panties – usually made of stretchable material such as Spandex and extending above the waist, these are designed to provide support and create a slimmer appearance.
Scovil Manufacturing introduced the snap fastener at this time, which became a popular addition to various kinds of undergarments.
* Round-neck T-shirt
'''Religious Under Clothing'''
Pantyhose, also called ''tights'' in British English, which combined panties and hose into one garment, made their first appearance in 1959, invented by Glen Raven Mills of North Carolina.
Side-cut shorts, dance shorts, french knickers
By the end of the 1910s, Chalmers Knitting Company split the union suit into upper and lower sections, effectively inventing the modern undershirt and drawers.
The original Wonderbra and push-up bra by Frederick's of Hollywood finally hit it big.
The string connects with the waistband directly to form a "V" shape at back.
This codpiece allowed men to urinate without having to remove the braies completely.
Though her company closed within one year, it had a significant impact on many levels.
In various, mainly tropical, cultures, the traditional male dress may still consist of only a single garment below the waist or even none at all, with underwear as optional, including the Far-Eastern ''dhoti'' and ''lungi'', or the Scottish kilt.
Inez Gaches-Sarraute invented the "health corset", with a straight-fronted bust made to help support the wearer's muscles.
Undergarments are known by a number of terms.
A corset may be worn as a foundation garment to alter a woman's body shape.
A common style among young men is to allow the trousers to sag below the waist, thus revealing the waistband or a greater portion of whatever underwear the man is wearing.
Medieval people wearing only tunics, without underpants, can be seen on works like The Ass in the School by Pieter Bruegel the Elder, in the
* Strapless pouch – consists of a support pouch for the genitals and a waistband, with no securing straps.
By 1960, men's underwear was regularly printed in loud patterns, or with messages or images such as cartoon characters.
Women wore a chemise underneath their gowns or robes, sometimes with petticoats over the chemise.
* Gym midway briefs – skin-tight and usually have no fly.
Terms for specific undergarments are shown in the table below.
Fifteenth-century hose were often particolored, with each leg in a different-coloured fabric or even more than one colour on a leg.
* Double-seat or double-back briefs.
British manufacturers and retailers claim that most British men prefer "trunks", or short boxer briefs.
Undergarments are generally of two types, those that are worn to cover the torso and those that are worn to cover the waist and legs, although there are also garments which cover both.
* High-sided bikini underwear
There is no reference, image, or surviving belt to support this story.
Egyptian king Tutankhamun (1341 BC – 1323 BC) was found buried with numerous linen loincloths of this style.
An alternate form is more skirt-like: a cloth is wrapped around the hips several times and then fastened with a girdle.
'''UK''': Y-fronts, slips
The corset was usually worn over a thin shirt-like shift of linen or cotton or muslin.
There is usually a fly, either with or without buttons.
In 1938, when Jockeys were introduced in the UK, they sold at the rate of 3,000 a week.
Jockey briefs proved so popular that over 30,000 pairs were sold within three months of their introduction.
''Subligacula'' were also worn by men.
'''Undergarments''' are items of clothing worn beneath outer clothes, usually in direct contact with the skin, although they may comprise more than a single layer.
Meanwhile, World War I soldiers were issued button-front shorts as underwear.
Some items of clothing are designed as undergarments, while others, such as T-shirts and certain types of shorts, are appropriate both as undergarments and as outer clothing.
* Diagonal-flap briefs.
Bikini, string bikini
In the Middle Ages, western men's underwear became looser fitting.
long leg boxer briefs, boxerjocks
* Hipster – worn lower with the waistband around the hips.
Union suit advertisements raved about patented new designs that reduced the number of buttons and increased accessibility.
* Low-cut or low-rise briefs
Cee-string, C string
Men's braies and hose were eventually replaced by simple cotton, silk or linen drawers, which were usually knee-length trousers with a button flap in the front.
Consists of an elastic waistband with a support pouch for the genitalia and two elastic straps affixed to the base of the pouch and to the left and right sides of the waistband at the hip.
In warmer climates the loincloth was often the only clothing worn (effectively making it an outer garment rather than an undergarment), as was doubtless its origin, but in colder regions the loincloth often formed the basis of a person's clothing and was covered by other garments.
Some items of clothing are designed exclusively as underwear, while others such as T-shirts and certain types of shorts are suitable both as underwear and as outer clothing.
At first they were called pairs of bodies, which refers to a stiffened decorative bodice worn on top of another bodice stiffened with buckram, reeds, canes, whalebone or other materials.
In 1913, a New York socialite named Mary Phelps Jacob created the first modern brassiere by tying two handkerchiefs together with ribbon.
Women's undergarments began to emphasize the breasts instead of the waist.
Another form is usually called a cache-sexe: a triangle of cloth is provided with strings or loops, which are used to fasten the triangle between the legs and over the genitals.
Booty shorts, boyleg briefs, boy short panties, boys' cut shorts, boyshorts, hipsters, shorties
Most of these experimental designs had to do with new ways to hold closed the crotch flap common on most union suits and drawers.
The loincloth continues to be worn by people around the world – it is the traditional form of undergarment in many Asian societies, for example.
The waistbands of boxer shorts are usually wider than those of briefs, and often bear the brand name of the manufacturer.
This new female athleticism helped push the corset out of style.
Corsets also began to be worn about this time.
Thongs are sometimes worn to reduce "panty lines" when wearing tightly fitting trousers.
The decade saw the introduction of the bullet bra pointed bust, inspired by Christian Dior's "New Look", which featured pointed cups.
Codpieces were also worn with hose when very short doublets – vest- (UK: waistcoat-) like garments tied together in the front and worn under other clothing – were in fashion, as early forms of hose were open at the crotch.
Lindsay "Layneau" Boudreaux, a French immigrant, established the short-lived panty company Layneau.
Some men wear T-shirts underneath partly or fully unbuttoned shirts.
In the later Middle Ages they were used exclusively as undergarments.
Wealthier men often wore chausses as well, which only covered the legs.
Benjamin Joseph Clark, a migrant to Louisiana from New Jersey, opened a venture capitalist firm named Bossier in Bossier Parish.
A woman may, for instance, allow the top of her brassiere to be visible from under her collar, or wear a see-through blouse over it.
Elaborately quilted petticoats might be displayed by a cut-away dress, in which case they served a skirt rather than an undergarment.
Jacob's original intention was to cover the whalebone sticking out of her corset, which was visible through her sheer dress.
Over the upper part of their bodies, both medieval men and women usually wore a close-fitting shirt-like garment called a chemise in France, or a smock or shift in England.
Conversely, some types of underwear can be worn for sexual titillation, such as edible underwear, crotchless panties and thongs.
The first underwear print advertisement in the US appeared in ''The Saturday Evening Post'' in 1911 and featured oil paintings by J. C. Leyendecker of the "Kenosha Klosed Krotch".
Women of the 1930s brought the corset back, now called the "girdle".
During the 16th century, the farthingale was popular.
These are similar in style to boxer briefs, which are longer in the legs from the waist to the knees and tighter-fitting, like briefs.
By 1914, Jacob had a patent for her design and was marketing it throughout the US.
In cold climates, underwear may constitute an additional layer of clothing helping to keep the wearer warm.
By the early 20th century, the mass-produced undergarment industry was booming, and competition forced producers to come up with all sorts of innovative and gimmicky designs to compete.
These are similar in style to boxer shorts, but are generally shorter and form-fitting like briefs.
Specialist retailers of underwear include high street stores La Senza (Canada), Agent Provocateur (UK), Victoria's Secret (USA), and GapBody, the lingerie division of the Gap established in 1998 (USA).
Before the 1950s, underwear consisted of simple, white pieces of clothing which were not to be shown in public.
In cold weather, long underwear is sometimes worn to provide additional warmth.
The increased wealth of the gay community helped to promote a diversity of undergarment choices.
The buttons attached to a separate piece of cloth, or "yoke", sewn to the front of the garment, and tightness of fit was adjusted by means of ties on the sides.
A woman wearing low-rise trousers may expose the upper rear portion of her thong underwear is said to display a "whale tail".
In the UK in the 1970s, tight jeans gave briefs a continued edge over boxer shorts among young men, but a decade later boxers were given a boost by Nick Kamen's performance in Levi's "Launderette" TV commercial for its 501 jeans, during which he stripped down to a pair of white boxer shorts in a public laundromat.
A type of strapless Japanese loincloth used as a female underwear garment that covers the genitals
Undergarments were harder to find as well, since soldiers abroad had priority to obtain them.
Women wore lacier versions of this basic duo known as the camisole and tap pants.
In 1912, the US had its first professional underwear designer.
