Many countries aid the unemployed through social welfare programs.
Unemployment can harm growth not only because it is a waste of resources, but also because it generates redistributive pressures and subsequent distortions, drives people to poverty, constrains liquidity limiting labor mobility, and erodes self-esteem promoting social dislocation, unrest and conflict.
This was very much the consensus in the United Kingdom until 1983, when Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government won a landslide in the general election, despite overseeing a rise in unemployment from 1,500,000 to 3,200,000 since its election four years earlier.
This is accomplished by dividing the proletariat into surplus labour (employees) and under-employment (unemployed).
2013/2014 has seen the employment rate increase from 1,935,836 to 2,173,012 as supported by showing the UK is creating more job opportunities and forecasts the rate of increase in 2014/2015 will be another 7.2%
In the U.S., the unemployment insurance allowance one receives is based solely on previous income (not time worked, family size, etc.)
This stress is increased when the unemployed are faced with health issues, poverty, and lack of relational support.
However, they maintain that their data does not take into account exogenous events.
This happens with cyclical unemployment, as macroeconomic forces cause microeconomic unemployment which can boomerang back and exacerbate these macroeconomic forces.
There are relatively limited historical records on unemployment because it has not always been acknowledged or measured systematically.
Unemployment differs from country to country and across different time periods.
A 2014 study by Van der Meer found that the stigma that comes from being unemployed affects personal well-being, especially for men, who often feel as though their masculine identities are threatened by unemployment.
The clearest cases of involuntary unemployment are those where there are fewer job vacancies than unemployed workers even when wages are allowed to adjust, so that even if all vacancies were to be filled, some unemployed workers would still remain.
The labor force participation rate can decrease when the rate of growth of the population outweighs that of the employed and unemployed together.
Yet, it does not benefit workers.
The workweek during most of the 19th century was 60 hours.
In the long term, the velocity of money supply measures such as the MZM ("money zero maturity," representing cash and equivalent demand deposits) velocity is far more predictive of inflation than low unemployment.
When comparing unemployment rates between countries or time periods, it is best to consider differences in their levels of industrialization and self-employment.
Recognition of unemployment occurred slowly as economies across the world industrialized and bureaucratized.
So, in practice, the distinction between voluntary and involuntary unemployment is hard to draw.
The tight labor market was a factor in productivity gains allowing workers to maintain or increase their nominal wages during the secular deflation that caused real wages to rise at various times in the 19th century, especially in the final decades.
According to a study published in Social Indicator Research, even those who tend to be optimistic find it difficult to look on the bright side of things when unemployed.
In ''Out of Work: Unemployment and Government in the Twentieth-Century America'', economists Richard Vedder and Lowell Gallaway argue that the empirical record of wages rates, productivity, and unemployment in American validates classical unemployment theory.
Government-funded employment is not widely advocated as a solution to unemployment, except in times of crisis; this is attributed to the public sector jobs' existence depending directly on the tax receipts from private sector employment.
To some degree these differences remain despite national statistical agencies increasingly adopting the definition of unemployment by the International Labour Organization.
However, a more recent study has found that people often stick together in “unhappy” or “unhealthy” marriages when unemployed to buffer financial costs.
The demand for labour in an economy is derived from the demand for goods and services.
In many countries only those who have no work but are actively looking for work (and/or qualifying for social security benefits) are counted as unemployed.
The labor force participation rate explains how an increase in the unemployment rate can occur simultaneously with an increase in employment.
This is because people join the labour market (give up studying, start a job hunt, etc.)
Though there have been several definitions of "voluntary" and "involuntary unemployment" in the economics literature, a simple distinction is often applied.
Then came a strong economic recovery.
Statistical data are available by member state, for the European Union as a whole (EU28) as well as for the euro area (EA19).
In April 2010, the U.S. unemployment rate was 9.9%, but the government's broader U-6 unemployment rate was 17.1%.
Temporary measures can include public works programs such as the Works Progress Administration.
With inflation down to 1.6% by 1993, unemployment then began to fall rapidly, standing at 1,800,000 by early 1997.
These theories argue against interventions imposed on the labor market from the outside, such as unionization, bureaucratic work rules, minimum wage laws, taxes, and other regulations that they claim discourage the hiring of workers.
This Survey measures the unemployment rate based on the ILO definition.
The BLS revised the CPS in 1994 and among the changes the measure representing the official unemployment rate was renamed U3 instead of U5.
Family responsibilities keep others out of the labour force.
This implies that other factors may have contributed to women choosing to invest in advancing their careers.
Keynesian models recommend government interventions designed to increase demand for workers; these can include financial stimuli, publicly funded job creation, and expansionist monetary policies.
There are also different ways national statistical agencies measure unemployment.
Another cost for the unemployed is that the combination of unemployment, lack of financial resources, and social responsibilities may push unemployed workers to take jobs that do not fit their skills or allow them to use their talents.
* U3: Official '''unemployment rate''' per the ILO definition occurs when people are without jobs and they have actively looked for work within the past four weeks.
Such legislation diminished sexual discrimination and encouraged more women to enter the labor market by receiving fair remuneration to help raising families and children.
Therefore, higher wages increase general consumption and as a result need for labor increases and unemployment decreases in the economy.
This reserve army of labour fight among themselves for scarce jobs at lower and lower wages.
In some countries, the availability of unemployment benefits can inflate statistics since they give an incentive to register as unemployed.
Another intervention involves an expansionary monetary policy that increases the supply of money which should reduce interest rates which should lead to an increase in non-governmental spending.
According to Karl Marx, unemployment is inherent within the unstable capitalist system and periodic crises of mass unemployment are to be expected.
They were young single women who typically withdrew from the labor force at marriage unless family needed two incomes.
It hired men (and some women) off the relief roles ("dole") typically for unskilled labor.
The labor force participation rate is a key component in long-term economic growth, almost as important as productivity.
On the other hand, cyclical unemployment, structural unemployment, and classical unemployment are largely involuntary in nature.
Efforts to preserve existing jobs of domestic and native workers include legal barriers against "outsiders" who want jobs, obstacles to immigration, and/or tariffs and similar trade barriers against foreign competitors.
The decade of the 1930s saw the Great Depression impact unemployment across the globe.
The function of the proletariat within the capitalist system is to provide a "reserve army of labour" that creates downward pressure on wages.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics also calculates six alternate measures of unemployment, U1 through U6, that measure different aspects of unemployment:
Many economies industrialize and experience increasing numbers of non-agricultural workers.
A 2007 study from Jacob and Kleinert found that young people (ages 18 to 24) who have fewer resources and limited work experiences are more likely to be unemployed.
Europe's young workers have been especially hard hit.
In 1929, the U.S. unemployment rate averaged 3%.
There were two million homeless people migrating across the United States.
In 1535, a bill was drawn up calling for the creation of a system of public works to deal with the problem of unemployment, to be funded by a tax on income and capital.
Historical experience suggests that low unemployment affects inflation in the short term but not the long term.
It is argued that supply-side policies, which include cutting taxes on businesses and reducing regulation, create jobs, reduce unemployment and decrease labour's share of national income.
Unemployment has risen in two-thirds of European countries since 2010.
This corrects for the normal increase in the number of people employed due to increases in population and increases in the labour force relative to the population.
The use of birth control gave women the flexibility of opting to invest and advance their career while maintaining a relationship.
The Current Employment Statistics survey (CES), or "Payroll Survey", conducts a survey based on a sample of 160,000 businesses and government agencies that represent 400,000 individual employers.
In addition, those who are of working age but are currently in full-time education are usually not considered unemployed in government statistics.
Industrialization involves economies of scale that often prevent individuals from having the capital to create their own jobs to be self-employed.
This means that they may not fit the job vacancies that are created when the economy recovers.
The main source used is the European Union Labour Force Survey (EU-LFS).
Many of these are going to school or are retired.
Internationally, some nations' unemployment rates are sometimes muted or appear less severe due to the number of self-employed individuals working in agriculture.
Other factors include the changing nature of work, with machines replacing physical labor, eliminating many traditional male occupations, and the rise of the service sector, where many jobs are gender neutral.
During the reign of Henry VIII, as many as 72,000 people are estimated to have been executed.
With cyclical unemployment, the number of unemployed workers exceeds the number of job vacancies, so that even if full employment were attained and all open jobs were filled, some workers would still remain unemployed.
For example, the United States' non-agricultural labour force increased from 20% in 1800, to 50% in 1850, to 97% in 2000.
As well as anxiety, it can cause depression, lack of confidence, and huge amounts of stress.
The official unemployment rate in the 16 EU countries that use the euro rose to 10% in December 2009 as a result of another recession.
This results in substantial, permanent structural unemployment.
In addition, unemployed people have higher rates of medication use, poor diet, physician visits, tobacco smoking, alcoholic beverage consumption, drug use, and lower rates of exercise.
Classical or real-wage unemployment occurs when real wages for a job are set above the market-clearing level, causing the number of job-seekers to exceed the number of vacancies.
Early in 2009, unemployment passed the 2,000,000 mark, by which time economists were predicting it would soon reach 3,000,000.
New entrants (such as graduating students) and re-entrants (such as former homemakers) can also suffer a spell of frictional unemployment.
For monthly calculations, national surveys or national registers from employment offices are used in conjunction with quarterly EU-LFS data.
In 2013, Representative Hunter proposed that the Bureau of Labor Statistics use the U5 rate instead of the current U3 rate.
u = rate of unemployment = U / LF
The "natural" rate of unemployment is defined as the rate of unemployment that exists when the labour market is in equilibrium and there is pressure for neither rising inflation rates nor falling inflation rates.
In 1547, a bill was passed that subjected vagrants to some of the more extreme provisions of the criminal law, namely two years servitude and branding with a "V" as the penalty for the first offense and death for the second.
The United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), which reports current long-term unemployment rate at 1.9 percent, defines this as unemployment lasting 27 weeks or longer.
At times, they were a financial help to their families.
The Elizabethan Poor Law of 1601, one of the world's first government-sponsored welfare programs, made a clear distinction between those who were unable to work and those able-bodied people who refused employment.
Across the United States the growing ranks of people made homeless in the foreclosure crisis are generating tent cities.
In 1979, Brenner found that for every 10% increase in the number of unemployed there is an increase of 1.2% in total mortality, a 1.7% increase in cardiovascular disease, 1.3% more cirrhosis cases, 1.7% more suicides, 4.0% more arrests, and 0.8% more assaults reported to the police.
The closing of the monasteries in the 1530s increased poverty, as the church had helped the poor.
This is in fact beneficial to the economy since it results in a better allocation of resources.
In Cleveland, Ohio, the unemployment rate was 60%; in Toledo, Ohio, 80%.
Since it is operating below its production possibility frontier, it could have higher output if all the workforce were usefully employed.
In the early stages of an economic boom, unemployment often rises.
One of the major problems with the NAIRU theory is that no one knows exactly what the NAIRU is (while it clearly changes over time).
A description of the miserable living standards of the mill workers in England in 1844 was given by Fredrick Engels in ''The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844''.
Individuals who are actively seeking job placement must make the effort to: be in contact with an employer, have job interviews, contact job placement agencies, send out resumes, submit applications, respond to advertisements, or some other means of active job searching within the prior four weeks.
Costs of unemployment also vary depending on age.
Such critics often propose quitting jobs when possible, working less, reassessing the cost of living to this end, creation of jobs which are "fun" as opposed to "work," and creating cultural norms where work is seen as unhealthy.
The use of this method has been declining in favor of Labour Surveys.
* U1: Percentage of labor force unemployed 15 weeks or longer.
In the 1576 Act each town was required to provide work for the unemployed.
However, mainstream economic discussions of full employment since the 1970s suggest that attempts to reduce the level of unemployment below the natural rate of unemployment will fail, resulting only in less output and more inflation.
No matter what its name, demand theory holds that this means that if the unemployment rate gets "too low," inflation will accelerate in the absence of wage and price controls (incomes policies).
However, large economic events such as the Great Depression can lead to similar unemployment rates across the globe.
By the spring of 1983, unemployment in the United Kingdom had risen by 6% in the previous 12 months; compared to 10% in Japan, 23% in the United States of America and 34% in West Germany (seven years before reunification).
Still others have a physical or mental disability which prevents them from participating in labour force activities.
Particularly many young people between 15 and 24 are studying full-time and are therefore neither working nor looking for a job.
According to classical economic theory, markets reach equilibrium where supply equals demand; everyone who wants to sell at the market price can.
However, the number applying for and receiving benefits increases during recessions.
Some demand theory economists see the inflation barrier as corresponding to the natural rate of unemployment.
Advocates of supply-side policies believe those policies can solve this by making the labour market more flexible.
Both the actual count and rate of unemployment are reported.
Pop = total population
Another, normative, definition of full employment might be called the ''ideal'' unemployment rate.
However, in countries such as the United States, Canada, Mexico, Australia, Japan and the European Union, unemployment is measured using a sample survey (akin to a Gallup poll).
One study found that women are more likely to experience unemployment than men and that they are less likely to move from temporary positions to permanent positions.
Long-term the increased demand will be negated by inflation.
However, some elderly and many disabled individuals are active in the labour market
A historic shift began around the end of the great recession as women began leaving the labor force in the United States and other developed countries.
Additionally, children, the elderly, and some individuals with disabilities are typically not counted as part of the labour force in and are correspondingly not included in the unemployment statistics.
Scarcity of labor was a factor in the economics of slavery in the U.S.
As of April 2015 the female labor force participation is at 56.6%, the male labor force participation rate is at 69.4% and the total is 62.8%.
High unemployment can encourage xenophobia and protectionism as workers fear that foreigners are stealing their jobs.
Some argue that minimum wages and union activity keep wages from falling, which means too many people want to sell their labour at the going price but cannot.
By having control over the timing of their fertility, they were not running a risk of thwarting their career choices.
This method is the most internationally comparable.
and usually compensates for one-third of one's previous income.
Before current levels of world trade were developed, unemployment was demonstrated to reduce inflation, following the Phillips curve, or to decelerate inflation, following the NAIRU/natural rate of unemployment theory, since it is relatively easy to seek a new job without losing one's current one.
As such, if the demand for goods and services in the economy increases, the demand for labour will increase, increasing employment and wages.
Other researchers have found that today’s high school seniors place a lower value on work than those in the past, and this is likely because they recognize the limited availability of jobs.
One suggested interventions involves deficit spending to boost employment and demand.
Laws restricting layoffs may make businesses less likely to hire in the first place, as hiring becomes more risky.
Their data shows a strong correlation between adjusted real wage and unemployment in the United States from 1900 to 1990.
A direct demand-side solution to unemployment is government-funded employment of the able-bodied poor.
The exact calculation for individual countries, resulting in harmonized monthly data, depend on the availability of the data.
This is defined in European Union statistics, as unemployment lasting for longer than one year.
LF = labor force = U + E
Keynesian economists on the other hand see the lack of supply for jobs as potentially resolvable by government intervention.
The statistic also does not count the "underemployed"&nbsp;– those working fewer hours than they would prefer or in a job that doesn't make good use of their capabilities.
Those who do not want to sell at this price do not; in the labour market this is classical unemployment.
In these terms, much or most of frictional unemployment is voluntary, since it reflects individual search behavior.
Hidden, or covered, unemployment is the unemployment of potential workers that is not reflected in official unemployment statistics, due to the way the statistics are collected.
Unemployment in Canada reached 27% at the depth of the Depression in 1933.
People who do not really seek work may choose to declare themselves unemployed so as to get benefits; people with undeclared paid occupations may try to get unemployment benefits in addition to the money they earn from their work.
For those under 25, the unemployment rate in Spain was 43.8%.
Since not all unemployment may be "open" and counted by government agencies, official statistics on unemployment may not be accurate.
David Ames Wells also noted that living conditions in England had improved near the end of the 19th century and that unemployment was low.
Simply looking at advertisements and not responding will not count as actively seeking job placement.
In the preface to the 1892 edition Engels notes that the extreme poverty he wrote about in 1844 had largely disappeared.
Seasonal unemployment may be seen as a kind of structural unemployment, since it is a type of unemployment that is linked to certain kinds of jobs (construction work, migratory farm work).
* ''Employment Office Statistics'' are the least effective being that they only include a monthly tally of unemployed persons who enter employment offices.
The scarcity and high price of labor in the U.S. during the 19th century was well documented by contemporary accounts, as in the following:
In 1999, economists Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger estimated that increased incarceration lowered measured unemployment in the United States by 0.17% between 1985 and the late 1990s.
As defined by the International Labour Organization, "unemployed workers" are those who are currently not working but are willing and able to work for pay, currently available to work, and have actively searched for work.
For example, a surprise decrease in the money supply may shock rational economic factors and suddenly inhibit aggregate demand.
Much ''technological unemployment'', due to the replacement of workers by machines, might be counted as structural unemployment.
Between 1930 and 1950, female labor force participation increased primarily due to the increased demand for office workers, women's participation in the high school movement, and due to electrification which reduced the time spent on household chores.
Providing aid to the unemployed is a strategy used to prevent cutbacks in consumption of goods and services which can lead to a vicious cycle of further job losses and further decreases in consumption/demand.
The unemployment rate is a measure of the prevalence of unemployment and it is calculated as a percentage by dividing the number of unemployed individuals by all individuals currently in the labor force.
For the fourth quarter of 2004, according to OECD, (source  Employment Outlook 2005 ISBN 92-64-01045-9), normalized unemployment for men aged 25 to 54 was 4.6% in the U.S. and 7.4% in France.
The main types of unemployment include structural unemployment which focuses on structural problems in the economy and inefficiencies inherent in labour markets, including a mismatch between the supply and demand of laborers with necessary skill sets.
An 26 April 2005 ''Asia Times'' article notes that, "In regional giant South Africa, some 300,000 textile workers have lost their jobs in the past two years due to the influx of Chinese goods".
However, unemployment is profitable within the global capitalist system because unemployment lowers wages which are costs from the perspective of the owners.
2013 Economics Nobel prize winner Robert J. Shiller said that rising inequality in the United States and elsewhere is the most important problem.
These are people who have no job and are not looking for one.
However, the existence of structural unemployment may reflect choices made by the unemployed in the past, while classical (natural) unemployment may result from the legislative and economic choices made by labour unions or political parties.
It is possible to be neither employed nor unemployed by ILO definitions, i.e., to be outside of the "labour force."
These are considerably lower than the standard youth unemployment rates, ranging from 7.9 (Germany) to 57.9 percent (Greece).
Into the 21st century, unemployment in the United Kingdom remained low and the economy remaining strong, while at this time several other European economies&nbsp;– namely, France and Germany (reunified a decade earlier)&nbsp;– experienced a minor recession and a substantial rise in unemployment.
Rising unemployment has traditionally been regarded by the public and media in any country as a key guarantor of electoral defeat for any government which oversees it.
In the U.S., the WPA (1935–43) was the largest make-work program.
Another factor that may have contributed to the trend was The Equal Pay Act of 1963, which aimed at abolishing wage disparity based on sex.
The unemployed in the U.S. often use welfare programs such as Food Stamps or accumulating debt because unemployment insurance in the U.S. generally does not replace a majority of the income one received on the job (and one cannot receive such aid indefinitely).
Structural unemployment occurs when a labour market is unable to provide jobs for everyone who wants one because there is a mismatch between the skills of the unemployed workers and the skills needed for the available jobs.
Unemployment increases susceptibility to cardiovascular disease, somatization, anxiety disorders, depression, and suicide.
The latter can be important.
High unemployment can also cause social problems such as crime; if people have less disposable income than before, it is very likely that crime levels within the economy will increase.
However, the labor market is not 100% efficient: It does not clear, though it may be more efficient than bureaucracy.
Other supply-side policies include education to make workers more attractive to employers.
Unemployment in the United Kingdom fell later in the 1930s as the depression eased, and remained low (in six figures) after World War II.
Frictional unemployment is always present in an economy, so the level of involuntary unemployment is properly the unemployment rate minus the rate of frictional unemployment, which means that increases or decreases in unemployment are normally under-represented in the simple statistics.
According to this theory, unemployment may promote general labour productivity and profitability by increasing employers' rationale for their monopsony-like power (and profits).
Voluntary unemployment is attributed to the individual's decisions, whereas involuntary unemployment exists because of the socio-economic environment (including the market structure, government intervention, and the level of aggregate demand) in which individuals operate.
Over 3 million unemployed young men were taken out of the cities and placed into 2600+ work camps managed by the CCC.
In particular, as of 2005, roughly 0.7% of the U.S. population is incarcerated (1.5% of the available working population).
Statistics for the U.S. economy as a whole hide variations among groups.
By the end of 1989, unemployment had fallen to 1,600,000.
Discussions of frictional unemployment focus on voluntary decisions to work based on each individuals' valuation of their own work and how that compares to current wage rates plus the time and effort required to find a job.
By 1972 unemployment in the UK had crept back up above 1,000,000, and was even higher by the end of the decade, with inflation also being high.
Unemployment at times was between one and two percent.
