It further teaches that, having married, he and his wife would have become "True Parents", created a "True Family", and would have saved humanity and perfected the world.
Among Tongil Group’s chief holdings are: The Ilwha Company, which produces ginseng and related products; Ilshin Stone, building materials; and Tongil Heavy Industries, machine parts including hardware for the South Korean military.
A church official said, "pornography makes love seem temporal, pure love goes beyond the sexual relationship."
The seminary's professors come from a wide range of faiths, including a rabbi, a Methodist minister, a Presbyterian, and a Catholic priest.
The ''Divine Principle'' posits that departed souls can expiate their sins and achieve spiritual growth by "returning" to earth and cooperating with living people, leading them to fulfill their mission on earth and live in accordance to their conscience.
The church's official teachings, the ''Divine Principle,'' was first published as ''Wolli Wonbon'' ("Original Text of the Divine Principle") in 1945.
The character 'hwa' has meanings of 'harmony and peace.'
Unificationist beliefs are derived from the Christian Bible and are explained in the church's textbook, the ''Divine Principle''.
In 2012, the Unification Church-affiliated Universal Peace Federation held an interfaith dialogue in Italy that was cosponsored by United Nations.
In 2010, ''Forbes'' reported that Moon and Han were living in South Korea while their children took more responsibility for the day-to-day leadership of the Unification Church and its affiliated organizations.
The Sunmoon Peace Football Foundation founded by the church in 2003 sponsors the Peace Cup, an invitational preseason friendly association football tournament for club teams, currently held every two years.
Eight verses of the Family Pledge include the phrase "by centering on true love."
Unification Church subscribes to the belief in coming back to life after death.
The first part says, "Our family, the owner of Cheon Il Guk, pledges to seek our original homeland and build the Kingdom of God on earth and in heaven, the original ideal of creation, by centering on true love."
The Blessing ceremony of the Unification Church, a wedding or wedding vow renewal ceremony, is a church tradition which has attracted widespread public attention as well as controversy.
What we start here continues in quality and expands infinitely.
The account in the ''Divine Principle'' offers Unificationists a comprehensive context for understanding human suffering."
All participants were Unification Church members and Rev.
Eugene V. Gallagher commented: "The ''Divine Principle's'' analysis of the Fall sets the stage for the mission of Rev.
The ''Divine Principle'' includes new interpretations of the Bible not found in mainstream Christian traditions.
We are thinking animals and loving creatures.
Other Christian commentators have criticized the concept of indemnity as being contrary to the Christian doctrine of ''sola fide''.
In 1984 Mose Durst, then the president of the Unification Church of the United States and himself a convert from Judaism, said that the Jewish community had been hateful in its response to the growth of the Unification Church, and placed blame both on the community's insecurity and on Unification Church members' youthful zeal and ignorance.
He died there on September 3, 2012.
In 1982 the first large scale Blessing (of 2,000 couples) outside of Korea took place in Madison Square Garden, New York City.
and him and his wife as the "True Parents" of humankind, who have realized the ideal of true love as the incarnation of God's Word.
All the couples were members of the church.
Jewish commentators, including Rabbi A. James Rudin of the American Jewish Committee in a 1976 report, have stated that ''Divine Principle'' contains pejorative language, stereotyped imagery, and accusations of Jewish deicide.
By 1973, it had some presence in all 50 states and a few thousand members.
The Universal Ballet, founded South Korea in 1984, is one of only four professional ballet companies in South Korea.
Members own the country's largest hotel, one of its leading banks, the second-largest newspaper and two of the largest printing plants.
Eileen Barker, a sociologist of religion and the founder of INFORM (Information Network Focus on Religious Movements), argues that the Unification Church and other new religious movements of that time "demonstrably did not have access to the irresistible or irreversible techniques they were reputedly wielding".
In April 2008, Moon, then 88 years old, appointed his youngest son, Hyung Jin Moon, to be the leader of the church and movement, saying, "I hope everyone helps him so that he may fulfil his duty as the successor of the True Parents."
:d. Moon’s seminary, however, has not only attracted a respectable faculty (many of whom are not members of his church), but it also has graduated many students (who are members of his church) who have been accepted into doctoral programs at institutions such as Harvard and Yale."
The main objections were theological, especially because of the Unification Church’s addition of material to the Bible.
The Unification Church has a seminary in Barrytown, New York called The Unification Theological Seminary.
Moon as "Father" and "Mother" or "True Father" and "True Mother."
:"You and I are going to live forever.
Also, after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, he donated $1.7 million to the Japanese Red Cross.
She emphasized that failure to make the distinction has led many dead people to try to "reincarnate", but wound up only possessing other people - to their mutual detriment.
As of December 1994, the church had invested $150 million in Uruguay.
In 1984 Barker published ''The Making of a Moonie'' based on her seven-year study of Unification Church members in the United Kingdom and the United States.
In 1988, Moon matched 2,500 Korean members with Japanese members for a Blessing ceremony held in Korea, partly in order to promote unity between the two nations.
He was released from prison by the advance of United Nations forces during the Korean War, and moved south along with many other North Koreans.
Unification Church cemeteries, or sections of existing facilities, have been established in South Korea, the United Kingdom and the United States.
"Give-and-take action" (reciprocal interaction) and "subject and object position" (initiator and responder) are "key interpretive concepts", and the self is designed to be God's object.
The "Family Pledge" of the Unification Church is an eight-part promise of church members to focus on God and His kingdom.
The ''Times'' is currently owned by diversified conglomerate Operations Holdings, also associated with the Unification Church.
The biblical verse "life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth" (Exod.21:23-24) is quoted as an example of an equal indemnity condition.
It owns United Press International, ''The World and I'', ''The Segye Ilbo'' (South Korea), and ''The Sekai Nippo'' (Japan).
In 1982, the first large scale Blessing ceremony held outside of Korea took place in Madison Square Garden in New York City with 2075 couples.
In 2014 Sarah M. Lewis wrote that the Unification Church’s greatest present influence comes from church affiliated groups such as the Universal Peace Federation, which include non-church members working for common interests and goals.
As of 1994, the church had about 5,000 members in Russia.
The ''Divine Principle'' then explains that an indemnity condition must reverse the course by which the mistake or loss came about.
Abraham's attempted sacrifice of his son Isaac (Gen. 22:1-18) and the Israelites' 40 years of wandering in the wilderness under Moses (Num.14:34) are mentioned as examples of greater indemnity conditions.
About 500 Russian students had been sent to USA to participate in 40-day workshops.
Its beliefs, which differ from traditional Christian interpretations of the Bible, have been called heretical and antisemitic by some critics.
Until 2008 it published the Washington D.C. based newsmagazine ''Insight on the News''.
The '''Family Federation for World Peace and Unification''', founded as the '''Holy Spirit Association for the Unification of World Christianity''', and commonly called the '''Unification Church''' or '''Unificationism''', is a new religious movement founded in South Korea in 1954 by Sun Myung Moon.
Its purpose has been described as training leaders and theologians within the Unification Church."1.
Unification theology teaches that Jesus achieved this perfection only on the individual level and that had he not died on the cross, he would have married.
According to the current head of the Family Federation for World Peace and Unification (FFWPU), the Tongil ("Unity" or "Unification" in Korean) mark represents the flag of "Cheon Il Guk"—otherwise understood as the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth.
In 2009, Moon's autobiography, ''As a Peace-Loving Global Citizen'' (), was published by Gimm-Young Publishers in South Korea.
The Unification Church does not uphold belief in reincarnation or eternal damnation.
In 1998 Irving Louis Horowitz, sociologist, questioned the relationship between the Unification Church and scholars whom it paid to conduct research on its behalf.
It was co-written by church founder Sun Myung Moon and early disciple Hyo Won Eu and first published in 1966.
Since its founding, the church has expanded throughout the world with most members living in Korea, Japan, the Philippines, and other nations in East Asia.
In 2000 the Church and the Nation of Islam co-sponsored the Million Family March, a rally in Washington, D.C., to celebrate family unity and racial and religious harmony.
In that case a greater price must be paid to make up for the earlier failure.
The company performs a repertory that includes many full length classical story ballets, together with shorter contemporary works and original full-length Korean ballets created especially for the company.
The book became a bestseller in Korea and Japan.
It has also been criticized for its involvement in politics, especially in support of the government of South Korea for which it was investigated by a committee of the United States Congress in 1977.
Other scholars, including some psychologists and psychiatrists, argue that brainwashing theories are widely endorsed within the academy at large.
The first conference had 20 participants, while the largest conference in Seoul in 1982, had 808 participants from over 100 countries.
The use of 'seung hwa' was first instructed by Father at this time."
Participants included Nobel laureates John Eccles (Physiology or Medicine 1963, who chaired the 1976 conference) and
The Unification Church is well known for its wedding or wedding vow renewal ceremony.
When the new and more distinct format was ordained, the official church newspaper reported:
News World Communications is an international news media corporation founded by Moon in 1976.
In 2005 scholars Daske and Ashcraft explained the Unificationist concept of indemnity:
In 1988, Moon matched 2,500 Korean members with Japanese members for a Blessing ceremony held in Korea, partly in order to promote unity between the two nations.
This ceremony was presided over by Hak Ja Han.
In August 1985, six years before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Professors World Peace Academy, an organization founded by Moon, sponsored a conference in Geneva to debate the theme, "The situation in the world after the fall of the communist empire."
:c. Since many people regard Moon as a cult leader, there is a false impression that this seminary is academically weak.
In 1973 they performed at the Headquarters of the United Nations in New York City.
That year, Unification Church affiliated Universal Peace Federation held an interfaith program for representatives of 12 various religions and confessions in the hall of the United Nations General Assembly.
The American Baptist Churches USA, the National Council of Churches, the National Black Catholic Clergy Caucus, and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference filed briefs in support of Moon.
A second, expanded version, ''Wolli Hesol'', or ''Explanation of the Divine Principle'', was published in 1957.
Some sociologists of religion tend to argue that these accusations were based on theories that for the most part have not gained acceptance among scholars.
The group’s dances are based on Korean legends and regional dances, and its costumes on traditional Korean styles.
On August 15, 2012, Moon was reported to be gravely ill and was put on a respirator at the intensive care unit of St. Mary’s Hospital at the Catholic University of Korea in Seoul.
Another, Ek Nath Dhakal, is a member of the 2nd Nepalese Constituent Assembly and a first Minister for Cooperatives and Poverty Alleviation Ministry of the Government of Nepal.
White and light colored clothing, rather than the traditional black, is worn by participants.
We will think and we will love forever.
The zeal and enthusiasm of the Unification Church members is not so much based on love for God as it is compulsion to indemnify one's own sins."
Christian historian Ruth Tucker said: "In simple language indemnity is salvation by works."
Through it, members of the Unification Church believe, the couple is removed from the lineage of sinful humanity and engrafted into God's sinless lineage.
A church official said that similar political parties would be started in Japan and the United States.
(see ''United States v. Sun Myung Moon'') His conviction was upheld on appeal in a split decision.
The text cites a scripture justifying the concept: "Apart from us they may not be made perfect".
Their children are known as the "True Children."
In 1977 the Subcommittee on International Organizations of the Committee on International Relations, of the United States House of Representatives, while investigating the Koreagate scandal found that the South Korean National Intelligence Service (KCIA) had worked with the Unification Church to gain political influence within the United States, with some members working as volunteers in Congressional offices.
''Moonie'' is a colloquial term sometimes used to refer to members of the Unification Church.
Recent church activities have included building projects and a revival tour.
Moon was a member of the Honorary Committee of the Ministry of Unification of South Korea.
Moon moved to the United States in 1971, although he remained a citizen of the Republic of Korea.
In the 1970s the Unification Church was accused of "brainwashing" by the newly-active anti-cult movement, which included Steven Hassan and some other former church members.
The Unification Theological Seminary
The political activities of the Unification Church were opposed by some leftists.
In the 1980s Moon instructed church members to take part in a program called "Home Church" in which they reached out to neighbors and community members through public service.
The case was the center of national freedom of religion and freedom of speech debates.
She rejected the then popular "brainwashing" theory as an explanation for conversion to the Unification Church.
It is used as a theological training center, where members are prepared to be leaders and theologians in the church.
The Unification Church has been the subject of controversy over several issues.
In the 1970s, American Unification Church members were noted for their enthusiasm and dedication, which often included raising money for church projects on so-called "mobile fundraising teams."
For the first 40 years of the church's existence, members recited the pledge on Sunday mornings at 5:00&nbsp;a.m. Now they recite it every 8 days, on ''Ahn Shi Il'': Day of Settlement and Attendance, which is the Unification Church's equivalent of a Sabbath.
The ''Divine Principle'' then states that human beings, not God or the angels, are the ones responsible for making indemnity conditions.
Those two faculties show our kinship to the eternal God.
From its beginning, the Unification Church claimed to be Christian and promoted its teachings to mainstream Christian churches and organizations.
Human beings and the universe reflect God's personality, nature, and purpose.
Moon was given an 18-month sentence and a $15,000 fine.
Following Moon's death his widow Hak Ja Han has taken on the role of spiritual leader of the church.
It is contested by the eight clubs from several continents, though 12 teams participated in 2009.
The Unification Church has a seminary in Barrytown, New York called The Unification Theological Seminary.
It denied that the ''Divine Principle'' teaches antisemitism and gave detailed responses to 17 specific allegations contained in the AJC's report, stating that allegations were distortions of teaching and obscuration of real passage content or that the passages were accurate summaries of Jewish scripture or New Testament passages.
It is located in Barrytown, New York and with an Extension Center in midtown Manhattan.
The church has also been accused of brainwashing its members, which led to some being subject to deprogramming.
Unification Church theologian Young Oon Kim explained that returning resurrection is not the same as reincarnation.
In 1977 representatives from the American Jewish Committee, the National Council of Churches, and the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York held a press conference to say that the ''Divine Principle'' contains antisemitic references and heresy.
Moon, who in the last days brings a revelation that offers humankind the chance to return to an Edenic state.
At the same time he appointed his daughter In Jin Moon as the president of the Unification Church of the United States.
The Family Federation for World Peace and Unification has continuously held its Marriage Blessing tradition each year.
There are two concepts of resurrection detailed in the ''Divine Principle''.
In the same year Durst wrote in his autobiography: "Our relations with the Jewish community have been the most painful to me personally.
The ''Divine Principle'' or ''Exposition of the Divine Principle'' (Korean 원리강론/原理講論, translit.
It teaches that God is the Creator and Heavenly Parent, whose dual nature combines both masculinity and femininity and whose center is true love.
Thus, our wisdom will continually grow and our love can be enriched more and more.
Moon's practice of matching couples was very unusual in both Christian tradition and in modern Western culture and attracted much attention and controversy.
Eugene Wigner (Physics 1963).
Massimo Introvigne, who studied the Unification Church and other new religious movements, said that this confirmed that full-time membership is no longer considered crucial to church members.
In 2012, December 19, the candidate Park Geun-hye, with the support of the Unification Church, became the first female President of South Korea.
The FFWPU co-sponsored Blessing ceremonies in which thousands of non&ndash;Unification Church married couples were given the marriage blessing previously given only to Unification Church members.
Since the 1990s, many Unification Church texts that were formerly regarded as esoteric have been posted on the church's official websites.
Church members who had died prior to this were given traditional Christian funerals.
Moon formally founded the Unification Church in Busan on May 1, 1954, calling it "The Holy Spirit(ual) Association for the Unification of World Christianity."
This is derived from the name of the church's founder Sun Myung Moon, and was first used in 1974 by the American media.
Equal conditions of indemnity pay back the full value of what was lost.
Other controversial events include Moon's 1982 conviction in the United States of filing false federal income tax returns and criminal conspiracy and the 2001 wedding of Roman Catholic archbishop Emmanuel Milingo to a Unification Church member in a ceremony presided over by Moon.
The character for 'seung' means 'ascending, elevation'.
The Blessing ceremony was first held in 1961 for 36 couples in Seoul, South Korea by the Moons shortly after their own marriage in 1960.
Milingo is now an advocate of the removal of the requirement for celibacy by priests in the Catholic Church.
The ''Divine Principle'' lists the Muslim world as one of the world’s four major divisions (the others being East Asia, Hindu, and Christendom).
By 1971, the Unification Church of the United States had about 500 members.
Faith, baptism, and the eucharist are mentioned as examples of lesser indemnity conditions.
Laurence Tribe, a professor at Harvard Law School, argued that the trial by jury had "doomed (Moon) to conviction based on religious prejudice."
Cremation is discouraged in the Unification Church, although it is sometimes practiced especially in Japan where it is required by law.
It is emphasized that the ceremony should have a joyful atmosphere since it is a celebration of the person's life and his or her transition to the spirit world.
Moon and early church members associated with spiritualists, including the famous Arthur Ford.
The primary mission of True Parents is to engraft all people on earth and in the spirit world to the original sinless lineage of God, removing them from the satanic lineage established at the fall of humanity (the original sin in the Garden of Eden).
Barker alleged that new inductees were indoctrinated with little privacy, and nearly everything was a group event including colorful balloons and banners that read "Welcome Home Brothers & Sisters."
However, the earliest manuscript was lost in North Korea during the Korean War.
In 1997 American civil rights activist, Baptist minister, television/radio talk show host and political adviser Al Sharpton took part in at least three religious ceremonies hosted by the Unification Church, in which he and his wife, Katherine, renewed their marriage vows based on the tenets of the church.
The book was given the Distinguished Book Award for 1985 by the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion.
The President of the United Nations General Assembly, the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations and other UN officials gave speeches.
In 2013, four months after the death of Sun Myung Moon, the church held a Blessing ceremony for 3500 couples in South Korea, while another 24,000 followers took part in other countries via video link.
The Unification Church is said to be esoteric in that it keeps some of its doctrines secret from nonmembers,  a practice that is sometimes called "heavenly deception."
In 1987, scholars with American Psychological Association rejected the hypotheses of those who accused new religious movements (such as the Unification Church) of brainwashing and coercive persuasion, stating that those "conclusions...cannot be said to be scientific in any meaningful sense".
The church also sent missionaries to Europe.
Radio and television evangelist Bob Larson said, "Moon's doctrine of sinless perfection by 'indemnity', which can apply even to deceased ancestors, is a denial of the salvation by grace offering through Jesus Christ."
What does immortality signify?
The ''Divine Principle'' upholds a belief in spiritualism, that is communication with the spirits of deceased persons.
The committee also investigated possible KCIA influence on the Unification Church's campaign in support of Nixon.
In 1982, Moon was convicted in the United States of filing false federal income tax returns and criminal conspiracy.
Sun Myung Moon preached in northern Korea after the end of World War II and in 1946 was imprisoned by the communist regime in North Korea.
Unification Church scholars writing on the church's funeral customs cite the church's main theological text the ''Divine Principle'' which says: "Man, upon his death, after his life in the visible world, goes to the invisible world in a spiritual body, having taken off his 'clothes of flesh' (Job 10:11), and lives there forever."
There will be no sharp break between life here and life hereafter.
Sung went on a hunger strike to protest the separation and attracted much media attention.
It was founded in 1992 by Hak Ja Han and is supported by the church.
In 2003, Korean Unification Church members started a political party in South Korea, "The Party for God, Peace, Unification, and Home."
In 2001, the Unification Church came into conflict with the Catholic Church when Catholic archbishop Emmanuel Milingo and Maria Sung, a 43-year-old Korean acupuncturist, married in a Unification Church Blessing ceremony presided over by Rev.
Professors from other denominations, including a Methodist minister, a Presbyterian, and a Roman Catholic priest, as well as a rabbi, were hired to teach Unificationist students."1.
It is given to engaged or married couples.
The ''Divine Principle'' goes on to explain three types of indemnity conditions.
An inauguration declaration stated the new party would focus on preparing for Korean reunification by educating the public about God and peace.
Moon himself has made some controversial statements about the Holocaust, including that its Jewish victims were paying indemnity for the crucifixion of Jesus.
Most church activities have continued, although some unprofitable business projects have been reduced or discontinued.
Indemnification is the vehicle that allows a "just and righteous" God to work through mankind.
:c. Moon’s seminary, however, has not only attracted a respectable faculty (many of whom are not members of his church), but it also has graduated many students (who are members of his church) who have been accepted into doctoral programs at institutions such as Harvard and Yale."
In 1977, the Unification Church won a lawsuit in the United States against deprogrammers, as did some other groups about the same time.
It has sponsored other organizations and projects over the years; including businesses, news media, projects in education and the arts, and political and social activism.
''wonli ganglon'') is the main theological textbook of the Unification Church.
Indemnity, at its core, is required of humans because God is pure, and purity cannot relate directly with impurity.
I say this with a heavy heart, since I was raised in the Jewish faith and am proud of my heritage."
Later Blessing ceremonies were larger in scale but followed the same pattern.
Starting in 1972, the Unification Church sponsored the International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences, a series of scientific conferences.
The Unification Theological Seminary
A Unification Church funeral (or seungwha) is a funeral ceremony held for the purpose of aiding the deceased person's transition to the spirit world and to celebrate his or her life among family and friends.
The "four-position foundation" is "another important and interpretive concept", and explains in part the emphasis on the family.
Since 1990, U.S. courts have consistently rejected testimonies about brainwashing (mind control) and manipulation, stating that such theories were not part of accepted mainline science according to the Frye standard of 1923.
Rudin, then the national interreligious affairs director of the American Jewish Committee, said that Durst's remarks were inaccurate and unfair and that "hateful is a harsh word to use."
