The island of Iwo Jima served as the next area of battle, which began on 19 February 1945.
Females attend only the Parris Island depot as part of the segregated Fourth Recruit Training Battalion.
Many Marines regard their culture to have a deep warrior tradition, with the ethos that "Every Marine a rifleman" and emphasis on cross-training and combat readiness despite actual job, be it infantry or otherwise.
The Javelin can utilize top-attack profiles to avoid heavy frontal armor.
The Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps also E-9, is a billet conferred on the senior enlisted Marine of the entire Marine Corps, personally selected by the Commandant.
As in any military organization, the official and unofficial traditions of the Marine Corps serve to reinforce camaraderie and set the service apart from others.
The Korean War (1950–1953) saw the hastily formed Provisional Marine Brigade holding the defensive line at the Pusan Perimeter.
A MAGTF integrates a ground combat element (GCE), an aviation combat element (ACE), and a logistics combat element (LCE) under a common command element (CE), capable of operating independently or as part of a larger coalition.
Shortly afterward, in 1952 the Douglas–Mansfield Act afforded the Commandant an equal voice with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on matters relating to the Marines and established the structure of three active divisions and air wings that remain today.
Enlisted Marines in the pay grades E-1 to E-3 make up the bulk of the Corps' ranks, usually referred to simply as "Marines".
The Corps encourages the idea that "Marine" is an earned title and most Marine Corps personnel take to heart the phrase "Once a Marine, Always a Marine".
It is the smallest of the U.S. Armed Forces within the U.S. DoD.
They primarily supervise junior Marines and act as a vital link with the higher command structure, ensuring that orders are carried out correctly.
They reject the term "ex-Marine" in most circumstances.
With most of the 2000s spent in operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has voiced concerns that the Marines are becoming a "second Army".
Today, the basic framework for deployable Marine units is the Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF), a flexible structure of varying size.
Training alongside each other is viewed as critical, as the Navy provides transport, logistical, and combat support to put Marine units into the fight, for example, maritime prepositioning ships and naval gunfire support.
Since then, the Marine Corps, alongside other military and federal agencies, has engaged in global operations around the world in support of that mission.
It noted that the corps has more often than not performed actions of a non-naval nature, including its famous actions in Tripoli, the War of 1812, Chapultepec, and numerous counter-insurgency and occupational duties (such as those in Central America), World War I, and the Korean War.
However given expected defense budget cuts, the Marines are well positioned for "fielding cheap options for an uncertain world."
Doctrinally, the Marine Corps' focus is on being expeditionary and independent, and places emphasis on amphibious mobility and combined arms; these make it a much lighter force than many units of the Army.
In late June 2016, it was reported that the Marine Corps will be removing the word "man" from 19 key job titles.
Through 1941, as the prospect of war grew, the Corps pushed urgently for joint amphibious exercises and acquired amphibious equipment that would prove of great use in the upcoming conflict.
Marines in all other MOSs other than infantry train for 29 days in Marine Combat Training (MCT), learning common infantry skills, before continuing on to their MOS schools which vary in length.
The Advanced Base Doctrine of the early 20th century codified their combat duties ashore, outlining the use of Marines in the seizure of bases and other duties on land to support naval campaigns.
In this one campaign, the Marines suffered approximately 1,000 casualties, while the Chinese suffered at least twice as many.
That date is regarded and celebrated as the date of the Marine Corps' birthday.
The Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps acts as a deputy to the Commandant.
In addition, the Corps operates its own organic aerial refueling and electronic warfare (EW) assets in the form of the KC-130 Hercules and EA-6B Prowler, respectively.
The majority of vehicles and weapons are shared with, modified, or inherited from Army programs.
Portions of the Corps were responsible for the less-known Combined Action Program (CAP) that implemented unconventional techniques for counter-insurgency and worked as military advisers to the Republic of Vietnam Marine Corps.
The role of the Marine Corps has expanded significantly since then; as the importance of its original naval mission declined with changing naval warfare doctrine and the professionalization of the naval service, the Corps adapted by focusing on formerly secondary missions ashore.
It is roughly equivalent in function and composition to a business suit.
In light of budget sequestration in 2013, commandant Amos set a goal of a force of 174,000 Marines.
The Marines left Iraq in the summer of 2003, but returned for occupation duty in the beginning of 2004.
Marines were withdrawn in 1971, and returned briefly in 1975 to evacuate Saigon and attempt a rescue of the crew of the Mayagüez.
Individuals from the USMC operated in the Northern I Corps Regions of South Vietnam.
In 2001, the Marine Corps initiated an internally designed martial arts program, called Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP).
Although the notion of a Marine special forces contribution to the United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) was considered as early as the founding of USSOCOM in the 1980s, it was resisted by the Marine Corps.
It is most often seen in recruiting advertisements and is equivalent to black tie.
All Marines, regardless of military specialization, receive training as a rifleman; and all officers receive additional training as infantry platoon commanders.
The Predator SRAW, FGM-148 ''Javelin'' and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles.
The Marines often leverage the Army's acquisition of ground equipment (as well as benefiting from Army research and development resources), training resources, and other support concepts.
After a three-year development period, the Corps agreed in 2006 to supply a 2,500-strong unit, Marine Forces Special Operations Command (MARSOC), which would answer directly to USSOCOM.
The Marine Corps budget is comparably well handled with a tiny fraction of the Anti-Deficiency Act violations of any of the other three major branches.
The current Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the highest-ranking military officer in the U.S. armed forces, is a Marine Corps general.
Although Reno was lost, the 5th Marines held both Vegas and Carson through the rest of the campaign.
Marines operate detachments at many installations owned by other branches, to better share resources, such as specialty schools.
In 1947, a proposal was made that the Department of War furnish Marine Corps personnel for Foreign Service guard duty under the provisions of the Foreign Service Act of 1946.
The United States Marine Corps traces its institutional roots to the Continental Marines of the American Revolutionary War, formed by Captain Samuel Nicholas by a resolution of the Second Continental Congress on 10 November 1775, to raise two battalions of Marines.
The M4 carbine and Colt 9mm SMG have also been issued.
The First Sergeant and Sergeant Major ranks are command-oriented, serving as the senior enlisted Marines in a unit, charged to assist the commanding officer in matters of discipline, administration and the morale and welfare of the unit.
Their most significant contribution, however, was holding the center of General Jackson's defensive line at the Battle of New Orleans, the final major battle and most one-sided engagement of the war.
While its previous expeditionary experiences had not earned it much acclaim in the Western world, the Marines' ferocity and toughness in France earned them the respect of the Germans, who rated them of stormtrooper quality.
By the mid-20th century, the U.S. Marine Corps had become a major theorist of and the world's dominant practitioner of amphibious warfare.
In late November 1861, Marines and sailors landed a reconnaissance in force from the  at Tybee Island, Georgia, to occupy the Lighthouse and Martello Tower on the northern end of the island.
Marines would continue a battle of attrition around the 38th Parallel until the 1953 armistice.
The smaller and lighter M72 LAW can destroy targets at ranges up to 200 meters.
After the Vietnam War, the U.S. Marines resumed their expeditionary role, participating in the failed 1980 Iran hostage rescue attempt Operation Eagle Claw, the invasion of Grenada (Operation Urgent Fury) and the invasion of Panama (Operation Just Cause).
During World War I veteran Marines served a central role in the late American entry into the conflict, on 6 April 1917.
The three MEFs contain the vast majority of active duty deployable forces.
This commitment to standardized units can be seen in the short-lived experiment of the Marine Raiders, born in World War II, which was controversial, while the U.S. Army's 75th Ranger Regiment, also born in World War II, enjoys high prestige to this day.
The Marine Corps has the most stable and most recognizable uniforms in the American military; the Blue Dress dates back to the early 19th century and the service uniform to the early 20th century.
They also cross train with other countries.
While there, they were constantly engaged in a guerrilla war against the Viet Cong, along with an intermittent conventional war against the North Vietnamese Army (NVA).
The AV-8B is a V/STOL aircraft that can operate from amphibious assault ships, land air bases and short, expeditionary airfields, while the F/A-18 can only be flown from land or aircraft carriers.
Opha May Johnson was the first woman to enlist in the Marines; she joined the Marine Corps Reserve in 1918 during World War I, officially becoming the first female Marine.
Those in the pay grades of E-4 and E-5 are non-commissioned officers (NCOs).
The Operating Forces are divided into three categories: Marine Corps Forces (MARFOR) assigned to unified commands (viz., the Fleet Marine Forces (FMF), Security Forces guarding high-risk naval installations, and Security Guard detachments at American embassies.
Both services operate a network security team in conjunction.
The USMC is planning to reduce its logistical requirements and by 2025 eliminate all liquid fuel use for Marine Expeditionary Forces, except for highly efficient vehicles.
During the war, the Marines, fighting on the Western Front in France, fought their famed battle at Belleau Wood, creating the Marines' reputation in modern history.
While recovering from Vietnam, the Corps hit a detrimental low point in its service history caused by courts-martial and non-judicial punishments related partially to increased unauthorized absences and desertions during the war.
Prior to 2005, the Marines operated exclusively tube artillery – the M198 155&nbsp;mm howitzer, now being replaced by the M777 155&nbsp;mm howitzer.
There are three different forms of the Dress uniform, the most common being the Blue Dress Uniform, called "Dress Blues" or simply "Blues".
By authority of the 1946 Foreign Service Act, the Marine Security Guards of the Marine Embassy Security Command provide security for American embassies, legations, and consulates at more than 140 posts worldwide.
After World War II, an alert, disciplined force was needed to protect American embassies, consulates, and legations throughout the world.
In 2013, the USMC became the first American military branch to ever have a fully audited annual budget.
The Marine Corps relies on the Navy for sealift to provide its rapid deployment capabilities.
The United States Army maintains light infantry units capable of rapid worldwide deployment, but those units do not match the combined-arms integration of an MAGTF and lack the logistics that the Navy provides.
Marines and other American forces began staging in Pakistan and Uzbekistan on the border of Afghanistan as early as October 2001 in preparation for Operation Enduring Freedom.
Marines of the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit flooded into the Taliban-held town of Garmsir on 29 April 2008, in Helmand Province, in the first major American operation in the region in years.
Under the "Forces for Unified Commands" memo, in accordance with the Unified Command Plan approved by the President, Marine Corps Forces are assigned to each of the Combatant Commands at the discretion of the Secretary of Defense.
Chinese troops surrounded, surprised and overwhelmed the overextended and outnumbered American forces.
Its ability to rapidly respond on short notice to expeditionary crises gives it a strong role in the implementation and execution of American foreign policy.
Segregated between officer and enlisted, the MOS determines the staffing of a unit.
However, the Army maintains much larger and diverse combat arms (infantry, armor, artillery, special operations), ground transport, and logistics, while the Marines have a more diverse aviation arm (which constitutes a larger percentage of forces), and is usually organic to the MAGTF.
It is possible however for an enlisted Marine to hold a position senior to Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps as has been the case since the 2011 appointment of Sergeant Major Bryan B. Battaglia to the billet of Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman which is deemed the senior enlisted member of the United States military.
On 1 March 2009, at Camp Lejeune, President Obama announced an accelerated withdrawal, promising all troops out by August 2010.
The Marine Corps emphasizes authority and responsibility downward to a greater degree than the other military services.
By the end of the war, the Corps expanded from two brigades to six divisions, five air wings, and supporting troops, totaling about 485,000 Marines.
The attitude dates back to the founding of the Continental Marines, when General George Washington refused to allow the initial Marine battalions to be drawn from among his Continental Army.
From then until the end of World War I, 305 women enlisted in the Corps.
At TBS, second lieutenants, warrant officers, and selected foreign officers learn the art of infantry and combined arms warfare.
The '''United States Marine Corps''' ('''USMC''') is a branch of the United States Armed Forces responsible for providing power projection, using the mobility of the United States Navy to, by Congressional mandate, rapidly deliver combined-arms task forces on land, at sea, and in the air.
The E-8 and E-9 levels have two and three ranks per pay grade, respectively, each with different responsibilities.
* "Ex-Marine" is used in reference to persons removed from the Corps with less than a full and honorable discharge, especially those dishonorably discharged.
"''Operational Maneuver from the Sea''" is the current doctrine of power projection.
Marine Corps Forces are divided into Forces Command (MARFORCOM) and Pacific Command (MARFORPAC), each headed by a Lieutenant General dual-posted as the commanding general of either FMF Atlantic (FMFLANT) or FMF Pacific (FMFPAC), respectively.
Marines from Ceremonial Companies A & B, quartered in Marine Barracks, Washington, D.C., guard presidential retreats, including Camp David, and the Marines of the Executive Flight Detachment of HMX-1 provide helicopter transport to the President and Vice President, with the radio call signs "Marine One" and "Marine Two", respectively.
The United States Marine Corps has distinguished itself as it has served in the majority of American wars and armed conflicts, from its inception to the modern era, and attained prominence in the 20th century when its theories and practices of amphibious warfare proved prescient and ultimately formed the cornerstone of the Pacific theater of World War II.
Though they only reached Derna, the action at Tripoli has been immortalized in the Marines' hymn and the Mameluke Sword carried by Marine officers.
Marines and Sailors share many naval traditions, especially terminology and customs.
Vietnam was the longest war for Marines; by its end, 13,091 had been killed in action, 51,392 had been wounded, and 57 Medals of Honor had been awarded.
There are no regulations concerning the address of persons who have left active service, so a number of customary terms have come into common use:
Therefore, the Marine Corps is often assigned to non-combat missions such as the evacuation of Americans from unstable countries and providing humanitarian relief during natural disasters.
As a result, a large degree of initiative and autonomy is expected of junior Marines, particularly the NCOs (corporals and sergeants), as compared with many other military organizations.
In garrison, the woodland and desert uniforms are worn depending on the Marine's duty station.
The campaign was collectively known as the Nevada Cities Campaign.
There was brutal fighting on Reno hill, which was eventually captured by the Chinese.
Both are slated to be replaced by 340 of the STOVL B version of the F-35 Lightning II, beginning training operations in 2008, and 80 of the carrier F-35C versions for deployment with Navy carrier air wings.
Every other Marine capability exists to support the infantry.
In the 1850s, the Marines would see further service in Panama and Asia, escorting Matthew Perry's East India Squadron on its historic trip to the Far East.
The relationship between the Department of State and the U.S. Marine Corps is nearly as old as the corps itself.
Marines' uniforms are distinct in their simplicity; Marines do not wear unit patches or United States flags on any of their uniforms, nor name tags on their service and formal uniforms.
The Anbar Awakening and 2007 surge reduced levels of violence.
Flexibility of execution is implemented via an emphasis on "commander's intent" as a guiding principle for carrying out orders; specifying the end state but leaving open the method of execution.
The Marines operate unmanned aerial vehicles: the RQ-7 Shadow and Scan Eagle for tactical reconnaissance.
It is a stated aim of the program to instill and maintain the "Warrior Ethos" within Marines.
Versions with a khaki shirt in lieu of the coat (Blue Dress Charlie/Delta) are worn as a daily working uniform by Marine recruiters and NROTC staff.
Two small manuals published during the 1930s would establish USMC doctrine in two areas.
During World War II, Marines continued to serve on capital ships.
Finally, Marines operate a presence in the National Capital Region, with Headquarters Marine Corps scattered amongst the Pentagon, Henderson Hall, Washington Navy Yard, and Marine Barracks, Washington, D.C.
As a result, the Navy and Marine Corps have a close relationship, more so than with other branches of the military.
They often were assigned to man anti-aircraft batteries.
Marines do not recruit or train noncombatants such as chaplains or medical/dental personnel; naval personnel fill these roles.
This focus on the infantry is matched with the doctrine of "Every Marine is a rifleman", a focus of Commandant Alfred M. Gray, Jr., emphasizing the infantry combat abilities of every Marine.
A larger percentage of the Marine Corps' personnel and assets are in the combat arms (infantry, artillery, armor, and close air support) than the Army.
The Prowler is one of the only two active tactical electronic warfare aircraft left in the United States inventory, and has been labeled a "national asset"; it is used along with the Navy's EA-18G Growlers to assist in any American combat action since the retirement of the Air Force's EW aircraft.
These outposts were codenamed "Reno", "Vegas", and "Carson".
However, the Corps has consistently sought to maintain its own identity with regard to mission, funding, and assets, while utilizing support available from the larger branches.
Commandant Henderson volunteered the Marines for service in the Seminole Wars of 1835, personally leading nearly half of the entire Corps (two battalions) to war.
Other important bases include air stations, recruit depots, logistics bases, and training commands.
Due to an expectation that urban and police-type peacekeeping missions would become more common in the 21st century, placing Marines in even closer contact with unarmed civilians, MCMAP was implemented to provide Marines with a larger and more versatile set of less-than-lethal options for controlling hostile, but unarmed individuals.
Their time in Iraq has courted controversy with the Haditha killings and the Hamdania incident.
Marines consider the utilities a working uniform and do not permit their wear off-base, except in transit to and from their place of duty and in the event of an emergency.
The mottos ''"Fortitudine"'' (With Fortitude); ''By Sea and by Land'', a translation of the Royal Marines' ''Per Mare, Per Terram''; and ''To the Shores of Tripoli'' were used until 1868.
Meanwhile, Marines served as a convenient resource for interventions and landings to protect American lives and interests overseas.
While the Marine Corps does not employ any unique combat arms, as a force it can rapidly deploy a combined-arms task force to almost anywhere in the world within days.
As of 2016, the USMC has around 182,000 active duty members and some 38,900 reserve Marines.
To aid rapid deployment, the Maritime Pre-Positioning System was developed: fleets of container ships are positioned throughout the world with enough equipment and supplies for a Marine Expeditionary Force to deploy for 30 days.
Due to policies concerning rotation, more Marines were deployed for service during Vietnam than World War II.
The ''Marine Corps emblem'' is the Eagle, Globe, and Anchor, sometimes abbreviated "EGA", adopted in 1868.
During the first year of the MSG program, 36 detachments were deployed worldwide.
The role of the Corps has since grown and evolved, expanding to aerial warfare and earning popular titles such as, "America's third air force", and, "second land army".
The mission was accomplished at very high losses, with 26,000 American casualties and 22,000 Japanese.
Two styles of ''swords'' are worn by Marines: the officers' Mameluke Sword, similar to the Persian shamshir presented to Lt. Presley O'Bannon after the Battle of Derna, and the Marine NCO sword.
The Marine Corps focus is on standardized infantry units with the other arms in support roles, as the "Every Marine a rifleman" creed shows.
The Marine Corps operates many major bases, 14 of which host operating forces, several support and training installations, as well as satellite facilities.
warrant distinguishing badges, and rank insignia is not worn on uniform headgear (with the exception of an officer's garrison service cover).
The most senior Marine officer is the Commandant, responsible to the Secretary of the Navy for organizing, recruiting, training, and equipping the Marine Corps so that its forces are ready for deployment under the operational command of the Combatant Commanders.
For over 200 years, Marines have served at the request of various Secretaries of State.
The Marine Corps '''Dress uniform''' is the most elaborate, worn for formal or ceremonial occasions.
The Marine Corps' counterpart under the Department of the Navy is the United States Navy.
To execute a flanking maneuver, General Douglas MacArthur called on Marine air and ground forces to make an amphibious landing at Inchon.
In 1951, the House of Representatives' Armed Services Committee called the clause "one of the most important statutory – and traditional – functions of the Marine Corps."
Marine aviators and flight officers are trained in the Naval Aviation training pipeline and are winged as Naval Aviators or Naval Flight Officers.
The Korean War saw the Corps expand from 75,000 regulars to a force of 261,000 Marines, mostly reservists.
Rifleman was to remain unchanged.
In February 2010, the 2nd Marine Expeditionary Brigade launched the largest offensive of the Afghan Campaign since 2001, the Battle of Marjah, to clear the Taliban from their key stronghold in Helmand Province.
The Army has a longer continuous tradition of special operations forces; the Marines joined the Special Operations Command with the establishment of MCSOCOM Detachment One in 2003.
The Marine Corps has ordered 1,960 MRAP vehicles, hoping to use them to replace HMMWVs and some Medium Tactical Vehicle Replacements on patrols in Iraq.
The Corps was involved in over 28 separate interventions in the 30 years from the end of the American Civil War to the end of 19th century, with 148 U.S. Marines killed in action fighting against the Confederates in the U.S. Civil War.
One source states Marines tend to decentralize and push leadership to lower levels, while fostering initiative to a greater degree.
Using a four digit code, it designates what field and specific occupation a Marine performs.
The Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps is the senior enlisted Marine, and acts as an adviser to the Commandant.
The U.S. Marines served prominently in the Iraq War's Operation Iraqi Freedom.
With widespread news of the battle and the capture of the HMS ''Cyane'', HMS ''Levant'' and HMS ''Penguin'', the final engagements between British and American forces, the Marines had acquired a well-deserved reputation as expert marksmen, especially in defensive and ship-to-ship actions.
Marines are also present at, and operate many, forward bases during expeditionary operations.
Culturally, Marines and soldiers share most of the common U.S. military slang and terminology, but the Corps utilizes a large number of naval terms and traditions incompatible with the Army lifestyle, as well as their own unique vernacular.
The number of pieces of equipment (everything from radios to trucks) in a typical infantry battalion has also increased, from 3,400 pieces of gear in 2001 to 8,500 in 2013.
Under his tenure, the Corps took on expeditionary duties in the Caribbean, the Gulf of Mexico, Key West, West Africa, the Falkland Islands, and Sumatra.
In larger conflicts, Marines act as a stopgap, to get into and hold an area until larger units can be mobilized.
The Corps entered the war with 511 officers and 13,214 enlisted personnel, and by 11 November 1918 had reached a strength of 2,400 officers and 70,000 enlisted.
The threat of land mines and improvised explosive devices in Iraq and Afghanistan has seen the Corps begin purchasing heavy armored vehicles that can better withstand the effects of these weapons as part of the Mine Resistant Ambush Protected vehicle program.
Some MOSs change with rank to reflect supervisory positions, others are secondary and represent a temporary assignment outside of a Marine's normal duties or special skill.
The M2 .50&nbsp;caliber heavy machine gun and MK19 automatic grenade launcher (40&nbsp;mm) are available for use by dismounted infantry, though they are more commonly vehicle-mounted.Precision firepower is provided by the M40 series, and the Barrett M107, while designated marksmen use the DMR (being replaced by the M39 EMR), and the SAM-R.
In addition to its primary duties, the Marine Corps conducts Visit, board, search, and seizure (VBSS) operations, as well as missions in direct support of the White House and the State Department.
US Marines would ultimately return to Iraq in the summer of 2014, in response to growing violence there.
An important part of the Marine Corps culture is the traditional seafaring naval terminology derived from its history with the Navy.
In spring 2009, President Barack Obama's goal of reducing spending in the Defense Department was led by Secretary Robert Gates in a series of budget cuts which did not result in significant changes in the Corps' budget and programs, cutting only the VH-71 Kestrel and resetting the VXX program.
Though Marines and American media reported that Germans had nicknamed them ''Teufel Hunden'' as meaning "Devil Dogs", there is no evidence of this in German records (as ''Teufelshunde'' would be the proper German phrase).
Despite transferring overall command to the Navy in 2006, the Marines continued to operate in the Horn of Africa into 2007.
Marines E-6 and higher are Staff Non-Commissioned Officers (SNCOs), charged with supervising NCOs and acting as enlisted advisers to the command.
The Corps receives a significant portion of its officers from the United States Naval Academy and Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC).
There is a "Blue-White" Dress for summer, and Evening Dress for formal (white tie) occasions.
In addition to basing a third of the Fleet Marine Force in Japan, Marine Expeditionary Units (MEU) are typically stationed at sea.
For example, Basic Infantryman will change to Basic Infantry Marine.
The basic infantry weapon of the Marine Corps is the M16 assault rifle family, with a majority of Marines being equipped with the M16A2 or M16A4 service rifles (the M16A2 is being phased out).
The stated objective of the Global War on Terror is "the defeat of Al-Qaeda, other terrorist groups and any nation that supports or harbors terrorists."
Two battalions of Continental Marines were formed on 10 November 1775 in Philadelphia as a service branch of infantry troops capable of fighting for independence both at sea and on shore.
Marine Fighter Training Squadron 401 (VMFT-401), operates F-5E, F-5F and F-5N Tiger II aircraft in support of air combat adversary (aggressor) training.
The U.S. Marine Corps is one of the four armed service branches in the U.S. Department of Defense and one of the seven uniformed services of the United States.
However, much of the resistance from within the Corps dissipated when Marine leaders watched the Corps' 15th and 26th MEU(SOC)s "sit on the sidelines" during the very early stages of Operation Enduring Freedom while other special operations units actively engaged in operations in Afghanistan.
NROTC staff includes Marine instructors, while Marine drill instructors contribute to training of officers in the Navy's Officer Candidate School.
Persons wishing to avoid this issue address these individuals by name with no reference to the Corps.
It was during this time that "The Marines' Hymn" was first heard.
The Marine Corps officially ended its role in Iraq on 23 January 2010 when they handed over responsibility for Al Anbar Province to the United States Army.
The Marine Corps Martial Arts program is an eclectic mix of different styles of martial arts melded together.
Other Marine generals may be senior to the Commandant or Assistant Commandant in terms of time in grade and/or billet.
