The influential Church in Wales "poet-priest" and Welsh nationalist R. S. Thomas was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1996.
In the 2001 Census over a fifth (21%) of the population of Wales said they could speak Welsh, an increase from the 1991 Census (18%).
estimated that 96.7% of households are connected to the sewer network.
Until the 19th century there was little change to those arrangements, but there has since been a constant evolution of role and function, most significantly the devolution of powers to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
It is a recognised nuclear weapons state and its military expenditure ranks fourth or fifth in the world.
The latter three have devolved administrations, each with varying powers, based in their capitals, Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast, respectively.
The Council for the Curriculum, Examinations & Assessment (CCEA) is the body responsible for advising the government on what should be taught in Northern Ireland's schools, monitoring standards and awarding qualifications.
When the EEC became the European Union (EU) in 1992, the UK was one of the 12 founding members.
Percentage of total population, 2011
Major scientific discoveries from the 18th century include hydrogen by Henry Cavendish; from the 20th century penicillin by Alexander Fleming, and the structure of DNA, by Francis Crick and others.
They comprise three independently administered jurisdictions: the Channel Islands of Jersey and Guernsey in the English Channel, and the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea.
As well as this it manufactures the Hawk, the world's most successful jet training aircraft.
Famous British engineers and inventors of the Industrial Revolution include James Watt, George Stephenson, Richard Arkwright, Robert Stephenson and Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
Scientific research and development remains important in British universities, with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and co-operation with industry.
The national anthem of the United Kingdom is "God Save the King", with "King" replaced with "Queen" in the lyrics whenever the monarch is a woman.
The capital of UK and its largest city is London, a global city and financial centre with an urban area population of 10,3 million, the fourth-largest in Europe and second-largest in the European Union.
Councillors are subject to a code of conduct enforced by the Standards Commission for Scotland.
The UK applied temporary restrictions to citizens of Romania and Bulgaria, which joined the EU in January 2007.
The late-2000s recession in the UK reduced the economic incentive for Poles to migrate to the UK, the migration becoming temporary and circular.
Two Britons are also notable for a theory of moral philosophy utilitarianism, first used by Jeremy Bentham and later by John Stuart Mill in his short work ''Utilitarianism''.
A government commission's report in 2014 found that privately educated people comprise 7% of the general population of the UK but much larger percentages of the top professions, the most extreme case quoted being 71% of senior judges.
The Muslim population has increased from 1.6 million in 2001 to 2.7 million in 2011, making it the second-largest religious group in the United Kingdom.
Atlantic currents, warmed by the Gulf Stream, bring mild winters; especially in the west where winters are wet and even more so over high ground.
London dominates the media sector in the UK: national newspapers and television and radio are largely based there, although Manchester is also a significant national media centre.
It plays leading roles in the EU, UN and NATO.
Local government in Wales consists of 22 unitary authorities.
From around the seventh century, the connection between Wales and the Old North was lost, and the focus of Welsh-language culture shifted to Wales, where Arthurian legend was further developed by Geoffrey of Monmouth.
Elections are conducted by single transferable vote in multi-member wards that elect either three or four councillors.
The British directors Alfred Hitchcock, whose film ''Vertigo'' is considered by some critics as the best film of all time, and David Lean are among the most critically acclaimed of all-time.
Authors of other nationalities, particularly from Commonwealth countries, the Republic of Ireland and the United States, have lived and worked in the UK.
The Jacobites were finally defeated at the Battle of Culloden in 1746, after which the Scottish Highlanders were brutally suppressed.
The United Kingdom has a temperate climate, with plentiful rainfall all year round.
Between 2004 and 2008 the UK produced 7% of the world's scientific research papers and had an 8% share of scientific citations, the third and second highest in the world (after the United States and China, respectively).
After World War II, there was significant immigration from the colonies and newly independent former colonies, partly as a legacy of empire and partly driven by labour shortages.
The premier national auto racing event is the British Touring Car Championship.
Under the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, the UK Parliament could, in theory, therefore, abolish the Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly or Northern Ireland Assembly.
By mutual agreement, the British Government manages the islands' foreign affairs and defence and the UK Parliament has the authority to legislate on their behalf.
Based on market exchange rates the UK is today the fifth-largest economy in the world and the second-largest in Europe after Germany.
Since 1997 the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee, headed by the Governor of the Bank of England, has been responsible for setting interest rates at the level necessary to achieve the overall inflation target for the economy that is set by the Chancellor each year.
These are the remnants of the British Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the world's land mass and was the largest empire in history.
In 1841, 0.25% of the population of England and Wales was born in a foreign country.
The UK has been a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council since its first session in 1946.
Towns and cities began to swell with a new urban working class.
Asian/Asian British: Bangladeshi
The Executive is led by a diarchy representing unionist and nationalist members of the Assembly.
UK box-office takings totalled £944&nbsp;million in 2009, with around 173&nbsp;million admissions.
The English monarchs, through inheritance of substantial territories in France and claims to the French crown, were also heavily involved in conflicts in France, most notably the Hundred Years War, while the Kings of Scots were in an alliance with the French during this period.
The Learning and Teaching Scotland provides advice, resources and staff development to education professionals.
The working partnership will draw on BAE Systems' extensive aerospace technology development and project management expertise and will provide Reaction Engines with access to critical industrial, technical and capital resources to help progress the development of the SABRE engine.
In the 19th century there followed further innovation by Jane Austen, the gothic novelist Mary Shelley, the children's writer Lewis Carroll, the Brontë sisters, the social campaigner Charles Dickens, the naturalist Thomas Hardy, the realist George Eliot, the visionary poet William Blake and romantic poet William Wordsworth.
In England and Wales the economic regulator of water companies is the Water Services Regulation Authority (Ofwat).
Lying off the north-western coast of the European mainland, it includes the island of Great Britain (the name of which is also loosely applied to the whole country), the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and many smaller islands.
Since 2005 each Crown dependency has had a Chief Minister as its head of government.
This situation has given rise to the so-called West Lothian question which concerns the fact that members of parliament from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland can vote, sometimes decisively, on matters that only affect England.
Sport governing bodies in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland organise and regulate the game separately.
The world's oldest tennis tournament, the Wimbledon championships, first occurred in 1877, and today the event takes place over two weeks in late June and early July.
In 2014 the net increase was 318,000: immigration was 641,000, up from 526,000 in 2013, while the number of people emigrating (for more than 12 months) was 323,000.
It is also a principal subcontractor on the F35 Joint Strike Fighter—the world's largest single defence project—for which it designs and manufactures a range of components including the aft fuselage, vertical and horizontal tail and wing tips and fuel system.
Devolution to Northern Ireland is contingent on participation by the Northern Ireland administration in the North-South Ministerial Council, where the Northern Ireland Executive cooperates and develops joint and shared policies with the Government of Ireland.
Northern Ireland remained part of the United Kingdom.
Some of the notable film score composers include John Barry, Clint Mansell, Mike Oldfield, John Powell, Craig Armstrong, David Arnold, John Murphy, Monty Norman and Harry Gregson-Williams.
The 2011 census also confirmed that the proportion of the population aged 0–14 has nearly halved (31% in 1911 compared to 18 in 2011) and the proportion of older people aged 65 and over has more than tripled (from 5 to 16%).
In the decade-long process of European integration, the UK was a founding member of the alliance called Western European Union, established with the London and Paris Conferences in 1954.
In 2009, British films grossed around $2&nbsp;billion worldwide and achieved a market share of around 7% globally and 17% in the United Kingdom.
Sales of newspapers have fallen since the 1970s and in 2010 41% of people reported reading a daily national newspaper.
However, at the 2015 general election, the Scottish National Party became the third-largest party by number of seats won, ahead of the Liberal Democrats.
The statutory incorporation followed acceptance of the European Convention on Human Rights.
Although the monarchy was restored, the Interregnum ensured (with the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the subsequent Bill of Rights 1689, and the Claim of Right Act 1689) that, unlike much of the rest of Europe, royal absolutism would not prevail, and a professed Catholic could never accede to the throne.
, 87.2% of the UK population identified themselves as white, meaning 12.8% of the UK population identify themselves as of one of number of ethnic minority groups.
The English top division, the Premier League, is the most watched football league in the world.
Since 1979 expenditure on healthcare has been increased significantly to bring it closer to the European Union average.
The Brit Awards are the BPI's annual music awards, and some of the British recipients of the Outstanding Contribution to Music award include; The Who, David Bowie, Eric Clapton, Rod Stewart and The Police.
The proportion of children in Scotland attending private schools is just over 4%, and it has been rising slowly in recent years.
In addition it is estimated that about 200,000 Welsh speakers live in England.
In 2011, 40% of the UK's electricity was produced by gas, 30% by coal, 19% by nuclear power and 4.2% by wind, hydro, biofuels and wastes.
The Crown dependencies are possessions of the Crown, as opposed to overseas territories of the UK.
Ethnic diversity varies significantly across the UK.
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have devolved self-government.
The annual British Academy Film Awards are hosted by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts.
Black/African/Caribbean/Black British
The World Health Organization, in 2000, ranked the provision of healthcare in the United Kingdom as fifteenth best in Europe and eighteenth in the world.
Since the height of the British Empire in the late 19th century, Britannia has often been associated with British maritime dominance, as in the patriotic song "Rule, Britannia!".
It is also rich in a number of natural resources including coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, silica and an abundance of arable land.
The United Kingdom does not have a single legal system, as Article 19 of the 1706 Treaty of Union provided for the continuation of Scotland's separate legal system.
The UK has proved successful in the international sporting arena in rowing.
Scotland's capital, Edinburgh, was UNESCO's first worldwide City of Literature.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, including the same members as the Supreme Court, is the highest court of appeal for several independent Commonwealth countries, the British Overseas Territories and the Crown Dependencies.
Her Majesty's Prison Service, which reports to the Ministry of Justice, manages most of the prisons within England and Wales.
In the 18th century Daniel Defoe (author of ''Robinson Crusoe'') and Samuel Richardson were pioneers of the modern novel.
British influence can be observed in the language, culture, and legal systems of many of its former colonies.
It includes Lough Neagh which, at , is the largest lake in the British Isles by area.
England's highest mountain is Scafell Pike () in the Lake District.
Sir Harrison Birtwistle is one of the foremost living composers.
French and German are the two most commonly taught second languages in England and Scotland.
This is a higher level of relative poverty than all but four other EU members.
The Welsh Government and the National Assembly for Wales have more limited powers than those devolved to Scotland.
May is also the leader of the Conservative Party.
There is no consistent system of administrative or geographic demarcation across the United Kingdom.
Following a period of widespread economic slowdown and industrial strife in the 1970s, the Conservative government of the 1980s under Margaret Thatcher initiated a radical policy of monetarism, deregulation, particularly of the financial sector (for example, Big Bang in 1986) and labour markets, the sale of state-owned companies (privatisation), and the withdrawal of subsidies to others.
The nearby Isle of Man, Bailiwick of Guernsey and Bailiwick of Jersey are not part of the United Kingdom, being Crown dependencies with the British Government responsible for defence and international representation.
A treaty between England and Scotland resulted in 1707 in a unified Kingdom of Great Britain, which merged in 1801 with the Kingdom of Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
To seek new markets and sources of raw materials, the Conservative Party under Disraeli launched a period of imperialist expansion in Egypt, South Africa, and elsewhere.
Several islands lie off the Welsh mainland, the largest of which is Anglesey (''Ynys Môn'') in the northwest.
It is also the 21st-most populous country, with an estimated 65.1 million inhabitants.
The United Kingdom lies between latitudes 49° to 61° N, and longitudes 9° W to 2° E. Northern Ireland shares a  land boundary with the Republic of Ireland.
It is growing at a rate of 7.5% annually, according to its umbrella organisation, the UK Space Agency.
Northern Ireland is also referred to as a "province".
Elections are held every four years under the first-past-the-post system.
However, by the end of 2014, UK growth was the fastest in both the G7 and in Europe, and by September 2015, the unemployment rate was down to a seven-year low of 5.3%.
The BBC, founded in 1922, is the UK's publicly funded radio, television and Internet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster in the world.
The majority of children are educated in state-sector schools, a small proportion of which select on the grounds of academic ability.
In June 2010 the government introduced a temporary limit of 24,000 on immigration from outside the EU, aiming to discourage applications before a permanent cap was imposed in April 2011.
Scots, a language descended from early northern Middle English, has limited recognition alongside its regional variant, Ulster Scots in Northern Ireland, without specific commitments to protection and promotion.
A. Milne (the creator of Winnie-the-Pooh), Roald Dahl and Enid Blyton; the controversial D. H. Lawrence; the modernist Virginia Woolf; the satirist Evelyn Waugh; the prophetic novelist George Orwell; the popular novelists W. Somerset Maugham and Graham Greene; the crime writer Agatha Christie (the best-selling novelist of all time); Ian Fleming (the creator of James Bond); the poets T.S.
The term has no definite legal connotation, but is used in law to refer to UK citizenship and matters to do with nationality.
Network Rail owns and manages most of the fixed assets (tracks, signals etc.).
The term "United Kingdom" became official in 1801 when the parliaments of Britain and Ireland each passed an Act of Union, uniting the two kingdoms and creating the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Together, this makes it the fourth most densely populated country in the European Union.
Additionally, the United Kingdom's Olympic team competes under the name "Great Britain" or "Team GB".
The British Film Institute has produced a poll ranking of what it considers to be the 100 greatest British films of all time, the BFI Top 100 British films.
All bills passed are given Royal Assent before becoming law.
Government strategy is for the space industry to be a £40bn business for the UK by 2030, capturing a 10% share of the $250bn world market for commercial space technology.
The UK's ''de facto'' official language is English.
It consists of 11 teams from Northern England, 1 from London, 1 from Wales and 1 from France.
On 13 March 2008 the executive agreed on proposals to create 11 new councils and replace the present system.
The UK retains a significant, though much reduced fishing industry.
The UK has a partially regulated market economy.
One of the more recent trends in migration has been the arrival of workers from the new EU member states in Eastern Europe, known as the A8 countries.
The UK suffered heavy bombing during the Blitz.
Between the 2001 and 2011 census there was a decrease in the amount of people who identified as Christian by 12%, whilst the percentage of those reporting no religious affiliation doubled.
British claims in Antarctica are not universally recognised.
Two non-departmental public bodies have key roles in Scottish education.
Highland games are held in spring and summer in Scotland, celebrating Scottish and celtic culture and heritage, especially that of the Scottish Highlands.
Glasgow's contribution to music was recognised in 2008 when it was named a UNESCO City of Music, one of only three cities in the world to have this honour.
In the final quarter of 2008, as a result of the Great Recession, the UK economy officially entered recession for the first time since 1991.
The 1707 Acts of Union declared that the kingdoms of England and Scotland were "United into One Kingdom by the Name of Great Britain", though the new state is also referred to in the Acts as the "Kingdom of Great Britain", "United Kingdom of Great Britain" and "United Kingdom".
The United Kingdom trails only the United States in terms of representation on lists of top 100 universities.
Britain has participated in every modern Olympic Games to date and is third in the medal count.
The essence of common law is that, subject to statute, the law is developed by judges in courts, applying statute, precedent and common sense to the facts before them to give explanatory judgements of the relevant legal principles, which are reported and binding in future similar cases (''stare decisis'').
The Commander-in-Chief is the British monarch, Elizabeth II, to whom members of the forces swear an oath of allegiance.
Although there are no UK-wide data in the 2001 census on adherence to individual Christian denominations, it has been estimated that 62% of Christians are Anglican, 13.5% Catholic, 6% Presbyterian, 3.4% Methodist with small numbers of other Protestant denominations such as Open Brethren, and Orthodox churches.
After the end of World War II in 1945, the UK was one of the Big Four powers (the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the U.S. and China) who met to plan the post-war world; it was an original signatory to the Declaration of the United Nations.
The highest peak in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard in the Mourne Mountains at .
The proportion of foreign-born people in the UK remains slightly below that of many other European countries.
The prison population of England and Wales has increased to 86,000, giving England and Wales the highest rate of incarceration in Western Europe at 148 per 100,000.
Queen Elizabeth II is the head of state of the UK as well as monarch of fifteen other independent Commonwealth countries.
A government figure estimated that there are 3.6 million homosexual people in Britain comprising 6% of the population.
Cricket is distinct from football and rugby where Wales and England field separate national teams, although Wales had fielded its own team in the past.
The UK is considered to have a high-income economy and is categorised as very high in the Human Development Index, ranking 14th in the world.
With the rules and codes of many modern sports invented and codified in late 19th century Victorian Britain, in 2012, the President of the IOC, Jacques Rogge, stated; "This great, sports-loving country is widely recognized as the birthplace of modern sport.
It is usually considered to have ended with the Belfast "Good Friday" Agreement of 1998.
General elections are called by the monarch when the prime minister so advises.
15% of respondents stated that they had no religion, with a further 7% not stating a religious preference.
The UK entered World War II by declaring war on Germany in 1939, after the Nazis had invaded Poland and Czechoslovakia.
In the immediate post-war years, the Labour government initiated a radical programme of reforms, which had a significant effect on British society in the following decades.
The automotive industry is a significant part of the UK manufacturing sector and employs over 800,000 people, with a turnover of some £52 billion, generating £26.6 billion of exports.
It operates numerous television and radio stations in the UK and abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television licence.
Most British literature is in the English language.
However, the war left the UK severely weakened and depending financially on the Marshall Plan.
5.5% of the population are estimated to speak languages brought to the UK as a result of relatively recent immigration.
In England and Wales water and sewerage services are provided by 10 private regional water
The Welsh Local Government Association represents the interests of local authorities in Wales.
In Great Britain, the British Rail network was privatised between 1994 and 1997, which was followed by a rapid rise in passenger numbers following years of decline, although the factors behind this are disputed.
It is the third-largest in the European Union, the fifth-largest in the Commonwealth and the 22nd-largest in the world.
In a 2015 survey conducted by BSA (British Social Attitudes) on religious affiliation; 49% of respondents indicated 'no religion', while 42% indicated they were Christians, followed by 8% who affiliated with other religions (e.g.
The British colonies in North America that broke away from Britain in the American War of Independence became the United States of America, recognised by Britain in 1783.
England has the two oldest universities in English-speaking world, Universities of Oxford and Cambridge (jointly known as "Oxbridge") with history of over eight centuries.
In 2001, people in this category accounted for 1.2% of the UK population; by 2011, the proportion was 2%.
In 2016, the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union.
The chief courts are the Court of Session, for civil cases, and the High Court of Justiciary, for criminal cases.
Thoroughbred racing, which originated under Charles II of England as the "sport of kings", is popular throughout the UK with world-famous races including the Grand National, the Epsom Derby, Royal Ascot and the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival (including the Cheltenham Gold Cup).
Apart from this land border, the UK is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to its east, the English Channel to its south and the Celtic Sea to its south-southwest, giving it the 12th longest coastline in the world.
Among emigrant-descended populations some Scottish Gaelic is still spoken in Canada (principally Nova Scotia and Cape Breton Island), and Welsh in Patagonia, Argentina.
In 1950 there were probably fewer than 20,000 non-white residents in Britain, almost all born overseas.
Asian/Asian British: Other Asian
This resulted in high unemployment and social unrest, but ultimately also economic growth, particularly in the services sector.
Golf is the sixth most popular sport, by participation, in the UK.
On 2 November 2015, BAE Systems announced they have bought a 20% stake in Reaction Engines ltd.
The M25, encircling London, is the largest and busiest bypass in the world.
Its engines power more than 30 types of commercial aircraft and it has more than 30,000 engines in service in the civil and defence sectors.
England's population in 2011 was found to be 53 million.
Until the late 19th century the majority of Welsh literature was in Welsh and much of the prose was religious in character.
A Great Britain Olympic football team was assembled for the first time to compete in the London 2012 Olympic Games.
The Roman conquest, beginning in 43 AD, and the 400-year rule of southern Britain, was followed by an invasion by Germanic Anglo-Saxon settlers, reducing the Brythonic area mainly to what was to become Wales and the historic Kingdom of Strathclyde.
In 2012, the UK and Scottish governments signed the Edinburgh Agreement setting out the terms for a referendum on Scottish independence in 2014, which was defeated 55% to 45%.
In 2010, over half  of places at the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge were taken by students from state schools, while the proportion of children in England attending private schools is around 7% which rises to 18% of those over 16.
An alliance of merchants and industrialists with the Whigs would lead to a new party, the Liberals, with an ideology of free trade and ''laissez-faire''.
The organisation of local government in England is complex, with the distribution of functions varying according to local arrangements.
Asian/Asian British: Chinese
''GB'' and ''GBR'' are the standard country codes for the United Kingdom (see ISO 3166-2 and ISO 3166-1 alpha-3) and are consequently used by international organisations to refer to the United Kingdom.
The highest mountains in Wales are in Snowdonia and include Snowdon () which, at , is the highest peak in Wales.
Northern Ireland, separated from Great Britain by the Irish Sea and North Channel, has an area of  and is mostly hilly.
The British Empire was expanded to include India, large parts of Africa and many other territories throughout the world.
Northern Ireland is the only part of the UK that shares a land border with another sovereign state—the Republic of Ireland.
Motorcycle road racing has a long tradition with races such as the Isle of Man TT and the North West 200.
Agriculture is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by European standards, producing about 60% of food needs with less than 1.6% of the labour force (535,000 workers).
, 26.5% of primary and 22.2% of secondary pupils at state schools in England were members of an ethnic minority.
Many became members of the Commonwealth of Nations.
They are the remnants of the British Empire and several have specifically voted to remain British territories (Bermuda in 1995, Gibraltar in 2002 and the Falkland Islands in 2013).
He is remembered for his poetry—his "Do not go gentle into that good night; Rage, rage against the dying of the light" is one of the most quoted couplets of English language verse—and for his "play for voices", ''Under Milk Wood''.
