Progress in human development during the 20th century has been dramatic and the UN and its agencies have certainly helped the world become a more hospitable and livable place for millions."
The UN mission in Somalia was widely viewed as a failure after the US withdrawal following casualties in the Battle of Mogadishu, and the UN mission to Bosnia faced "worldwide ridicule" for its indecisive and confused mission in the face of ethnic cleansing.
Seventy-seven nations founded the organization, but by November 2013 the organization had since expanded to 133 member countries.
The ICJ can also be called upon by other UN organs to provide advisory opinions.
In practice, the UN is unable to take significant action against human rights abuses without a Security Council resolution, though it does substantial work in investigating and reporting abuses.
The council has one annual meeting in July, held in either New York or Geneva.
A large share of the UN's expenditure addresses its core mission of peace and security, and this budget is assessed separately from the main organizational budget.
Since its founding, there have been many calls for reform of the United Nations but little consensus on how to do so.
The foregoing declaration may be adhered to by other nations which are, or which may be, rendering material assistance and contributions in the struggle for victory over Hitlerism.
The UN Development Programme (UNDP), an organization for grant-based technical assistance founded in 1945, is one of the leading bodies in the field of international development.
UNHCR and WFP programmes are funded by voluntary contributions from governments, corporations, and individuals, though the UNHCR's administrative costs are paid for by the UN's primary budget.
In September 2015, Saudi Arabia's  Faisal bin Hassan Trad has been elected Chair of the United Nations Human Rights Council panel that appoints independent experts, a move criticized by human rights groups.
The text of the "Declaration by United Nations" was drafted by President Franklin Roosevelt, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, and Roosevelt aide Harry Hopkins, while meeting at the White House, 29 December 1941.
Under the current Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, the UN has intervened with peacekeepers in crises including the War in Darfur in Sudan and the Kivu conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo and sent observers and chemical weapons inspectors to the Syrian Civil War.
ECOSOC has 54 members, which are elected by the General Assembly for a three-year term.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), established in 1950, works to protect the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, and stateless people.
The ICJ's primary purpose is to adjudicate disputes among states.
The peacekeeping force as a whole received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988.
The assembly is led by a president, elected from among the member states on a rotating regional basis, and 21 vice-presidents.
*General Committee – a supervisory committee consisting of the assembly's president, vice-president, and committee heads
ECOSOC may also grant consultative status to non-governmental organizations; by 2004, more than 2,200 organizations had received this status.
The UN works towards decolonization through groups including the UN Committee on Decolonization, created in 1962.
In 2006, it was replaced by a Human Rights Council consisting of 47 nations.
With the end of the Cold War, the push for human rights action took on new impetus.
Beginning in the last decades of the Cold War, American and European critics of the UN condemned the organization for perceived mismanagement and corruption.
Other evaluations of the UN's effectiveness have been mixed.
This surcharge serves to offset discounted peacekeeping assessment rates for less developed countries.
The five permanent members hold veto power over UN resolutions, allowing a permanent member to block adoption of a resolution, though not debate.
The Security Council is charged with maintaining peace and security among countries.
Staff salaries are subject to an internal tax that is administered by the UN organizations.
The court has heard cases related to war crimes, illegal state interference, ethnic cleansing, and other issues.
The UN is financed from assessed and voluntary contributions from member states.
The two-year budget for 2012–13 was $5.512 billion in total.
While other organs of the United Nations can only make "recommendations" to member states, the Security Council has the power to make binding decisions that member states have agreed to carry out, under the terms of Charter Article 25.
In 1979, the General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, followed by the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1989.
In 1994, the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) was established by the General Assembly to serve as an efficiency watchdog.
With an increasing Third World presence and the failure of UN mediation in conflicts in the Middle East, Vietnam, and Kashmir, the UN increasingly shifted its attention to its ostensibly secondary goals of economic development and cultural exchange.
They were initially formed separately from the UN through the Bretton Woods Agreement in 1944.
Third World nations organized into the Group of 77 coalition under the leadership of Algeria, which briefly became a dominant power at the UN.
The group held its first major meeting in Algiers in 1967, where it adopted the Charter of Algiers and established the basis for permanent institutional structures.
There have also been numerous calls for the UN Security Council's membership to be increased, for different ways of electing the UN's Secretary-General, and for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly.
"On New Year's Day 1942, President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, Maxim Litvinov, of the USSR, and T. V. Soong, of China, signed a short document which later came to be known as the United Nations Declaration and the next day the representatives of twenty-two other nations added their signatures."
'''Kurt Waldheim'''
The ICJ is composed of 15 judges who serve 9-year terms and are appointed by the General Assembly; every sitting judge must be from a different nation.
In 1960 alone, 17 new states joined the UN, 16 of them from Africa.
Between 1988 and 2000, the number of adopted Security Council resolutions more than doubled, and the peacekeeping budget increased more than tenfold.
The smallest, United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP), included 42 uniformed personnel responsible for monitoring the ceasefire in Jammu and Kashmir.
Its objectives include maintaining international peace and security, promoting human rights, fostering social and economic development, protecting the environment, and providing humanitarian aid in cases of famine, natural disaster, and armed conflict.
Viewed as separate from the specialized bodies it co-ordinates, ECOSOC's functions include information gathering, advising member nations, and making recommendations.
UNICEF won the prize in 1965, the International Labour Organization in 1969, the UN Peace-Keeping Forces in 1988, the International Atomic Energy Agency (which reports to the UN) in 2005, and the UN-supported Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in 2013.
The United Nations Commission on Human Rights was formed in 1993 to oversee human rights issues for the UN, following the recommendation of that year's World Conference on Human Rights.
In 1953, the USSR effectively forced the resignation of Trygve Lie, the Secretary-General, through its refusal to deal with him, while in the 1950s and 1960s, a popular US bumper sticker read, "You can't spell communism without U.N." In a sometimes-misquoted statement, President George W. Bush stated in February 2003 (referring to UN uncertainty towards Iraqi provocations under the Saddam Hussein regime) that "free nations will not allow the United Nations to fade into history as an ineffective, irrelevant debating society."
The group was founded 15 June 1964 by the "Joint Declaration of the Seventy-Seven Countries" issued at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
The International Court of Justice (ICJ), located in The Hague, in the Netherlands, is the primary judicial organ of the UN.
The first meetings of the General Assembly, with 51 nations represented, and the Security Council took place in London beginning 6 January 1946.
Secretaries-General of the United Nations
The Assembly has established the principle that the UN should not be unduly dependent on any one member to finance its operations.
Roosevelt first coined the term ''United Nations'' to describe the Allied countries.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), begun in 1996, co-ordinates the organization's response to the AIDS epidemic.
In 2013, an internal review of UN actions in the final battles of the Sri Lankan Civil War in 2009 concluded that the organization had suffered "systemic failure".
A lack of success in the first two decades of UN work in this area led to the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, which sought to give new impetus to these efforts.
The Governments signatory hereto,
After World War II, the French Committee of National Liberation was late to be recognized by the US as the government of France, and so the country was initially excluded from the conferences that created the new organization.
For the least developed countries (LDCs), a ceiling rate of 0.01% is applied.
These soldiers are sometimes nicknamed "Blue Helmets" for their distinctive gear.
*Second Committee (Economic and Financial)
When the General Assembly votes on important questions, a two-thirds majority of those present and voting is required.
Draft resolutions can be forwarded to the General Assembly by eight committees:
'''Boutros Boutros-Ghali'''
In 1947, the General Assembly approved a resolution to partition Palestine, approving the creation of the state of Israel.
The organization won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2001, and a number of its officers and agencies have also been awarded the prize.
The General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in 1960 with no votes against but abstentions from all major colonial powers.
Evaluating the first 50 years of the UN's history, the author Stanley Meisler writes that ''"the United Nations never fulfilled the hopes of its founders, but it accomplished a great deal nevertheless"'', citing its role in decolonization and its many successful peacekeeping efforts.
The General Assembly is the main deliberative assembly of the United Nations.
One hundred and one UN personnel died in the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the worst loss of life in the organization's history.
By the 1970s, the UN budget for social and economic development was far greater than its peacekeeping budget.
The United Nations Charter was drafted at a conference in April–June 1945; this charter took effect 24 October 1945, and the UN began operation.
In addition to peacekeeping, the UN is also active in encouraging disarmament.
Also in 2005, the Human Security Report documented a decline in the number of wars, genocides, and human rights abuses since the end of the Cold War, and presented evidence, albeit circumstantial, that international activism—mostly spearheaded by the UN—has been the main cause of the decline in armed conflict in that period.
The UN has been involved with arms-limitation treaties, such as the Outer Space Treaty (1967), the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (1968), the Seabed Arms Control Treaty (1971), the Biological Weapons Convention (1972), the Chemical Weapons Convention (1992), and the Ottawa Treaty (1997), which prohibits landmines.
Examples of important questions include recommendations on peace and security; election of members to organs; admission, suspension, and expulsion of members; and budgetary matters.
In 1948, the General Assembly adopted a Universal Declaration of Human Rights, drafted by a committee headed by Franklin D. Roosevelt's widow, Eleanor, and including the French lawyer René Cassin.
The peacekeeping budget for the 2015–16 fiscal year was $8.27 billion, supporting 82,318 troops deployed in 15 missions around the world.
After the end of the Cold War, the UN took on major military and peacekeeping missions across the world with varying degrees of success.
Established in 1945 by the UN Charter, the Court began work in 1946 as the successor to the Permanent Court of International Justice.
UN peacekeepers have also been accused of child rape, soliciting prostitutes, and sexual abuse during various peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Liberia, Sudan and what is now South Sudan, Burundi, and Ivory Coast.
The president is elected for a one-year term and chosen amongst the small or middle powers represented on ECOSOC.
In the late 1990s and 2000s, international interventions authorized by the UN took a wider variety of forms.
She knows that no state, no matter how powerful, can solve urgent problems, fight for development and bring an end to all crises... France wants the UN to be the centre of global governance."
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), also founded in 1945, promotes agricultural development and food security.
Following the catastrophic loss of life in the First World War, the Paris Peace Conference established the League of Nations to maintain harmony between countries.
ECOSOC's subsidiary bodies include the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, which advises UN agencies on issues relating to indigenous peoples; the United Nations Forum on Forests, which co-ordinates and promotes sustainable forest management; the United Nations Statistical Commission, which co-ordinates information-gathering efforts between agencies; and the Commission on Sustainable Development, which co-ordinates efforts between UN agencies and NGOs working towards sustainable development.
The UN's most prominent officer is the Secretary-General, an office held by South Korean Ban Ki-moon since 2007.
There are no specific criteria for the post, but over the years it has become accepted that the post shall be held for one or two terms of five years, that the post shall be appointed on the basis of geographical rotation, and that the Secretary-General shall not originate from one of the five permanent Security Council member states.
Disagreements in the Security Council about military action and intervention are seen as having failed to prevent the Bangladesh genocide in 1971, the Cambodian genocide in the 1970s, and the Rwandan genocide in 1994.
The Declaration serves as a "common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations" rather than a legally binding document, but it has become the basis of two binding treaties, the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
It is based in the Peace Palace in The Hague, sharing the building with the Hague Academy of International Law, a private centre for the study of international law.
Scientists cited UN peacekeepers from Nepal as the likely source of the 2010–13 Haiti cholera outbreak, which killed more than 8,000 Haitians following the 2010 Haiti earthquake.
(1) Each Government pledges itself to employ its full resources, military or economic, against those members of the Tripartite Pact and its adherents with which such government is at war.
(A notable exception was a Security Council resolution in 1950 authorizing a US-led coalition to repel the North Korean invasion of South Korea, passed in the absence of the USSR.)
*Fourth Committee (Special Political and Decolonization)
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was awarded in 1954 and 1981, becoming one of only two recipients to win the prize twice.
The World Health Organization (WHO), which focuses on international health issues and disease eradication, is another of the UN's largest agencies.
The presidency of the Security Council rotates alphabetically each month.
In 2013, the top 10 providers of assessed financial contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations were the United States (28.38%), Japan (10.83%), France (7.22%), Germany (7.14%), the United Kingdom (6.68%), China (6.64%), Italy (4.45%), the Russian Federation (3.15%), Canada (2.98%), and Spain (2.97%).
Though the UN's primary mandate was peacekeeping, the division between the US and USSR often paralysed the organization, generally allowing it to intervene only in conflicts distant from the Cold War.
In December 2000, the Assembly revised the scale of assessments in response to pressure from the United States.
Jacques Fomerand, a scholar of the UN, describes this organization's mandate as "broad and vague", with only "meagre" resources to carry it out.
The UN mission in the Sierra Leone Civil War of 1991–2002 was supplemented by British Royal Marines, and the invasion of Afghanistan in 2001 was overseen by NATO.In 2003, the United States invaded Iraq despite failing to pass a UN Security Council resolution for authorization, prompting a new round of questioning of the organization's effectiveness.
These include specialized agencies, research and training institutions, programmes and funds, and other UN entities.
*Sixth Committee (Legal)
Lester B. Pearson, the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs, was awarded the prize in 1957 for his role in organizing the UN's first peacekeeping force to resolve the Suez Crisis.
Four of the five principal organs are located at the main UN Headquarters in New York City.
While travelling to meet with rebel leader Moise Tshombe during the conflict, Dag Hammarskjöld, often named as one of the UN's most effective Secretaries-General, died in a plane crash; months later he was posthumously awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
During the war, the United Nations became the official term for the Allies.
Jacques Fomerand states the most enduring divide in views of the UN is "the North–South split" between richer Northern nations and developing Southern nations.
The General Assembly approves the regular budget and determines the assessment for each member.
Regulation of armaments was included in the writing of the UN Charter in 1945 and was envisioned as a way of limiting the use of human and economic resources for their creation.
Further main offices are situated in Geneva, Nairobi, and Vienna.
In 1975, a bloc comprising the USSR and Third World nations passed a resolution, over strenuous US and Israeli opposition, declaring Zionism to be racism; the resolution was repealed in 1991, shortly after the end of the Cold War.
This organization resolved some territorial disputes and created international structures for areas such as postal mail, aviation, and opium control, some of which would later be absorbed into the UN.
A number of agencies and individuals associated with the UN have won the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of their work.
It provides studies, information, and facilities needed by United Nations bodies for their meetings.
Article 99 of the charter states that the Secretary-General can bring to the Security Council's attention "any matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security", a phrase that Secretaries-General since Trygve Lie have interpreted as giving the position broad scope for action on the world stage.
The first session convened 10 January 1946 in the Methodist Central Hall Westminster in London and included representatives of 51 nations.
Other UN institutions are located throughout the world.
In 2004, the UN faced accusations that its recently ended Oil-for-Food Programme—in which Iraq had been allowed to trade oil for basic needs to relieve the pressure of sanctions—had suffered from widespread corruption, including billions of dollars of kickbacks.
In 1964, Hammarskjöld's successor, U Thant, deployed the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, which would become one of the UN's longest-running peacekeeping missions.
The ten temporary seats are held for two-year terms, with member states voted in by the General Assembly on a regional basis.
The United Nations was formulated and negotiated among the delegations from the Allied Big Four (the Soviet Union, the UK, the US and China) at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in 1944.
UN System agencies include the World Bank Group, the World Health Organization, the World Food Programme, UNESCO, and UNICEF.
The UN negotiated an end to the Salvadoran Civil War, launched a successful peacekeeping mission in Namibia, and oversaw democratic elections in post-apartheid South Africa and post-Khmer Rouge Cambodia.
'''Dag Hammarskjöld'''
The World Bank provides loans for international development, while the IMF promotes international economic co-operation and gives emergency loans to indebted countries.
The United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, one of three bodies with a mandate to oversee issues related to indigenous peoples, held its first session in 2002.
Similarly, UN inaction is blamed for failing to either prevent the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 or complete the peacekeeping operations in 1992–93 during the Somali Civil War.
The organization is financed by assessed and voluntary contributions from its member states.
The decisions of the Council are known as United Nations Security Council resolutions.
(2) Each Government pledges itself to cooperate with the Governments signatory hereto and not to make a separate armistice or peace with the enemies.
"The heads of the delegations of the sponsoring countries took turns as chairman of the plenary meetings: Anthony Eden, of Britain, Edward Stettinius, of the United States, T. V. Soong, of China, and Vyacheslav Molotov, of the Soviet Union.
"Four Policemen" was coined to refer to four major Allied countries, United States, United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and China, which emerged in the Declaration by United Nations.
The headquarters of the United Nations is in Manhattan, New York City, and experiences extraterritoriality.
Three UN bodies oversee arms proliferation issues: the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission.
Owing to its broad mandate of co-ordinating many agencies, ECOSOC has at times been criticized as unfocused or irrelevant.
The Assembly may make recommendations on any matters within the scope of the UN, except matters of peace and security that are under consideration by the Security Council.
Special UN programmes not included in the regular budget, such as UNICEF and the World Food Programme, are financed by voluntary contributions from member governments, corporations, and private individuals.
One major change from the Atlantic Charter was the addition of a provision for religious freedom, which Stalin approved after Roosevelt insisted.
The advent of nuclear weapons came only weeks after the signing of the charter, resulting in the first resolution of the first General Assembly meeting calling for specific proposals for "the elimination from national armaments of atomic weapons and of all other major weapons adaptable to mass destruction".
On 25 October 1971, with opposition from the United States, but with the support of many Third World nations, the mainland, communist People's Republic of China was given the Chinese seat on the Security Council in place of the Republic of China that occupied Taiwan; the vote was widely seen as a sign of waning US influence in the organization.
After months of planning, the UN Conference on International Organization opened in San Francisco, 25 April 1945, attended by 50 governments and a number of non-governmental organizations involved in drafting the United Nations Charter.
Being convinced that complete victory over their enemies is essential to defend life, liberty, independence and religious freedom, and to preserve human rights and justice in their own lands as well as in other lands, and that they are now engaged in a common struggle against savage and brutal forces seeking to subjugate the world,
Composed of all United Nations member states, the assembly meets in regular yearly sessions, but emergency sessions can also be called.
The Group of 77 at the UN is a loose coalition of developing nations, designed to promote its members' collective economic interests and create an enhanced joint negotiating capacity in the United Nations.
*Fifth Committee (Administrative and Budgetary)
The document proclaims basic civil, political, and economic rights common to all human beings, though its effectiveness towards achieving these ends has been disputed since its drafting.
UNICEF (the United Nations Children's Fund) was created in 1946 to aid European children after the Second World War and expanded its mission to provide aid around the world and to uphold the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The UN has six principal organs: the General Assembly (the main deliberative assembly); the Security Council (for deciding certain resolutions for peace and security); the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) (for promoting international economic and social co-operation and development); the Secretariat (for providing studies, information, and facilities needed by the UN); the International Court of Justice (the primary judicial organ); and the United Nations Trusteeship Council (inactive since 1994).
The Norwegian Foreign Minister, Trygve Lie, was elected as the first UN Secretary-General.
After the Cold War, the UN saw a radical expansion in its peacekeeping duties, taking on more missions in ten years than it had in the previous four decades.
The World Food Programme (WFP), created in 1961, provides food aid in response to famine, natural disasters, and armed conflict.
UN peacekeepers with the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) have been stationed in the Middle East since 1948, the longest-running active peacekeeping mission.
During the 1990s, the US withheld dues citing inefficiency and only started repayment on the condition that a major reforms initiative was introduced.
Numerous bodies have been created to work towards this goal, primarily under the authority of the General Assembly and ECOSOC.
With the spread of decolonization in the 1960s, the organization's membership saw an influx of newly independent nations.
The organization participated in major actions in Korea and the Congo, as well as approving the creation of the state of Israel in 1947.
In 1984, the US President, Ronald Reagan, withdrew his nation's funding from UNESCO (the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, founded 1946) over allegations of mismanagement, followed by Britain and Singapore.
In contrast, the French President, François Hollande, stated in 2012 that "France trusts the United Nations.
The UN officially came into existence 24 October 1945, upon ratification of the Charter by the five permanent members of the Security Council—France, the Republic of China, the Soviet Union, the UK and the US—and by a majority of the other 46 signatories.
The UN-sponsored Kyoto Protocol, signed in 1997, set legally binding emissions reduction targets for ratifying states.
The United Nations obey the ''Noblemaire principle'', which is binding on any organization that belongs to the united nations system.
'''Javier Pérez de Cuéllar'''
The Secretary-General is appointed by the General Assembly, after being recommended by the Security Council, where the permanent members have veto power.
At its founding, the UN had 51 member states; there are now 193.
In 1994, former Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the UN to Somalia Mohamed Sahnoun published "Somalia: The Missed Opportunities", a book in which he analyses the reasons for the failure of the 1992 UN intervention in Somalia, showing that, between the start of the Somali civil war in 1988 and the fall of the Siad Barre regime in January 1991, the UN missed at least three opportunities to prevent major human tragedies; when the UN tried to provide humanitarian assistance, they were totally outperformed by NGOs, whose competence and dedication sharply contrasted with the UN's excessive caution and bureaucratic inefficiencies.
Throughout the Cold War, both the US and USSR repeatedly accused the UN of favouring the other.
The UN as a whole was awarded the prize in 2001, sharing it with Annan.
The earliest concrete plan for a new world organization began under the aegis of the US State Department in 1939.
The UN Secretariat is headed by the Secretary-General, assisted by a staff of international civil servants worldwide.
Non-governmental organizations may be granted consultative status with ECOSOC and other agencies to participate in the UN's work.
All other questions are decided by a majority vote.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General from 1992 to 1996, initiated a reform of the Secretariat, reducing the size of the organization somewhat.
Its site—like UN headquarters buildings in Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi—is designated as international territory.
The organization reports that it feeds an average of 90 million people in 80 nations each year.
The six official languages of the United Nations, used in intergovernmental meetings and documents, are Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish.
In the century prior to the UN's creation, several international treaty organizations and conferences had been formed to regulate conflicts between nations, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907.
In subsequent decades, WHO largely eradicated polio, river blindness, and leprosy.
The UN has also drawn criticism for perceived failures.
Apart from approval of budgetary matters, resolutions are not binding on the members.
It incorporated Soviet suggestions, but left no role for France.
Other UN bodies responsible for women's rights issues include United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, a commission of ECOSOC founded in 1946; the United Nations Development Fund for Women, created in 1976; and the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, founded in 1979.
*Third Committee (Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural)
In 2000, the 192 United Nations member states agreed to achieve eight Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
By 1 March 1945, 21 additional states had signed.
However, the League lacked representation for colonial peoples (then half the world's population) and significant participation from several major powers, including the US, USSR, Germany, and Japan; it failed to act against the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931, the Second Italo-Ethiopian War in 1935, the Japanese invasion of China in 1937, and German expansions under Adolf Hitler that culminated in the Second World War.
Critics have also accused the UN of bureaucratic inefficiency, waste, and corruption.
At the later meetings, Lord Halifax deputized for Mr. Eden, Wellington Koo for T. V. Soong, and Mr Gromyko for Mr.
A JOINT DECLARATION BY THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, CHINA, AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, CANADA, COSTA RICA, CUBA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, EL SALVADOR, GREECE, GUATEMALA, HAITI, HONDURAS, INDIA, LUXEMBOURG, NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NORWAY, PANAMA, POLAND, SOUTH AFRICA, YUGOSLAVIA
The International Court of Justice is located in The Hague, while other major agencies are based in the UN offices at Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi.
*Credentials Committee – responsible for determining the credentials of each member nation's UN representatives
In 1994, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda failed to intervene in the Rwandan Genocide amid indecision in the Security Council.
