Congress has prescribed the following oath for new senators:
Senate procedure depends not only on the rules, but also on a variety of customs and traditions.
They also have considerable influence: senators who cooperate with their committee chairs are likely to accomplish more good for their states than those who do not.
However, the Constitution's Origination Clause provides that "All bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives".
A legislative day begins when the Senate convenes and ends with adjournment; hence, it does not necessarily coincide with the calendar day.
This means that 41 senators can make a filibuster happen.
In the history of the United States, the House of Representatives has impeached sixteen officials, of whom seven were convicted.
Apart from rules governing civility, there are few restrictions on the content of speeches; there is no requirement that speeches be germane to the matter before the Senate.
The second-highest member, the spokesperson on the committee for the minority party, is known in most cases as the ranking member.
The former identifies bills and resolutions awaiting Senate floor actions.
Conviction requires a two-thirds majority of the senators present.
In most states (since 1970), a primary election is held first for the Republican and Democratic parties, with the general election following a few months later.
Hence, the power of joint committees is considerably lower than those of standing committees.
The House elects the president if the Electoral College deadlocks on that choice.
The Senate chamber is located in the north wing of the Capitol, in Washington, D.C.
Elections to the Senate are held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in even-numbered years, Election Day, and coincide with elections for the House of Representatives.
Since the 1950s, vice presidents have presided over few Senate debates.
Typically, a nominee is first subject to a hearing before a Senate committee.
Some joint committees oversee independent government bodies; for instance, the Joint Committee on the Library oversees the Library of Congress.
The Democratic Party traditionally sits to the presiding officer's right, and the Republican Party traditionally sits to the presiding officer's left, regardless which party has a majority of seats.
During an impeachment trial, senators are constitutionally required to sit on oath or affirmation.
Recent criticisms of the Senate's operations object to what the critics argue is obsolescence as a result of partisan paralysis and a preponderance of arcane rules.
Senators are elected by their state as a whole.
A filibuster may entail long speeches, dilatory motions, and an extensive series of proposed amendments.
Each standing committee may consider, amend, and report bills that fall under its jurisdiction.
However, when the Senate originates an appropriations bill, the House simply refuses to consider it, thereby settling the dispute in practice.
The Senate also has several committees that are not considered standing committees.
For decades the task of presiding over Senate sessions was one of the vice president's principal duties.
In most cases, cloture requires the support of three-fifths of the Senate; however, if the matter before the Senate involves changing the rules of the body&nbsp;– this includes amending provisions regarding the filibuster&nbsp;– a two-thirds majority is required.
First convened in 1789, the Senate of the United States was formed on the example of the ancient Roman Senate.
The Vice President of the United States is the ex officio President of the Senate, with authority to preside over the Senate's sessions, although he can vote only to break a tie.
(For instance, the Judiciary Committee considers nominees for judgeships, and the Foreign Relations Committee considers nominees for positions in the Department of State.)
Current senators whose six-year terms expire on January 3, 2017, belong to Class III.
Standing committees also oversee the departments and agencies of the executive branch.
Many non-member officers are also hired to run the day-to-day functions of the Senate.
Along with earning salaries, senators receive retirement and health benefits that are identical to other federal employees, and are fully vested after five years of service.
Frequently, freshmen senators (newly elected members) are asked to preside so that they may become accustomed to the rules and procedures of the body.
The name is derived from the ''senatus'', Latin for ''council of elders'' (from ''senex'' meaning ''old man'' in Latin).
Popular election to the Senate was standardized nationally in 1913 by the ratification of the Seventeenth Amendment.
The powers of the presiding officer of the Senate are far less extensive than those of the Speaker of the House.
Some senators have opted to withdraw from their re-election races rather than face certain censure or expulsion, such as Robert Torricelli in 2002.
The other was intended to represent the states to such extent as they retained their sovereignty except for the powers expressly delegated to the national government.
Furthermore, each standing committee considers presidential nominations to offices related to its jurisdiction.
Customarily, the Majority Leader and Minority Leader are accorded priority during debates even if another senator rises first.
The Senate may expel a senator by a two-thirds vote.
For instance, the Constitution provides that the president may make an appointment during a congressional recess without the Senate's advice and consent.
Americans sometimes call the Senate the "world's greatest deliberative body".
The Senate rules and customs were reformed in the twentieth century, largely in the 1970s.
James Madison made the following comment about the Senate:
The amount of a senator's pension depends on the years of service and the average of the highest 3 years of their salary.
The most-junior "senior senator" is Deb Fischer of Nebraska, who was sworn in January 3, 2013, and is currently 84th in seniority, ahead of senator Ben Sasse who was sworn in January 3, 2015 and is currently 99th in seniority.
Article I, Section 3 of the Constitution sets three qualifications for senators: 1) they must be at least 30 years old, 2) they must have been citizens of the United States for the past 9 years or longer, and 3) they must be inhabitants of the states they seek to represent at the time of their election.
The chairs hold extensive powers: they control the committee's agenda, and so decide how much, if any, time to devote to the consideration of a bill; they act with the power of the committee in disapproving or delaying a bill or a nomination by the president; they manage on the floor of the full Senate the consideration of those bills the committee reports.
A member who has been elected, but not yet seated, is called a "senator-elect"; a member who has been appointed to a seat, but not yet seated, is called a "senator-designate".
The District of Columbia elects two shadow senators, but they are officials of the D.C. city government and not members of the U.S. Senate.
Only two presidents of the United States have ever been impeached: Andrew Johnson in 1868 and Bill Clinton in 1998.
The Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution disqualifies from the Senate any federal or state officers who had taken the requisite oath to support the Constitution, but later engaged in rebellion or aided the enemies of the United States.
A senator, however, may challenge the presiding officer's assessment and request a recorded vote.
The request may be granted only if it is seconded by one-fifth of the senators present.
The Senate uses Standing Rules of the Senate for operation.
When debate concludes, the motion in question is put to a vote.
Under the rules and customs of the Senate, a quorum is always assumed present unless a quorum call explicitly demonstrates otherwise.
The Constitution provides that a majority of the Senate constitutes a quorum to do business.
One hundred desks are arranged in the chamber in a semicircular pattern and are divided by a wide central aisle.
The president pro tempore, committee chairs, and some other officials are generally from the majority party; they have counterparts (for instance, the "ranking members" of committees) in the minority party.
In the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Select Committee on Ethics, however, the senior minority member is known as the vice chair.
A senator may request a quorum call by "suggesting the absence of a quorum"; a clerk then calls the roll of the Senate and notes which members are present.
The approval of both houses is required for any bill, including a revenue bill, to become law.
On some rare occasions, the majority leader presides briefly to call to order a session.
In other cases (for example, for the budget process), limits are imposed by statute.
Other employees include the Chaplain, who is elected by the Senate, and Pages, who are appointed.
As a result, three senators who failed to meet the age qualification were nevertheless admitted to the Senate: Henry Clay (aged 29 in 1806), Armistead Thomson Mason (aged 28 in 1816), and John Eaton (aged 28 in 1818).
Fifteen senators have been expelled in the history of the Senate: William Blount, for treason, in 1797, and fourteen in 1861 and 1862 for supporting the Confederate secession.
The Constitution provides that the president may only "make Treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur."
The Senate (not the judiciary) is the sole judge of a senator's qualifications.
Far more senators have been nominees for the presidency than representatives.
Neither executive agreements nor congressional-executive agreements are mentioned in the Constitution, leading some scholars such as Laurence Tribe and John Yoo to suggest that they unconstitutionally circumvent the treaty-ratification process.
On occasion, the Senate may go into what is called a secret or closed session.
Both trials ended in acquittal; in Johnson's case, the Senate fell one vote short of the two-thirds majority required for conviction.
Thereafter, the nomination is considered by the full Senate.
not for a full term).
However, not all international agreements are considered treaties under US domestic law, even if they are considered treaties under international law.
The Senate is served by several officials who are not members.
Under Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution, a large number of government appointments are subject to potential confirmation; however, Congress has passed legislation to authorize the appointment of many officials without the Senate's consent (usually, confirmation requirements are reserved for those officials with the most significant final decision-making authority).
Filibustered bills require a three-fifths majority to overcome the cloture vote (which usually means 60 votes) and get to the normal vote where a simple majority (usually 51 votes) approves the bill.
The Constitution requires that senators take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution.
The other nine states require that special elections be held outside of the normal two-year election cycle in some or all circumstances.
In some states, runoffs are held if no candidate wins a majority.
Furthermore, as the Supreme Court held in ''Myers v. United States'', although the Senate's advice and consent is required for the appointment of certain executive branch officials, it is not necessary for their removal.
The presiding officer enforces the rules of the Senate, and may warn members who deviate from them.
Unanimous consent agreements are typically negotiated beforehand by party leaders.
In the 114th Congress, the most-senior "junior senator" is Barbara Boxer of California, who was sworn in on January 3, 1993 and is currently 11th in seniority, behind Dianne Feinstein who was sworn in on November 4, 1992 and is currently 10th in seniority.
Instead, quorum calls are generally used to temporarily delay proceedings; usually such delays are used while waiting for a senator to reach the floor to speak or to give leaders time to negotiate.
The Senate often votes by voice vote.
A hold may be placed for any reason and can be lifted by a senator at any time.
The vote is closed at the discretion of the presiding officer, but must remain open for a minimum of 15 minutes.
In September 2009, Massachusetts changed its law to enable the governor to appoint a temporary replacement for the late Senator Edward Kennedy until the special election in January 2010.
The proceedings remain sealed indefinitely until the Senate votes to remove the injunction of secrecy.
The "Majority party" is the political party that either has a majority of seats or can form a coalition or caucus with a majority of seats; if two or more parties are tied, the vice president's affiliation determines which party is the majority party.
The Constitution set the date for Congress to convene—Article 1, Section 4, Clause 2 originally set that date for the third day of December.
The latter identifies executive resolutions, treaties, and nominations reported out by Senate committee(s) and awaiting Senate floor action.
The Senate has also censured and condemned senators; censure requires only a simple majority and does not remove a senator from office.
The age and citizenship qualifications for senators are more stringent than those for representatives.
In practice, senators rarely request quorum calls to establish the presence of a quorum.
The length of these speeches is not limited by the rules; thus, in most cases, senators may speak for as long as they please.
The Twentieth Amendment, however, changed the opening date for sessions to noon on the third day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
Instead, they have usually presided only on ceremonial occasions, such as joint sessions, or at times to announce the result of significant legislation or nomination, or when a tie vote on an important issue is anticipated.
If a special election for one seat happens to coincide with a general election for the state's other seat, each seat is contested separately.
This convention does not have official significance, though it is a factor in the selection of physical offices.
All speeches must be addressed to the presiding officer, who is addressed as "Mr. President" or "Madam President", and not to another member; other Members must be referred to in the third person.
Historically, cloture has rarely been invoked because bipartisan support is usually necessary to obtain the required supermajority, so a bill that already has bipartisan support is rarely subject to threats of filibuster.
Furthermore, three senators (Warren Harding, John F. Kennedy, and Barack Obama) have been elected president while serving in the Senate, while only one Representative (James Garfield) has been elected president while serving in the House, though Garfield was also a Senator-elect at the time of his election to the Presidency, having been chosen by the Ohio Legislature to fill a Senate vacancy.
The winner is the candidate who receives a plurality of the popular vote.
The House of Representatives convenes in the south wing of the same building.
The recess appointment remains valid only temporarily; the office becomes vacant again at the end of the next congressional session.
Committee chairmen have less power and are generally more moderate and collegial in exercising it, than they were before reform.
In practice, however, the choice of members is made by the political parties.
If the vice president is not present, the motion fails.
This means some citizens are effectively two orders of magnitude better represented in the Senate than those in other states.
Under the Twelfth Amendment, the Senate has the power to elect the vice president if no vice presidential candidate receives a majority of votes in the Electoral College.
By custom, the leader of each party sits in the front row along the center aisle.
The rules of the Senate provide that no senator may make more than two speeches on a motion or bill on the same legislative day.
There was also a desire to have two Houses that could act as an internal check on each other.
Problems with repeated vacant seats due to the inability of a legislature to elect senators, intrastate political struggles, and even bribery and intimidation had gradually led to a growing movement to amend the Constitution to allow for the direct election of senators.
Legislation is referred to some of these committees, although the bulk of legislative work is performed by the standing committees.
In addition, the president sometimes withdraws nominations when they appear unlikely to be confirmed.
The composition and powers of the Senate are established in Article One of the U.S. Constitution.
Other joint committees serve to make advisory reports; for example, there exists a Joint Committee on Taxation.
Before the adoption of the Seventeenth Amendment in 1913, senators were elected by the individual state legislatures.
Thus, the presiding officer has little control over the course of debate.
Sessions of the Senate are opened with a special prayer or invocation and typically convene on weekdays.
The constitutional provision barring the Senate from introducing revenue bills is based on the practice of the British Parliament, in which only the House of Commons may originate such measures.
Because the 17th Amendment vests the power to grant that authority to the legislature&nbsp;– not the people or the state generally&nbsp;– it is unclear whether the ballot measure supplants the legislature's statute granting that authority.
(One resigned before the Senate could complete the trial.)
In practice, however, senators second requests for recorded votes as a matter of courtesy.
Senators who were not in the chamber when their name was called may still cast a vote so long as the voting remains open.
The president can make certain appointments only with the advice and consent of the Senate.
62, James Madison justified this arrangement by arguing that the "senatorial trust" called for a "greater extent of information and stability of character".
Such an occurrence, however, has not been repeated since.
The Senate commonly waives some of its stricter rules by unanimous consent.
According to the convention of Senate seniority, the senator with the longer tenure in each state is known as the "senior senator"; the other is the "junior senator".
Often, the Senate adopts unanimous consent agreements imposing time limits.
Like the House of Representatives, the Senate meets in the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. At one end of the chamber of the Senate is a dais from which the presiding officer presides.
As a result, it is uncertain whether an Alaska governor may appoint an interim senator to serve until a special election is held to fill the vacancy.
Under certain circumstances, the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 provides for a process called "reconciliation" by which Congress can pass bills related to the budget without those bills being subject to a filibuster.
Historically, the Senate has disputed the interpretation advocated by the House.
This has caused some news media to confuse the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster with the 51 votes needed to approve a bill, with for example USA Today erroneously stating "''The vote was 58-39 in favor of the provision establishing concealed carry permit reciprocity in the 48 states that have concealed weapons laws.
The Senate is widely considered both a more deliberative and more prestigious body than the House of Representatives, due to its longer terms, smaller size, and statewide constituencies, which historically led to a more collegial and less partisan atmosphere.
The Constitution authorizes the Senate to elect a president pro tempore (Latin for "president for a time") to preside in the vice president's absence; the most senior senator of the majority party is customarily chosen to serve in this position.
In most cases, senators do not refer to each other by name, but by state or position, using forms such as "the senior senator from Virginia", "the gentleman from California", or "my distinguished friend the Chairman of the Judiciary Committee".
Like the vice president, the president pro tempore does not normally preside over the Senate, but typically delegates the responsibility of presiding to junior senators of the majority party, usually in blocks of one hour on a rotating basis.
A convicted official is automatically removed from office; in addition, the Senate may stipulate that the defendant be banned from holding office.
Debate, like most other matters governing the internal functioning of the Senate, is governed by internal rules adopted by the Senate.
A senator may place a hold simply to review a bill, to negotiate changes to the bill, or to kill the bill.
The Senate may end a filibuster by invoking cloture.
The lower tier of the dais is used by clerks and other officials.
Such temporary committees cease to exist after fulfilling their tasks.
In 1934, Rush D. Holt, Sr. was elected to the Senate at the age of 29; he waited until he turned 30 (on the following June 19) to take the oath of office.
Committees may block nominees and impede bills from reaching the floor of the Senate.
Senators are regarded as more prominent political figures than members of the House of Representatives because there are fewer of them, and because they serve for longer terms, usually represent larger constituencies (the exception being House at-large districts, which similarly comprise entire states), sit on more committees, and have more staffers.
The powers of the Senate concerning nominations are, however, subject to some constraints.
No further punishment is permitted during the impeachment proceedings; however, the party may face criminal penalties in a normal court of law.
Each Senate committee and subcommittee is led by a chair (usually a member of the majority party).
A senator may disclose that he or she has placed a hold.
During a closed session, the chamber doors are closed, cameras are turned off, and the galleries are completely cleared of anyone not sworn to secrecy, not instructed in the rules of the closed session, or not essential to the session.
The Constitution provides that the approval of both chambers is necessary for the passage of legislation.
The Senate has several advice and consent powers not granted to the House, including consenting to treaties as a precondition to their ratification and consenting to or confirming appointments of Cabinet secretaries, federal judges, other federal executive officials, military officers, regulatory officials, ambassadors, and other federal uniformed officers, as well as trial of federal officials impeached by the House.
Floor leaders act as the party chief spokesmen.
As a result, the Senate does not have the power to initiate bills imposing taxes.
This was achieved by dividing the senators of the 1st Congress into thirds (called classes), where the terms of one-third expired after two years, the terms of another third expired after four, and the terms of the last third expired after six years.
The filibuster is a tactic used to defeat bills and motions by prolonging debate indefinitely.
Holds can be overcome, but require time-consuming procedures such as filing cloture.
The Constitution empowers the House of Representatives to impeach federal officials for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" and empowers the Senate to try such impeachments.
Senators serve terms of six years each; the terms are staggered so that approximately one-third of the seats are up for election every two years.
Holds are considered private communications between a senator and the Leader, and are sometimes referred to as "secret holds".
A senator elected in a special election takes office as soon as possible after the election and serves until the original six-year term expires (i.e.
If the sitting President of the United States is being tried, the Chief Justice of the United States presides over the trial.
The starting amount of a senator's retirement annuity may not exceed 80% of their final salary.
Bills and nominees are not referred to joint committees.
Officials whose appointments require the Senate's approval include members of the Cabinet, heads of most federal executive agencies, ambassadors, Justices of the Supreme Court, and other federal judges.
Senators are covered by the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS) or Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS).
The Congress includes joint committees, which include members from both the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Each senator chooses a desk based on seniority within the party.
If the Senate does not approve release of a secret transcript, the transcript is stored in the Office of Senate Security and ultimately sent to the national archives.
Nevertheless, presidents have frequently used recess appointments to circumvent the possibility that the Senate may reject the nominee.
Each state, regardless of population, is represented by two senators who serve staggered six-year terms.
The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote.
In 1837, it elected Richard Mentor Johnson.
Article 1, Section 3 provides that the President has the power to convene Congress on extraordinary occasions at his discretion.
A senator may block such an agreement, but in practice, objections are rare.
The Twelfth Amendment requires the Senate to choose from the two candidates with the highest numbers of electoral votes.
The Senate's chief administrative officer is the Secretary of the Senate, who maintains public records, disburses salaries, monitors the acquisition of stationery and supplies, and oversees clerks.
Each party elects Senate party leaders.
In thirty-seven of these states, the special election to permanently fill the U.S. Senate seat is customarily held at the next biennial congressional election.
Seats in the House of Representatives are approximately proportionate to the population of each state, reducing the disparity of representation.
This last role was particularly important in mid-century, when floor amendments were thought not to be collegial.
The Constitution stipulates that no constitutional amendment may be created to deprive a state of its equal suffrage in the Senate without that state's consent.
Oregon, Wisconsin and Oklahoma require special elections for vacancies with no interim appointment.
A bill can be held for as long as the senator who objects to the bill wishes to block its consideration.
If the Senate invokes cloture, debate does not end immediately; instead, it is limited to 2 additional hours unless increased by another three-fifths vote.
