Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with others in Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible Soviet attack.
The key battles of the Spanish–American War of 1898 were fought by the Navy.
By the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S.
The U.S. victory resulted in acquisition of territory that eventually became all or parts of the states of California, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Arizona, Wyoming and New Mexico.
Two corps, V and VII, were reactivated under Seventh United States Army in 1950 and American strength in Europe rose from one division to four.
In 1986, the Goldwater–Nichols Act mandated that operational control of the services follows a chain of command from the President to the Secretary of Defense directly to the unified combatant commanders, who have control of all armed forces units in their geographic or function area of responsibility.
troops led by former U.S. Army officers, mobilized a very large fraction of Southern white manpower.
The War of 1812, the second and last American war against Great Britain was a mixed success.
Two weeks after a treaty was signed (but not ratified), Andrew Jackson defeated the British in the Battle of New Orleans and became a national hero.
Its eastern armies fought well, but the western armies were defeated one after another until the Union forces captured New Orleans in 1862 along with the Tennessee River.
In response to the September 11 attacks, and as part of the Global War on Terror, U.S. and NATO forces invaded Afghanistan in October 2001, displacing the Taliban government.
Using mostly new volunteers, the U.S. Army defeated Spain in land campaigns in Cuba and played the central role in suppressing a rebellion in the Philippines.
16th ROK Army Brigade (''soon to be included in structure''), CAB at Camp Humphreys South Korea
As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions, the three major types of ground combat brigades are:
1st, 2nd & 3rd Infantry BCTs (Air Assault), DIVARTY & CAB.
Volunteers on four separate occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century.
The service participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force.
In January 1991 Operation Desert Storm commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to drive out Iraqi forces.
In 1990 Iraq invaded its smaller neighbor, Kuwait, and U.S. land forces, quickly deployed to assure the protection of Saudi Arabia.
Following the Civil War, the U.S. Army had the mission of containing western tribes of Native Americans on their reservations.
The war remains the deadliest conflict in American history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 soldiers.
The length of AIT school varies by the MOS The length of time spent in AIT depends on the MOS of the soldier, and some highly technical MOS training may require many months (e.g., foreign language translators).
The M240 is the US Army's standard Medium Machine Gun.
It is one of the seven uniformed services of the United States and is designated as the Army of the United States in the United States Constitution, Article 2, Section 2, Clause 1 and United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle B, Chapter 301, Section 3001.
Basic training consists of 10&nbsp;weeks for most recruits followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they receive training for their military occupational specialties (MOS).
Direct reporting units
States also maintained full-time militias which could also be called into the service of the army.
1st, 2nd Infantry BCTs (Light), DIVARTY & CAB at Fort Drum; 3rd Infantry BCT (Light) at Fort Polk, Louisiana.
The army is also divided into major branches such as Air Defense Artillery, Infantry, Aviation, Signal Corps, Corps of Engineers, and Armor.
1st Stryker BCT at Fort Wainwright, Alaska; 2nd Stryker BCT, 3rd Infantry BCT (Light) & DIVARTY at Schofield Barracks; CAB at Wheeler Army Airfield, Hawaii; & 4th Infantry BCT (Airborne) at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, Alaska.
Starting in 1910, the army began acquiring fixed-wing aircraft.
The most common tent uses for the military are as temporary barracks (sleeping quarters), DFAC buildings (dining facilities), forward operating bases (FOBs), after action review (AAR), tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare, and recreation (MWR) facilities, and security checkpoints.
The most common weapons used by the army are the compact variant of the M16 rifle, the M4 carbine, as well as the 7.62×51mm variant of the FN SCAR for Army Rangers.
The force is in the process of contracting after several years of growth.
Fort Carson, Colorado
Combat service support brigades include sustainment brigades and come in several varieties and serve the standard support role in an army.
While the United States Army Aviation Branch operates a few fixed-wing aircraft, it mainly operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft.
Further career development is available through the Army Correspondence Course Program.
It took long wars (1818–58) to finally defeat the Seminoles and move them to Oklahoma.
Army Chief of Staff Raymond Odierno has projected that by 2018 the Army will eventually shrink to "450,000 in the active component, 335,000 in the National Guard and 195,000 in U.S. Army Reserve."
The United States joined World War I in 1917 on the side of Britain, France, Russia, Italy and other allies.
The AT4 is an unguided projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500 meters.
The Army of the United States was re-established for the Korean War and Vietnam War and was demobilized upon the suspension of the draft.
At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are typically supported by a section of 81&nbsp;mm M252 mortars.
In the following years the mission changed from conflict between regular militaries to counterinsurgency, resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S service members (as of March 2008) and injuries to thousands more.
Many systems were canceled and the remaining were swept into the BCT modernization program.
'''Regular combat maneuver units aligned under FORSCOM's corps:'''
Many units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons, including the M249 SAW (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive fire at the fire-team level.
In 2008, DRASH became part of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.
* United States Army Europe headquartered at Clay Kaserne, Wiesbaden, Germany
In the same way, the 40&nbsp;mm MK 19 grenade machine gun is mainly used by motorized units.
The campaign ended in total victory, as Western coalition forces routed the Iraqi Army, organized along Soviet lines, in just one hundred hours.
The standard garrison service uniform is the Army Service Uniform, which functions as both a garrison uniform (when worn with a white shirt and necktie) and a dress uniform (when worn with a white shirt and either a necktie for parades or a bow tie for after six or black tie events).
Restructuring plans call for reduction of 750 aircraft and from 7 to 4 types.
During the Cold War, American troops and their allies fought Communist forces in Korea and Vietnam.
While the Army National Guard is organized, trained and equipped as a component of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the command of individual state and territorial governors; the District of Columbia National Guard, however, reports to the U.S. President, not the district's mayor, even when not federalized.
¹ PVT is also used as an abbreviation for both private ranks when pay grade need not be distinguished.²  SP4 is sometimes encountered instead of SPC for specialist.
* United States Army Central headquartered at Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina
In 1941, the "Army of the United States" was founded to fight World War II.
The army also played a role in the invasions of Grenada in 1983 (Operation Urgent Fury) and Panama in 1989 (Operation Just Cause).
1st Stryker BCT, 2nd Infantry BCT (Light), 3rd Armored BCT, DIVARTY & CAB.
* United States Army North headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas
After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into the United States Army Reserve.
The U.S. Army's principal artillery weapons are the M109A6 Paladin self-propelled howitzer and the M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS), both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy mechanized units.
For the first two years Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states.
* Armored brigades, with strength of 4,743 troops as of 2014.
The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all psychological operations and civil affairs units.
In response to Budget sequestration in 2013 the army is planned to shrink to a size not seen since the WWII buildup.
Other vehicles include the Stryker, and the M113 armored personnel carrier, and multiple types of Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicles.
It served as the primary source for ground forces with its ability to sustain short and long-term deployment operations.
These include the AH-64 Apache attack helicopter, the OH-58D Kiowa Warrior armed reconnaissance/light attack helicopter, the UH-60 Black Hawk utility tactical transport helicopter, and the CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift transport helicopter.
Indirect fire is provided by the M203 grenade launcher.
The regular army, however, proved they were professional and capable of defeating the British army during the invasions of Plattsburgh and Baltimore, prompting British agreement on the previously rejected terms of a status quo ante bellum.
In 1910, Mexico was having a civil war, peasant rebels fighting government soldiers.
The U.S. Army fought and won the Mexican–American War (1846–1848), which was a defining event for both countries.
The end of World War II set the stage for the East–West confrontation known as the Cold War.
''For a description of US Army tactical organizational structure, see: a US context, and also a  global context.''
With a decisive victory at Yorktown, and the help of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.
The army was deployed to American towns near the border to ensure safety to lives and property.
The Regular Army was at first very small, and after General St. Clair's defeat at the Battle of the Wabash, the Regular Army was reorganized as the Legion of the United States, which was established in 1791 and renamed the "United States Army" in 1796.
1st, 2nd, & 3rd Armored BCTs, DIVARTY & CAB.
During the 1960s the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.
In the famous Vicksburg Campaign of 1862–63, Ulysses Grant seized the Mississippi River and cut off the Southwest.
Per the treaty both sides returned to the geographical status quo.
Currently, the army is divided into the Regular Army, the Army Reserve, and the Army National Guard.
Thousands of other MRAPs like the Cougar, BAE Caiman, and larger MaxxPros will be disposed of.
The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the Humvee, which is capable of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform, and ambulance, among many other roles.
These are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their equivalent NATO designations.
Although no living officer currently holds the rank of General of the Army, it is still authorized by Congress for use in wartime.
1st Stryker BCT, 2nd & 3rd Armored BCTs, DIVARTY and Combat Aviation Brigade (CAB).
* Infantry brigades, with strength of 4,413 troops as of 2014.
The United States Army considers itself descended from the Continental Army, and dates its institutional inception from the origin of that armed force in 1775.
After most slave states, located in the southern U.S., formed the Confederate States, C.S.
The M1014 Joint Service Combat Shotgun or the Mossberg 590 Shotgun are used for door breaching and close-quarters combat.
;Crew served weapons
'''Regular combat maneuver units aligned under other organizations:'''
Under the proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base.
With the outbreak of the Korean War, concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose.
The Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the Continental Congress as a unified army for the colonies to fight Great Britain, with George Washington appointed as its commander.
Furthermore, most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of Natick Soldier Systems Center.
The army converted to an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training and technology.
Stryker BCT: 6 squadrons: 1st, 2nd & 3rd (Stryker Infantry), 4th (RSTA), Fires Squadron (3×6 155&nbsp;mm towed artillery), & Regimental Support Squadron; 5 troops: Regimental HQ, Military Intelligence, Signal, Engineer & Anti-Armor.
Following ending victories in the province of Upper Canada, which dubbed the U.S. Army "Regulars, by God!
The usual strategy in Indian wars was to seize control of the Indians' winter food supply, but that was no use in Florida where there was no winter.
As the Revolutionary War progressed, French aid, resources, and military thinking influenced the new army.
The primary sidearm in the U.S. Army is the 9&nbsp;mm M9 pistol; the M11 pistol is also used.
Since the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role in U.S. military operations.
Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades that carry their divisional lineage.
Location of headquarters
U.S. Army troops also occupied several Southern states during the Reconstruction Era to protect freedmen.
Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools.
1st & 2nd Armored BCTs, DIVARTY & CAB.
The army's major campaign against the Indians was fought in Florida against Seminoles.
No reduction, however, in total Army National Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to accept the plan.
Under a United Nations umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of South Korea by North Korea, and later, to invade the northern nation.
Under the Johnson-McConnell agreement of 1966, the Army agreed to limit its fixed-wing aviation role to administrative mission support (light unarmed aircraft which cannot operate from forward positions).
Fort Bragg, North Carolina
The army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.
", British troops were able to capture and burn Washington which was defended by militia.
As a uniformed military service, the Army is part of the Department of the Army, which is one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense.
Both handguns are to be replaced through the Modular Handgun System program.
Of the total number of vehicles the Army will keep, 5,036 will be put in storage, 1,073 will be used for training, and the remainder will be spread across the active force.
For example, Reserve and Guard units took part in the Gulf War, peacekeeping in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
The smallest of these is the 60&nbsp;mm M224, normally assigned at the infantry company level.
Any or all of the National Guard can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor's wishes.
There were many forts set up, and several campaigns.
State militias became the new nation's sole ground army, with the exception of a regiment to guard the Western Frontier and one battery of artillery guarding West Point's arsenal.
The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and acquisition changed from $32 billion projected in 2012 for FY15, to $21 billion for FY15 expected in 2014.
The Chief of Staff of the Army, who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive agent for the Secretary of the Army, i.e., its service chief; and as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a body composed of the service chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the Department of Defense who advise the President of the United States, the Secretary of Defense, and the National Security Council on operational military matters, under the guidance of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Camp Red Cloud, South Korea
Following the Axis surrenders in May (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the "career" soldiers were known as the "Regular Army" with the "Enlisted Reserve Corps" and "Officer Reserve Corps" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.
It was demobilized at the end of World War I, and was replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps, and the State Militias.
In the first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent forts and perform other non-wartime duties such as engineering and construction works.
After years of complaints that it wasn't suited well for most work conditions, Army Chief of Staff General Martin Dempsey eliminated it for wear with the ACU in June 2011.
The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river systems.
Some individuals MOSs range anywhere from 14–20 weeks of One Station Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT.
During World War I, the "National Army" was organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S.
Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them.
The U.S. Army currently consists of 10 active divisions as well as several independent units.
As a branch of the armed forces, the mission of the U.S. Army is "to fight and win our Nation's wars, by providing prompt, sustained, land dominance, across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict, in support of combatant commanders."
Fort Drum, New York
Collective training at the unit level takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the most intensive training at higher echelons is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC); the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin, California, the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) at Fort Polk, Louisiana, and the Joint Multinational Training Center (JMRC) at the  Hohenfels Training Area in Hohenfels, Germany.
They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918.
Also, in 1948, the army was desegregated by order of President Harry S. Truman.
After the war, though, the Continental Army was quickly given land certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the republican distrust of standing armies.
23,813 insurgents were killed in Iraq between 2003–2011.
With the armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.
The task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775.
Soldiers are also equipped with various hand grenades, such as the M67 fragmentation grenade and M18 smoke grenade.
In addition, there are combat support and service support modular brigades.
ARFORGEN is the Army Force Generation process approved in 2006 to meet the need to continuously replenish forces for deployment, at unit level, and for other echelons as required by the mission.
Caserma Ederle, Vicenza, Italy
After the taking control of Lake Erie in 1813, the Americans were able to seize parts of western Upper Canada, burn York and defeat Tecumseh, which caused his Indian Confederacy to collapse.
By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000.
The US Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability.
As the largest and senior branch of the U.S. military, the modern U.S. Army has its roots in the Continental Army, which was formed (14 June 1775) to fight the American Revolutionary War (1775–83)—before the U.S. was established as a country.
In 1990 the Department of Defense issued guidance for "rebalancing" after a review of the Total Force Policy, but in 2004, Air War College scholars concluded the guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an "essential ingredient to the successful application of military force."
The U.S. Army's black beret is no longer worn with the new ACU for garrison duty, having been permanently replaced with the patrol cap.
However, because of continuing conflict with Native Americans, it was soon realized that it was necessary to field a trained standing army.
The Pentagon bought 25,000 MRAP vehicles since 2007 in 25 variants through rapid acquisition with no long-term plans for the platforms.
The 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization.
In November 2012, the United States Army developed a tactical 3D printing capability to allow it to rapidly manufacture critical components on the battlefield.
The United States Army is made up of three components: the active component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.
The Army did not conquer Canada but it did destroy the Indian threat to expansion in the Midwest, and it validated American independence by stopping two major British invasions in 1814 and 1815.
Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength.
Schofield Barracks, Hawaii
Training in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories – individual and collective.
In June 2013, the Army announced plans to downsize to 32 active combat brigade teams by 2015 to match a reduction in active duty strength to 490,000 soldiers.
Fire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers, including the 105&nbsp;mm M119A1 and the 155&nbsp;mm M777 (which will replace the M198).
This is a holdover from when there were additional specialist ranks at pay grades E-5 to E-7.
The army is also changing its base unit from divisions to brigades.
The central part of this plan is that each brigade will be modular, i.e., all brigades of the same type will be exactly the same, and thus any brigade can be commanded by any division.
Washington led victories against the British at Trenton and Princeton, but lost a series of battles around New York City in 1776 and Philadelphia in 1777.
The '''United States Army''' ('''USA''') is the largest branch of the United States Armed Forces and performs land-based military operations.
On a tactical level, American soldiers (and the U.S. military as a whole) did not lose a sizable battle.
* Stryker brigades, with strength of 4,500 troops as of 2014.
Within the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve there are a further eight divisions, over fifteen maneuver brigades, additional combat support and combat service support brigades, and independent cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer, and support battalions.
For example, a combat medic, whose duties are to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist, or even a licensed practical nurse.
* United States Army Africa headquartered at Vicenza, Italy
The U.S. Army also led the combined U.S. and allied invasion of Iraq in 2003.
1st Armored, 2nd Infantry BCT (Light), & DIVARTY at Fort Stewart, Georgia; CAB at Hunter Army Airfield, Georgia.
On D-Day, June 6, 1944, and in the subsequent liberation of Europe and defeat of Nazi Germany, millions of U.S. Army troops played a central role.
Fort Stewart, Georgia
Following their basic and advanced training at the individual-level, soldiers may choose to continue their training and apply for an "additional skill identifier" (ASI).
For commissioned officers, ASI training includes pre-commissioning training either at USMA, or via ROTC, or by completing OCS.
The U.S. Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the deployable rapid assembly shelter or DRASH.
U.S. soldiers still wear berets who are currently in a unit in jump status, whether the wearer is parachute-qualified, or not (maroon beret), Members of the 75th Ranger Regiment and the Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade  (tan beret), and Special Forces (rifle green beret) and may wear it with the Army Service Uniform for non-ceremonial functions.
The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant, the Secretary of the Army (SECARMY), and by a chief military officer, the Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) who is also a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles.
Elite special operations & counter-terrorism unit under the control of Joint Special Operations Command.
Thus, the secretaries of the military departments (and their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components.
Through 2013, the army is shifting to six geographical commands that will line up with the six geographical unified combatant commands (COCOM):
Before 1903 members of the National Guard were considered state soldiers unless federalized (i.e., activated) by the President.
After commissioning, officers undergo branch specific training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course, (formerly called Officer Basic Course), which varies in time and location according their future assignments.
During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much larger United States Volunteers which were raised independently by various state governments.
U.S. troops were sent to the Western Front and were involved in the last offensives that ended the war.
In 1967 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard were unnecessary and cut the number to 8 divisions (1 mechanized infantry, 2 armored, and 5 infantry), but increased the number of brigades from 7 to 18 (1 airborne, 1 armored, 2 mechanized infantry, and 14 infantry).
On the European front, U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that captured North Africa and Sicily, and later fought in Italy.
The M2 heavy machine gun is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun.
