On Thursday, April 15, 2010, the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform held a hearing to examine the status of the Postal Service and recent reports on short and long term strategies for the financial viability and stability of the USPS entitled "Continuing to Deliver: An Examination of the Postal Service's Current Financial Crisis and its Future Viability."
These services also deliver packages which are larger and heavier than USPS will accept.
Undeliverable mail that cannot be readily returned, including mail without return addresses, is treated as dead mail at a Mail Recovery Center in Atlanta, Georgia or Saint Paul, Minnesota.
A ZIP+4 code will facilitate delivery.
In 1891, the first experiments with Rural Free Delivery began in less densely populated areas.
In 2013, the Postal Service announced that starting August 2013, Saturday delivery would be discontinued.
The evaluated hours are created by having all mail counted for a period of two or four weeks, and a formula used to create the set dollar amount they will be paid for each day worked until the next time the route is counted.
The United States Postal Service would rank 29th on the 2010 Fortune 500 list, if considered a private company.
The half percent difference in interest was intended to pay for the operation of the system.
(CCA's) With the Das Arbitration award the designation of PTF City Carrier has been abolished.
The Postal Service also has a Mailers' Technical Advisory Committee and local Postal Customer Councils, which are advisory and primarily involve business customers.
The fleet is notable in that many of its vehicles are right-hand drive, an arrangement intended to give drivers the easiest access to roadside mailboxes.
CCA's earn annual leave.
In February 2013, the USPS announced that in order to save about $2 billion per year, Saturday delivery service would be discontinued except for packages, mail-order medicines, Priority Mail, Express Mail, and mail delivered to Post Office boxes, beginning August 10, 2013.
Also monitoring foreign mail and acting as counter-espionage to help secure allied victory.
It also corrects spelling errors and, where there is an error, omission, or conflict in the written address, identifies the most likely correct address.
Mail routes are outfitted with a number of scanpoints (mailbox barcodes) on random streets every 30 to 40 minutes apart to keep track of the Carriers' whereabouts up until the last 5 minutes of any given workday.
Mail from individual customers and public postboxes is collected by mail carriers into plastic tubs, which are taken to one of approximately 251 '''Processing and Distribution Centers''' ('''P&DC''') across the United States.
Post offices and mail facilities are constantly downsizing, replacing craft positions with new machines and consolidating mail routes through the MIARAP (Modified Interim Alternate Route Adjustment Process) agreement.
Delivery Point Validation (DPV) provides the highest level of address accuracy checking.
Processed mail is imaged by the Mail Isolation Control and Tracking (MICT) system to allow easier tracking of hazardous substances.
After four-year-old Charlotte May Pierstorff was mailed from her parents to her grandparents in Idaho in 1914, mailing of people was prohibited.
The United States Postal Service Office of Inspector General (OIG) was authorized by law in 1996.
The nine appointed members then select the United States Postmaster General, who serves as the board's tenth member, and who oversees the day-to-day activities of the service as Chief Executive Officer (see ).
To resolve those issues, one economist proposes a cost-allocation model that would determine the optimal allocation of USPS's common costs by finding the share of costs that would maximize USPS profits from its competitive products.
Most of the mail went back and forth to counting houses and government offices in London.
On October 15, 2008, the Postal Service submitted a report to the PRC on its position related to the Universal Service Obligation (USO).
Military mail is billed at domestic rates when being sent from the United States to a military outpost, and is free when sent by deployed military personnel.
The U.S. Mail traces its roots to 1775 during the Second Continental Congress, where Benjamin Franklin was appointed the first postmaster general.
For some stamps issued without a printed value, the current value is the original value.
During 1918, the Post Office hired an additional 36 pilots.
In 2012, the USPS had its fifth straight annual operating loss, in the amount of $15.7 billion, of which $11.1 billion was the accrual of unpaid mandatory retiree health payments.
Of those, 53 were due to weather and 37 to engine failure.
The chief office was established in New York City, where letters were conveyed by regular packets across the Atlantic.
The changes are a result of the declining volumes of single-piece First-Class Mail, population shifts, the increase in drop shipments by advertising mailers at destinating postal facilities, advancements in equipment and technology, redundancies in the existing network, and the need for operational flexibility.
* The associated states are integrated into the USPS addressing and ZIP code system.
The advent of Rural Free Delivery (RFD) in the U.S. in 1896, and the inauguration of a domestic parcel post service by Postmaster General Frank H. Hitchcock in 1913, greatly increased the volume of mail shipped nationwide, and motivated the development of more efficient postal transportation systems.
The card could be used to open or add to an account when its value, together with any attached stamps, amounted to one or more dollars, or it could be redeemed for cash.
This provides a locked box at the post office to which mail is addressed and delivered (usually earlier in the day than home delivery).
The USPS Commission on a Safe and Secure Workplace found that "Postal workers are only a third as likely as those in the national workforce to be victims of homicide at work."
In October 2008, the Postal Service released ''Vision 2013'', a five-year plan required by law starting in 1993.
Finally, postage (e.g., stamps, meter imprints, information-based indicia IBI, etc.)
The overseas logistics are handled by the Military Postal Service Agency in the Department of Defense.
:Line 3: City, State (ISO 3166-2:US code or APO/FPO code) and ZIP+4 code
He was fortunate in meeting several outward-bound trains, and thereby made frequent changes of horses, some four or five, and reached Independence in six days, having hardly rested or slept the whole way."
Other non-managerial positions in the USPS include:
The meter stamp serves as proof of payment and eliminates the need for adhesive stamps.
In 2016, a video footage was released showing a group of police officers from the New York City Police Department (NYPD) arresting a US Postal Service officer while he was in the middle of his deliveries.
Customers can look up ZIP codes and verify addresses using USPS Web Tools available on the official USPS website and Facebook page, as well as on third-party sites.
In 2010, there will be just two remaining RECs open, in Salt Lake City, Utah and Wichita, Kansas.
Originally, mail was not delivered to homes and businesses, but to post offices.
In February 2013, the Postal Service announced that on Saturdays it would only deliver packages, mail-order medicines, Priority Mail, and Express Mail, effective August 10, 2013.
It is one of the few government agencies explicitly authorized by the United States Constitution.
Mail with typed addresses goes to a Multiline Optical Character Reader (MLOCR) which reads the ZIP Code and address information and prints the appropriate bar code onto the envelope.
The report argued that eliminating or reducing either aspect of the monopoly "would have a devastating impact on the ability...to provide the affordable universal service that the country values so highly."
On August 12, 1918, the Post Office Department took over airmail service from the United States Army Air Service (USAAS).
This required streets to be named, houses to be numbered, with sidewalks and lighting provided, and these street addresses to be added to envelopes.
(The USPS calls these "Forever Stamps".
Some Rural Letter Carriers use personal vehicles.
Although USPS and FedEx are direct competitors, USPS contracts with FedEx for air transport of Priority and Express Priority Mail.
At its peak in 1947, the system held almost $3.4 billion in deposits, with more than four million depositors using 8,141 postal units.
Customers can deliver their messages either by paying postage, by placing messages on or under a door or a doormat, by using newspaper or non-postal boxes, by telephoning or emailing, by engaging in person-to-person delivery in public areas, by tacking or taping their notices on a door post, or by placing advertisements in local newspapers.
Postal money orders provide a safe alternative to sending cash through the mail, and are available in any amount up to $1000.
Rufus Easton was the first postmaster and built the first post office west of the Mississippi.
Various representatives in Congress protested, and the Senate passed a bill that would have kept open all post offices further than 10 miles from the next office.
An Act of Congress provided for the issuance of stamps on March 3, 1847, and the Postmaster General immediately let a contract to the New York City engraving firm of Rawdon, Wright, Hatch, and Edson.
The government, however, declined, and mail was delivered 7 days a week until 1912.
The contracts change periodically.
In 1828, local religious leaders noticed a decline in Sunday-morning church attendance because of local post offices' doubling as gathering places.
The USPS has exclusive access to letter boxes marked "U.S. Mail" and personal letterboxes in the United States, but still competes against private package delivery services, such as the United Parcel Service (UPS) and has part use with FedEx Express.
Rates of postage were fixed and authorized, and measures were taken to establish a post office in each town in Virginia.
When excess City Carrier positions exist the CCA in that work installation with the highest "relative standing" will be promoted to a career employee and be assigned to the vacant position.
These series of events in turn has influenced American culture, as seen in the slang term "going postal" (see Patrick Sherrill for information on his August 20, 1986, rampage) and the computer game ''Postal''.
This ranged from twice for residential areas to up to seven times for the central business district of Brooklyn, New York.
If a local postal worker can read the address, he or she manually sorts it out according to the ZIP code on the article.
* '''Clerks''', have a dual function by design of where their assignment is.
Benjamin Franklin headed it briefly.
The Postal Service is the nation's second-largest civilian employer.
However, Postmaster General Potter continued to advance plans to eliminate Saturday mail delivery.
In ''The Simpsons'' episode "Sunday, Cruddy Sunday," Nelson Muntz asks Postmaster Bill if he has "ever gone on a killing spree"; Bill replies, "The day of the gun-toting, disgruntled postman shooting up the place went out with the Macarena".
* '''Mail carriers''', also referred to as mailmen or letter carriers, prepare and deliver mail and parcels.
A central postal organization came to the colonies in 1691, when Thomas Neale received a 21-year grant from the British Crown for a '''North American Postal Service'''.
Customers in less densely populated areas where there is no city delivery and who do not qualify for rural delivery may receive mail only through post office boxes.
In 1806 Postmaster General Gideon Granger wrote a three-page letter to Easton, begging him not to partake in a duel with vice-president Aaron Burr.
The USPS is often mistaken for a government-owned corporation (e.g., Amtrak) because it operates much like a business.
:Line 1: Name of recipient
shipped within the United States must comply with an array of standards published in the USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM).
Mail''', or '''Postal Service'''), is an independent agency of the United States government responsible for providing postal service in the United States.
Labor unions representing USPS employees include: The American Postal Workers Union (APWU), which represents postal clerks and maintenance, motor vehicle, mail equipment shops, material distribution centers, and operating services and facilities services employees, postal nurses, and IT and accounting; the National Association of Letter Carriers (NALC), which represents city letter carriers; the National Rural Letter Carriers' Association (NRLCA), which represents rural letter carriers; and the National Postal Mail Handlers Union (NPMHU).
With "curbside delivery", mailboxes are at the ends of driveways, on the nearest convenient road.
On June 10, 2009, the National Rural Letter Carriers' Association (NRLCA) was contacted for its input on the USPS's current study of the effect of five-day delivery along with developing an implementation plan for a five-day service plan.
The address data is associated with the image via an ID Tag, a fluorescent barcode printed by mail processing equipment on the back of mail pieces.
In 1863, "city delivery" began in urban areas with enough customers to make this economical.
22, addressing this issue, passed the House of Representatives and Senate and was signed into law on September 30, 2009.
Instead, rural post offices would remain open with reduced retail hours (some as little as two hours per day) unless there was a community preference for a different option.
Beginning in August 2007, the Postal Service began requiring mailers shipping Parcel Select packages using a permit imprint to use eVS for manifesting their packages.
The mission of the Postal Service is to provide the American public with trusted universal postal service.
It should be noted that any stamp/indicia partly concealed or otherwise obscured by an overlapping stamp/indicia may not be counted as valid postage.
:Line 2: Street address or P.O.
The National Labor Relations Board agreed to hear the American Postal Workers Union's arguments that these counters should be manned by postal employees who earn far more and have "a generous package of health and retirement benefits".
The USPS provides much of this service by contracting with a private parcel service, FedEx.
Each P&DC sort mails for a given region (typically with a radius of around ) and connects with the national network for interregional mail.
The USPS does not offer DPV validation on their website however there are companies that offer services to perform DPV verification.
This is projected to raise approximately $50 million per year.
The Post Office was one of the first government departments to regulate obscene materials on a national basis.
The international mailing classes with a tracking ability are Express, Express Guaranteed, and Priority (except that tracking is not available for Priority Mail International Flat Rate Envelopes or Priority Mail International Small Flat Rate Boxes).
Comprehensive reform packages considered in the 113th Congress include S.1486 and H.R.2748.
FedEx provides the air transport service for Priority and Express Mail.
By 1920, the Air Mail service had delivered 49 million letters.
According to an official report on November 15, 2012, the U.S.
via secure Internet-type feeds and manually type the addresses they can decipher, using a special encoding protocol.
Priority Mail and Express Mail are transported from Priority Mail processing centers to the airport where they are handed off to FedEx.
Preferred placement of a return address is in the upper left portion of the mailpiece—on the side of the piece bearing postage.
When the U.S. Congress passed the Comstock laws of 1873, it became illegal to send through the U.S. mail any material considered obscene or indecent, or which promoted abortion issues, birth control, or alcohol consumption.
This will close down 252 of its 461 processing centers.
The '''United States Postal Service''' ('''USPS'''), (also known as the '''Post Office''', '''U.S.
Large commercial mailers can still have first-class mail delivered overnight if delivered directly to a processing center in the early morning, though as of 2014 this represented only 11% of first-class mail.
Bruce Adamson wrote that: "Next to Benjamin Franklin, Rufus Easton was one of the most colorful people in United States Postal History."
For every penny increase in the national average price of gasoline, the USPS spends an extra $8&nbsp;million per year to fuel its fleet.
Due to the postal monopoly, they are not allowed to deliver non-urgent letters and may not directly ship to U.S. Mail boxes at residential and commercial destinations.
In its first year of operation, the Post Office completed 1,208 airmail flights with 90 forced landings.
* '''City Carrier Assistants'''.
The Revolution made Philadelphia, the seat of the Continental Congress, the information hub of the new nation.
Congress has limited rate increases for First-Class Mail to the cost of inflation, unless approved by the Postal Regulatory Commission.
Mail handlers and Clerks are represented by the NPMHU and the APWU respectively.
The NYPD is reportedly investigating alleged disorderly conduct.
The Department of Defense and the USPS jointly operate a postal system to deliver mail for the military; this is known as the '''Army Post Office''' (for Army and Air Force postal facilities) and the '''Fleet Post Office''' (for Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard postal facilities).
The same year, the Pacific Mail Steamship Company had acquired the right to transport mail under contract from the United States Government from the Isthmus of Panama to California.
Additionally, machines with a recent Optical Character Recognition (OCR) upgrade have the capability to read the address information, including handwritten, and sort the mail based on local or outgoing ZIP codes.
Some proponents of universal service principles suggest that private communications that are protected by the veil of government promote the exchange of free ideas and communications.
Three independent countries with a Compact of Free Association with the U.S. (Palau, the Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia) have a special relationship with the United States Postal Service:
The postal service likewise assisted the Army in expanding control over the vast western territories.
Global Express is now Express Mail International, while Global Express Guaranteed is unchanged.
* '''Career, Part Time Flexible and Transitional employees''' (Career, PTF & TE) There are a variety of other non-managerial positions in such crafts as accounting, information technology, and the remote encoding center.
On September 30, 2014, the USPS failed to make a $5.7 billion payment on this debt, the fourth such default.
News, new laws, political  intelligence, and military orders circulated with a new urgency, and a postal system was necessary.
However, this change was reversed by federal law in the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2013.
By 1990, the last twice-daily deliveries in New York City were eliminated.
Journalists took the lead, securing post office legislation that allowed them to reach their subscribers at very low cost, and to exchange news from newspapers between the thirteen states.
The United States Postal Service played a role during World War I, enacting the Espionage and Trading with the Enemy Acts.
The official post office was created in 1792 as the Post Office Department (USPOD).
Contract airlines have included: UPS, Emery Worldwide, Ryan International Airlines, FedEx Express, American Airlines, United Airlines, and Express One International.
The ''United States Post Office'' (USPO) was created on July 26, 1775, by decree of the Second Continental Congress.
These methods are comparable in efficacy to communication via the mailbox.''
Priority Mail International Flat-Rate packaging in various sizes was introduced, with the same conditions of service previously used for Global Priority.
In 1816 it employed 3341 men, and in 1841, 14,290.
In July 2011, the USPS announced a plan to close about 3,700 small post offices.
Postal Service lost $15.9 billion its 2012 fiscal year.
It is seen by some as a dangerous step to extract the universal service principle from the post office, as the untainted nature of private communications is preserved as assurance of the protection of individual freedom of privacy.
The ten-member board then nominates a Deputy Postmaster General, who acts as Chief Operating Officer, to the eleventh and last remaining open seat.
The Post Office Department was enlarged during the tenure of President Andrew Jackson.
In the early 1990s, widely publicized workplace shootings by disgruntled employees at USPS facilities led to a Human Resource effort to provide care for stressed workers and resources for coworker conflicts.
Since its introduction, APCs do not take cash payments - they only accept credit or debit cards.
The U.S. Supreme Court has also upheld the USPS's statutory monopoly on access to letter boxes against a First Amendment freedom of speech challenge; it thus remains illegal in the U.S. for ''anyone'', other than the employees and agents of the USPS, to deliver mailpieces to letter boxes marked "U.S.
Free mail delivery began in the larger cities in 1863.
One of Lipsner's first acts was to hire four pilots, each with at least 1,000 hours flying experience, paying them an average of $4,000 per year ($ today).
It oversees postal rates and related concerns, having the authority to approve or reject USPS proposals.
It is by geography and volume the globe's largest postal system, delivering 40% of the world's mail.
The former Airmail (Letter Post) is now First-Class Mail International, and includes small packages weighing up to four pounds (1.8&nbsp;kg).
, it employed 574,000 personnel, divided into offices, processing centers, and actual post offices.
This would save $4.5 billion per year out of the $30 billion delivery budget; door-to-door city delivery costs annually on average $353 per stop, curbside $224, and cluster box $160 (and for rural delivery, $278, $176, and $126, respectively).
Easton, at Fort Union, New Mexico, had occasion to send some message east by a certain date, and contracted with Aubrey to carry it to the nearest post office (then Independence, Missouri), making his compensation conditional on the time consumed.
The first postal service in America commenced in February 1692.
The OIG has "oversight" responsibility for all activities of the Postal Inspection Service.
is to be affixed in the upper right corner of the address side of the mail cover.
materials, as well as others articulated in § 601 of the DMM.
One of the major changes in the new naming and services definitions is that USPS-supplied mailing boxes for Priority and Express mail are now allowed for international use.
For example, in the Chicago metropolitan area and many other major metros one must get a background check from police and pay a daily fee for the right to solicit or post commercial messages on private property.
Many rural customers took advantage of inexpensive Parcel Post rates to order goods and products from businesses located hundreds of miles away in distant cities for delivery by mail.
The Inspector General, who is independent of postal management, is appointed by and reports directly to the nine presidentially appointed, Senate–confirmed members of the Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service.
Homeless people are also eligible for post office boxes at the discretion of the local postmaster, or can use general delivery.
The series of massacres led the US Postal Service to issue a rule prohibiting the possession of any type of firearms (except for those issued to Postal Inspectors) in all designated USPS facilities.
Another option is the old-style general delivery, for people who have neither post office boxes nor street addresses.
It facilitated expansion into the West by creating an inexpensive, fast, convenient communication system.
This online PC Postage method relies upon application software on the customer's computer contacting a postal security device at the office of the postal service.
Written permission is required for use of copyrighted postage stamp images, although under USPS rules, permission is "generally" not required for "educational use", "news reporting" or "philatelic advertising use," but users must cite USPS as the source of the image and include language such as "© United States Postal Service.
The USPS maintains a list of proper abbreviations.
Of the eleven members of the Board, nine are appointed by the President and confirmed by the United States Senate (see ).
The system paid 2-percent interest per year on deposits.
To compensate for high mail volume and slow long-distance transportation which saw mail arrive at post offices throughout the day, deliveries were made multiple times a day.
They now deliver packages on Sunday for Amazon.com only.
To improve accuracy and efficiency, the  Postal Service introduced the  Intelligent Mail program to complement the zip™ code system.
Any changes would have far-reaching effects on customers and the trillion dollar mailing industry.
Images are taken at more than 200 mail processing centers, and are destroyed after being retained for 30 days.
Postal address verification tools and services are offered by the USPS and third party companies to help ensure mail is deliverable by fixing formatting, appending information such as zipcode and validating the address is a valid delivery point.
At the destination P&DC, mail is once again read by a DBCS which sorts the items into their local destinations, including grouping them by individual mail carrier.
It consists of two parts: the Private Express Statutes (PES) and the mailbox access rule.
The tax was repealed a year later.
* The USPS is responsible for transporting mail between the United States and the associated states, and between the individual states of the Federated States of Micronesia.
The law guaranteed the sanctity of personal correspondence, and provided the entire country with low-cost access to information on public affairs, while establishing a right to personal privacy.
All mailable articles (e.g., letters, flats, machinable parcels, irregular parcels, etc.)
Incoming mail does require customs declarations because, like some U.S. territories, the associated states are outside the main customs territory of the United States.
(See the section Revenue decline and planned cuts.)
In 2011, numerous media outlets reported that the USPS was going out of business.
From January 1, 1911, until July 1, 1967, the United States Post Office Department operated the United States Postal Savings System.
Ten years before waterways were declared post roads in 1823, the Post Office used steamboats to carry mail between post towns where no roads existed.
From the 1910s to the 1960s, many college students and others used parcel post to mail home dirty laundry, as doing so was less expensive than washing the clothes themselves.
This separates private communications from the ability of a private for-profit or non-profit organization to corrupt.
From 1810, mail was delivered seven days a week.
The footage showed that the officers were dressed in civilian clothing.
