Helicopters operate from Air Stations and can deploy on a number of different cutters.
Auxiliary vessels maintained by the Coast Guard also carry the Racing Stripe, but in inverted colors (i.e., broad blue stripe with narrow white and CG red stripes) and the Auxiliary shield.
All Coast Guardsmen wear the combination cap with all uniforms except the ODU and CUU.
In 1974, the current Coast Guard Service Dress Blue (SDB) uniform was introduced for wear by both officers and enlisted personnel; the transition was completed during 1974.
The Coast Guard operates approximately 204 fixed and rotary wing aircraft from 24 Coast Guard Air Stations throughout the contiguous United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico.
Coast Guardsmen have the legal authority to carry their service-issued firearms on and off base.
The Coast Guard's enduring roles are maritime safety, security, and stewardship.
Over time, chief warrant officers may be promoted to CWO-3 and CWO-4.
Above the eagle are the words "UNITED STATES COAST GUARD" below the eagle is the motto, "SEMPER PARATUS" and the inscription "1790."
"First Fleet" is a term occasionally used as an informal reference to the Coast Guard, although there is no indication that the United States has ever officially used this designation with reference either to the Coast Guard or any element of the Navy.
Units may also additionally authorize ball caps with the unit name embroidered for wear while on the unit.
These officers wear Coast Guard uniforms but replace the Coast Guard insignia with that of their own service.
During the Vietnam War and shortly thereafter, the Coast Guard considered abandoning the reserve program, but the force was instead reoriented into force augmentation, where its principal focus was not just reserve operations, but to add to the readiness and mission execution of every-day active duty personnel.
'''Warrant Officer grade structure of the United States Coast Guard'''
This changed the line in the Guardian Ethos "I am a Guardian."
Chief warrant officers may also compete for the Chief Warrant Officer to Lieutenant Program.
The current working uniform of the Coast Guard is the Operational Dress Uniform (ODU).
The "Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman" was written by Vice Admiral Harry G. Hamlet, who served as Commandant of the Coast Guard from 1932 to 1936.
If selected, the warrant officer will be promoted to lieutenant (O-3E).
Conversely, black-hulled cutters (such as buoy tenders and inland construction tenders) use the standard racing stripe.
The Ethos is as follows:
Coast Guard Port Security Units are entirely staffed with reservists, except for five to seven active duty personnel.
Air Force's Civil Air Patrol and FBI's InfraGard).
Wil Milam, a rescue swimmer from Alaska told the magazine, "In the Navy, it was all about the mission.
The camouflaged utility sun hat may be worn when prescribed by the operational commander, without rank insignia.
The planning for the unit began after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and culminated with its formation on 20 July 2007.
Admiral Robert J. Papp, Jr. stated that it was his belief that no Commandant had the authority to change what members of the Coast Guard are called as the term Coast Guardsman is found in Title 14 USC which established the Coast Guard in 1915.
The SDB uniform may be worn year-round for business within the Coast Guard and for social occasions where the civilian equivalent is coat and tie.
Spring Parade Dress Blue substitutes white trousers in lieu of navy.
Still, one court has held that Coast Guard boarding officers are qualified law enforcement officers authorized to carry personal firearms off-duty for self-defense.
In 1918, twin sisters Genevieve and Lucille Baker of the Naval Coastal Defense Reserve became the first uniformed women to serve in the Coast Guard.
Deployable Specialized Forces also employ specialized weapons including the Mk 18 carbine, Mk 11 precision rifle, and M203 grenade launcher.
A foul weather parka is the outerwear worn with the ODU.
Auxiliarists use their own vessel (e.g., boats, aircraft, and vehicles), once it is registered as a Coast Guard Facility, in Coast Guard missions.
This new strategy charted a course for the Navy, Coast Guard and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent regional crises, man-made or natural, from occurring, or reacting quickly should one occur to avoid negative impacts to the United States.
* Vocational skills and academics
There were over 25 specialized units within the Deployable Operations Group including the Maritime Security Response Team, Maritime Safety and Security Teams, Law Enforcement Detachments, Port Security Units, the National Strike Force, and Regional Dive Lockers.
* Lockheed HC-130J Super Hercules
Newly enlisted personnel are sent to eight weeks of recruit training at Coast Guard Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey.
On 7 June 1910, President William Howard Taft issued an Executive Order adding an emblem to (or "defacing") the ensign flown by the Revenue cutters to distinguish it from what is now called the Customs Ensign flown from the custom houses.
In the Coast Guard, it was, take care of our people and the mission will take care of itself."
The term ''Coast Guardsman'' is the correct form of address used in Title 14 USC and is the form that has been used historically.
The modern Coast Guard can be said to date to 1915, when the Revenue Cutter Service merged with the U.S. Life-Saving Service when Congress formalized the existence of the new organization.
Chief Warrant Officer 4
Rear Admiral Stephen W. Rochon was appointed by President George W. Bush to serve as the Director of the Executive Residence and White House Chief Usher, beginning service on 12 March 2007, and continues to serve in the same capacity under President Barack Obama.
The United States Coast Guard Reserve is the reserve military force of the Coast Guard.
In a 2005 article in ''Time'' magazine following Hurricane Katrina, the author wrote, "the Coast Guard's most valuable contribution to a military effort when catastrophe hits may be as a model of flexibility, and most of all, spirit."
* VC-37A Long Range Command and Control Aircraft (2 airframes as of December 2011: ''CG-01'', S/N 653 and ''CG-02'', S/N 638)
Its first director was Captain Dorothy C. Stratton who is credited with creating the name for the organization.
Enlisted rank insignia is also similar to the Navy with the Coast Guard shield replacing the eagle on collar and cap devices.
The Coast Guard has assigned primary responsibility for many recreational boating safety tasks to the Auxiliary, including public boating safety education and voluntary vessel safety checks called Courtesy Marine Examinations and Personal Watercraft Safety Checks.
In addition to the Academy, prospective officers, who already hold a college degree, may enter the Coast Guard through Officer Candidate School (OCS), also located at the Coast Guard Academy.
The Coast Guard Reserve was founded on 19 February 1941.
Rotary-Wing Aircraft:
However, the ODU is in a solid dark blue with no camouflage pattern and does not have lower pockets on the blouse.
The Ancient Albatross Award is presented to the active duty USCG member who qualified as an aviator earlier than any other person who is still serving.
Members of this organization unite to assist members and dependents in need, assist with Coast Guard recruiting efforts, support the aims and goals of the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Academy, keep informed on Coast Guard matters, and assemble for social amenities; and include Chief, Senior Chief, and Master Chief Petty Officers, active, reserve and retired.
In 2008, the Coast Guard introduced the Guardian Ethos.
Officers holding the rank of ensign (O-1) through lieutenant commander (O-4) are considered junior officers, commanders (O-5) and captains (O-6) are considered senior officers, and rear admirals (O-7) through admirals (O-10) are considered flag officers.
Coast Guard reservists normally drill two days a month and an additional 12 days of active duty each year, although many perform additional drill and active duty periods, to include those mobilized to extended active duty.
The Deployable Operations Group (DOG) was a Coast Guard command established in July 2007.
Civilian employees work at various levels in the Coast Guard to support its various missions.
Similar Racing Stripe designs have been adopted for the use of other coast guards and maritime authorities and many other law enforcement and rescue agencies.
During this initial processing period, the new recruits are led by temporary company commanders.
The DOG also managed Coast Guard personnel assigned to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command and was involved in the selection of Coast Guard candidates to attend Navy BUD/S and serve with Navy SEAL Teams.
The first Coast Guard station was in Newburyport, Massachusetts.
The DCO program is designed to commission officers with highly specialized professional training or certain kinds of previous military experience.
Like the officers' dress white uniforms, the mess dress uniforms are identical to those of the Navy, aside from Coast Guard-specific insignia.
Additionally, most of the staffing the Coast Guard provides to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command are reservists.
In May 2006, at the Change of Command ceremony when Admiral Thad Allen took over as Commandant, President George W. Bush awarded the entire Coast Guard, including the Coast Guard Auxiliary, the Coast Guard Presidential Unit Citation with hurricane device, for its efforts during and after Hurricane Katrina and Tropical Storm Rita.
This ensign became familiar in American waters and served as the sign of authority for the Revenue Cutter Service until the early 20th century.
Loewy had designed the colors for the Air Force One fleet for Jackie Kennedy.
* CASA HC-144A Ocean Sentry
The name also refers to a spar in nautical usage.
Marksmen from the Helicopter Interdiction Tactical Squadron and Law Enforcement Detachments use a variant of the Barrett M107 .50-caliber rifle to disable the engines on fleeing boats.
The second generation ODU is worn untucked and has black Coast Guard insignia embroidered on the left shirt pocket as well as the side pockets of the trousers.
The '''United States Coast Guard''' ('''USCG''') is a branch of the United States Armed Forces and one of the country's seven uniformed services.
The Coast Guard does not have medical officers or chaplains of its own.
In addition to gathering and distributing spill/incident information for Federal On Scene Coordinators and serving as the communications and operations center for the National Response Team, the NRC maintains agreements with a variety of federal entities to make additional notifications regarding incidents meeting established trigger criteria.
There is typically a designated lead company commander and two support company commanders.
The Coast Guard employs over 7,700 civilians in over two hundred different job types including Coast Guard Investigative Service special agents, lawyers, engineers, technicians, administrative personnel, tradesmen, and federal firefighters.
* Sikorsky HH / MH-60 J/T Jayhawk
Graduating OCS officers entering active duty are required to serve a minimum of three years, while graduating reserve officers are required to serve four years.
"Team Coast Guard" refers to the four components of the Coast Guard as a whole: Regular, Reserve, Auxiliary, and Coast Guard civilian employees.
First used and placed into official usage as of April 6, 1967, it consists of a narrow blue stripe, a narrow white stripe between, and a broad CG red bar with the Coast Guard shield centered.
As of 2012, there were approximately 32,000 active Auxiliarists.
Instead, chaplains from the U.S. Navy, as well as officers from the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps are assigned to the Coast Guard to perform chaplain-related functions and medical-related functions, respectively.
The ODU may be worn year-round primarily as a field utility and watchstanding uniform, and may be worn in an office environment.
Until the re-establishment of the Navy in 1798, the Revenue Cutter Service was the only naval force of the early United States.
These temporary company commanders are tasked with teaching the new recruits how to march and preparing them to enter into their designated company.
The statement of the keeper that he did not try to use the boat because the sea or surf was too heavy will not be accepted, unless attempts to launch it were actually made and failed."
The new Department of Homeland Security headquarters complex is being built on the grounds of the former St. Elizabeths Hospital in the Anacostia section of Southeast Washington, across the Anacostia River from former Coast Guard headquarters.
Most of these air stations are tenant activities at civilian airports, several of which are former Air Force Bases and Naval Air Stations, although several are also independent military facilities.
In 2008, the term "Guardian" was introduced as an alternative, but was later dropped.
The Coast Guard Pipe Band, a special musical unit composed of active, reserve and auxiliary coast guardsmen, wears a modified form of highland dress, including kilt and sporran.
Unlike the other military services, the Coast Guard does not have a Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) program.
Unlike the other branches of the United States Armed Forces, which are prevented from acting in a law enforcement capacity by Title 18 USC, section 1385, the Posse Comitatus Act, and Department of Defense policy, the Coast Guard is exempt from and not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act.
As these systems mature, research and operational experience gleaned from this joint effort will enable the Coast Guard to develop its own cutter and land-based UAS capabilities.
The '''Coast Guard Core Values''' are:
Coast Guard Air Stations are also located on active Naval Air Stations, Air National Guard bases, and Army Air Fields.
Training centers include the United States Coast Guard Academy, Training Center Petaluma, Training Center Cape May, Coast Guard Aviation Technical Training Center, Coast Guard Aviation Training Center Mobile, and Training Center Yorktown.
The band's kilt is patterned in the official U.S. Coast Guard tartan.
Lawyers, engineers, intelligence officers, military aviators holding commissions in other branches of the U.S. Armed Forces requesting interservice transfers to the Coast Guard, graduates of maritime academies, and certain other individuals may also receive an officer's commission in the Coast Guard through the Direct Commission Officer (DCO) program.
After retiring as Commandant of the Coast Guard in 2002, Admiral James Loy went on to serve as administrator of the Transportation Security Administration and later as Deputy Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security.
The temporary company commanders typically do not enforce any physical activity such as push ups or crunches.
Operated by the Coast Guard, the National Response Center (NRC) is the sole U.S. Government point of contact for reporting all oil, chemical, radiological, biological, and etiological discharges into the environment anywhere in the United States and its territories.
This places them under Title 19 USC, section 1589a, which grants customs officers general federal law enforcement authority, including the authority to:
Group Rate marks (stripes) for junior enlisted members (E-3 and below) also follow Navy convention with white for seaman, red for fireman, and green for airman.
OCS is a seventeen-week course of instruction that prepares candidates to serve effectively as officers in the Coast Guard.
Highly qualified enlisted personnel in pay grades E-6 through E-9 with a minimum of eight years experience can compete each year for appointment as warrant officers (WO).
Cadets at the U.S. Coast Guard Academy have access to standard Coast Guard uniforms, including Service Dress Blues and the ODU, however, also wear two different styles of parade dress uniforms.
After receiving Naval Aviator Wings, Coast Guard pilots, with the exception of those slated to fly the HC-130, report to U.S. Coast Guard Aviation Training Center, Mobile, Alabama to receive 6–12 weeks of specialized training in the Coast Guard fleet aircraft they will operate.
On 17 October 2007, the Coast Guard joined with the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps to adopt a new maritime strategy called ''A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower'' that raised the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war.
Successful candidates are chosen by a board and then commissioned as chief warrant officers (CWO-2) in one of sixteen specialties.
An introduction of how the Coast Guard operates with special emphasis on the Coast Guard's core values is an important part of the training.
It was established to collect taxes from a brand new nation of patriot smugglers.
Fixed-wing aircraft operate from Air Stations on long-duration missions.
* Physical fitness and wellness
HC-130 pilots report to Little Rock AFB, Arkansas, for joint C-130 training under the auspices of the 314th Airlift Wing of the U.S. Air Force.
To support this endeavor, the Coast Guard has partnered with the Navy and U.S. Customs and Border Protection to study existing/emerging unmanned aerial system (UAS) capabilities within their respective organizations.
Other shore establishments are Coast Guard Sectors (which may include Coast Guard Bases), Coast Guard Stations, Coast Guard Air Stations, and the United States Coast Guard Yard.
The two services jointly provide instructor staff for the National Search and Rescue School that trains SAR mission planners and coordinators.
It may be worn in lieu of the SDB uniform, but not to functions where civilian dress is coat and tie.
While not the oldest, search and rescue (SAR) is one of the Coast Guard's best known missions.
Membership is also open to all Chief Warrant Officers and Officers who have served as a Chief Petty Officer.
The ensign was originally intended to be flown only on revenue cutters and boats connected with the Customs Service but over the years it was found flying atop custom houses as well, and the practice became a requirement in 1874.
A standard baseball-style ball cap is worn, embroidered in gold block lettering with "U.S. Coast Guard."
The Coast Guard, like the other armed services of the United States, has a set of core values that serve as basic ethical guidelines for all Coast Guard active duty, reservists, auxiliarists, and civilians.
Previously located on Governors Island, New York, the school is now located at Coast Guard Training Center Yorktown at Yorktown, Virginia.
Graduates may be assigned to a cutter, flight training, a staff job, or an operations-ashore billet.
Coast Guard reservists possess the same training and qualifications as their active duty counterparts, and as such, can be found augmenting active duty Coast Guard units every day.
OCS is the primary channel through which the Coast Guard enlisted grades ascend to the commissioned officer corps.
The official march of the Coast Guard is "Semper Paratus" (Latin for "Always Ready").
Naval War College in 2007, Coast Guard Commandant Admiral Thad Allen said the new maritime strategy reinforced the time-honored missions the service has carried out in the United States since 1790.
'''Commissioned Officer grade structure of the United States Coast Guard'''
The "E" designates over four years active duty service as a warrant officer or enlisted member and entitles the member to a higher rate of pay than other lieutenants.
A light-blue button-up shirt with a pointed collar, two front button-flap pockets, and shoulder loops, along with a tie of the same shade as the jacket are worn with the uniform.
The United States Coast Guard Auxiliary is the uniformed volunteer component of the Coast Guard, established on 23 June 1939 by an act of Congress as the United States Coast Guard Reserve, it was re-designated as the Auxiliary on 19 February 1941.
In 1939, the Lighthouse Service was brought under the Coast Guard's purview.
The ''National Search and Rescue Plan'' designates the Coast Guard as the federal agency responsible for maritime SAR operations, and the United States Air Force as the federal agency responsible for inland SAR.
the Coast Guard had approximately 42,000 men and women on active duty, 7,900 reservists, 32,000 auxiliarists, and 8,700 full-time civilian employees.
"Coastie" is an informal term commonly used to refer to current or former Coast Guard personnel.
Following graduation from recruit training, most members are sent to their first unit while they await orders to attend advanced training in Class "A" Schools.
LieutenantCommander
The U.S. Coast Guard Academy is a four-year service academy located in New London, Connecticut.
Coast Guard aviators receive Primary (fixed-wing) and Advanced (fixed or rotary-wing) flight training with their Navy and Marine Corps counterparts at NAS Whiting Field, Florida, and NAS Corpus Christi, Texas, and are considered Naval Aviators.
The ODU is similar to the Battle Dress Uniform of other armed services, both in function and style.
Mess dress uniforms are worn by members for formal (black tie) evening ceremonies.
Smaller numbers are assigned directly to flight training at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida or to shore duty at Coast Guard Sector, District, or Area headquarters units.
The informal appellation honors the fact that between 1790 and 1798, there was no United States Navy and the cutters that were the predecessors of the Coast Guard were the only warships protecting the coast, trade, and maritime interests of the new republic.
The Racing Stripe, officially known as the Service Mark, was designed in 1964 by the industrial design office of Raymond Loewy Associates to give the Coast Guard a distinctive, modern image.
* Alenia C-27J Spartan
This authority is further defined in Title 14 USC, section 89, which gives law enforcement powers to all Coast Guard commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers.
With a decentralized organization and much responsibility placed on even the most junior personnel, the Coast Guard is frequently lauded for its quick responsiveness and adaptability in a broad range of emergencies.
The last time the Coast Guard operated as a whole within the Navy was in World War II.
Depending on the specific program and the background of the individual, the course is three, four or five weeks long.
The Coast Guard CW Operators Association (CGCWOA) is a membership organization comprising primarily former members of the United States Coast Guard who held the enlisted rating of Radioman (RM) or Telecommunications Specialist (TC), and who employed International Morse Code (CW) in their routine communications duties on Coast Guard cutters and at shore stations.
In times of war, the Coast Guard or individual components of it can operate as a service of the Department of the Navy.
During the launch of the new U.S. maritime strategy at the International Seapower Symposium at the U.S.
This is rarely done in practice, however; at many Coast Guard stations, commanders prefer to have all service-issued weapons in armories when not in use.
"It reinforces the Coast Guard maritime strategy of safety, security and stewardship, and it reflects not only the global reach of our maritime services but the need to integrate and synchronize and act with our coalition and international partners to not only win wars ... but to prevent wars," Allen said.
Red-hulled icebreaker cutters and most HH-65/MH-65 helicopters (i.e., those with a red fuselage) bear a narrow white bar, a narrow blue bar, and broad white bar, with the Coast Guard shield centered.
Details on the NRC organization and specific responsibilities can be found in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan.
Lieutenant(junior grade)
Prior to 1997, Auxiliarists were limited to those tasks and on-water patrols supporting recreational boating safety.
It operates under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security during peacetime, and can be transferred to the U.S. Department of the Navy by the U.S. President at any time, or by the U.S. Congress during times of war.
A white belt may be worn for honor guards.
New recruits arrive at Sexton Hall and remain there for three days of initial processing which includes haircuts, vaccinations, uniform issue, and other necessary entrance procedures.
Fixed-Wing Aircraft:
Later, SPARS was the United States Coast Guard Women's Reserve created on 23 November 1942 with the signing of Public Law 773 by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
The balance of the eight-week boot camp is spent in learning teamwork and developing physical skills.
The name is a contraction of the Coast Guard motto ''Semper Paratus'' and its English translation, "Always Ready."
The Commandant of the Coast Guard and the Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard are the only members of the Coast Guard authorized to hold the rank of admiral.
The Tropical Blue uniform may be worn year-round for general office wear and for visits between commands.
Two Coast Guard aviators, Commander Bruce E. Melnick and Captain Daniel C. Burbank, have served as NASA astronauts.
The cutter  is named for the SPARS.
Its missions include maritime law enforcement, anti-terrorism, port security, pollution response, and diving operations.
The ranks of warrant officer (WO-1) and chief warrant officer (CWO-5) are not currently used in the Coast Guard.
Approximately 225 cadets graduate each year, receiving a Bachelor of Science degree and a commission as an ensign in the Coast Guard.
President Kennedy was so impressed with his work, he suggested that the entire Federal Government needed his make-over and suggested that he start with the Coast Guard.
This arrangement has a broad historical basis, as the Coast Guard has been involved in wars as diverse as the War of 1812, the Mexican–American War, and the American Civil War, in which the cutter ''Harriet Lane'' fired the first naval shots attempting to relieve besieged Fort Sumter.
The ODU is worn with composite-toed boots in most circumstances, but low-cut brown boat shoes may be prescribed for certain vessel boarding operations.
Because of its legal authority, the Coast Guard can conduct military operations under the U.S. Department of Defense or directly for the President in accordance with Title 14 USC 1–3.
In 1967, the Coast Guard moved from the U.S. Department of the Treasury to the newly formed U.S. Department of Transportation, an arrangement that lasted until it was placed under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in 2003 as part of legislation designed to more efficiently protect American interests following the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001.
It is flown only as a symbol of law enforcement authority and is never carried as a parade standard.
The first week of the five-week course is an indoctrination week.
Admiral Loy was by no means the only Coast Guard officer who was later appointed to a civilian government position; following his Coast Guard career, Carlton Skinner served as the first Civilian Governor of Guam; G. William Miller, 65th Secretary of the Treasury was a graduate of the Coast Guard Academy, and retired Vice Admiral Harvey E. Johnson, Jr. served as Deputy Administrator and Chief Operating Officer of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) under President George W. Bush.
Created by Congress on 4 August 1790 at the request of Alexander Hamilton as the '''Revenue Marine''', it is the oldest continuous seagoing service of the United States.
Chief Warrant Officer 2
* Aérospatiale MH-65 C/D/E Dolphin
By the 1860s, the service was known as the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the term Revenue Marine gradually fell into disuse.
It was derived from the jack of the Coast Guard ensign which was flown by revenue cutters.
to become "I am proud to be a Coast Guardsman."
The emblem is a blue eagle from the coat of arms of the United States on a white field.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office Report to the House of Representatives, Committee on the Judiciary on its 2006 Survey of Federal Civilian Law Enforcement Functions and Authorities, identified the Coast Guard as one of 104 federal components that employed law enforcement officers.
The emblem was changed to the official seal of the Coast Guard in 1927.
As the Commandant, Admiral Allen noted in a message to all members of the Coast Guard: The Ethos "defines the essence of the Coast Guard," and is the "contract the Coast Guard and its members make with the nation and its citizens."
Title 14 USC, section 2 authorizes the Coast Guard to enforce U.S. federal laws.
The current nine Recruit Training Objectives are:
Established in 1929, the Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association, United States Coast Guard (CWOA) represents Coast Guard warrant and chief warrant officers (active, reserve and retired) to the Congress, White House and the Department of Homeland Security.
