Flogging is a punishment for criminal offences such as adultery, premarital sex and alcohol consumption.
France opened the Abu Dhabi Base in May 2009.
On 24 January 1968, British Prime Minister Harold Wilson announced the government's decision, reaffirmed in March 1971 by Prime Minister Edward Heath to end the treaty relationships with the seven Trucial Sheikhdoms, that had been, together with Bahrain and Qatar, under British protection.
Secret Dubai was an independent blog in Dubai, from 2002 until 2010.
However, the FNC is restricted to a largely consultative role.
The Federal Penal Code repealed only those provisions within the penal codes of individual emirates which are contradictory to the Federal Penal Code.
It generated a significant following in the Middle East Blogosphere until the UAE's Telecoms Regulatory Authority (TRA) in the UAE blocked the website.
In 2015, UAE participated in the Saudi Arabian-led military intervention in Yemen against the Shia Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who was deposed in the 2011 uprising.
Dubai is the top tourism destination in the Middle East.
Other laws discriminate against women.
Article 1 of the Federal Penal Code states that "provisions of the Islamic Law shall apply to the crimes of doctrinal punishment, punitive punishment and blood money."
The decline of pearling resulted in extreme economic hardship in the Trucial States.
The British Labour government rejected the offer.
The islands were taken by force, civilians and Arab defenders alike allowed to flee.
The rest of the population were from other Arab states.
The Houthis, who are also known as Ansar Allah, claimed responsibility for the attack which was conducted using a Soviet-era rocket known as Tochka.
Illicit sex is sometimes penalized by 60 lashes.
Using part of his head gear, the local driver whips the expatriate and also taunts him, before other passers-by intervene.
The emirate of Dubai is also home to two major golf courses: The Dubai Golf Club and Emirates Golf Club.
Fast food has become very popular among young people, to the extent that campaigns are underway to highlight the dangers of fast food excesses.
ADMA made further offshore discoveries at Zakum and elsewhere, and other companies made commercial finds such as the Fateh oilfield off Dubai, and the Mubarak field off Sharjah (shared with Iran).
In recent years, several people have retracted their guilty plea in illicit sex cases after being sentenced to stoning or 100 lashes.
Sometimes 40 lashes are given.
All nightclubs are permitted to sell alcohol.
The UAE coast stretches for more than  along the southern shore of the Persian Gulf.
Those who protest risk prison and deportation.
In March, it struck oil in the Upper Thamama, a rock formation that would provide many valuable oil finds.
Pakistan was the first country to formally recognize the UAE upon its formation and continues to be one of its major economic and trading partners; about 400,000 Pakistani expatriates are employed in the UAE.
All prime ministers but one have served concurrently as vice president.
In July 2015, an Australian expatriate was deported for swearing on Facebook.
The requirement is derived from Sharia law, and has been federal law since 2005.
It was also revealed that the local driver was a senior UAE government official.
Islam is the official religion of the UAE, and Arabic is the official language, although English is widely spoken and is the language of business and education, especially in Abu Dhabi and Dubai.
Following the death of Prophet Muhammad, the new Islamic communities south of the Persian Gulf threatened to disintegrate, with insurrections against the Muslim leaders.
World Expos can be a catalyst for economic, cultural and social transformation and generates legacies for the host city and nation.
However, the wealth of oil which the rulers could see from the revenues accruing to surrounding countries such as Iran, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and Saudi Arabia remained elusive.
Emirati culture is a part of the culture of Eastern Arabia.
Established in December 1971, the country is a federation of seven emirates.
The demography of the UAE is extremely diverse.
On that date, at the Dubai Guesthouse Palace, four other emirates agreed to enter into a union called the United Arab Emirates.
Thought to be Nestorian and built in 600 AD, the church appears to have been abandoned peacefully in 750 AD.
By the 17th century, the Bani Yas confederation was the dominant force in most of the area now known as Abu Dhabi.
In January 2008, France and the UAE signed a deal allowing France to set up a permanent military base in the emirate of Abu Dhabi.
Days after the announcement, the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, fearing vulnerability, tried to persuade the British to honour the protection treaties by offering to pay the full costs of keeping the British Armed Forces in the Emirates.
Mindful of the protests in nearby Bahrain, in November 2012 the UAE outlawed online mockery of its own government or attempts to organise public protests through social media.
Abortion is illegal and punishable by a maximum penalty of 100 lashes and up to five years in prison.
The Portuguese maintained an influence over the coastal settlements, building forts in the wake of the bloody 16th century conquests of coastal communities by Albuquerque and the Portuguese commanders who followed him – particularly on the east coast at Muscat, Sohar and Khor Fakkan.
Since independence in 1971, UAE's economy has grown by nearly 231 times to 1.45 trillion AED in 2013.
More than 85% of the UAE's economy was based on the oil exports in 2009.
People are also requested to wear modest clothing when entering mosques, such as the Sheikh Zayed Mosque in Abu Dhabi.
The UAE convened a half-elected Federal National Council in 2006.
The UAE also disputes claim on other islands against the neighboring state of Qatar.
The UAE ranks poorly in freedom indices measuring civil liberties and political rights.
When the British-Trucial Sheikhdoms treaty expired on 1 December 1971, they became fully independent.
The cinema of the United Arab Emirates is minimal but expanding.
Islam is the largest and the official state religion of the UAE.
In January 2006, Sheikh Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum, the prime minister of the UAE and the ruler of Dubai, died, and the crown prince Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum assumed both roles.
Western expatriates, from Europe, Australia, Northern America and Latin America make up 500,000 of the UAE population.
He was arrested by UAE authorities, detained, imprisoned and then expelled from the country.
On 2 November 2004, the UAE's first president, Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, died.
In several cases, the courts of the UAE have jailed women who have reported rape.
Dubai holds up to 66% share of the UAE's tourism economy, with Abu Dhabi having 16% and Sharjah 10%.
Prior to withdrawing from the area in 1971, Britain delineated the internal borders among the seven emirates in order to preempt territorial disputes that might hamper formation of the federation.
The issue of sexual abuse among female domestic workers is another area of concern, particularly given that domestic servants are not covered by the UAE labour law of 1980 or the draft labour law of 2007.
In July 2013, a video was uploaded onto YouTube, depicting a local driver hitting an expatriate worker, following a road related incident.
The British Prime Minister, David Cameron, expressed "concern" over the case and raised it with the UAE President, Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, during his 2013 state visit to the UK.
The average annual rainfall in the coastal area is less than , but in some mountainous areas annual rainfall often reaches .
When Dubai's oil exports commenced in 1969, Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum, the ruler of Dubai, was able to invest the revenues from the limited reserves found to spark the diversification drive that would create the modern global city of Dubai.
In 1952, they formed the Trucial States Council, and appointed Adi Bitar, Dubai's Sheikh Rashid's legal advisor, as Secretary General and Legal Advisor to the Council.
An Emirati, whose father is among the defendants, was arrested for tweeting about the trial.
He could not be deported back to the Palestinian territories, therefore he was deported to Malaysia.
Many foreign nationals and Emirati citizens have been arrested and abducted by the state.
On the following day the Federal Supreme Council elected his son, Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, to the post.
The three men were pardoned and released in July 2013.
The climate of the UAE is subtropical-arid with hot summers and warm winters.
Following Britain's military departure from the UAE in 1971, and its establishment as a new state, the UAE laid claim to islands resulting in disputes with Iran that remain unresolved.
Al Nahyan family, one of  the six ruling families of the United Arab Emirates, is believed to have a fortune of $150 billion collectively as a family.
World Expos are a meeting point for the global community to share innovations and make progress on issues such as the global economy, sustainable development and improved quality of life.
It is governed by a Federal Supreme Council made up of the seven emirs of Abu Dhabi, Ajman, Fujairah, Sharjah, Dubai, Ras al-Khaimah and Umm al-Qaiwain.
A destroyer group approached the island Abu Musa as well.
Emirati culture is based on Arabian culture and has been influenced by the cultures of Persia, India, and East Africa.
In February 1972, the Federal National Council (FNC) was created; it was a 40-member consultative body appointed by the seven rulers.
The constituent emirates are Abu Dhabi (which serves as the capital), Ajman, Dubai, Fujairah, Ras al-Khaimah, Sharjah, and Umm al-Quwain.
The UAE's rising international profile has led some analysts to identify it as a regional and middle power.
The spread of Islam to the North Eastern tip of the Arabian Peninsula is thought to have followed directly from a letter sent by the Islamic prophet, Muhammad, to the rulers of Oman in 630 AD, nine years after the hijrah.
Abu Dhabi's crown prince, Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, is the heir apparent.
The country had already signed a military defense agreement with the U.S. in 1994 and one with France in 1995.
Consequently, there are very few anti-discrimination laws in relation to labour issues, with Emiratis – other GCC Arabs – getting preference in public sector jobs despite lesser credentials than competitors and lower motivation.
During the 19th and early 20th centuries, the pearling industry thrived, providing both income and employment to the people of the Persian Gulf.
UAE forces joined the allies against Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait in 1990.
The State Security Apparatus in the UAE has been accused of series of atrocities and human rights abuses including enforced disappearance, arbitrary arrests and torture the latest being the forced disappearance of a Turkish businessman Dr Amer Al Shawa on 2 October 2014.
A new federal law in the UAE prohibits swearing in Whatsapp and penalizes swearing by a $68,061 fine and imprisonment; expatriates are penalized by deportation.
The country is scheduled to host the 2019 AFC Asian Cup.
Numerous islands are found in the Persian Gulf, and the ownership of some of them has been the subject of international disputes with both Iran and Qatar.
It was also agreed between the two that the constitution be written by 2 December 1971.
UAE has largely escaped the Arab Spring, which other countries have had; however, more than 100 Emirati activists were jailed and tortured because they sought reforms.
In return, the British promised to protect the Trucial Coast from all aggression by sea and to help in case of land attack.
Cardiovascular disease is the principal cause of death in the UAE, constituting 28% of total deaths; other major causes are accidents and injuries, malignancies, and congenital anomalies.
The dispute has not significantly impacted relations because of the large Iranian community presence and strong economic ties.
The UAE joined the Arab League in 1971.
Ancient Emirati poetry was strongly influenced by the 8th-century Arab scholar Al Khalil bin Ahmed.
A British warship stood idle during the course of the invasion.
Major holidays in Dubai include ''Eid al Fitr'', which marks the end of ''Ramadan'', and National Day (2 December), which marks the formation of the United Arab Emirates.
In December 2009, Issa appeared in court and proclaimed his innocence.
In 1962, PDTC became the Abu Dhabi Petroleum Company.
During the Gulf war, the US had troops and equipment stationed in the UAE as well as other parts of the Persian Gulf.
The latest forced disappearance involves three sisters from Abu Dhabi.
The charge of piracy is disputed by modern Emirati historians, including the current Ruler of Sharjah in his 1986 book ''The Myth of Arab Piracy in the Gulf''.
The island was quickly leased to Iran for $3 million a year.
The introduction of mandatory health insurance in Abu Dhabi for expatriates and their dependants was a major driver in reform of healthcare policy.
It shares a  border with Saudi Arabia on the west, south, and southeast, and a  border with Oman on the southeast and northeast.
Arabic is the national language of the United Arab Emirates.
The UAE's border with Oman was ratified in 2008.
Alcohol consumption for Muslims is illegal and punishable by 80 lashes; many Muslims have been sentenced to 80 lashes for alcohol consumption.
The UAE has a modest dress code.
Non-Muslim expatriates can be liable to Sharia rulings on marriage, divorce and child custody.
More than 100,000 British nationals live in the country.
UAE is ranked as the 31st best nation in the world for doing business based on its economy and regulatory environment, ranked by the Doing Business 2016 Report published by the World Bank Group.
The Trucial Oman Scouts was a small military force used by the British to keep the peace.
In 2011, oil exports accounted for 77% of the UAE's state budget.
The Dubai Metro is the first urban train network in the Arabian Peninsula.
There are 1.4 million Emirati citizens.
Based on the Ministry of Economy census in 2005, 76% of the total population was Muslim, 9% Christian, and 15% other (mainly Hindu).
The land border with Qatar in the Khawr al Udayd area is about  in the northwest; however, it is a source of ongoing dispute.
The Gulf dialect of Arabic is spoken natively by the Emirati people.
According to some organizations, more than 4,000 Shia expatriates have been deported from the UAE in recent years.
A number of options between PCL and the trucial rulers were signed, providing useful revenue for communities experiencing poverty following the collapse of the pearl trade.
The next edition of the Asia Cup Cricket tournament is likely to be held next year in the first week of March.
Most malls in the UAE have a dress code displayed at entrances.
According to the ''New York Times'', the UAE is "an autocracy with the sheen of a progressive, modern state".
The first bore holes in Abu Dhabi were drilled by IPC's operating company, Petroleum Development (Trucial Coast) Ltd (PDTC) at Ras Sadr in 1950, with a  bore hole taking a year to drill and turning out dry, at the tremendous cost at the time of £1 million.
In the Al Hajar Mountains, temperatures are considerably lower, a result of increased elevation.
The seasonal movements of these groups led not only to frequent clashes between groups but also to the establishment of seasonal and semi-seasonal settlements and centres.
The UAE has shown a strong interest in improving education and research.
Specific supermarkets may sell alcohol, but these products are sold in separate sections.
Migrant workers who participate in a strike can have their work permits cancelled and be deported.
In recent years, a large number of Shia Muslim expatriates have been deported from the UAE, Lebanese Shia families in particular have been deported for their alleged sympathy for Hezbollah.
APOC was prevented from developing the region alone because of the restrictions of the Red Line Agreement, which required it to operate through IPC.
Amnesty reported that the Qatari men have been abducted by the UAE government and the UAE government has withheld information about the men's fate from their families.
In its 2013 Annual Report, Amnesty International drew attention to the United Arab Emirates' poor record on a number of human rights issues.
PDTC had continued its onshore exploration activities, drilling five more bore holes that were also dry, but on 27 October 1960, the company discovered oil in commercial quantities at the Murban No.
Despite his lifetime residence in the UAE, as a Palestinian citizen, El-Baghdadi had no recourse to contest this order.
The report included 16 different methods of torture including severe beatings, threats with electrocution and denying access to medical care.
Meat and rice are other staple foods; lamb and mutton are the more favored meats, then goat and beef.
Other world languages are represented by expatriate population drawn from a wide mix of nationalities.
Moreover, migrant workers are banned from going on strike.
Khawr al Udayd was claimed by Abu Dhabi at that time, a claim supported by the British.In 1906, the British Political Resident, Percy Cox, confirmed in writing to the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Zayed bin Khalifa Al Nahyan ('Zayed the Great') that Khawr al Udayd belonged to his sheikhdom.
Emirati males prefer to wear a kandura, an ankle-length white tunic woven from wool or cotton, and Emirati women wear an abaya, a black over-garment that covers most parts of the body.
As migrant workers do not have the right to join a trade union or go on strike, they don't have the means to denounce the exploitation they suffer.
The traditional food of the Emirates has always been rice, fish, and meat.
After Labour MP Goronwy Roberts informed Sheikh Zayed of the news of British withdrawal, the nine Persian Gulf sheikhdoms attempted to form a union of Arab emirates, but by mid-1971 they were still unable to agree on terms of union even though the British treaty relationship was to expire in December of that year.
Further treaties were signed in 1843 and 1853.
UAE has escaped the Arab Spring; however, more than 100 Emirati activists were jailed and tortured because they sought reforms.
The UAE eGovernment is the extension of the UAE Federal Government in its electronic form.
An Iranian destroyer group broke formation from an exercise in the lower Gulf, sailing to the Tunb islands.
According to Human Rights Watch, UAE's criminal and civil courts apply elements of Sharia law, codified into its criminal code and family law, in a way that discriminates against women.
Nine were scheduled to open in 2008.
Sheikh Zayed, ruler of Abu Dhabi and the first President of the UAE, oversaw the development of the Emirates and steered oil revenues into healthcare, education and infrastructure.
A percentage of revenues from each emirate is allocated to the UAE's central budget.
The UAE has the most advanced and developed infrastructure in the region.
There are many documented cases of Egyptians and other foreign nationals who had spent years working in the UAE and were then given only a few days to leave the country.
The annual Freedom House report on Freedom in the World has listed the United Arab Emirates as "Not Free" every year since 1999, the first year for which records are available on their website.
Lake Zakher is a man-made lake near the border with Oman.
According to the annual MasterCard Global Destination Cities Index, Dubai is the fifth most popular tourism destination in the world.
This assured the integrity of the Caliphate and the unification of the Arabian Peninsula under the newly emerging Rashidun Caliphate.
The Sharjah Cricket Association Stadium in Sharjah has hosted four international test cricket matches so far.
The Jebel Jais mountain cluster in Ras al-Khaimah has experienced snow only twice since records began.
The UAE was one of only three countries to recognise the Taliban as Afghanistan's legitimate government (Pakistan and Saudi Arabia were the other two countries).
This treaty, the Exclusive Agreement, was signed by the Rulers of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Ajman, Ras Al Khaimah and Umm Al Quwain between 6 and 8 March 1892.
The ministry plans to add three hospitals to the current 14, and 29 primary healthcare centres to the current 86.
The United Arab Emirates Football Association was established in 1971 and since then has dedicated its time and effort to promoting the game, organizing youth programs and improving the abilities of not only its players, but of the officials and coaches involved with its regional teams.
These developments are particularly evident in the larger emirates of Abu Dhabi and Dubai.
This led to a group of rulers travelling to Medina, converting to Islam and subsequently driving a successful uprising against the unpopular Sassanids, who dominated the Northern coasts at the time.
Although initially small in number, the UAE armed forces have grown significantly over the years and are presently equipped with some of the most modern weapon systems, purchased from a variety of outside countries, mainly France, the US and the UK (the former protector of the UAE).
In accordance with the constitution, the UAE's Supreme Council of Rulers elected Khalifa as president.
The UAE has been criticized for its human rights record, including the role of Sharia law in its legal system.
This was the first commercial discovery of the Trucial Coast, leading to the first exports of oil in 1962.
In 1869, the Qubaisat tribe settled at Khawr al Udayd and tried to enlist the support of the Ottomans, whose flag was occasionally seen flying there.
At the same time, the UAE has made it illegal to disseminate online material that can threaten "public order".
The woman still had to serve one year in jail.
The following year, Britain and a number of local rulers signed a treaty to combat piracy along the Persian Gulf coast, giving rise to the term Trucial States, which came to define the status of the coastal emirates.
The UAE government denies these people are being held (to conceal their whereabouts), placing these people outside the protection of the law.
The International Trade Union Confederation has called on the United Nations to investigate evidence that thousands of migrant workers in the UAE are treated as slave labour.
Kissing in public is illegal and can result in deportation.
The UAE has long maintained close relations with Egypt and is Egypt's largest investor from the Arab world.
All associations and NGOs have to register through the Ministry of Social Affairs and are therefore under de facto State control.
Liwa is a type of music and dance performed locally, mainly in communities that contain descendants of Bantu peoples from the African Great Lakes region.
The sheikhs agreed not to dispose of any territory except to the British and not to enter into relationships with any foreign government other than the British without their consent.
Amongst the foreign nationals detained, imprisoned and expelled is Iyad El-Baghdadi, a popular blogger and Twitter personality.
Exports from the UAE to Japan include crude oil and natural gas and imports from Japan to UAE include cars and electric items.
A few years later, there were more sightings of snow and hail.
The most complicated borders were in the Al-Hajar al-Gharbi Mountains, where five of the emirates contested jurisdiction over more than a dozen enclaves.
In fact, just over eighty percent of Emirati workers hold government posts, with many of the rest taking part in state-owned enterprises such as Emirates airlines and Dubai Properties.
In the past, child camel jockeys were used and this led to widespread criticism.
There are also many private schools which are internationally accredited.
Commercially, the UK and Germany are the UAE's largest export markets and bilateral relations have long been close as a large number of their nationals reside in the UAE.
The UAE went so far as to bring the matter to the United Nations, but the case was dismissed.
Therefore, in July 2012, the UAE began operating a key overland oil pipeline which bypasses the Strait of Hormuz in order to mitigate any consequences of an Iranian shut-off.
The UAE lies between 22°30' and 26°10' north latitude and between 51° and 56°25′ east longitude.
They qualified for the 2015 Cricket World Cup held in Australia and New Zealand.
