It is generally easier for committees to reach accord on issues when compromise is possible.
Each chamber determines its own internal rules of operation unless specified in the Constitution or prescribed by law.
Critics such as constitutional scholar Sanford Levinson have suggested that the population disparity works against residents of large states and causes a steady redistribution of resources from "large states to small states."
Since 2006, Congress has dropped 10 points in the Gallup confidence poll with only 9% having "a great deal" or "quite a lot" of confidence in their legislators.
The main result of congressional activity is the creation of laws, most of which are contained in the United States Code, arranged by subject matter alphabetically under fifty title headings to present the laws "in a concise and usable form".
The house may debate and amend the bill; the precise procedures used by the House and Senate differ.
While their votes are constitutional when Congress authorizes their House Committee of the Whole votes, recent Congresses have not allowed for that, and they cannot vote when the House is meeting as the House of Representatives.
Congress also plays a role in presidential elections.
Congressional votes are recorded on an online database.
Representatives introduce a bill while the House is in session by placing it in the ''hopper'' on the Clerk's desk.
A bill which reaches the floor of the full house can be simple or complex and begins with an enacting formula such as "Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled."
The Great Depression ushered in President Franklin Roosevelt and strong control by Democrats and historic New Deal policies.
An additional factor that confounds public perceptions of Congress is that congressional issues are becoming more technical and complex and require expertise in subjects such as science, engineering and economics.
Sometimes lobbyists write legislation and submit it to a member for introduction.
In the early days after the North Korean invasion of 1950, President Truman described the American response as a "police action".
Reelections encourage candidates to focus their publicity efforts at their home states or districts.
Accordingly, the Senate does not necessarily elect a new president pro tempore at the beginning of a new Congress.
Elections are influenced by many variables.
But if Congress is adjourned during this period, presidents may veto legislation passed at the end of a congressional session simply by ignoring it; the maneuver is known as a pocket veto, and cannot be overridden by the adjourned Congress.
In 2009, there were 4,600 business, labor and special-interest PACs including ones for lawyers, electricians, and real estate brokers.
The Senate has an important check on the executive power by confirming Cabinet officials, judges, and other high officers "by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate."
The Library of Congress was established by an act of Congress in 1800.
Article Four gives Congress the power to admit new states into the Union.
It is the largest library in the world with nearly 150 million items including books, films, maps, photographs, music, manuscripts, graphics, and materials in 470 languages.
In 2008, George F. Will called the Capitol building a "tomb for the antiquated idea that the legislative branch matters."
From 2007 to 2008, 175 members of Congress received "half or more of their campaign cash" from PACs.
It makes projections about such matters as the national debt as well as likely costs of legislation.
Alexander Hamilton, for example, mentioned and expounded upon the doctrine in Federalist No.
There have been charges that presidents acting under the doctrine of the unitary executive have assumed important legislative and budgetary powers that should belong to Congress.
As time goes by, members develop expertise in particular subjects and their legal aspects.
It is a huge check by the courts on the legislative authority and limits congressional power substantially.
Some critics charge that the executive branch has usurped Congress's constitutionally defined task of declaring war.
After passage by both houses, a bill is enrolled and sent to the president for approval.
Members insert a voting ''ID card'' and can change their votes during the last five minutes if they choose; in addition, paper ballots are used on some occasions—''yea'' indicated by green and ''nay'' by red.
More complex issues required greater specialization and expertise, such as space flight and atomic energy policy.
Congressional districts are apportioned to states by population using the United States Census results, provided that each state has at least one congressional representative.
Each side has equal time and members can yield to other members who wish to speak.
Both senators and representatives enjoy free mailing privileges called franking privileges.
A major role for members of Congress is providing services to constituents.
If the second house amends the bill, then the differences between the two versions must be reconciled in a conference committee, an ''ad hoc'' committee that includes both senators and representatives sometimes by using a ''reconciliation process'' to limit budget bills.
The Library had mostly law books when it was burned by a British raiding party during the War of 1812, but the library's collections were restored and expanded when Congress authorized the purchase of Thomas Jefferson's private library.
Supreme Court decisions based on the Constitution's commerce clause expanded congressional power to regulate the economy.
One report suggested Congress posed the "biggest risk to the US economy" because of its brinksmanship, "down-to-the-wire budget and debt crises" and "indiscriminate spending cuts", resulting in slowed economic activity and keeping up to two million people unemployed.
Further, Congress has ancillary organizations such as the Government Accountability Office and the Library of Congress to help provide it with information, and members of Congress have staff and offices to assist them as well.
The Senate ratifies treaties and approves presidential appointments while the House initiates revenue-raising bills.
Indeed, some academics consider free mailings as giving incumbents a big advantage over challengers.
Representative Jim Cooper of Tennessee told Harvard professor Lawrence Lessig that a chief problem with Congress was that members focused on lucrative careers as lobbyists after serving––that Congress was a "Farm League for K Street"––instead of on public service.
Both trials ended in acquittal; in Johnson's case, the Senate fell one vote short of the two-thirds majority required for conviction.
A compromise plan was adopted with representatives chosen by population (benefiting larger states) and exactly two senators chosen by state governments (benefiting smaller states).
Academics such as Princeton's Stephen Macedo have proposed solutions to fix gerrymandering.
The Connecticut Compromise gave every state, large and small, an equal vote in the Senate.
In January 2014, it was reported that for the first time over half of the members of Congress are millionaires.
Some political scientists speculate that a prolonged period marked by narrow majorities in both chambers of Congress has intensified partisanship in the last few decades but that an alternation of control of Congress between Democrats and Republicans may lead to greater flexibility in policies as well as pragmatism and civility within the institution.
The 20th and 21st centuries have seen the rise of presidential power under politicians such as Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, and George W. Bush.
In the House, it begins with "H.Con.Res."
Public opinion of Congress plummeted further to 5% in October 2013 after parts of the U.S. government deemed 'nonessential government' shut down.
The Congress of the United States serves two distinct purposes that overlap: local representation to the federal government of a congressional district by representatives and a state's at-large representation to the federal government by senators.
Senate rules, however, are less strict and permit individual senators to waive the privilege as they choose.
In addition, they perform the function of ''oversight'' by monitoring the executive branch and investigating wrongdoing.
Disagreement about the extent of congressional versus presidential power regarding war has been present periodically throughout the nation's history."
The Constitution requires Congress meet at least once each year and forbids either house from meeting outside the Capitol without the consent of the other house.
Lobby groups and their members sometimes write legislation and whip bills.
A proposal is usually in one of these forms:
The members of the House of Representatives serve two-year terms representing the people of a single constituency, known as a "district".
It prepares an annual ''Economic and Budget Outlook'' with a mid-year update and writes ''An Analysis of the President's Budgetary Proposals'' for the Senate's Appropriations Committee.
The Senate is constitutionally empowered and obligated to try all impeachments.
One of the Library's missions is to serve the Congress and its staff as well as the American public.
One of Congress's foremost non-legislative functions is the power to investigate and oversee the executive branch.
In 1857, for example, the Supreme Court struck down provisions of a congressional act of 1820 in its Dred Scott decision.
It is neither expected nor possible that a member be an expert on all subject areas before Congress.
In 1960, Democratic candidate John F. Kennedy narrowly won the presidency and power shifted again to the Democrats who dominated both houses of Congress until 1994.
Though they are not permitted to send election materials, borderline material is often sent, especially in the run-up to an election by those in close races.
The two-chamber structure had functioned well in state governments.
Broad interpretations of this clause and of the Commerce Clause, the enumerated power to regulate commerce, in rulings such as McCulloch v Maryland, have effectively widened the scope of Congress's legislative authority far beyond that prescribed in Section 8.
Most committee hearings are open to the public (the House and Senate intelligence committees are the exception); important hearings are widely reported in the mass media and transcripts published a few months afterwards.
House and Senate rules can be complex, sometimes requiring a hundred specific steps before becoming a law.
In 1803, the Supreme Court established judicial review of federal legislation in ''Marbury v. Madison'', holding, however, that Congress could not grant unconstitutional power to the Court itself.
Public opinion polls asking people if they approve of the job Congress is doing have, in the last few decades, hovered around 25% with some variation.
Congress struggled with efficiency in the postwar era partly by reducing the number of standing congressional committees.
Standing committees meet at least once each month.
While soft money funds were not given to specific campaigns for candidates, the monies often benefited candidates substantially in an indirect way and helped reelect candidates.
A term of Congress is divided into two "sessions", one for each year; Congress has occasionally been called into an extra or ''special session''.
However, others argue that the Connecticut compromise was deliberately intended by the Framers to construct the Senate so that each state had equal footing not based on population, and contend that the result works well on balance.
In the House, a Rules Committee guides legislation; in the Senate, a Standing Rules committee is in charge.
In the history of the United States, the House of Representatives has impeached sixteen officials, of whom seven were convicted.
The rules of the House strictly guard this privilege; a member may not waive the privilege on their own, but must seek the permission of the whole house to do so.
The Constitution specifies that a majority of members known as a ''quorum'' be present before doing business in each house.
Legislative, oversight, and internal administrative tasks are divided among about two hundred committees and subcommittees which gather information, evaluate alternatives, and identify problems.
Generally militia forces are controlled by state governments, not Congress.
The Constitution guarantees absolute freedom of debate in both houses, providing in the Speech or Debate Clause of the Constitution that "for any Speech or Debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other Place."
The position of Speaker of the House became extremely powerful under leaders such as Thomas Reed in 1890 and Joseph Gurney Cannon.
Political scientists Ornstein and Mann suggested that oversight functions do not help members of Congress win reelection.
It is primarily housed in three buildings on Capitol Hill, but also includes several other sites: the National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped in Washington, D.C.; the National Audio-Visual Conservation Center in Culpeper, Virginia; a large book storage facility located at Ft. Meade, Maryland; and multiple overseas offices.
A simple majority in the House is required to impeach an official; however, a two-thirds majority in the Senate is required for conviction.
Lobbyists represent diverse interests and often seek to influence congressional decisions to reflect their clients' needs.
While power balances among the different parts of government continue to change, the internal structure of Congress is important to understand along with its interactions with so-called ''intermediary institutions'' such as political parties, civic associations, interest groups, and the mass media.
Nevertheless, the Supreme Court has treated campaign contributions as a free speech issue.
Generally, discussion requires a ''quorum'', usually half of the total number of representatives, before discussion can begin, although there are exceptions.
A House-originated bill begins with the letters "H.R."
Investigations are conducted to gather information on the need for future legislation, to test the effectiveness of laws already passed, and to inquire into the qualifications and performance of members and officials of the other branches.
Members sometimes use experts such as Walter Oleszek, a senior specialist in American national government at the Congressional Research Service, to learn about proper procedures.
When the Constitution was ratified in 1787, the ratio of the populations of large states to small states was roughly twelve to one.
Today's races cost more than a million dollars for a House seat, and six million or more for a Senate seat.
The watershed event was the Civil War which resolved the slavery issue and unified the nation under federal authority, but weakened the power of states rights.
One critic compared being elected to Congress to receiving life tenure at a university.
Others have criticized the wealth of members of Congress.
* '''Joint resolutions'''.
Almost all standing committee meetings for transacting business must be open to the public unless the committee votes, publicly, to close the meeting.
Nevertheless, the Presidency remains considerably more powerful today than during the 19th century.
If convicted in court, an individual found guilty of contempt of Congress may be imprisoned for up to one year.
Past presidents, including Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush have made public statements when signing congressional legislation about how they understand a bill or plan to execute it, and commentators including the American Bar Association have described this practice as against the spirit of the Constitution.
While the Senate cannot originate revenue and appropriation bills, it has power to amend or reject them.
They explain to legislators the goals of their organizations.
Scandals, even when they involve a single member, add to the public's frustration with Congress and have contributed to the institution's low ratings in opinion polls.—Smith, Roberts & Wielen
In addition, the Senate elects an officer called the President pro tempore.
The Constitution does not explicitly state that the courts may exercise judicial review; however, the notion that courts could declare laws unconstitutional was envisioned by the founding fathers.
Congress began reasserting its authority.
Constitutional amendments have granted Congress additional powers.
1978 saw an additional delegate for American Samoa, and another for the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands began in 2009.
Committees investigate specialized subjects and advise the entire Congress about choices and trade-offs.
On the other hand, concurrent resolutions (passed by both houses) and simple resolutions (passed by only one house) do not have the force of law but express the opinion of Congress or regulate procedure.
If both houses agree to the version reported by the conference committee, the bill passes, otherwise it fails.
The biggest expense is television ads.
The Progressive Era was characterized by strong party leadership in both houses of Congress as well as calls for reform; sometimes reformers would attack lobbyists as corrupting politics.
The House and Senate are equal partners in the legislative process—legislation cannot be enacted without the consent of both chambers.
Congress can borrow money on the credit of the United States, regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the states, and coin money.
followed by its number.
Democrats maintained control of Congress during World War II.
There has been increasing public dissatisfaction with Congress, with extremely low approval ratings which dropped to 5% in October 2013.
Indeed, it publishes House and Senate reports and maintains databases which are updated irregularly with publications in a variety of electronic formats.
It reflects our regional idiosyncrasies, our ethnic, religious, and racial diversity, our multitude of professions, and our shadings of opinion on everything from the value of war to the war over values.
Committees may also amend the bill, but the full house holds the power to accept or reject committee amendments.
:—Smith, Roberts, and Wielen
The rough-and-tumble world of legislating is not orderly and civil, human frailties too often taint its membership, and legislative outcomes are often frustrating and ineffective ...
The new government became active in 1789.
If a bill is ''tabled'' then it is rejected.
Negative advertising is seen as effective because "the messages tend to stick."
Impeachment is a ''formal accusation'' of unlawful activity by a civil officer or government official.
But since 1787, the population disparity between large and small states has grown; in 2006, for example, California had seventy times the population of Wyoming.
However, the Constitution states, "All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives."
Still, we are not exaggerating when we say that Congress is essential to American democracy.
The Thirteenth (1865), Fourteenth (1868), and Fifteenth Amendments (1870) gave Congress authority to enact legislation to enforce rights of African Americans, including voting rights, due process, and equal protection under the law.
The '''United States Congress''' is the bicameral legislature of the federal government of the United States consisting of two chambers: the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Some see money as a good influence in politics since it "enables candidates to communicate with voters."
For example, the ''Wall Street Journal'' reported lawmaker trips abroad at taxpayer expense, which included spas, $300-per-night extra unused rooms, and shopping excursions.
Government powerlessness led to the Convention of 1787 which proposed a revised constitution with a two–chamber or ''bicameral'' congress.
Since 2011, Gallup poll has reported Congress's approval rating among Americans at 10% or below three times.
In the case of a tie, the motion in question fails.
On July 4, 1776, the Second Continental Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence, referring to the new nation as the "United States of America".
The influence of Congress on the presidency has varied from period to period depending on factors such as congressional leadership, presidential political influence, historical circumstances such as war, and individual initiative by members of Congress.
Numerous New Deal initiatives came from the White House rather than being initiated by Congress.
One effect of popular election of senators was to reduce the difference between the House and Senate in terms of their link to the electorate.
Most legislation is considered by standing committees which have jurisdiction over a particular subject such as Agriculture or Appropriations.
However, in recent years, Congress has restricted presidential power with laws such as the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 and the War Powers Resolution.
They propose solutions for consideration by the full chamber.
A Gilded Age (1877–1901) was marked by Republican dominance of Congress.
Congress is constantly changing and is constantly in flux.
Congress is the "heart and soul of our democracy", according to this view, even though legislators rarely achieve the prestige or name recognition of presidents or Supreme Court justices; one wrote that "legislators remain ghosts in America's historical imagination".
In October 2013, with Congress unable to compromise, the government was shut down for several weeks and risked a serious default on debt payments, causing 60% of the public to say they would "fire every member of Congress" including their own representative.
Congress also has implied powers deriving from the Constitution's Necessary and Proper Clause which permit Congress to "make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof."
Furthermore, there were checks and balances ''within'' the legislature since there were two separate chambers.
Finally, the president may do nothing—neither signing nor vetoing the bill—and then the bill becomes law automatically after ten days (not counting Sundays) according to the Constitution.
The Senate was effectively controlled by a half dozen men.
Few members retire from Congress without complaining about how much it costs to campaign for reelection.
The Congressional Research Service provides detailed, up-to-date and non-partisan research for senators, representatives, and their staff to help them carry out their official duties.
Some activists joined the Anti-Administration Party that James Madison and Thomas Jefferson were forming about 1790–91 to oppose policies of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton; it soon became the Democratic-Republican Party or the Jeffersonian Democrat Party and began the era of the First Party.
Prominent Founding Fathers writing in ''The Federalist'' Papers felt that elections were essential to liberty, and that a bond between the people and the representatives was particularly essential and that "frequent elections are unquestionably the only policy by which this dependence and sympathy can be effectually secured."
Smaller states argued for equal representation for each state.
Members of Congress under FERS contribute 1.3% of their salary into the FERS retirement plan and pay 6.2% of their salary in Social Security taxes.
Privileges include having an office and paid staff.
During this time, lobbying activity became more intense, particularly during the administration of President Ulysses S. Grant in which influential lobbies advocated for railroad subsidies and tariffs on wool.
Since members of Congress must advertise heavily on television, this usually involves negative advertising, which smears an opponent's character without focusing on the issues.
The House reserves roll-call votes for the most formal matters, as a roll call of all 435 representatives takes quite some time; normally, members vote by using an electronic device.
Members of Congress make fact-finding missions to learn about other countries and stay informed, but these outings can cause controversy if the trip is deemed excessive or unconnected with the task of governing.
In 1907, salaries were raised to $7,500 per year, the equivalent of $173,000 in 2010.
* '''Bills''' are laws in the making.
Other scholars suggest that despite the criticism, "Congress is a remarkably resilient institution ... its place in the political process is not threatened ... it is rich in resources" and that most members behave ethically.
Members of the Senate are referred to as senators; members of the House of Representatives are referred to as representatives, congressmen, or congresswomen.
Another factor leading to less control over the budget was a Keynesian belief that balanced budgets were unnecessary.
In 1971, a delegate for the District of Columbia was authorized, and in 1972 new delegate positions were established for U.S. Virgin Islands and Guam.
It confirms most presidential nominees but rejections are not uncommon.
In 1974, Richard Nixon resigned from office after impeachment proceedings in the House Judiciary Committee indicated he would eventually be removed from office.
Witnesses and experts can present their case for or against a bill.
The franking privilege allows members of Congress to send official mail to constituents at government expense.
The Constitution enumerates the powers of Congress in detail.
But some races can be competitive when there is no incumbent.
Members received an annual salary of $1,500 per year from 1815 to 1817, then a per diem salary of $8 from 1818 to 1855; since then they have received an annual salary, first pegged in 1855 at $3,000.
The committee structure permits members of Congress to study a particular subject intensely.
In 2007 there were approximately 17,000 federal lobbyists in Washington.
Both houses use voice voting to decide most matters in which members shout "aye" or "no" and the presiding officer announces the result.
Impeachment proceedings may not inflict more than this; however, a convicted party may face criminal penalties in a normal court of law.
Currently, there are 100 senators representing the 50 states.
Some political scientists speculate there is a ''coattail effect'' (when a popular president or party position has the effect of reelecting incumbents who win by "riding on the president's coattails"), although there is some evidence that the coattail effect is irregular and possibly declining since the 1950s.
Article I of the Constitution sets forth most of the powers of Congress, which include numerous explicit powers enumerated in Section 8.
Congressional staff can help citizens navigate government bureaucracies.
Congressional oversight is usually delegated to committees and is facilitated by Congress's subpoena power.
A final vote on the bill follows.
Anyone can write a bill, but only members of Congress may introduce bills.
It provides ideas for legislation, helps members analyze a bill, facilitates public hearings, makes reports, consults on matters such as parliamentary procedure, and helps the two chambers resolve disagreements.
In the Senate, the vice president may cast the tie-breaking vote if present.
