Set amid numerous outdoor athletic fields are the ‘‘Cadet Gymnasium’‘ and the Cadet Fieldhouse.
Cadets are required to take physical education courses in each of their four years at the Academy.
The Aeronautics Research Center (also known as the "Aero Lab") contains numerous aeronautical research facilities, including transonic, subsonic, low speed, and cascade wind tunnels; engine and rocket test cells; and simulators.
The Department of Defense claimed that the program was successful although during the school year 2010–11 there were increased reports of sexual assault at the academy; however, one goal of the program is increased reporting.
Many cadets are involved in research via their major, coordinated in more than a dozen Academy research centers, including the Institute for Information Technology Applications, the Institute for National Security Studies, the Air Force Humanities Institute, the Eisenhower Center for Space and Defense Studies, the Life Sciences Research Center, the Academy Center for Physics Education Research, among others.
Fourth class cadets are expected to learn an extensive amount of military and Academy-related knowledge and have significant restrictions placed on their movement and actions—traversing the Cadet Area only by approved routes (including staying on the marble "strips" on the Terrazzo) and interacting with upper class cadets using a very specific decorum.
Cadets receive a monthly stipend, but incur a commitment to serve a number of years of military service after graduation.
With an enrollment of over 1300, Air Academy High School is the only high school in the United States built on a military academy.
Graduates of the Academy's four-year program receive a Bachelor of Science degree, and are commissioned as second lieutenants in the United States Air Force.
The rings are received at the Ring Dance at the beginning of the Graduation Week festivities for the class ahead of the ring recipients.
The admissions process is a lengthy one and applicants usually begin the paperwork during their junior year of high school.
In a controversial move following the 2003 sexual assault scandal, the words "Bring me men..." were taken down and replaced with the Academy's (later adopted as the Air Force's) core values: "Integrity first, service before self, and excellence in all we do."
''Doolittle Hall'' is the headquarters of the Academy's Association of Graduates and also serves as the initial reception point for new cadets arriving for Basic Cadet Training.
The Secretary of the Air Force, Harold E. Talbott, announced the winning site on 24 June 1954.
The Cadet Wing is divided into four groups, of ten cadet squadrons each.
The men's boxing team competes in the National Collegiate Boxing Association.
Congressional oversight of the Academy is exercised through a Board of Visitors (BOV), established under Title 10, United States Code, Section 9355.
One of the most significant events in the history of the Academy was the admission of women.
In 2005, allegations surfaced that some Evangelical Christian cadets and staff were effectively engaging in religious proselytizing at the Academy.
After the first year, cadets have more options for summer military training.
Some male cadets also believed that the presence of women had softened the rigors of Academy life and that women received special treatment.
Meanwhile, Air Training Command (ATC) began developing a detailed curriculum for the Academy program.
During the academic year, all cadets take formal classes in military theory, operations and leadership.
In developing a distinctive uniform for cadets, the Air Force turned to Hollywood.
A powered flight program is conducted under the 557th Flying Training Squadron to expose cadets to the basics of powered flight.
The Academy fields a coeducational team in rifle.
Other aggravating factors were the presence in the Cadet Wing of cadets motivated to attend the Academy for reasons of draft avoidance, and a number of highly publicized cheating scandals.
The effects of the anti-war movement were felt at the Academy as well.
Air Force has traditional service academy rivalries with Navy and Army.
The main buildings in the Cadet Area are set around a large, square pavilion known as ‘‘the Terrazzo’‘.
At the same time, the Academy implemented programs to combat sexual assault, harassment and gender bias.
Falcon Stadium, located outside of the Cadet Area, is the football field and site of the graduation ceremonies.
A number of cadets are selected for further training and become members of The Wings of Blue, the U.S. Air Force Parachute Team.
Following the 2003 crisis, the Department of Defense directed its attention to the problem of sexual harassment and assault at the military academies.
The 15 members of the BOV are variously appointed by the President of the United States, the Vice President, the Senate and House Armed Services Committees and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Between their fourth and third class years, cadets undergo training in Air Force operations in a deployed environment (called Expeditionary Skills and Evasion Training ESET) and may participate in flying gliders, cyber-warfare training, satellite and space operations, unmanned systems, or free-fall parachute training.
The panel's investigation found a "religious climate that does not involve overt religious discrimination, but a failure to fully accommodate all members’ needs and a lack of awareness over where the line is drawn between permissible and impermissible expression of beliefs."
It is the youngest of the five United States service academies, having graduated its first class in 1959.
The students, called "cadets", are divided into four classes, based on their year in school, much like a civilian college.
It contains the inscription by Austin Dusty Miller, "Man's flight through life is sustained by the power of his knowledge."
Following each of these events, the Academy thoroughly examined the etiology of the mass cheating in addition to alleged excessive pressures that the academic system at the time placed on cadets and made changes in attempts to reduce the opportunities for future incidents
The football team has played in 17 bowl games and the basketball team has had strong showings in the last several years, qualifying for the NCAA tournament and, most recently, making the final four of the 2007 NIT Tournament.
As such, the Superintendent oversees all aspects of the Academy, including military training, academics, athletics, admissions and the administration of the base.
The Academy's intercollegiate program has 17 men's and 10 women's NCAA sanctioned teams, nicknamed the ‘‘Falcons.’‘ Men's teams compete in football, baseball, basketball, ice hockey, cross-country, fencing, golf, gymnastics, indoor and outdoor track, lacrosse, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis, water polo and wrestling.
Hanlon wrote, "As the Military and Naval Academies are the backbone of the Army and Navy, so must the Aeronautical Academy be the backbone of the Air Service.
The Air Force Academy continued the tradition, beginning with the first class, 1959, and so is the only service academy to have had class rings for every class since its founding.
The three service academies compete for the Commander-in-Chief's Trophy in football each year.
The female cadets were initially segregated from the rest of the Cadet Wing but were fully integrated into their assigned squadrons after their first semester.
In 1925, air power pioneer General Billy Mitchell testified on Capitol Hill that it was necessary "to have an air academy to form a basis for the permanent backbone of your air service and to attend to the...organizational part of it, very much the same way that West Point does for the Army, or that Annapolis does for the Navy."
Cadets' military training occurs throughout their time at the Academy, but is especially intense during their four summers.
Both the academy's Association of Graduates and the Academy Library maintain displays of class rings.
The cadet social center is Arnold Hall, located just outside the Cadet Area, which houses a 3000-seat theater, a ballroom, a number of lounges, and dining and recreation facilities for cadets and visitors.
The Cadet Area also contains an observatory and a planetarium for academic use and navigation training.
The Academy's Association of Graduates (AOG) accepts rings of deceased graduates which are melted down to form an ingot of white gold from which a portion of all future rings are made.
Each class designs its own class crest; the only requirements being that each crest include all the elements on the Class of 1959's crest: the class number, the class year, the Polaris star, and the eagle.
Senator or U.S. Representative.
The ''United States Air Force Academy Preparatory School'' (usually referred to as the "Prep School") is a program offered to selected individuals who were not able to obtain appointments directly to the Academy.
The position of Superintendent is normally held by an active-duty lieutenant general.
Female cadets have had consistently higher dropout rates than men and have left the Air Force in higher numbers than men.
The academy's recent implementation of a computer and network security program may represent a return to form.
Arnold W. Braswell, a native of Minden, Louisiana, was commander of the original four cadet squadrons at the academy 1955 to 1958.
In addition to their full academic course loads, heavy demands are placed on fourth class cadets outside of class.
F-4 Phantom II pilot Steve Ritchie '64 and F-4 Phantom II weapon systems officer Jeffrey Feinstein '68 each became aces by downing five enemy aircraft in combat.
In 1919, Congressman Charles F. Curry introduced legislation providing for an Academy, but concerns about cost, curriculum and location led to its demise.
The Cadet Area also contains extensive facilities for use by cadets participating in intercollegiate athletics, intramural athletics, physical education classes and other physical training.
Approximately sixty percent of a cadet's course load is mandated by the core curriculum.
These allegations, along with concerns over how the Air Force handles other religious issues, prompted Academy graduate Michael L. Weinstein to file a lawsuit against the Air Force.
Other officials expressed similar sentiments.
The Center's programs, when coupled with the Honor Code and Honor System, establish a foundation for the "leaders of character" that the Academy aspires to produce.
Externally funded research at the Air Force Academy has been a large and growing part of the technical majors.
In 1984, the Cadet Wing voted to add an "Honor Oath," which was to be taken by all cadets.
Harmon Hall is the primary administration building, which houses the offices of the Superintendent and the Superintendent's staff.
In addition, the Academy also sponsors two non-NCAA programs: cheerleading and boxing.
The Preparatory School provides an academic, athletic and military program for qualified young men and women who may need certain additional preparation prior to acceptance to the Academy.
They are not referred to as freshmen, sophomores, juniors and seniors, however, but as fourth-, third-, second- and first class cadets, respectively.
As early as 1918, Lieutenant Colonel A.J.
In addition to an AOC, cadet squadrons and groups are also supervised by an active duty non-commissioned officer known as an Academy Military Trainer (AMT), who fulfills a similar job as the AOC.
Cadets live, march and eat meals with members of their squadrons.
The most controversial aspect of the SOM-designed Air Force Academy was its chapel.
Regular demonstrations were held at the Cadet Chapel, and cadets often became the targets of protesters' insults.
The campus of the Academy covers 18,500 acres (73&nbsp;km²) on the east side of the Rampart Range of the Rocky Mountains, just north of Colorado Springs.
Gould was removed from the College Football Selection Committee but was able to retain his retirement pay.
This "honor probation" is usually only reserved for cadets in their first two years at the Academy.
Military training and intramural athletics are conducted by squadron as well.
Following the scandal and rising concerns about sexual assault throughout the U.S. military, the Department of Defense established a task force to investigate sexual harassment and assault at each of the United States service academies.
Due to the need for more pilots, Academy enrollment grew significantly during this time.
On 28&nbsp;May 1980, 97 of the original female cadets completed the program and graduated from the Academy—just over 10% of the graduating class.
Cadets also have the opportunity to take a parachuting course conducted by the 98th Flying Training Squadron.
These officers have command authority over the cadets, counsel cadets on leadership and military career issues, oversee military training and serve as role models for the future officers.
Since 2006, the board has been required to include at least two Academy graduates.
Academy facilities were likewise expanded, and training was modified to better meet the needs of the wartime Air Force.
Every Dean of the Faculty (equivalent to a Provost at most universities) has always been an active-duty brigadier general, although technically, a civilian may hold the position.
From the late 1960s until the mid-1990s, cadets also completed SERE training in the Jacks Valley complex between their fourth- and third-class years.
Mitchell's arguments did not gain traction with legislators, and it was not until the late 1940s that the concept of the United States Air Force Academy began to take shape.
The first class adopted the Cadet Honor Code, and chose the falcon as the Academy's mascot.
The Academy's organization is unusual in a number of respects.
The student body of the Academy is known as the Cadet Wing.
All cadets are required to compete in intramural athletics for their entire time at the Academy, unless they are on-season for intercollegiate athletics.
The primary elements of the athletic program are intercollegiate athletics, intramural athletics, physical education, and the physical fitness tests.
Permanent Professors are nominated by the President of the United States and approved by the Senate, and can serve until age 64.
Famed director Cecil B. DeMille designed the cadet parade uniform; it is still worn by cadets today.
The Prop and Wings insignia of the Air Service (1918–26), Air Corps (1926–41), and Army Air Forces (1941–47) became the insignia of upperclass cadets at the Air Force Academy beginning with the first class, 1959.
The Air Force ring is distinctive for being white gold instead of the yellow gold used at the other academies.
Each member of Congress and the Vice President can have five appointees attending the Air Force Academy at any time.
This is particularly true of the non-cadet units—most assigned to the 10th Air Base Wing—that provide base services such as security, communications, and engineering.
The U.S. Air Force Academy Flying Team is composed of ~26 cadets selected to compete in National Intercollegiate Flying Association competitions.
The Vietnam War was the first war in which Academy graduates fought and died.
They may also be able to take courses offered by other military services, such as the U.S. Army's Airborne School at Fort Benning, Georgia, or the Air Assault School, at Fort Campbell, Kentucky.
Admission is extremely competitive, with nominations divided equally among Congressional districts.
All cadets at the Academy take part in the school's extensive athletic program.
After Recognition, the stringent rules of the fourth class year are relaxed.
All graduates receive a Bachelor of Science degree, regardless of major, because of the technical content of the core requirements.
Air Force has ranked highest of all undergraduate-only universities in federally funded research as reported by the National Science Foundation, surpassing $60 million in 2010.
Among the panel members were Charles Lindbergh, General Carl Spaatz, and Lieutenant General Hubert R. Harmon, who later became the Academy's first superintendent.
Each cadet squadron and cadet group is supervised by a specially selected active duty officer called an Air Officer Commanding (AOC).
The standard insignia uses the design of the Air Corps Prop and Wings, except that it is all silver instead of the gold wings and silver prop of the earlier design.
Each year, several soaring students are selected to become instructor pilots to teach new classes of soaring students.
The Air Force Academy is an accredited four-year university offering bachelor's degrees in a variety of subjects.
The presumed sanction for an honor violation is disenrollment, but mitigating factors may result in the violator being placed in a probationary status for some period of time.
Additional nomination slots are available for children of career military personnel, children of disabled veterans or veterans who were killed in action, or children of Medal of Honor recipients.
Because there were no female upper class cadets, the Air Training Officer model used in the early years of the Academy was revived, and fifteen young female officers were brought in to help with the integration process.
Cadets also take classes in team sports such as basketball and soccer, in lifetime sports such as tennis and golf and on the physiology of exercise.
Most recognizable is the 17-spired Cadet Chapel.
The 10th Air Base Wing provides all base support functions that exist at other air force bases, including civil engineering, communications, medical support, personnel, administration, security and base services.
The American college tradition of the class ring began with the class of 1835 at the U.S. Military Academy.
The men's and women's programs compete in NCAA's Division I, with the football team competing in Division I FBS.
The Academy's stated mission is "to educate, train, and inspire men and women to become leaders of character, motivated to lead the United States Air Force in service to our nation."
By 1961, class size was down to 271, but due to the need for officers in the Vietnam War, grew to 745 admittees in 1970, and peaking in 1974, with 1620, and 1975, with 1,626, the largest number ever admitted.
The Academy's men's and women's rugby teams have each won multiple national championships and the women's side recently had two players selected for the United States national team.
In turn Gould said to the Times that the suggestion that he had interfered with the investigation “preposterous."
Cadets throughout the Wing are expected to sit on Honor Boards as juries that determine whether their fellow cadets violated the code.
The Fieldhouse is the home to Clune Arena, the ice hockey rink and an indoor track, which doubles as an indoor practice facility for a number of sports.
The size of the graduating classes went from 217 cadets in 1961 to 745 cadets in 1970.
No service can flourish without some such institution to inculcate into its embryonic officers love of country, proper conception of duty, and highest regard for honor."
The Minuteman III was removed in August 2008 due to rusting and other internal damage.
In July 2009, Speaker Nancy Pelosi appointed Colorado Congressman Jared Polis to the BOV, the first openly gay person to serve on a service academy’s advisory board.
Many of the women from those early classes went on to achieve success within the Cadet Wing and after graduation (see list of Academy graduates below).
:: ''We will not lie, steal, or cheat, nor tolerate among us anyone who does. ''
The ‘‘War Memorial’‘, a black marble wall located just under the flagpole on the Terrazzo, is etched with the names of Academy graduates who have been killed in combat.
While at Lowry, they were housed in renovated World War II barracks.
Air Force Falcons football has had the best showing of the three, winning the trophy 18 of its 34 years.
Cadets may choose from a variety of majors, including engineering, the basic sciences, social sciences and humanities, as well as in a variety of divisional or inter-disciplinary subjects.
The original 582 sites considered were winnowed to three: Alton, Illinois; Lake Geneva, Wisconsin; and the ultimate site at Colorado Springs, Colorado.
Recent incoming classes have had about 1,200 cadets; historically just under 1,000 of those will graduate.
An Air Force panel investigated the accusations and issued a report on 22 June 2005.
Morale sometimes suffered as a consequence.
On 5 January 2012 rape charges were preferred against cadets in three unrelated cases.
Traditionally, the academic program at the Air Force Academy (as with military academies in general) has focused heavily on science and engineering, with the idea that many graduates would be expected to manage complex air, space and information technology systems.
First-class cadets (seniors) are referred to as "firsties."
From there, it spread to the U.S.
It is named after General Jimmy Doolittle.
The rings of all the academies were originally designed to be worn on the left hand, so that the wearer reads the name of the academy on the bezel while a cadet or midshipman and others can read it after graduation, the rings are now worn on either hand.
Each cadet squadron consists of about 110 cadets, roughly evenly distributed among the four classes.
While core requirements remain significant during the third and fourth years, cadets have more flexibility to focus in their major areas of study, allowing them to participate in international and inter-service Academy exchange programs.
Each semester, cadets must pass two athletic fitness tests: a  run to measure aerobic fitness, and a 15-minute, 5-event, physical fitness test consisting of pull-ups, a standing long jump, sit-ups, push-ups and a  sprint.
Prior to the Academy's establishment, air power advocates had been pushing for a separate Air Force Academy for decades.
For a number of years, only the men's teams competed in Division I.
Because it is primarily a military unit, much of the Academy's structure is set up like that of any other Air Force Base.
This program was replaced with Combat Survival Training (CST) in 1995 and done away with entirely in 2005.
Repeated failures can lead to disenrollment.
There were no upper class cadets to train the new cadets, so the Air Force appointed a cadre of "Air Training Officers" (ATOs) to conduct training.
Women have made up just over 20% of the most recent classes, with the class of 2016 having the highest proportion of any class, 25%.
It was designed by SOM architect Walter Netsch, who at one point was prepared to abandon the design; but the accordion-like structure is acknowledged as an iconic symbol of the academy campus.
The program involves intense academic preparation (particularly in English, math and science), along with athletic and military training, meant to prepare the students for appointment to the Academy.
Following the recommendation of the Board, Congress passed legislation in 1954 to begin the construction of the Air Force Academy, and President Eisenhower signed it into law on 1 April of that year.
The legislation established an advisory commission to determine the site of the new school.
In response to the panel's findings, the Air Force released new guidelines to discourage public prayers at official events or meetings and to facilitate worship by non-Christian religions.
The program uses T-53A aircraft to offer cadets basic flight training and the opportunity to solo.
A 2010 survey found that 41 percent of academy cadets who identified themselves as non-Christian reported they were subjected to unwanted religious proselytizing at least once or twice last year at the school.
D20 also maintains an elementary school on the academy grounds.
Colorado congressman Mike Coffman criticized the academy for resisting calls to release details of the survey's results.
Despite a peak of 1,350 (admitted 2004) and 1,418 (admitted 2005), from 1995 to 2005 class size averaged about 1,250 freshmen.
The Code itself is simple:
Women's teams competed in Division II and were once members of the Continental Divide Conference, then the Colorado Athletic Conference.
The Cadet Honor Code is the cornerstone of a cadet's professional training and development – the minimum standard of ethical conduct that cadets expect of themselves and their fellow cadets.
As such, it had a profound effect on the development of the character of the Academy.
The classes cover a wide range of activities: Swimming and water survival build confidence while teaching important survival skills.
Each of the components of the program is intended to give cadets the skills and knowledge that they will need for success as officers.
The first USAFA class graduated and was commissioned on 3 June 1959.
In 2014, Academy Superintendent Lt. Gen. Michelle Johnson responded to reports of allegations of sexual assault and drug use at a December 2011 party by calling for a review of the Athletic Department by the Inspector General.
Cadets also recommend sanctions for violations.
According to at least one commentator, as many as ten percent of male Academy graduates in the late 1970s and early 1980s requested Army commissions, in part because of controversy over such issues.
For a cadet group, the AOC is normally an active-duty lieutenant colonel.
The Consolidated Education and Training Facility (CETF) was built in 1997 as an annex to Fairchild Hall.
The Academy's dedication ceremony took place on that first day and was broadcast live on national television, with Walter Cronkite covering the event.
These and other problems again rose to national prominence in the summer of 2014 when ''The Gazette'' broke an investigation into behavior by Academy cadets and faculty that included allegations of drug use, alcohol abuse, cheating, and sexual assault.
The first military experience for new cadets (called "basic cadets") occurs during the six weeks of Basic Cadet Training (BCT), in the summer before their fourth class (freshman) year.
Cadet honor representatives are chosen by senior leadership, and oversee the honor system by conducting education classes and investigating suspected honor violations.
Each year, hundreds of cadets earn their Basic Parachutist Badge by completing five jumps in the program.
Fourth class cadets (freshmen) are often referred to as "doolies," a term derived from the Greek word δοῦλος ("doulos") meaning "slave" or "servant."
The Academy also has several club sports, such as rugby, that compete intercollegiately.
The ‘‘Honor Wall,’‘ overlooking the Terrazzo, is inscribed with the Cadet Honor Code: "We will not lie, cheat, or steal, nor tolerate among us anyone who does."
In addition to a rigorous military training regimen, cadets also take a broad academic course load with an extensive core curriculum in engineering, humanities, social sciences, basic sciences, military studies and physical education.
Intramural sports put cadet squadrons against one another in many sports, including basketball, cross-country, flag football, ice hockey, racquetball, flickerball, rugby union, boxing, soccer, mountain biking, softball, team handball, tennis, Ultimate, wallyball and volleyball.
The current class (class of 2019) began with 1,248 students.
The ‘‘Core Values Ramp’‘ (formerly known as the ‘’Bring Me Men Ramp’’) leads down from the main Terrazzo level toward the parade field.
The insignia is given to fourth class (freshmen) cadets at the Recognition Ceremony near the end of their first year rite of passage.
This was only intended to be a short term fix, however, and disagreements between the services quickly led to the establishment of the Service Academy Board by Secretary of Defense James Forrestal.
The fourth class year ends with "Recognition," a physically and mentally demanding several-day event which culminates in the award of the Prop and Wings insignia to the fourth class cadets, signifying their ascension to the ranks of upper class cadets.
The Air Force Academy's Men's Hockey team recently lost in the "Elite Eight" of hockey in double overtime.
