The LCS is a class of relatively small surface vessels intended for operations in the littoral zone (close to shore).
There is also NSA Panama City, Florida which is home to the Navy Diving and Salvage Training Center.
In response this, Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus has stated that 60 percent of the total U.S. fleet will be deployed to the Pacific by the year 2020.
The Navy was extensively involved in Operation Urgent Fury, Operation Desert Shield, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Deliberate Force, Operation Allied Force, Operation Desert Fox and Operation Southern Watch.
Ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt, it was a mission designed to demonstrate the Navy's capability to extend to the global theater.
Among the commands of the shore establishment, , are the Naval Education and Training Command, the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command, the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command, the Naval Facilities Engineering Command, the Naval Supply Systems Command, the Naval Air Systems Command, the Naval Sea Systems Command, the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, the Bureau of Naval Personnel, the United States Naval Academy, the Naval Safety Center, the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center, and the United States Naval Observatory.
Cruisers are large surface combat vessels that conduct anti-air/anti-missile warfare, surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare, and strike operations independently or as members of a larger task force.
When attached to Marine Corps units deployed to an operational environment they generally wear Marine camouflage uniforms, but otherwise they wear Navy dress uniforms unless they opt to conform to Marine Corps grooming standards.
Its naval air station was deactivated in 1995 and its flight activities transferred to nearby Andersen Air Force Base.
The United States Navy had followed in the footsteps of the navies of Great Britain and Germany which favored concentrated groups of battleships as their main offensive naval weapons.
In 1907, most of the Navy's battleships, with several support vessels, dubbed the Great White Fleet, were showcased in a 14-month circumnavigation of the world.
All amphibious transport docks can operate helicopters, LCACs, and other conventional amphibious vehicles while the newer ''San Antonio'' class of ships has been explicitly designed to operate all three elements of the Marines' "mobility triad": Expeditionary Fighting Vehicles (EFVs), the V-22 Osprey tiltrotor aircraft, and LCACs.
By 1936, with the completion of , the U.S. Navy possessed a carrier fleet of 165,000 tonnes displacement, although this figure was nominally recorded as 135,000 tonnes to comply with treaty limitations.
(See: List of littoral combat ships) The navy has announced that a further 20 vessels to be built after that will be redesignated as 'frigates'.
Shore establishments exist to support the mission of the fleet through the use of facilities on land.
They also contain a well deck to support the use of Landing Craft Air Cushion (LCAC) and other amphibious assault watercraft.
In addition to missiles, the navy employs Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes and various types of naval mines.
The war saw ironclad warships in combat for the first time at the Battle of Hampton Roads in 1862, which pitted  against .
Though ultimately unsuccessful, Japan attempted to neutralize this strategic threat with the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941.
Franklin Roosevelt, the number two official in the Navy Department during World War I, appreciated the Navy and gave it strong support.
For the purpose of this article, the general term "insignia" shall be used to describe both, as it is done in Navy Uniform Regulations.
In addition, the Navy has more than one hundred vessels operated by the Military Sealift Command (MSC) crewed by a combination of civilian contractors and a small number of uniformed Naval personnel.
This new strategy charts a course for the Navy, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent these crises from occurring or reacting quickly should one occur to prevent negative impacts on the United States.
Modern carriers are named after American admirals and politicians, usually presidents.
Naval fixed-wing aircraft employ much of the same weapons as the United States Air Force for both air-to-air and air-to-surface combat.
The names of commissioned ships of the U.S. Navy are prefixed with the letters "USS", designating "United States Ship".
They will serve as a complement to cruise missiles, as they have less range, components wear out fast, and currently only ''Zumwalt''-class destroyers can generate enough electrical power for desired performance.
They are divided into five definable groups, with colored group rate marks designating the group to which they belong: Seaman, Fireman, Airman, Constructionman, and Hospitalman.
For two decades after the war, however, the U.S. Navy's fleet was neglected and became technologically obsolete.
The rest can be seen in the article cited at the top of this section:
Two examples are the 1966 Palomares B-52 crash incident and search for the nuclear bombs, and Task Force 71 of the Seventh Fleet operation in search for Korean Air Lines Flight 007 shot down by the Soviets on 1 September 1983.
Attack and guided missile submarines have several tactical missions, including sinking ships and other subs, launching cruise missiles, gathering intelligence, and assisting in special operations.
The result was a major defeat for the British invasion of New York state, and the defeat of the military threat from the Indian allies of the British.
It was "envisioned to be a networked, agile, stealthy surface combatant capable of defeating anti-access and asymmetric threats in the littorals".
This rapid expansion of the U.S. Navy and its easy victory over the Spanish Navy in 1898 brought a new respect for American technical quality.
It is a blue-water navy with the ability to project force onto the littoral regions of the world, engage in forward areas during peacetime, and rapidly respond to regional crises, making it an active player in U.S. foreign and defense policy.
Naval construction, especially of battleships was limited by the Washington Naval Conference of 1921–22.
At other times, Coast Guard port security units are sent overseas to guard the security of ports and other assets.
Current U.S. Navy shipboard weapons systems are almost entirely focused on missiles, both as a weapon and as a threat.
The Navy has approximately a dozen in active service, which are mainly used in the littoral regions of the Persian Gulf, but have also been used for home port patrols and drug interdiction missions.
The previous naval jack was a blue field with 50 white stars, identical to the canton of the ensign (the flag of the United States) both in appearance and size, and remains in use with vessels of the U.S. Coast Guard and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Initial operational capability of the F-35C is now expected to be February 2019.
With very few exceptions, destroyers are named after U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard heroes.
The navy participated in Operation Enduring Freedom, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and is a major participant in the ongoing War on Terror, largely in this capacity.
Short range defense against missiles is provided by the Phalanx CIWS and the more recently developed RIM-162 Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile.
The members of the oldest currently-commissioned attack submarine class, the , are typically named for cities.
To combat submarines, helicopters use Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes.
NAB Coronado is also home to the Naval Special Warfare Center, the primary training center for SEALs.
File:Surface Warfare Officer Insignia.png|Surface Warfare Officer Insignia
Destroyers and U.S.
Land strikes are the domain of the BGM-109 Tomahawk, which was first deployed in the 1980s and is continually being updated to increase its capabilities.
A jack of similar design was used in 1794, though with 13 stars arranged in a 3–2–3–2–3 pattern.
A modernization program beginning in the 1880s when the first steel hulled warships stimulated the American steel industry, and "the new steel navy" was born.
In March 2014, the Navy is considering counting deployable ships such as minesweepers, patrol craft, and hospital ships in the "battle fleet" in order to reach a count of 291, and also ships that have been put in "shrink wrap".
* In addition, , commissioned in 1797 and one of the original six frigates of the United States Navy, remains in commission at the Charlestown Navy Yard in Boston.
It has 272 deployable combat vessels and more than 3,700 aircraft in active service .
Later developments of vertical launch systems and the Tomahawk missile gave cruisers additional long-range land and sea strike capability, making them capable of both offensive and defensive battle operations.
To defend against enemy missile attack, the navy operates a number of systems that are all coordinated by the Aegis combat system.
The U.S. Navy currently has a three-step plan to boost the fleets' firepower: in the near-term, develop the Long Range Anti-Ship Missile to create a surface-launched, over-the-horizon cruise missile with greater coverage than the -ranged Harpoon anti-ship missile to have the capability that was lost with the retirement of the Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile; in the mid-term, replace defensive missile systems with laser weapon systems; and in the long-term, equip ships with electromagnetic railguns for over-the-horizon bombardment.
NAB Coronado is located on the southern end of the Coronado Island and is home to the navy's west coast SEAL teams and special boat units.
Vessels that are removed from the register prior to disposal are said to be ''stricken'' from the register.
They deliver, command, coordinate, and fully support all elements of a 2,200-strong Marine Expeditionary Unit in an amphibious assault using both air and amphibious vehicles.
Modern guided missile cruisers were developed out of a need to counter the anti-ship missile threat facing the United States Navy.
In the operational environment, as an expeditionary force specializing in amphibious operations, Marines often embark on Navy ships to conduct operations from beyond territorial waters.
The dock landing ship is a medium amphibious transport that is designed specifically to support and operate LCACs, though it is able to operate other amphibious assault vehicles in the United States inventory as well.
All cruisers in this class are named after battles.
Hesitation by the senior command meant that naval forces were not contributed until late 1917.
It played a major role in the American Civil War by blockading the Confederacy and seizing control of its rivers.
MCM vessels have mostly legacy names of previous US Navy ships, especially WWII-era minesweepers.
Supporters argued that a navy would protect shipping, defend the coast, and make it easier to seek out support from foreign countries.
This successful landing and capture of Veracruz opened the way for the capture of Mexico City and the end of the war.
On the list of available missiles are the Maverick, SLAM-ER and JSOW.
Ready logistics support for the group is provided by a combined ammunition, oiler, and supply ship.
The United States Navy established itself as a player in American foreign policy through the actions of Commodore Matthew Perry in Japan, which resulted in the Convention of Kanagawa in 1854.
The second largest concentration of installations is at Hampton Roads, Virginia, where the navy occupies over  of land.
The US Navy recognizes 13 October 1775 as the date of its official establishment&nbsp;— the date of the resolution of the Continental Congress that purchased two vessels to be armed against British ships.
Naval power played a significant role during the American Civil War, in which the Union had a distinct advantage over the Confederacy on the seas.
The size, complexity, and international presence of the United States Navy requires a large number of navy installations to support its operations.
File:USS America (LHA-6) off Pascagoula in 2013.JPG|The USS ''America'' Amphibious assault ship, launched in 2012.
There have been many designs for patrol boats, though the navy currently only has a single class.
The strategy recognized the economic links of the global system and how any disruption due to regional crises—man-made or natural—can adversely impact the U.S. economy and quality of life.
Petty Officers perform not only the duties of their specific career field but also serve as leaders to junior enlisted personnel.
The U.S. Navy has also been involved in search and rescue/search and salvage operations, sometimes in conjunction with vessels of other countries as well as with U.S. Coast Guard ships.
It can be released through free-fall or parachute and can be set to detonate in the air or on the ground.
Navy patrol boat near Kuwait Naval Base in 2009
File:US Navy 090210-N-9671T-144 A port security boat patrols the waters near Kuwait Naval Base.jpg|U.S.
For surface strikes, navy aircraft utilize a combination of missiles, smart bombs, and dumb bombs.
The First Naval Jack, however, has always been flown on the oldest ship in the active American fleet, which is currently .
The B61 is a thermonuclear device that can be dropped by strike aircraft such as the F/A-18 Hornet and Super Hornet at high speed from a large range of altitudes.
Both Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin D. Roosevelt were the assistant secretary of the navy prior to their presidencies.
An aircraft carrier is typically deployed along with a host of additional vessels, forming a carrier strike group.
These submarines have only one mission: to carry and, if called upon, to launch the Trident nuclear missile.
The F-35 Lightning II is presently under development and was scheduled to replace the C and D versions of the Hornet beginning in 2012.
The westernmost U.S. territory, it contains a natural deep water harbor capable of harboring aircraft carriers in emergencies.
The Marine Corps depends on the Navy for medical support (dentists, doctors, nurses, medical technicians known as corpsmen) and religious support (chaplains).
When deployed with a carrier strike group or expeditionary strike group, destroyers and their fellow Aegis-equipped cruisers are primarily tasked with defending the fleet while providing secondary strike capabilities.
The U.S. Navy traces its origins to the Continental Navy, which was established during the American Revolutionary War and was effectively disbanded as a separate entity shortly thereafter.
Non-commissioned, civilian-manned vessels of the navy have names that begin with "USNS", standing for "United States Naval Ship" The names of ships are officially selected by the secretary of the navy, often to honor important people or places.
While the majority of bases are located inside the United States itself, the navy maintains a significant number of facilities abroad, either in U.S.-controlled territories or in foreign countries under a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).
United States naval aviation fully came of age in World War II, when it became clear following the Attack on Pearl Harbor, the Battle of the Coral Sea, and the Battle of Midway that aircraft carriers and the planes that they carried had replaced the battleship as the greatest weapon on the seas.
The 21st century U.S. Navy maintains a sizable global presence, deploying in such areas as East Asia, the Mediterranean, and the Middle East.
Mine countermeasures vessels are a combination of minehunters, a naval vessel that actively detects and destroys individual naval mines, and minesweepers, which clear mined areas as a whole, without prior detection of the mines.
All dock landing ships are named after cities or important places in U.S. and U.S.
They have the capabilities of a small assault transport, including a flight deck and hangar for housing two helicopters, a stern ramp for operating small boats, and the cargo volume and payload to deliver a small assault force with fighting vehicles to a roll-on/roll-off port facility.
Some Marine aviation squadrons, usually fixed-wing assigned to carrier air wings train and operate alongside Navy squadrons; they fly similar missions and often fly sorties together under the cognizance of the CAG.
CMCs can be Command level (within a single unit, such as a ship or shore station), Fleet level (squadrons consisting of multiple operational units, headed by a flag officer or commodore), or Force level (consisting of a separate community within the Navy, such as Subsurface, Air, Reserves).
The aircraft carriers  and  were built on the hulls of partially built battle cruisers that had been canceled by the treaty.
Thus Navy officers and enlisted sailors fulfill these roles.
With the current  class attack submarines, the U.S. Navy has extended the ''Ohio'' class' state-based naming scheme to these submarines.
U.S. Navy training manuals state that the mission of the U.S. Armed Forces is "to prepare and conduct prompt and sustained combat operations in support of the national interest.
To these, attack submarines also add the battlegroup operations mission.
Nuclear weapons in the U.S. Navy arsenal are deployed through ballistic missile submarines and aircraft.
The U.S. Navy began to research the use of aircraft at sea in the 1910s, with Lieutenant Theodore G. "Spuds" Ellyson becoming the first naval aviator on 28 January 1911, and commissioned its first aircraft carrier, , in 1922.
The navy has approximately a dozen of these in active service, but the mine countermeasure (MCM) role is also being assumed by the incoming classes of littoral combat ships.
The ship is easy to reconfigure for different roles, including anti-submarine warfare, mine countermeasures, anti-surface warfare, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, homeland defense, maritime intercept, special operations, and logistics, all by swapping mission-specific modules as needed.
When underway, the ensign is raised on the mainmast.
In 1798–99 the Navy was involved in an undeclared Quasi-War with France.
It concentrated on mine laying operations against German U-Boats.
All current and planned U.S. Navy submarines are nuclear-powered, as only nuclear propulsion allows for the combination of stealth and long duration, high-speed sustained underwater movement that makes modern nuclear submarines so vital to a modern blue-water navy.
Lasers like the Laser Weapon System in testing are currently for defense of ships and would allow missile compartments to be freed up for offensive system, while the laser could run as long as the ship has power.
Amphibious assault ships are the centerpieces of US amphibious warfare and fulfill the same power projection role as aircraft carriers except that their striking force centers on land forces instead of aircraft.
Many past and present United States historical figures have served in the navy.
The navy was a major participant in the Vietnam War, blockaded Cuba during the Cuban Missile Crisis, and, through the use of ballistic missile submarines, became an important aspect of the United States' nuclear strategic deterrence policy.
Aviation is where the Navy and Marines share the most common ground, since aircrews are guided in their use of aircraft by standard procedures outlined in series of publications known as NATOPS manuals.
When larger guns were needed to bombard Veracruz, navy volunteers landed large navy guns and manned them in the successful bombardment and capture of the city.
At its peak, the U.S. Navy was operating 6,768 ships on V-J Day in August 1945.
Naval Air Force units contributed to the anti-submarine operations.
File:Naval Aviator Badge.jpg|Naval Aviator Badge
One significant change in U.S. policy-making that is having a major effect on naval planning is the Pivot to East Asia.
It provides Law Enforcement Detachments (LEDETs) to Navy vessels, where they perform arrests and other law enforcement duties during naval boarding and interdiction missions.
With a landing platform, amphibious transport docks also have the capability to serve as secondary aviation support for an expeditionary group.
Others included Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and George H. W. Bush.
In 1846–1848 the navy successfully used the Pacific Squadron under Commodore (Rear Admiral) Robert Stockton and its marines and blue-jackets to facilitate the capture of California with large scale land operations coordinated with the local militia organized in the California Battalion.
Among the most important is the "warfare qualification", which denotes a journeyman level of capability in Surface Warfare, Aviation Warfare, Information Dominance Warfare, Naval Aircrew, Special Warfare, Seabee Warfare, Submarine Warfare or Expeditionary Warfare.
In return, senior leaders were eager for innovation and experimented with new technologies, such as magnetic torpedoes, and developed a strategy called War Plan Orange for victory in the Pacific in a hypothetical war with Japan that would eventually become reality.
Maryland is home to NAS Patuxent River, which houses the Navy's Test Pilot School.
NAS North Island is located on the north side of Coronado, and is home to Headquarters for Naval Air Forces and Naval Air Force Pacific, the bulk of the Pacific Fleet's helicopter squadrons, and part of the West Coast aircraft carrier fleet.
This placed much of the burden of retaliating against the Japanese on the small number of aircraft carriers.
Navy aircraft also played a significant role in conflicts during the following Cold War years, with the F-4 Phantom II and the F-14 Tomcat becoming military icons of the era.
The main U.S. Navy submarine bases on the east coast are located in Naval Submarine Base New London in Groton, Connecticut and NSB Kings Bay in Kings Bay, Georgia.
The United States First Fleet existed after the Second World War from 1947, but it was redesignated the Third Fleet in early 1973.
The Continental Navy achieved mixed results; it was successful in a number of engagements and raided many British merchant vessels, but it lost twenty four of its vessels and at one point was reduced to two in active service.
Also located in Maryland is the United States Naval Academy, situated in Annapolis.
Navy officers aboard the aircraft carrier USS ''Abraham Lincoln'' (CVN-72) monitor defense systems during early 2010s maritime security operations exercises.
They may only be relegated to short-range defensive work, as they cannot fire over the horizon or out of line-of-sight.
It achieved notable acclaim in the Pacific Theater, where it was instrumental to the Allies' successful "island hopping" campaign.
Official Navy websites list the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and the chief of naval operations as part of the shore establishment, but these two entities effectively sit superior to the other organizations, playing a coordinating role.
The Washington Navy Yard in Washington, DC is the Navy's oldest shore establishment and serves as a ceremonial and administrative center for the U.S. Navy, home to the Chief of Naval Operations, and is headquarters for numerous commands.
Recently, amphibious assault ships have begun to be deployed as the core of an expeditionary strike group, which usually consists of an additional amphibious transport dock and dock landing ship for amphibious warfare and an Aegis-equipped cruiser and destroyer, frigate, and attack submarine for group defense.
NS Newport in Newport, Rhode Island is home to many schools and tenant commands, including the Officer Candidate School, Naval Undersea Warfare Center, and more, and also maintains inactive ships.
The ''Ticonderoga'' class is the only active class of cruiser.
Amphibious transport docks are warships that embark, transport, and land Marines, supplies, and equipment in a supporting role during amphibious warfare missions.
The U.S. Navy has the world's largest aircraft carrier fleet, with ten in service, two in the reserve fleet, and three new carriers under construction.
Dock landing ships are normally deployed as a component of an expeditionary strike group's amphibious assault contingent, operating as a secondary launch platform for LCACs.
Rotary aircraft weapons are focused on anti-submarine warfare (ASW) and light to medium surface engagements.
Rapid building of at first pre-dreadnoughts, then dreadnoughts brought the U.S. in line with the navies of countries such as Britain and Germany.
The United States was without a navy for nearly a decade—a state of affairs that exposed its merchant ships to a series of attacks by Barbary pirates.
Doctrine had significantly shifted by the end of the war.
At the same time, the Chief of Naval Operations is one of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which is the second-highest deliberatory body of the armed forces after the United States National Security Council, although it only plays an advisory role to the President and does not nominally form part of the chain of command.
The current naval jack of the United States is the First Navy Jack, traditionally regarded as having been used during the American Revolutionary War.
Because they are unmanned weapons, missiles allow for attacks on heavily defended targets without risk to human pilots.
The LCS program is still relatively new as of 2015 with only a few active ships, but the navy has announced plans for up to 32 ships.
King, Chester W. Nimitz, and William F. Halsey, Jr..
As the four current U.S. guided missile submarines are converted ''Ohio''-class boats, they have retained their U.S. state names.
Notable officers include John Paul Jones, John Barry (Continental Navy officer and first flag officer of the United States Navy), Edward Preble, James Lawrence (whose last words "don't give up the ship" are memorialized in Bancroft Hall at the United States Naval Academy), Stephen Decatur, Jr., David Farragut, David Dixon Porter, Oliver Hazard Perry, Commodore Matthew Perry (whose Black Ships forced the opening of Japan), George Dewey (the only person in the history of the United States to have attained the rank of Admiral of the Navy), and the officers who attained the rank of Fleet Admiral during World War II: William D. Leahy, Ernest J.
The primary missions of attack and guided missile submarines in the U.S. Navy are peacetime engagement, surveillance and intelligence, special operations, precision strikes, and control of the seas.
The follow-on ' three submarines—''Seawolf'', ''Connecticut'' and ''Jimmy Carter''—share no consistent naming scheme.
In its 2013 budget request, the navy focused on retaining all eleven big deck carriers, at the expense of cutting numbers of smaller ships and delaying the SSBN replacement.
Independently, frigates are able to conduct counterdrug missions and other maritime interception operations.
Amphibious transport docks are named after U.S. cities, with the exception of the , named after a former Congressman and USMC Officer and , named for Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado.
They may be operated by a nation's navy or coast guard, and may be intended for marine ("blue water") and/or estuarine or river ("brown water") environments.
By 1911, the U.S. had begun building the super-dreadnoughts at a pace to eventually become competitive with Britain.
Air engagements are handled by the heat-seeking Sidewinder and the radar guided AMRAAM missiles along with the M61 Vulcan cannon for close range dogfighting.
The sole armed maritime presence between 1790 and the launching of the U.S. Navy's first warships in 1797 was the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service (USRCS), the primary predecessor of the U.S. Coast Guard.
The United States Navy continues to be a major support to U.S. interests in the 21st century.
By the next year the USN found itself unable to maintain eleven aircraft carriers in the face of the expiration of budget relief offered by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 and CNO Jonathan Greenert said that a ten ship carrier fleet would not be able to sustainably support military requirements.
In an offensive role, missiles are intended to strike targets at long distances with accuracy and precision.
Puerto Rico in the Caribbean formerly housed NS Roosevelt Roads, which was shut down in 2004 shortly after the controversial closure of the live ordnance training area on nearby Vieques Island.
Many qualifications are denoted on a sailor's uniform with U.S. Navy badges and insignia.
In 1834, the United States Marine Corps came under the Department of the Navy.
The Standard missile doubles as the primary shipboard anti-aircraft weapon and is undergoing development for use in theater ballistic missile defense.
The register tracks data such as the current status of a ship, the date of its commissioning, and the date of its decommissioning.
The Navy is administratively managed by the Department of the Navy, which is headed by the civilian Secretary of the Navy.
1 Rank in abeyance - appointments no longer made to this rank in peacetime.
The development of the aircraft carrier and its devastating utilization by the Japanese against the U.S. at Pearl Harbor, however, shifted U.S. thinking.
Medium-long range defense is provided by the Standard Missile 2, which has been deployed since the 1980s.
The navy's current class of patrol boats have names based on weather phenomena.
U.S. Navy (nuclear) ballistic missile submarines carry the stealthiest leg of the U.S. strategic triad (the other legs are the land-based U.S. strategic missile force and the air-based U.S. strategic bomber force).
Smart bombs include the GPS-guided JDAM and the laser-guided Paveway series.
She serves as a tribute to the heritage of the Navy, and occasionally sails for commemorative events such as Independence Day and various victories during the War of 1812.
It played the central role in the World War II defeat of Imperial Japan.
The Navy is also looking to eventually replace its F/A-18E/F Super Hornets with the F/A-XX program.
The state of Florida is the location of three major bases, NS Mayport, the Navy's fourth largest, in Jacksonville, Florida; NAS Jacksonville, a Master Air Anti-submarine Warfare base; and NAS Pensacola; home of the Naval Education and Training Command, the Naval Air Technical Training Center that provides specialty training for enlisted aviation personnel and is the primary flight training base for Navy and Marine Corps Naval Flight Officers and enlisted Naval Aircrewmen.
In 2007, the U.S. Navy joined with the U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Coast Guard to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower that raises the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war.
Additionally, each ship is given a letter-based hull classification symbol (for example, CVN or DDG) to indicate the vessel's type and number.
Destroyers additionally specialize in anti-submarine warfare and are equipped with VLA rockets and LAMPS Mk III Sea Hawk helicopters to deal with underwater threats.
In the case of the  carrier, two naval reactors give the ship almost unlimited range and provide enough electrical energy to power a city of 100,000 people.
However, the Marine Corps is a distinct, separate service branch with its own uniformed service chief – the Commandant of the Marine Corps, a four-star general.
A Union blockade on all major ports shut down exports and the coastal trade, but blockade runners (mostly owned and operated by British companies) provided a thin lifeline.
The Coast Guard also jointly staffs the Navy's naval coastal warfare groups and squadrons (the latter of which were known as harbor defense commands until late-2004), which oversee defense efforts in foreign littoral combat and inshore areas.
