While the denomination expected legal expenses to surpass six figures, it halted donations after raising $59,564 in less than a week.
Local churches often give financial support to the association to support its activities.
The curriculum is based on guidelines provided by the Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States.
The position of Executive Minister of Local Church Ministries is vacant.
It acknowledges as kindred in Christ all who share in this confession.
Associations meet at least once annually to elect officers and board members and set budgets for the association's work; fellowship and informational workshops are often conducted during those meetings, which may take place more frequently according to local custom.
Pennsylvania, a bastion of the German Reformed tradition, has the largest number of members and churches.
This union adopted an earlier general statement of unity between the two denominations, the 1943 "Basis of Union".
United Church of Christ was recognized in the Apology Resolution to Native Hawaiians.
"Within the United Church of Christ, the various expressions of the church relate to each other in a covenantal manner.
While clergy emphasized Holy Communion as "a meal in which we encounter God's living presence," laity emphasized "a remembrance of Jesus' last supper, death, and resurrection."
While the UCC refers to its ''evangelical'' characteristics, it springs from (and is considered part of) mainline Protestantism as opposed to Evangelicalism.
Thus, local church governance varies widely throughout the denomination.
* Westminster College of Salt Lake City (Salt Lake City, Utah)
The Anti-Defamation League stated that those same resolutions are "disappointing and disturbing" and "deeply troubling".
The resolution was one of  32 actions by General Synod and other national bodies, beginning in 1969, which support civil rights for LGBT citizens and urge their full inclusion in the life of the church.
The starred '*' ministries are carried out through the Common Global Ministries Board, a joint instrumentality of the United Church of Christ and the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), based in Indianapolis, Indiana.
JWM also maintains an office called "Minister for Children, Families and Human Sexuality Advocacy" that promotes the Our Whole Lives sex education curriculum.
Other churches, mainly of Evangelical and Reformed descent, have one central "church council" or "consistory" that handles most or all affairs in a manner somewhat akin to a Presbyterian session, while still holding an annual congregational meeting for the purpose of electing officers and/or ratifying annual budgets.
The United Church of Christ has a highly educated membership, with 46% of members holding graduate or post-graduate degrees.
Still others, usually those congregations started after the 1957 merger, have structures incorporating aspects of both, or other alternative organizational structures entirely.
UCC is generally theologically liberal, and the denomination notes that the "Bible, ''though written in specific historical times and places'', still speaks to us in our present condition".
The resolution "''In support of equal marriage rights for all"'', supported by an estimated 80 percent of delegates to the church's 2005 General Synod, made the United Church of Christ the first major Christian deliberative body in the U.S. to endorse "equal marriage rights for all people, regardless of gender," and now is the second largest Christian denominational entity in the U.S. supporting same-sex marriage (after Presbyterian Church (USA)).
* The Nicene Creed,
The current system of national governance was adopted in 1999 as a restructure of the national setting, consolidating numerous agencies, boards, and "instrumentalities" that the UCC, in the main, had inherited from the Congregational Christian Churches at the time of merger, along with several created during the denomination's earlier years.
Baptism as an "entry into the Church Universal" was the most frequent response.
In 2015, Pew Research estimated that .4%, or 1 million adult adherents, of the U.S population self-identify with the United Church of Christ.
Local churches have the freedom to govern themselves, establishing their own internal organizational structures and theological positions.
'''The Insurance Board''' is a nonprofit corporation collectively "owned" by the Conferences of the United Church of Christ.
In addition to the concerns raised about the merits of the "economic leverage" resolution, additional concerns were raised about the process in which the General Synod approved the resolution.
The association ordains new ministers, holds ministers' standing in covenant with local churches, and is responsible for disciplinary action; typically a specific ministerial committee handles these duties.
Local churches also are members of larger ''Conferences'', of which there are 38 in the United Church of Christ.
Most current UCC conferences were formed in the several years following the consummation of the national merger in 1961, and in some instances were the unions of former Congregational Christian conferences (led by superintendents) and Evangelical and Reformed synods (led by presidents, some of whom served only on a part-time basis).
David Roozen, director of the Hartford Institute for Religion Research who has studied the United Church of Christ, said surveys show the national church's pronouncements are often more liberal than the views in the pews but that its governing structure is set up to allow such disagreements.
Some congregations, mainly of Congregational or Christian Connection origin, have numerous relatively independent "boards" that oversee different aspects of church life, with annual or more frequent meetings (often conducted after a worship service on a Sunday afternoon) of the entire congregation to elect officers, approve budgets and set congregational policy.
Everett Parker of the United Church of Christ Office of Communication—at the request of the Rev.
Local churches have, in addition to the freedom to hire ministers and lay staff, the sole power to dismiss them also.
It is self-described as "an extremely pluralistic and diverse denomination".
The United Church of Christ was formed when two Protestant churches, the Evangelical and Reformed Church and the General Council of the Congregational Christian Churches united in 1957.
On October 17, 2015, representatives of the United Church of Christ and the United Church of Canada came together in Niagara Falls, Ontario to sign an historic full communion agreement.
Sixteen churches were reported to have over 2,000 members, but 64% had fewer than 200 members.
A few have had territorial adjustments since then; only one conference, the Calvin Synod, composed of Hungarian-heritage Reformed congregations, received exemption from the geographical alignments, with its churches scattered from Connecticut westward to California and southward to Florida.
The highest membership rates are in the states of Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine, situated in the heartland of the American Congregationalist movement.
According to its 2008 annual report, the United Church of Christ had about 1.1 million members in about 5,300 local congregations.
By 1980, membership was at about 1.7 million and by the turn of the century had dropped to 1.3 million.
Participation in the search and call process is usually considered a sign of the congregation's loyalty to the larger denomination and its work.
* '''Wider Church Ministries (WCM)''' is responsible for partner relations* (relations with churches around the world, missionary work, etc.
The denomination places high emphasis on participation in worldwide interfaith and ecumenical efforts.
Local churches are usually aided in searching for and calling ordained clergy through a denominationally coordinated "search-and-call" system, usually facilitated by staff at the conference level.
Currently, the UCC has entered into an ecumenical partnership with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) and through ''A Formula of Agreement'', signed in 1997, is in full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Presbyterian Church (USA), and the Reformed Church in America.
United Church of Christ General Synod XXV also passed two resolutions concerning the conflict between Israel and Palestinians in the Middle East.
Internationally, the UCC has been in full communion with the Union Evangelischer Kirchen (Union of Evangelical Churches) in Germany since 1981.
Starting in 2003, a task force commissioned by General Synod 24 studied the diverse worship habits of UCC churches.
This includes membership in the National Muslim-Christian Initiative.
An interplay of wider interdependence with local autonomy characterizes the organization of the UCC.
The current Executive Minister for Justice and Witness Ministries is Rev.
* Beloit College (Beloit, Wisconsin)
Though in many respects similar to the colleges and universities that have full membership in the Council, these institutions tend to be less intentional about their relationships with the United Church of Christ."
Our Whole Lives includes modules for Grades K-1, 4-6, 7-9, 10-12, and for Young Adults and Adults.
The church's diversity and adherence to covenantal polity (rather than government by regional elders or bishops) give individual congregations a great deal of freedom in the areas of worship, congregational life, and doctrine.
However, the local church may, for various reasons, opt not to avail itself of the conference placement system, and is free to do so without fear of retaliation, which would likely occur in synodical or presbyterian polities.
In the Resolution, Congress recognized the reconciliation made by the UCC in the Eighteenth General Synod for their actions in overthrowing the Kingdom of Hawaii.
The United Church of Christ facilitates bilateral dialogues with many faith groups, including members of the Jewish and Muslim communities.
In almost all cases, though, the selection of a minister for the congregation is, in keeping with the Reformed tradition of the "priesthood of all believers," vested in a congregational meeting, held usually after a special ''ad hoc'' committee searches on the congregation's behalf for a candidate.
Conferences, like associations, are congregationally representative bodies, with each local church sending ordained and lay delegates.
This agreement will allow the two denominations to recognize the validity of each other's sacraments and ordination of ministers and opens up the possibility of ministers being called to serve in congregations of either denomination.
With ultimate authority given to the local church, many see United Church of Christ polity as closer to congregationalism; however, with ordination and pastoral oversight of licensed, commissioned and ordained ministers conducted by Associations, and General Synod representation given to Conferences instead of congregational delegates, certain similarities to presbyterian polity are also visible.
The primary ecclesiastical function of a conference is to provide the primary support for the search-and-call process by which churches select ordained leadership; the conference minister and/or his or her associates perform this task in coordination with the congregation's pulpit search committee (see above) and the association to which the congregation belongs (particularly its ministerial committee).
The United Church of Christ acknowledges as its sole Head, Jesus Christ, Son of God and Savior.
The decline in number of congregations continued through 2011, as the 2011 Annual Report shows 5,100 member churches.
* '''Justice and Witness Ministries (JWM)''' is responsible for ministries related to economic justice, human rights, justice for women and transformation, public life and social policy, and racial justice.
The denomination's official literature uses broad doctrinal parameters, emphasizing freedom of individual conscience and local church autonomy.
The Simon Wiesenthal Center stated that the July 2005 UCC resolutions on divestment from Israel were "functionally anti-Semitic".
The IB administers a property insurance, liability insurance, and risk management program serving the United Church of Christ, the Presbyterian Church(USA), and the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) churches and related entities.
Because of this, the UCC is involved in Churches Uniting in Christ, an organization seeking to establish full communion among nine Protestant denominations in America.
Each expression of the church has responsibilities and rights in relation to the others, to the end that the whole church will seek God's will and be faithful to God's mission.
As agents of the General Synod, the denomination maintains national offices comprising four "covenanted ministries", one "associated ministry", and one "affiliated ministry".
At this time, the UCC claimed about two million members.
* Hood College (Frederick, Maryland)
The UCC adopted its constitution and by-laws in 1961.
* Ursinus College (Collegeville, Pennsylvania)
Churches in the UCC can solemnize same-sex unions.
In accordance with the teaching of our Lord and the practice prevailing among evangelical Christians, it recognizes two sacraments: Baptism and the Lord's Supper or Holy Communion.
These two denominations, which were themselves the result of earlier unions, had their roots in Congregational, Christian, Evangelical, and Reformed denominations.
* '''Local Church Ministries (LCM)''' is responsible for evangelism, stewardship and church finance, worship and education, Pilgrim Press and United Church Resources (the publishing house of the United Church of Christ), and parish life and leadership (authorization, clergy development, seminary relations, parish leadership, etc.).
The Our Whole Lives curricula are secular.
This section lists notable people known to have been past or present members or raised in the United Church of Christ or its predecessor denominations.
As of 2000, the state had over 700 congregations and over 200,000 members.
Barry Lynn, an ordained UCC minister and the executive director of Americans United for Separation of Church and State, stated that although he personally would not have invited a Presidential candidate to speak at the meetings, he believed "the Internal Revenue Service permits this to happen."
The UCC national body has been active in numerous traditionally liberal social causes, including support for abortion rights, the United Farm Workers, and the Wilmington Ten.
The other resolution, named "Tear Down the Wall", calls upon Israel to remove the separation barrier between Israel and the West Bank.
Local churches are typically gathered together in regional bodies called ''Associations''.
The self-described "moderate" group, however, was the largest at 45%.
As members of the Body of Christ, each expression of the church is called to honor and respect the work and ministry of each other part.
At the time of its formation, the UCC had over 2 million members in nearly 7,000 churches.
Other statistics found by the Hartford Institute show that 53.2% of members say "the Bible" is the highest source of authority, 16.1% say the "Holy Spirit," 9.2% say "Reason," 6.3% say "Experience," and 6.1% say "Creeds."
Clergy and laity were invited to identify two meanings of Holy Communion that they emphasize.
Conferences are supported financially through local churches' contribution to "Our Church's Wider Mission" (formerly "Our Christian World Mission"), the United Church of Christ's denominational support system; unlike most associations, they usually have permanent headquarters and professional staff.
Formally launched during the advent season in 2004, the campaign included coordinated program of evangelism and hospitality training for congregations paired with national and local television "brand" advertising, known as the "God is Still Speaking" campaign or "The Stillspeaking Initiative."
The Biblical Witness Fellowship, a small conservative evangelical organization within the denomination, opposes the denomination's growing support for same-sex relationships.
Nonetheless, some critics, mainly social and theological conservatives, are vocal about the UCC's theology, political identity, and cultural milieu.
They were also to suggest the meaning that they thought their entire church emphasized.
Opponents of the "Tear Down the Wall" resolution have noted that the wall's purpose is to prevent terrorist attacks, and that the resolution does not call for a stop to these attacks.
Among the results of this were findings that in the UCC, 5.6% of the churches responding to the survey described their members as "very liberal or progressive," 3.4% as "very conservative," 22.4% as "somewhat liberal or progressive," and 23.6% as "somewhat conservative."
The UCC later won a lawsuit that resulted in the federal court decision that the broadcast air waves are public, not private, property, a decision leading toward the proliferation of people of color in television studios and newsrooms.
WCM is sometimes referred to as the United Church Board for World Ministries, the historic successor to the Congregationalist American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions and the E&R affiliated Board of International Missions The current Executive Minister for Wider Church Ministries is the Rev.
It affirms the responsibility of the Church in each generation to make this faith its own in reality of worship, in honesty of thought and expression, and in purity of heart before God.
The head executives of these ministries comprise the five member ''Collegium of Officers'', which are the non-hierarchical official officers of the denomination.
United Church Funds' offices are also located in New York City.
Many of its congregations choose to practice open communion.
Decisions are made in consultation and collaboration among the various parts of the structure.
* Luther's Small Catechism (inherited from the German Evangelical heritage),
* Cedar Crest College (Allentown, Pennsylvania)
The ''ethos'' of United Church of Christ organization is considered "covenantal."
A number of conservative congregations also ended their affiliation with the denomination after the decision in favor of same-sex marriage.
At the end of 2014, the UCC's 5,116 congregations claimed 979,239 members, primarily in the United States.
These structures carry out the work of the General Synod and support the local churches, associations, and conferences.
In a few instances where there is only one association within a conference, or where the associations within a conference have agreed to dissolve, the Conference (below) assumes the association's functions.
This setting is designed to provide an opportunity for mutual responsibility and reporting, as well as ongoing assessment of UCC programs."
* The Apostles' Creed,
The UCC often uses four words to describe itself: "Christian, Reformed, Congregational and Evangelical".
'''United Church Funds (UCF)''', formerly known as '''The United Church Foundation''', provides low cost, socially responsible,  professionally managed Common Investment Funds (CIFs) and other trustee services to any setting of the United Church of Christ.
John H. Thomas announced the creation of The UCC Legal Fund, to aid in the denomination's defense against the IRS.
Members of the congregation vote for or against the committee's recommended candidate for the pastorate, usually immediately after the candidate has preached a "trial sermon;" candidates are usually presented one at a time and not as a field of several to be selected from.
* The Kansas City Statement of Faith (a 1913 statement in the Congregationalist tradition),
However the 2010 annual report showed a decline of 31,000 members and a loss of 33 congregations since then.
Michael Downs of the  United Church of Christ Pension Boards (who would be charged with implementing any divestment of the UCC's Pension Board investments) wrote a letter to UCC President John H. Thomas expressing concern "with the precedent-setting implications of voted actions, integrity of process and trust."
The study can be found online and reflects statistics on attitudes toward worship, baptism, and communion, such as "Laity (70%) and clergy (90%) alike overwhelmingly describe worship 'as an encounter with God that leads to doing God's work in the world.'"
Clergy and laity were invited to select two meanings of baptism that they emphasize.
The word evangelical in this case more closely corresponds with the original Lutheran origins meaning "of the gospel" as opposed to the Evangelical use of the word.
The United Church of Christ, along with the Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations, created the Our Whole Lives curriculum (commonly known as OWL), which is a lifespan, comprehensive, inclusive, and developmentally appropriate sexuality education program.
In addition to its offices in Cleveland, JWM also maintains an office on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C.
Quoting the United Church of Christ Constitution, "The basic unit of the life and organization of the United Church of Christ is the local church."
* The Evangelical Catechism (a 1927 catechism in the German Evangelical tradition), and
Such standing, among other things, permits a minister to participate in the UCC clergy pension and insurance plans.
It claims as its own the faith of the historic Church expressed in the ancient creeds and reclaimed in the basic insights of the Protestant Reformers.
Same-sex marriage is not supported by some UCC congregations, although the practice is rapidly gaining ground.
The denomination, therefore, looks to a number of historic confessions as expressing the common faith around which the church gathers, including:
The national settings of the UCC have historically favored liberal views on social issues, such as civil rights, LGBT rights, women's rights, and abortion.
The UCC's "Covenantal Polity" is best expressed in Article III of the 1999 revision of the Bylaws and Constitution of the United Church of Christ.
The World Council of Churches, to which the denomination belongs, reports that the UCC could have upwards near 1.4 million members.
While this has been occurring to a lesser degree in other mainline denominations as well, the UCC's congregational polity allows for churches to adopt such approaches without ecclesiological restraint, as might happen in a more hierarchical denominational structure.
Typically the candidate must secure anywhere from 60 to 90 percent affirmative votes from the membership before the congregation issues a formal call to the candidate; this depends on the provisions in the congregation's particular constitution and/or by-laws.
The UCC maintains full communion with other mainline Protestant denominations.
The main offices of the Covenanted ministries are at the "Church House", the United Church of Christ national headquarters at 700 Prospect Avenue in Cleveland, Ohio.
In 1982 the World Council of Churches published "Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry", a document that has served as a foundation for many ecumenical recognition agreements.
An evangelism event was held in Atlanta in August 2005 to promote the campaign.
Those results suggested a nearly equal balance between liberal and conservative congregations.
However, many UCC congregations have constitutions that mandate that their called pastor be an ordained minister approved by the association, while others require that the call of a pastor be approved by the association committee on ministry.
The reduction in a typical church's size has also meant that, increasingly, many congregations are no longer able, as they once were, to afford a full-time, seminary-educated pastor, and that some of them have to rely on alternatives such as one of their members serving the church under a license, the use of recently retired clergy on a short-term basis, or ordained ministers serving the church on a half-time (or less) basis while earning their primary income from chaplaincies or other occupations.
In 1959, in its General Synod, the UCC adopted a broad "Statement of Faith".
Opponents included the Iglesia Evangelica Unida de Puerto Rico (United Evangelical Church of Puerto Rico) which voted by a 3–1 margin to withdraw from the UCC after the 2005 General Synod vote.
* The Heidelberg Catechism (inherited from both the German Reformed and German Evangelical heritages),
In 2001, Hartford Institute for Religion Research did a "Faith Communities Today" (FACT) study that included a survey of United Church of Christ beliefs.
Martin Luther King, Jr.—organized UCC churches during 1959 against television stations in the southern United States that were imposing news blackouts of information pertaining to the then growing U.S. civil rights movement.
''"These colleges continue to relate to the United Church of Christ through the Council for Higher Education, but chose not to affirm the purposes of the Council.
Nevertheless, in February 2008, the IRS sent a letter to the church stating that it was launching an inquiry into the matter.
The Evangelical and Reformed Church and the General Council of the Congregational Christian Churches united in 1957 to form the UCC.
* Fisk University (Nashville, Tennessee)
"95 percent of our congregations use the Revised Common Lectionary in some way in planning or actual worship and preaching" and "96 percent always or almost always have a sermon, 86 percent have a time with children, 95 percent have a time of sharing joys and concerns, and 98 percent include the Prayer of Our Savior/Lord's Prayer."
Sexuality and Our Faith are separate manuals which bring in the UUA principles and scripture used in the UCC to support our teachings.
Only one conference has ever withdrawn completely from the denomination: Puerto Rico, expressing disapproval of national UCC tolerance of homosexuality (as well as that of a large number of mainland congregations), departed the denomination in 2006, taking all of its churches.
* The '''Office of General Ministries (OGM)''' is responsible for administration, common services (technology, physical plant, etc.
It is run by a president/CEO and a 19-member Board, with the full corporate board consisting of Conference, Region and Presbytery ministers as well as laypeople.
Only Episcopalians (56%) and Anglicans (60%) ranked higher.
* Franklin and Marshall College (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
* Ripon College (Ripon, Wisconsin)
At the end of 2008, 5,320 churches were reported to be within the UCC, averaging 210 members.
One of the UCC's central beliefs is that it is "called to be a united and uniting church."
The church had consulted lawyers prior to the event to make sure they were following the law and had instructed those in attendance that no Obama campaign material would be allowed in the meeting.
The United Church of Christ is in historical continuation of the General Council of Congregational Christian churches founded under the influence of New England Puritanism.
Several renewal groups panned the ad campaign for its efforts to create an ONA/progressive perception of the UCC identity despite its actual majority in centrist/moderate viewpoints.
The initiative was themed around the quotation "Never place a period where God has placed a comma," and campaign materials, including print and broadcast advertising as well as merchandise, featured the quote and a large "comma," with a visual theme in red and black.
The association's main ecclesiastical function is to provide primary oversight and authorization of ordained and other authorized ministers; it also is the ecclesiastical link between the local congregation and the larger UCC.
The denomination has suffered a 44 percent loss in membership since the mid-1960s.
), covenantal relations (ecumenical relations, formal relations to other settings of the church), financial development, and "proclamation, identity and communication".
The official delegates of an association are all ordained clergy within the bounds of the association together with lay delegates sent from each local church.
Within this locally focused structure, however, there are central beliefs common to the UCC.
On April 28, 2014, the UCC filed a lawsuit against the state of North Carolina for not permitting same-sex marriage; this lawsuit is America's first faith-based challenge to same-sex marriage bans.
Congregations who use this program often also use "Sexuality and Our Faith" for the age level they are offering.
On February 27, 2008, in an open letter to UCC members, Rev.
It looks to the Word of God in the Scriptures, and to the presence and power of the Holy Spirit, to prosper its creative and redemptive work in the world.
The ''structure'' of UCC organization is a mixture of the congregational and presbyterian polities of its predecessor denominations.
In May 2008, the IRS issued a letter which states that the UCC had taken appropriate steps and that the denomination's tax status was not in jeopardy.
United Church of Christ congregations were asked to "opt in" to the campaign, signifying their support as well as their willingness to receive training on hospitality and evangelism.
Each "setting" of the United Church of Christ relates ''covenantally'' with other settings, their actions speaking "to but not for" each other.
In this covenant, the various expressions of the United Church of Christ seek to walk together in all God's ways."
Membership is concentrated primarily in the Northeast and Midwest.
In 2006, the UCC had roughly 1.2 million members in 5,452 churches.
The basic unit of the United Church of Christ is the ''local church'' (also often called the ''congregation'').
However, unlike purely congregational polities, the association has the main authority to ordain clergy and grant membership, or "standing," to clergy coming to a church from another association or another denomination (this authority is exercised "in cooperation with" the person being ordained/called and the local church that is calling them).
Each expression of the church listens, hears, and carefully considers the advise, counsel and requests of others.
The latter statistic probably indicates where most of the denomination's declining membership has occurred, in formerly mid-sized congregations between 200 and 500 members or so.
A conference typically contains multiple associations; if no associations exist within its boundaries, the conference exercises the functions of the association as well.
* Grinnell College (Grinnell, Iowa)
The pro-life ministry in the UCC is done by the United Church of Christ Friends for Life group.
(from the United Church of Christ website)''
The UEK is an organization of 13 Reformed and United Landeskirchen (regional churches) within the federation of Protestant churches known as the Evangelical Church of Germany.
As a WCC member church, the United Church of Christ issued a response as part of the process to work toward a statement of common theological perspectives.
The UCC's Open and Affirming movement, funded by the  UCC Open and Affirming Coalition, is the largest LGBT-welcoming-church program in the world with more than 1,100 congregations and 275,000 members.
