The largest private employment sector is health care and social assistance, with 16.4 million people.
The 1846 Oregon Treaty with Britain led to U.S. control of the present-day American Northwest.
The Great Migration of millions of African Americans out of the American South began before World War I and extended through the 1960s; whereas the Dust Bowl of the mid-1930s impoverished many farming communities and spurred a new wave of western migration.
The U.S. ecology is megadiverse: about 17,000 species of vascular plants occur in the contiguous United States and Alaska, and over 1,800 species of flowering plants are found in Hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland.
Current leadership in the Senate includes Democratic Vice President Joseph Biden, Republican President Pro Tempore (Pro Tem) Orrin Hatch, Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, and Minority Leader Harry Reid.
Despite accounting for only 4.4% of the global population, Americans collectively possess 41.6% of the world's total wealth, and Americans make up roughly half of the world's population of millionaires.
The number of employees at all levels of government outnumber those in manufacturing by 1.7 to 1.
''OECD,'' May 2014.
In the 20th century, the modern musical form emerged on Broadway; the songs of musical theater composers such as Irving Berlin, Cole Porter, and Stephen Sondheim have become pop standards.
Basketball and ice hockey are the country's next two leading professional team sports, with the top leagues being the National Basketball Association (NBA) and the National Hockey League (NHL).
The U.S. population almost quadrupled during the 20th century, from about 76 million in 1900.
There were about 578,424 sheltered and unsheltered homeless persons in the U.S. in January 2014, with almost two-thirds staying in an emergency shelter or transitional housing program.
The United States energy market is about 29,000 terawatt hours per year.
At first effectively neutral during World War II while Germany conquered much of continental Europe, the United States began supplying material to the Allies in March 1941 through the Lend-Lease program.
This technology, along with the establishment of a machine tool industry, enabled the U.S. to have large scale manufacturing of sewing machines, bicycles and other items in the late 19th century and became known as the American system of manufacturing.
Approximately 90,000 U.S. troops were serving in Afghanistan in April 2012; by November 8, 2013 2,285 had been killed during the War in Afghanistan.
After a surge in female labor participation over the previous decade, by 1985 the majority of women aged 16 and over were employed.
Despite continuing new arrivals, the rate of natural increase was such that by the 1770s only a small minority of Americans had been born overseas.
p. 70 ISBN 0-691-16405-3.Peter Kerwin (June 10, 2015).
The governor (chief executive) of each state is directly elected.
Violence was not a significant factor in the overall decline among Native Americans, though conflict among themselves and with Europeans affected specific tribes and various colonial settlements.
Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines were ceded by Spain in the same year, following the Spanish–American War.
The Rocky Mountains, at the western edge of the Great Plains, extend north to south across the country, reaching altitudes higher than  in Colorado.
Since the general election of 1856, the major parties have been the Democratic Party, founded in 1824, and the Republican Party, founded in 1854.
While inflation-adjusted ("real") household income had been increasing almost every year from 1947 to 1999, it has since been flat on balance and has even decreased recently.
The Spanish–American War and  confirmed the country's status as a global military power.
The most prominent is the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), created by presidential order in 1970.
As for public expenditures on higher education, the U.S. trails some other OECD nations but spends more per student than the OECD average, and more than all nations in combined public and private spending.
The four major broadcasters in the U.S. are the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) and Fox.
The prison population has quadrupled since 1980, and state and local spending on prisons and jails has grown three times as much as that spent on public education during the same period.
The ensuing war was at first for Union, then after 1863 as casualties mounted and Lincoln delivered his Emancipation Proclamation, a second war aim became abolition of slavery.
Focus on Top Incomes and Taxation in OECD Countries: Was the crisis a game changer?
Aaron Copland and George Gershwin developed a new synthesis of popular and classical music.
The Beat Generation writers opened up new literary approaches, as have postmodernist authors such as John Barth, Thomas Pynchon, and Don DeLillo.
In 1507 the German cartographer Martin Waldseemüller produced a world map on which he named the lands of the Western Hemisphere "America" after the Italian explorer and cartographer Amerigo Vespucci (Latin: ''Americus Vespucius'').
The Supreme Court, led by the Chief Justice of the United States, has nine members, who serve for life.
The Constitution has been amended 27 times; the first ten amendments, which make up the Bill of Rights, and the Fourteenth Amendment form the central basis of Americans' individual rights.
While federal law currently does not require sick leave, it's a common benefit for government workers and full-time employees at corporations.
This draft of the document did not surface until June 21, 1776, and it is unclear whether it was written before or after Dickinson used the term in his June 17 draft of the Articles of Confederation.
French fries, Mexican dishes such as burritos and tacos, and pasta dishes freely adapted from Italian sources are widely consumed.
Princeton University Press.
Several insular territories grant official recognition to their native languages, along with English: Samoan and Chamorro are recognized by American Samoa and Guam, respectively; Carolinian and Chamorro are recognized by the Northern Mariana Islands; Cherokee is officially recognized by the Cherokee Nation within the Cherokee tribal jurisdiction area in eastern Oklahoma; Spanish is an official language of Puerto Rico and is more widely spoken than English there.
Retrieved June 11, 2015.
In 2009, the United States had the third highest workforce productivity per person in the world, behind Luxembourg and Norway.
The flat, fertile prairie of the Great Plains stretches to the west, interrupted by a highland region in the southeast.
The United States is the only advanced economy that does not guarantee its workers paid vacation and is one of just a few countries in the world without paid family leave as a legal right, with the others being Papua New Guinea, Suriname and Liberia.
Health-care coverage in the United States is a combination of public and private efforts and is not universal.
Although the cost of publishing has increased over the years, the price of newspapers has generally remained low, forcing newspapers to rely more on advertising revenue and on articles provided by a major wire service, such as the Associated Press or Reuters, for their national and world coverage.
American eating habits owe a great deal to that of their British culinary roots with some variations.
The "red states" of the South and parts of the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains are relatively conservative.
The President is not elected by direct vote, but by an indirect electoral college system in which the determining votes are apportioned to the states and the District of Columbia.
Study finds private prisons keep inmates longer, without reducing future crime.
Britain recognized the independence of the United States following their defeat at Yorktown.
Natives taught many settlers where, when and how to cultivate corn, beans and squash.
The United States has an established structure of foreign relations.
Beginning in 1994, the U.S. entered into the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), linking 450 million people producing $17 trillion worth of goods and services.
The District of Columbia is a federal district which contains the capital of the United States, Washington DC.
American Indians are U.S. citizens and tribal lands are subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S Congress and the federal courts.
In 2001, with over 127,000 adoptions, the U.S. accounted for nearly half of the total number of adoptions worldwide.
After World War II the United States and the Soviet Union jockeyed for power during what became known as the Cold War, driven by an ideological divide between capitalism and communism and, according to the school of geopolitics, a divide between the maritime Atlantic and the continental Eurasian camps.
Elements from folk idioms such as the blues and what is now known as old-time music were adopted and transformed into popular genres with global audiences.
The 50.5 million Americans of Hispanic descent are identified as sharing a distinct "ethnicity" by the Census Bureau; 64% of Hispanic Americans are of Mexican descent.
There is no proportional representation at the federal level, and it is rare at lower levels.
No executions took place from 1967 to 1977, owing in part to a U.S. Supreme Court ruling striking down arbitrary imposition of the death penalty.
The states and the District of Columbia choose the President of the United States.
Environmental issues have been on the national agenda since 1970.
Banking became a major part of the economy, with J.P. Morgan playing a notable role.
"American" rarely refers to subjects not connected with the United States.
Marshals Service have specialized duties, including protecting civil rights, national security and enforcing U.S. federal courts' rulings and federal laws.
Americans have the highest average household and employee income among OECD nations, and in 2007 had the second highest median household income.
Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics.''
Among the DC mayor and the 5 territorial governors, there are 2 Republicans, 1 Democrat, 1 Popular Democrat), and 2 Independents.
However, according to the Congressional Budget Office the net effect of Social Security is that the benefit to tax ratio ranges from roughly 70% for the top earnings quintile to about 170% for the lowest earning quintile, making the system progressive.
In addition, there are 1,460 public radio stations.
Cash crops included tobacco, rice and wheat.
Edison and Tesla undertook the widespread distribution of electricity to industry, homes, and for street lightiing.
The rate has declined by 57% since 1991.
However, the Senate refused to approve this, and did not ratify the Treaty of Versailles that established the League of Nations.
The singular form is now standard; the plural form is retained in the idiom "these United States".
Rapid economic development during the late 19th and early 20th centuries fostered the rise of many prominent industrialists.
Mexico has been the leading source of new residents since the 1965 Immigration Act.
In almost all cases, executive and legislative officials are elected by a plurality vote of citizens by district.
The ARPANET was developed in the 1960s to meet Defense Department requirements, and became the first of a series of networks which evolved into the Internet.
From 1980 through 2008 males represented 77% of homicide victims and 90% of offenders.
Director D. W. Griffith, American's top filmmaker during the silent film period, was central to the development of film grammar, and producer/entrepreneur Walt Disney was a leader in both animated film and movie merchandising.
The United States is home to many cultures and a wide variety of ethnic groups, traditions, and values.
The leading business field by gross business receipts is wholesale and retail trade; by net income it is manufacturing.
Transport of goods by rail is extensive, though relatively low numbers of passengers (approximately 31 million annually) use intercity rail to travel, partly because of the low population density throughout much of the U.S. interior.
In 2001–2, the United States had above-average levels of violent crime and particularly high levels of gun violence compared to other developed nations.
Originating in U.S. defense networks, the Internet spread to international academic networks, and then to the public in the 1990s, greatly affecting the global economy, society, and culture.
sentenced to more than a year in state or federal facilities is 478 per 100,000 in 2013 and the rate for pre-trial/remand prisoners is 153 per 100,000 residents in 2012.
A combination of court decisions and legislation, culminating in the Civil Rights Act of 1964, sought to end racial discrimination.
After the Cold War, the 1990s saw the longest economic expansion in modern U.S. history, ending in 2001.
Wealth, like income and taxes, is highly concentrated; the richest 10% of the adult population possess 72% of the country's household wealth, while the bottom half claim only 2%.
In the early 20th century, the automobile companies of Ransom E. Olds and Henry Ford popularized the assembly line.
It is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many other countries.
It works closely with fellow NATO members on military and security issues and with its neighbors through the Organization of American States and free trade agreements such as the trilateral North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico.
The climate is arid in the Great Basin, desert in the Southwest, Mediterranean in coastal California, and oceanic in coastal Oregon and Washington and southern Alaska.
Rock bands such as Metallica, the Eagles, and Aerosmith are among the highest grossing in worldwide sales.
The first documentary evidence of the phrase "United States of America" is from a letter dated January 2, 1776, written by Stephen Moylan, Esq., George Washington's aide-de-camp and Muster-Master General of the Continental Army.
The infant mortality rate of 6.17 per thousand places the United States 169th highest out of 224 countries, with the 224th country having the lowest mortality rate.
There are 52 metropolitan areas with populations greater than one million.
Well-known newspapers are ''The New York Times'', ''USA Today'' and ''The Wall Street Journal''.
Marketing by U.S. industries is largely responsible for making orange juice and milk ubiquitous breakfast beverages.
The United States has a life expectancy of 79.8 years at birth, up from 75.2 years in 1990.
Americans have long been important in the modern artistic medium of photography, with major photographers including Alfred Stieglitz, Edward Steichen, and Ansel Adams.
Since the Civil War, only one third-party presidential candidate—former president Theodore Roosevelt, running as a Progressive in 1912—has won as much as 20% of the popular vote.
The proposed base Department of Defense budget for 2012, $553 billion, was a 4.2% increase over 2011; an additional $118 billion was proposed for the military campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Jazz was developed by innovators such as Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington early in the 20th century.
Major cities often have "alternative weeklies" to complement the mainstream daily papers, for example, New York City's ''The Village Voice'' or Los Angeles' ''LA Weekly'', to name two of the best-known.
For 2013 the United Nations Development Programme ranked the United States 5th among 187 countries in its Human Development Index and 28th in its inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI).
The U.S. often opposed Third World movements that it viewed as Soviet-sponsored.
Fast food consumption has sparked health concerns.
Nationalists led the Philadelphia Convention of 1787 in writing the United States Constitution, ratified in state conventions in 1788.
The U.S. spends more on education per student than any nation in the world, spending more than $11,000 per elementary student in 2010 and more than $12,000 per high school student.
While the U.S. and Soviet Union engaged in proxy wars and developed powerful nuclear arsenals, the two countries avoided direct military conflict.
A proxy war in Southeast Asia eventually evolved into full American participation, as the Vietnam War.
The war remains the deadliest military conflict in American history, resulting in the deaths of approximately 618,000 soldiers as well as many civilians.
For the latest data, see National Research Council. ''
On July 4, 1776, as the colonies were fighting Great Britain in the American Revolutionary War, delegates from the 13 colonies unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence.
College football and basketball attract large audiences.
In 2013, the highest teenage birth rate was in Alabama, and the lowest in Wyoming.
Chemical products are the leading manufacturing field.
The U.S. is a global leader in medical innovation.
In the peace treaty of 1783, American sovereignty was recognized from the Atlantic coast west to the Mississippi River.
The Christian revivalist movement of the 1730s and 1740s known as the Great Awakening fueled interest in both religion and religious liberty.
Baseball has been regarded as the U.S. national sport since the late 19th century, with Major League Baseball (MLB) being the top league.
While most major U.S. sports have evolved out of European practices, basketball, volleyball, skateboarding, and snowboarding are American inventions, some of which have become popular in other countries.
The American Dream, or the perception that Americans enjoy high social mobility, plays a key role in attracting immigrants.
House seats are apportioned among the states by population every tenth year.
The first inhabitants of North America migrated from Siberia by way of the Bering land bridge and arrived at least 15,000 years ago, though increasing evidence suggests an even earlier arrival.
The total reporting non-Christian religions in 2014 was 5.9%.
Issues that affect water supply in the United States include droughts in the West, water scarcity, pollution, a backlog of investment, concerns about the affordability of water for the poorest, and a rapidly retiring workforce.
The U.S. Census Bureau estimated the country's population to be  as of April 25, 2016, and to be adding 1 person (net gain) every 13 seconds, or about 6,646 people per day.
The United States is a federal republic of 50 states, a federal district, five territories and eleven uninhabited island possessions.
Many settlers were dissenting Christian groups who came seeking religious freedom.
The phrase "United States" was originally plural, a description of a collection of independent states—e.g., "the United States are"—including in the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified in 1865.
In the American federalist system, citizens are usually subject to three levels of government: federal, state, and local.
The United States has a "Special Relationship" with the United Kingdom and strong ties with Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Japan, South Korea, Israel, and several European Union countries, including France, Italy, Germany, and Spain.
Some 80% of U.S. college students attend public universities.
Mass transit accounts for 9% of total U.S. work trips.
By contrast, religion plays the least important role in New England and in the Western United States.
Dutch Reformed congregations were founded first in New Amsterdam (New York City) before spreading westward.
The majority of world's top universities listed by different ranking organizations are in the US.
Mark Twain and poet Walt Whitman were major figures in the century's second half; Emily Dickinson, virtually unknown during her lifetime, is now recognized as an essential American poet.
Irreligion is growing rapidly among Americans under 30.
The country is the primary developer and grower of genetically modified food, representing half of the world's biotech crops.
The United States has been a leader in technological innovation since the late 19th century and scientific research since the mid 20th century.
More recent immigration from Asia and especially Latin America has added to a cultural mix that has been described as both a homogenizing melting pot, and a heterogeneous salad bowl in which immigrants and their descendants retain distinctive cultural characteristics.
English (American English) is the de facto national language.
Between June 2007 and November 2008 the global recession led to falling asset prices around the world.
The team of Harrigan and Hart produced a series of popular musical comedies in New York starting in the late 1870s.
While the abortion rate is falling, the abortion ratio of 241 per 1,000 live births and abortion rate of 15 per 1,000 women aged 15–44 remain higher than those of most Western nations.
The U.S. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for three sovereign nations through Compact of Free Association with Micronesia, the Marshall Islands and Palau.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2014.
North and South Dakota are the only states in which a plurality of the population is Lutheran.
Adoption in the United States is common and relatively easy from a legal point of view (compared to other Western countries).
"United States", "American" and "U.S." refer to the country adjectivally ("American values", "U.S.&nbsp;forces").
Spanish, spoken by 12% of the population at home, is the second most common language and the most widely taught second language.
The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest economy by nominal GDP.
Successful English settlement on the eastern coast of North America began with the Virginia Colony in 1607 at Jamestown and the Pilgrims' Plymouth Colony in 1620.
Law enforcement in the United States is primarily the responsibility of local police and sheriff's departments, with state police providing broader services.
In the 1800s the average woman had 7.04 children, by the 1900s this number had decreased to 3.56.
As coastal land grew more expensive freed indentured servants pushed further west.
On December 7, 1941, the Empire of Japan launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, prompting the United States to join the Allies against the Axis powers.
These are divided into subdivisions of counties and independent cities.
In recent years, Arabic-speaking residents increased by 29%, Urdu by 23% and Persian by 9%.
Cable television offers hundreds of channels catering to a variety of niches.
By the end of that century, the United States extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar.
, 83.8% of American households owned at least one computer, and 73.3% had high-speed Internet service.
The highest 10% of income earners pay a majority of federal taxes, and about half of all taxes.
As of 2014, the United States has won 2,400 medals at the Summer Olympic Games, more than any other country, and 281 in the Winter Olympic Games, the second most behind Norway.
In a 2009 Gallup poll, 42% of Americans said that they attended church weekly or almost weekly; the figures ranged from a low of 23% in Vermont to a high of 63% in Mississippi.
The state governments are structured in roughly similar fashion; Nebraska uniquely has a unicameral legislature.
U.S. underage drinking among teenagers is among the lowest in industrialized nations.
Both Hawaiian and English are official languages in Hawaii, by state law.
Whether this perception is realistic has been a topic of debate.
The President holds the title of commander-in-chief of the nation's armed forces and appoints its leaders, the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Altogether, the government owns about 28% of the country's land area.
As with other Western countries, the U.S. is becoming less religious.
It ranks highly in several measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human development, per capita GDP, and productivity per person.
The United States remained neutral from the outbreak of World War I, in 1914, until 1917 when it joined the war as an "associated power", alongside the formal Allies of World War I, helping to turn the tide against the Central Powers.
For decades, nuclear power has played a limited role relative to many other developed countries, in part because of public perception in the wake of a 1979 accident.
Over time American foods changed to a point that food critic, John L. Hess stated in 1972: ''"Our founding fathers were as far superior to our present political leaders in the quality of their food as they were in the quality of their prose and intelligence"''.
Protestantism is the largest Christian religious grouping in the United States.
91% of Americans also own a mobile phone .
Initially, states entering the Union alternated between slave and free states, keeping a sectional balance in the Senate, while free states outstripped slave states in population and in the House of Representatives.
At 4.7% of GDP, the rate was the second-highest among the top 15 military spenders, after Saudi Arabia.
They dominated the military affairs of Europe, with the U.S. and its NATO allies on one side and the USSR and its Warsaw Pact allies on the other.
Other states, such as California, mandate the publication of Spanish versions of certain government documents including court forms.
Much of the Western mountains have an alpine climate.
The end of the Indian Wars further expanded acreage under mechanical cultivation, increasing surpluses for international markets.
The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century, displacing American Indian tribes, acquiring new territories, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848.
The second draft of the Articles of Confederation, prepared by John Dickinson and completed by June 17, 1776, at the latest, declared "The name of this Confederation shall be the 'United States of America.'"
In 1938, Superman, the comic book superhero of DC Comics, developed into an American icon.
The subject of uninsured and underinsured Americans is a major political issue.
The Sierra Nevada and Cascade mountain ranges run close to the Pacific coast, both ranges reaching altitudes higher than .
In June 1776, Thomas Jefferson wrote the phrase "UNITED STATES OF AMERICA" in all capitalized letters in the headline of his "original Rough draught" of the Declaration of Independence.
These include taxes on income, payroll, property, sales, imports, estates and gifts, as well as various fees.
, there are 15,433 licensed full-power radio stations in the US according to the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
