The Corps of Cadets is officially organized into a brigade.
Cadets begin their USMA careers as trainees (new cadets), then advance in rank, starting as CDT Privates (freshmen) and culminating as CDT Officers (seniors).
The class of 1836 chose no rings, and the class of 1879 had cuff links in lieu of a class ring.
The Mexican–American War brought the academy to prominence as graduates proved themselves in battle for the first time.
During the summer months, the museum operates access to the Fort Putnam historic site on main post and access to the 282 acre Constitution Island.
The academy has the cadets change companies after their freshman or sophomore years.
Rising Firstie (senior) cadets also spend one-month training at Camp Buckner, where they train for modern tactical situations that they will soon face as new platoon leaders.
During the Gulf War, alumnus General Schwarzkopf was the commander of Allied Forces, and the American senior generals in Iraq, Generals Petraeus, Odierno and Austin, and Afghanistan, retired General Stanley McChrystal and General David Rodriguez, are also alumni.
The applicant then submits to a formal interview.
An alternate form of punishment to walking hours is known as "fatigue tours," where assigned hours may be "worked off" by manual labor, such as cleaning the barracks.
The cadet fitness center, Arvin Cadet Physical Development Center (usually just called "Arvin" by cadets and faculty), which was rebuilt in 2004, houses extensive physical fitness facilities and equipment for student use.
Although being out of their rooms after midnight is officially against regulations, violations have been known to be overlooked for the sake of tradition.
Up to 60&nbsp;students from foreign countries are present at USMA, educated at the expense of the sponsoring nation, with tuition assistance based on the GNP of their country.
International student
Cadets also have the opportunity during their second, third and fourth summers to serve in active army units and military schools around the world.
There is also one senior Non-Commissioned Officer to assist each TAC, known as TAC-NCOs.
The outbreak of America's involvement in World War I caused a sharp increase in the demand for army officers, and the academy accelerated graduation of all four classes then in attendance to meet this requirement, beginning with the early graduation of the First Class on 20 April 1917, the Second Class in August 1917, and both the Third and Fourth Classes just before the Armistice of 11 November 1918, when only freshman cadets remained (those who had entered in the summer of 1918).
Cadets compete in one sport every fall, winter, and spring season at the intramural, club, or intercollegiate level.
This process is known as scrambling, and the method of scrambling has changed several times in recent years.
Cadets are grouped into ''companies'' identified by alpha-numeric codes.
Seven graduates have an "A" suffix after their Cullum Number.
Nearly every general officer of note from either army during the Civil War was a graduate of West Point and a West Point graduate commanded the forces of one or both sides in every one of the 60 major battles of the war.
Hazing at the academy entered the national spotlight with the death of former cadet Oscar L. Booz on 3 December 1900.
Between 1778 and 1780, the Polish engineer and military hero Tadeusz Kościuszko oversaw the construction of the garrison defenses.
This increased demand for officers led Congress to increase the size of the Corps of Cadets to 481&nbsp;cadets in 1900.
Military training and discipline fall under the purview of the Office of the Commandant.
Its alumni and students are collectively referred to as "The Long Gray Line", and its ranks include two Presidents of the United States (as well as the President of the Confederate States of America), presidents of Costa Rica, Nicaragua, and the Philippines, numerous famous generals, and seventy-five Medal of Honor recipients.
The cemetery is also the burial place of several recent graduates who have died during the ongoing conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan.
West Point began the collegiate tradition of the class ring, beginning with the class of 1835.
Most cadets are housed with one roommate, but some rooms are designed for three cadets.
Within each regiment there are three battalions, each consisting of three companies.
The 2015 football season marked Navy's fourteenth consecutive victory over Army, the longest streak in the series since inception.
In 1985, cadets were formally authorized to declare an academic major; all previous graduates had been awarded a general bachelor of science degree.
The remaining campus area is home to 27 other monuments and memorials.
It was so successful in its engineering curriculum that it significantly influenced every American engineering school founded prior to the Civil War.
The student body is 15.1% female.
In all, wartime contingencies and post-war adjustments resulted in ten classes, varying in length of study from two to four years, within a seven-year period before the regular course of study was fully resumed.
To accommodate this accelerated schedule, summer training was formally moved to a recently acquired piece of land southwest of main post.
According to a Vanity Fair essay, the LGBT cadets were well accepted.
A few buildings, such as Cullum Hall and the Old Cadet Chapel, are built in the Neoclassical style.
Based on the significance both of the Revolutionary War fort ruins and of the military academy itself, the majority of the academy area was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960.
Cadets' attendance is mandatory at football games and the Corps stands for the duration of the game.
West Point also produced some famous generals and statesmen of recent note including John Abizaid, Stanley A. McChrystal, Wesley Clark, Alexander Haig, Barry McCaffrey, Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr., Brent Scowcroft, Lloyd Austin, and former Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, retired General David Petraeus.
There are two other general officer positions at the academy.
Tuition for cadets is fully funded by the Army in exchange for an active duty service obligation upon graduation.
The academy is also overseen by the Board of Visitors (BOV).
Following the 1973 end of American involvement in Vietnam, the strain and stigma of earlier social unrest dissolved and West Point enjoyed surging enrollments.
In 2008 gender-neutral lyrics were incorporated into West Point's "Alma Mater" and "The Corps" — replacing lines like "The men of the Corps" with "The ranks of the Corps."
In its tumultuous early years, the academy featured few standards for admission or length of study.
The West Point Cemetery is the final resting place of many notable graduates and faculty, including George Armstrong Custer, Winfield Scott, William Westmoreland, Earl Blaik, Maggie Dixon, and sixteen Medal of Honor recipients.
In addition the monthly pay that the remaining amount ranges from $100 to $400 in the first three years, cadets receive meals in the dining halls, and have access to the Internet and a phone in their barracks.
294 graduates served as general officers for the Union, and 151 served as general officers for the Confederacy.
After reciting a poem known to cadets as the ''Ring Poop'', the senior usually grants the freshmen permission to touch the ring.
One side of the ring bears the academy crest, while the other side bears the class crest and the center stone ring bears the words ''West Point'' and the class year.
Approximately 1,300 cadets enter the Academy each July, with about 1,000 cadets graduating.
The academy was the only engineering school in the country until the founding of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1824.
Although cadets choose their majors in the fall of their sophomore year, all cadets take the same course of instruction until the beginning of their junior year.
However, some knowledge changes daily, such as "the days" (a running list of the number of days until important academy events), the menu in the mess hall for the day, or the lead stories in ''The New York Times''.
Senior cadets receive their rings during Ring Weekend in the early fall of their senior year.
In its first 65&nbsp;years, hazing was uncommon or non-existent beyond small pranks played upon the incoming freshmen, but took a harsher tone as Civil War veterans began to fill the incoming freshman classes.
The 1960s saw the size of the Corps expand to 4,400&nbsp;cadets while the barracks and academic support structure grew proportionally.
The class motto is proposed by the class during cadet basic training and voted on by the class prior to the beginning of their freshman academic year.
Cadets' uniforms are inspected before their tours begin each day.
The Cullum number is a reference and identification number assigned to each graduate.
According to legend, if Sedgwick's ghost catches them, they will fail the exam.
Many cadets join several clubs during their time at the academy and find their time spent with their clubs a welcome respite from the rigors of cadet life.
Goethals gained prominence as the chief engineer of the Panama Canal, and Pershing would become famous for his exploits against the famed Pancho Villa in Mexico and later for leading American Forces during World War I.
The current Superintendent, Lieutenant General Robert L. Caslen, Jr., took command on 17 July 2013.
Five years later there was a major revision of the ''Fourth Class System'', as the Cadet Leader Development System (CLDS) became the guidance for the development of all four classes.
The academy officially commenced operations on 4 July 1802.
From the earliest days of the academy, one form of punishment for cadets who commit regulatory infractions has been a process officially known as ''punishment tours''.
Cadets who walk more than 100 total hours in their career are affectionately known as "Century Men."
The Continental Army first occupied West Point, New York, on 27 January 1778; and it is the oldest continuously-operating Army post in the United States.
An unofficial motto of the academy's history department is "Much of the history we teach was made by people we taught."
There are a number of theories for the origin of the term ''cow''; however the most prevalent and probably accurate one is that cadets in years past had no leave until the end of their yearling year, when they were granted a summer-long furlough.
As World War II engulfed Europe, Congress authorized an increase to 2,496 cadets in 1942 and began graduating classes early.
Their second summer, cadets undergo cadet field training (CFT) at nearby Camp Buckner, where they train in more advanced field craft and military skills.
Because of the academy's congressional nomination process, students come from all 50&nbsp;states, Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, the Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the US Virgin Islands.
Plebeians were the lower class of ancient Roman society, while yearling is a euphemism for a year-old animal.
Candidates may have previous college experience, but they may not transfer, meaning that regardless of previous college credit, they enter the academy as a fourth class cadet and undergo the entire four-year program.
Each class crest is required to contain the initials ''USMA'' and their class motto.
If they are found guilty by a jury of their peers, they face severe consequences ranging from being "turned back" (repeating an academic year) to separation from the academy.
Congressional hearings, which included testimony by cadet Douglas MacArthur, investigated his death and the pattern of systemic hazing of freshmen.
West Point has produced many high government officials, including Brent Scowcroft, the National Security Advisor under Presidents Gerald Ford and George H. W. Bush, and Eric Shinseki, former Secretary of Veterans Affairs under President Barack Obama.
Brigadier General Diana Holland is the Commandant of Cadets, and Brigadier General Cindy Jebb is the Dean of the Academic Board.
The academic program grants a bachelor of science degree with a curriculum that grades cadets' performance upon a broad academic program, military leadership performance, and mandatory participation in competitive athletics.
It was created by brevet Major General George W. Cullum (USMA Class of 1833) who, in 1850, began the monumental work of chronicling the biographies of every graduate.
The award has been awarded to many notable American citizens, to include George H. W. Bush, Colin Powell, Tom Brokaw, Sandra Day O'Connor, Henry Kissinger, Ronald Reagan, Barry Goldwater, Carl Vinson, Barbara Jordan, William J. Perry, Bob Hope, and Condoleezza Rice.
DCA sponsors or operates 113&nbsp;athletic and non-sport clubs.
Many of the academy's most famous graduates graduated during the 15-year period between 1900 and 1915: Douglas MacArthur (1903), Joseph Stilwell (1904), Henry "Hap" Arnold (1907), George S. Patton (1909), Dwight D. Eisenhower, and Omar Bradley (both 1915).
From this amount, pay is automatically deducted for the cost of uniforms, books, supplies, services, and other miscellaneous expenses.
Cadets are "awarded" punishment tours based upon the severity of the infraction.
Certain cadets whose academics are deficient may also conduct "sitting tours," where they have to "sit hours" in a designated academic room in a controlled study environment, for which they receive half credit towards their reduction of tours.
Graduates of the academy refer to themselves as "The Long Gray Line," a phrase taken from the academy's traditional hymn "The Corps."
West Point was the alma mater of many notable World War II generals, Henry H. Arnold, Omar Bradley, Mark Wayne Clark, Robert L. Eichelberger, James M. Gavin, Leslie Groves, Douglas MacArthur, George S. Patton, Joseph Stilwell, Maxwell D. Taylor, James Van Fleet, Jonathan Mayhew Wainwright IV, and Simon Bolivar Buckner, Jr. the highest ranking General to be killed in combat during World War II, with many of these graduates also serving in commanding roles in the Korean War.
West Point's student body has a unique rank structure and lexicon.
Known as the "Father of the Military Academy," he is honored with a monument on campus for the profound impact he had upon the academy.
Other nomination sources include the President and Vice President of the United States.
During the Civil War, graduates included John Bell Hood, Stonewall Jackson, Robert E. Lee, Simon Bolivar Buckner, James Longstreet, George G. Meade, Phillip Sheridan, William Tecumseh Sherman, J.E.B.
Women currently compose approximately 15% of entering new cadets.
With the completion of Jefferson Hall, Patton's statue was relocated and unveiled at a temporary location on 15 May 2009, where it will remain until the completion of the renovation of the old cadet library and Bartlett Hall.
Leadership responsibility decreases with the lower classes, with second class cadets holding the rank of cadet sergeant, third class cadets holding the rank of cadet corporal, and fourth class cadets as cadet privates.
This process is better known to the cadets as "hours" because as punishment, cadets must walk a specified number of hours in penalty.
The visitor's center is just outside the Thayer Gate in the village of Highland Falls and offers the opportunity to arrange for a guided tour.
A monument to Civil War Union soldier general John Sedgwick stands on the outskirts of the Plain.
The commanding officer at the USMA is the Superintendent.
U.S. sports media use "Army" as a synonym for the academy.
Some of the origins of the class names are known, some are not.
In 1801, shortly after his inauguration as president, Thomas Jefferson directed that plans be set in motion to establish at West Point the United States Military Academy.
Also in 1976, 151 junior cadets were found guilty of 'violating the honour code' in their exams.
Instead they are officially called fourth class, third class, second class, and first class cadets.
Colloquially, freshmen are ''plebes'', sophomores are ''yearlings'' or ''yuks'', juniors are ''cows'', and seniors are ''firsties''.
When MacArthur returned as superintendent, he made an effort to end the practice of hazing the incoming freshmen by placing Army sergeants in charge of training new cadets during freshman summer.
The football team plays its home games at Michie Stadium, where the playing field is named after Earl Blaik.
The site would later become Camp Buckner.
The practice of hazing continued on some levels well into the late 20th century, but is no longer allowed in the present day.
All cadets reside on campus for their entire four years in one of the seven barracks buildings.
A total of 76&nbsp;graduates have been awarded the Medal of Honor.
Cadets accused of violating the Honor Code face an investigative and hearing process.
Some receive a nomination from the Vice President or even the President of the United States.
The student population was 4,487 cadets for the 2007–2008 academic year.
Entering freshmen, or fourth class cadets, are referred to as New Cadets, and enter the academy on Reception Day or R-day, which marks the start of cadet basic training (CBT), known colloquially as Beast Barracks, or simply Beast.
First class cadets celebrate three different formal occasions.
The official alumni association of West Point is the West Point Association of Graduates (WPAOG or AOG), headquartered at Herbert Hall.
However, the post-war years were a difficult time for the academy as it struggled to admit and reintegrate cadets from former confederate states.
All of the "class weekends" involve a formal dinner and social dance, known in old cadet slang as a "hop," held at Eisenhower Hall.
MacArthur was a firm supporter of athletics at the academy, as he famously said "Upon the fields of friendly strife are sown the seeds that, upon other fields, on other days, will bear the fruits of victory."
The schools include Airborne, Air Assault, Sapper, Pathfinder, etc.
The academic program consists of a structured core of thirty-one courses balanced between the arts and sciences.
In its early years, lacrosse was used by football players, like the "Lonesome End" Bill Carpenter, to stay in shape during the off-season.
The 2005–06 women's basketball team went 20–11 and won the Patriot League tournament.
Alumni currently serving in public office include Senator Jack Reed, Governor of Nebraska David Heineman, Governor of Louisiana John Bel Edwards and Congressmen Geoff Davis, Brett Guthrie, Mike Pompeo and John Shimkus.
There is one TAC for every cadet company.
To be eligible for appointment, candidates must also undergo a Candidate Fitness Assessment and a complete physical exam.
All 4,000&nbsp;cadets dine together at breakfast and lunch in the Washington Hall during the weekdays.
Army also plays the U.S. Air Force Academy for the Commander-in-Chief's Trophy.
By March 2012, cadets were forming a gay-straight alliance group called Spectrum.
Cadets previously enforced collective censure by an unofficial sanction known as "silencing" by not speaking to cadets accused of violating the honor code, but the practice ended in 1973 after national scrutiny.
In recent years, female cadets have begun playing a flag football contest, so there are now two Goat-Engineer games, played back to back the same night.
Army football began in 1890, when Navy challenged the cadets to a game of the relatively new sport.
First played in 1907, it is a game between the "Goats" (the bottom half of the senior (Firstie) class academically), and the "Engineers" (the top half).
All cadets reside on campus and dine together ''en masse'' on weekdays for breakfast and lunch.
Each cadet class celebrates at least one special "class weekend" per academic year.
Students are officers-in-training and are referred to as "cadets" or collectively as the "United States Corps of Cadets" (USCC).
Class mottos typically have verbiage that rhymes or is phonetically similar with their class year.
The academy was also an early adopter of the Internet in the mid-1990s, and was recognized in 2006 as one of the nation's "most wired" campuses.
Another tradition associated with punishment tours is that any visiting head of state has the authority to grant "amnesty," releasing all cadets with outstanding hours from the remainder of their assigned tours.
West Point is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education.
Candidates for admission must both apply directly to the academy and receive a nomination, usually from a member of Congress or Delegate/Resident Commissioner in the case of Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico, Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Virgin Islands.
The majority of candidates receive a nomination from their United States Representative or Senator.
This series, conceived in 1923, is the longest-running annual international sporting event in the world.
As all cadets are commissioned as second lieutenants upon graduation, military and leadership education is nested with academic instruction.
Candidates must be between 17 and 23 years old, unmarried, and with no legal obligation to support a child.
The academy library has a large collection of cadet rings on display.
The academy bases a cadet's leadership experience as a development of all three pillars of performance: academics, physical, and military.
In its most traditional form, punishment tours are "walked off" by wearing the dress gray uniform under arms and walking back and forth in a designated area of the cadet barracks courtyard, known as "Central Area."
These officers are titled "Professors USMA" or PUSMA.
Three other females have been appointed as First Captain: Grace H. Chung in 2003, Stephanie Hightower in 2005, and Lindsey Danilack in 2013.
Between the 1998 and 2004 seasons, Army's football program was a member of Conference USA, but has since reverted to its former independent status.
During a cadet's third summer, they may serve as instructors for CBT or CFT.
One of the most notable items on display at the museum are George Washington's pistols, Napoleon's sword, a dagger carried by Hermann Goering when he was captured, a revolver that belonged to Goering and a silver-plated party book, signed by Charles Lindbergh, Herbert Hoover and Mussolini etc.
He expanded and modernized the academic program and abolished antiquated courses in fencing and horsemanship.
+ ''Demographics of student body''
The cemetery is also home to a monument to Revolutionary War heroine Margaret Corbin.
Their return as second classmen was heralded as "the cows coming home."
Past NFL coaches Vince Lombardi and Bill Parcells were Army assistant coaches early in their careers.
The men's lacrosse team has won eight national championships and appeared in the NCAA tournament sixteen times.
The West Point Association of Graduates (WPAOG) also offers scholarship support to people who are qualified but not selected.
Companies are lettered A through I, with a number signifying which regiment it belongs to.
Of these foreign cadets the Code of Federal Regulations specifically permits one Filipino cadet designated by the President of the Philippines.
The brigade is organized into four regiments.
Above average high school and/or previous college grades, and strong performance on standardized testing is expected.
West Point played a prominent role in WWII; four out of five of the five-star generals were alumni and nearly 500&nbsp;graduates died.
The upper class cadets saw it as their duty to "teach the plebes their manners."
The academy grounds are home to numerous monuments and statues.
West Point fields a total of 24&nbsp;club sports teams that have been very successful in recent years, winning national championships in judo, boxing, orienteering, pistol, triathlon, crew, cycling, and team handball.
Those who do not must repay the AOG.
The actual application process consists of two main requirements: candidates apply to USMA for admission and separately provide a nomination.
The location has changed over the years, with recent venues being Shea Stadium, Michie Stadium, and Daly Field.
The impending War of 1812 caused the United States Congress to authorize a more formal system of education at the academy and increased the size of the Corps of Cadets to 250.
The role of the TAC is to mentor, train, and teach the cadets proper standards of good order and discipline and be a good role model.
The origin of cow is less known.
Cadets receive a monthly stipend of $1,017.00 for books, uniforms, and other necessities, as of 2015.
The Army granted its first honorable discharge in 1971 to a West Point cadet, Cary E. Donham, of Illinois, who applied for conscientious objector status in 1970.
Following the September 11 attacks, applications for admission to the academy increased dramatically, security on campus was increased, and the curriculum was revamped to include coursework on terrorism and military drills in civilian environments.
The Class of 2005 has been referred to as The Class of 9/11 as the attacks occurred during their first year at the academy, and they graduated 911 students.
Currently, the award guidelines state that the recipient not be a graduate of the academy.
Cadets are not referred to as freshmen, sophomores, juniors, or seniors.
The Academy traces its roots to 1801, when President Thomas Jefferson directed, shortly after his inauguration, that plans be set in motion to establish the United States Military Academy at West Point.
In all, 452 of 523 graduates who served in the war received battlefield promotions or awards for bravery.
The nomination process is not political.
In 1935, the academy's authorized strength increased to 1,960 cadets.
They also elect a ring and crest committee, which designs the class's crest, the emblem that signifies their class and it is embossed upon their class rings.
Before his death in 1892, General Cullum completed the first three volumes of a work that eventually comprised 10&nbsp;volumes, titled ''General Cullum’s Biographical Register of the Officers and Graduates of the United States Military Academy, and covering USMA classes from 1802 through 1850''.
Donations of class rings are melted and merged.
Though football may receive a lot of media attention due to its annual rivalry game, West Point has a long history of athletics in other NCAA sports.
The foundation of the ethical code at West Point is found in the academy's motto, "Duty, Honor, Country."
For example, there are four "A" companies: A1, A2, A3, and A4.
In the first half of the 20th&nbsp;century, Army and Notre Dame were football rivals, but that rivalry has since died out.
One of the most visited and scenic sites on post, Trophy Point, overlooks the Hudson River to the north, and is home to many captured cannon from past wars as well as the Stanford White-designed Battle Monument.
