Recently, the RPAs have been seen to offer the possibility of cheaper, more capable fighting machines that can be used without risk to aircrews.
* F-15C and F-15D Eagle
OCA comprises attack operations, sweep, escort, and suppression/destruction of enemy air defense.
In 2014, following morale and testing/cheating scandals in the Air Force's missile launch officer community, Secretary of the Air Force Deborah Lee James admitted that there remained a "systemic problem" in the USAF's management of the nuclear mission.
The use of "challenge coins" is a recent innovation that was adopted from the U.S. Army while another cultural tradition unique to the Air Force is the "roof stomp", practiced by Air Force members to welcome a new commander or to commemorate another event, such as a retirement.
These activities imply a broader dimension of time or space than do tactics; they provide the means by which tactical successes are exploited to achieve strategic and operational objectives.
Enlisted promotions are granted based on a combination of test scores, years of experience, and selection board approval while officer promotions are based on time-in-grade and a promotion selection board.
The U.S. Air Force provides air support for surface forces and aids in the recovery of troops in the field.
* U.S. Army Air Corps (2 July 1926 to 20 June 1941) and
Combat search and rescue is the primary Air Force recovery method utilized to conduct PR taskings.
The USAF's KC-135 and KC-10 aerial refueling aircraft are based on civilian jets.
Analysis and production is "the conversion of processed information into intelligence through the integration, evaluation, analysis, and interpretation of all source data and the preparation of intelligence products in support of known or anticipated user requirements" (JP 2-01).
The AC-130W's are former MC-130W Combat Spear aircraft.
This includes aerial refueling of vertical lift aircraft and ground refueling during forward arming and refueling point operations.
Most of the existing Air Force warrant officers entered the commissioned officer ranks during the 1960s, but small numbers continued to exist in the warrant officer grades for the next 21 years.
As part of the ''Fit to Fight'' program, the USAF adopted a more stringent physical fitness assessment; the new fitness program was put into effect on 1 June 2010.
* UV-18B Twin Otter
Aeromedical evacuation forces can operate as far forward as fixed-wing aircraft are able to conduct airland operations.
In all other branches, NCO status is generally achieved at the pay grade of E-4 (e.g., a Corporal in the Army and Marine Corps, Petty Officer Third Class in the Navy and Coast Guard).
The Commander of Air Combat Command, General Mike Hostage indicated that the USAF must reduce its F-15 and F-16 fleets and eliminate platforms like the A-10 in order to focus on a fifth-generation jet fighter future.
The Air Force shall be responsible for the preparation of the air forces necessary for the effective prosecution of war except as otherwise assigned and, in accordance with integrated joint mobilization plans, for the expansion of the peacetime components of the Air Force to meet the needs of war.''
The 1940s proved to be important in other ways as well.
After BMT, new enlisted airmen attend a technical training school where they learn their particular AFSC.
Air Refueling is "the refueling of an aircraft in flight by another aircraft" (JP 1-02).
* MC-130P Combat Shadow
It serves as a US presence that demonstrates resolve and compassion in humanitarian crisis.
Recently, the Air Force refined its understanding of the core duties and responsibilities it performs as a Military Service Branch, streamlining what previously were six distinctive capabilities and seventeen operational functions into twelve core functions to be used across the doctrine, organization, training, equipment, leadership, and education, personnel, and facilities spectrum.
The AETF is the Air Force presentation of forces to a CCDR for the employment of Air Power.
Some aircraft serve specialized transportation roles such as executive/embassy support (C-12), Antarctic Support (LC-130H), and USSOCOM support (C-27J, C-145A, and C-146A).
* RC-135V and RC-135W Rivet Joint
Disaster Response can be described as the capability to support and assist US government agencies and embassies during national and international disasters with rapidly deployable and flexible air/ground rescue forces.
Space superiority may be localized in time and space, or it may be broad and enduring.
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance is the synchronization and integration of platforms and sensors with the planning and direction, collection, processing and exploitation, analysis, and production and dissemination processes.
Space Force Application is defined as "combat operations in, through, and from space to influence the course and outcome of conflict.
These activities provide actionable intelligence, weather, environmental awareness, and prediction across all SOF command echelons.
This deployment phase, now called the BEAST, places the trainees in a surreal environment that they may experience once they deploy.
(The term "line officer" derives from the concept of the line of battle and refers to an officer whose role falls somewhere within the "Line of the Air", meaning combat or combat-support operations within the scope of legitimate combatants as defined by the Geneva Conventions.)
On 26 June 2009, the USAF released a force structure plan that cut fighter aircraft and shifted resources to better support nuclear, irregular and information warfare.
In addition since the USAF dwarfs all allied air forces, it often provides support for allied forces in conflicts to which the United States is otherwise not involved, for example the 2013 French campaign in Mali.
HH-60U are replacement aircraft for "G" models that have been lost in combat operations or accidents.
It is the most recent branch of the U.S. military to be formed, and is the largest and one of the world's most technologically advanced air forces.
Space Force Enhancement is defined as the "combat support operations and force-multiplying capabilities delivered from space systems to improve the effectiveness of military forces as well as support other intelligence, civil, and commercial users.
1 Rank in abeyance - appointments no longer made to this rank in peacetime.
* EC-130J Commando Solo
In World War II, almost 68,000 U.S airmen died helping to win the war; only the infantry suffered more enlisted casualties.
Originally viewed as a "knife and fork school" that covered little beyond basic wear of the uniform, COT in recent years has been fully integrated into the OTS program and today encompasses extensive coursework as well as field exercises in leadership, confidence, fitness, and deployed-environment operations.
Gates in effect fired both men for "systemic issues associated with declining Air Force nuclear mission focus and performance".
Command and Control is the exercise of the commander's authority and direction over assigned and attached forces by trained, organized, and equipped C2 elements.
"The United States Air Force will be a trusted and reliable joint partner with our sister services known for integrity in all of our activities, including supporting the joint mission first and foremost.
Theater Air Control Systems control employment of forces during these missions.
This mission area includes ballistic missile defense and force projection" (JP 1-02).
Combat Search and Rescue is "the tactics, techniques, and procedures performed by forces to effect the recovery of isolated personnel during combat" (JP 1-02).
Finally in the midst of scandal and failure in maintaining its nuclear arsenal, the civilian and military leaders of the air force were replaced in 2008.
Daniel L. Magruder, Jr defines USAF culture as a combination of the rigorous application of advanced technology, individualism and progressive airpower theory.
Paul Scharre has reported that the cultural divide between the USAF and US Army has kept both services from adopting each other's drone handing innovations.
The USAF aircraft are equipped primarily for providing the fuel via a tail-mounted refueling boom, and can be equipped with "probe and drogue" refueling systems.
While all USAF military personnel are referred to as ''Airmen'', the term also refers to the pay grades of E-1 through E-4, which are below the level of non-commissioned officers (NCOs).
During the board process an officer's record is reviewed by a selection board at the Air Force Personnel Center at Randolph Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.
"Chopped" units are referred to as ''forces''.
Since 2005, the USAF has placed a strong focus on the improvement of Basic Military Training (BMT) for enlisted personnel.
The service's B-2A aircraft entered service in the 1990s, its B-1B aircraft in the 1980s and its current B-52H aircraft in the early 1960s.
Badges can also be used as merit-based or service-based awards.
* C-12C, C-12D, C-12F and C-12J Huron
Civil Search and Rescue is "the use of aircraft, surface craft, submarines, and specialized rescue teams and equipment to search for and rescue distressed persons on land or at sea in a permissive environment" (JP 1-02).
The MC-12W is used in the Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) role.
For many years, the U.S. Air Force used "Aim High" as its recruiting slogan; more recently, they have used "Cross into the Blue", "We've been waiting for you" and "Do Something Amazing", "Above All", and the newest one, as of 7 October 2010, considered a call and response, "Aim high" followed with the response, "Fly-Fight-Win" Each wing, group, or squadron usually has its own slogan(s).
Rapid Global Mobility is essential to virtually every military operation, allowing forces to reach foreign or domestic destinations quickly, thus seizing the initiative through speed and surprise.
Moreover, different deterrence strategies are required to deter various adversaries, whether they are a nation state, or non-state/transnational actor.
The organizational structure as shown above is responsible for the peacetime organization, equipping, and training of aerospace units for operational missions.
At the 10 to 11 year mark, captains will take part in a selection board to major.
Casualty evacuation involves the unregulated movement of casualties aboard ships, land vehicles, or aircraft (JP 4-02, Health Service Support).
However, the reduction was ended at approximately 330,000 personnel in 2008 in order to meet the demand signal of combatant commanders and associated mission requirements.
The last active duty Air Force warrant officer, CWO4 James H. Long, retired in 1980 and the last Air Force Reserve warrant officer, CWO4 Bob Barrow, retired in 1992.
The Air Force is headed by the civilian Secretary of the Air Force, who reports to the Secretary of Defense, and is appointed by the President with Senate confirmation.
Upon his retirement, he was honorarily promoted to CWO5, the only person in the Air Force ever to hold this grade.
USAF personnel assigned to Base Honor Guard duties wear, for certain occasions, a modified version of the standard service dress uniform, but with silver trim on the sleeves and trousers, with the addition of a ceremonial belt (if necessary), wheel cap with silver trim and Hap Arnold Device, and a silver aiguillette placed on the left shoulder seam and all devices and accoutrement.
* RC-135S Cobra Ball
The Air Force maintains and presents credible deterrent capabilities through successful visible demonstrations and exercises which assure allies, dissuade proliferation, deter potential adversaries from actions that threaten US national security or the populations and deployed military forces of the US, its allies and friends.
Nearly all enlisted career fields are "entry level", meaning that the USAF provides all training.
Commissioned officer rank is designated by bars, oak leaves, a silver eagle, and anywhere from one to four stars (one to five stars in war-time).
The '''United States Air Force''' ('''USAF''') is the aerial warfare service branch of the United States Armed Forces and one of the seven American uniformed services.
* C-5A, C-5B, C-5C and C-5M Galaxy
* F-15E Strike Eagle
Recover the Total Force includes preparing forces to remain in place, redeploy, relocate, and be reconstituted to prescribed levels of readiness; restoring operating locations and/or environments to planned conditions; protecting the dynamic levels of force structure; and ensuring Air Force mission elements can be effectively applied at the direction of national leadership.
AFSCs range from officer specialties such as pilot, combat systems officer, missile launch officer, intelligence officer, aircraft maintenance officer, judge advocate general (JAG), medical doctor, nurse or other fields, to various enlisted specialties.
, the service operates more than 5,137 military aircraft, 450 ICBMs and 63 military satellites.
This mission area includes: intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; integrated tactical warning and attack assessment; command, control, and communications; positioning, navigation, and timing; and environmental monitoring" (JP 1-02).
¹ The USAF does not have a separate First Sergeant rank; it is instead a duty denoted by a diamond within the upper field.
;Q – Multi-mission Remote Piloted Aircraft
It allows air assets to more rapidly reach any trouble spot around the world with less dependence on forward staging bases or overflight/landing clearances.
At the Operational Level Command and Control, campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted, sustained, and assessed to accomplish strategic goals within theaters or areas of operations.
Chief Master Sergeantof the Air Force
There are additional occupational fields such as computer specialties, mechanic specialties, enlisted aircrew, communication systems, cyberspace operations, avionics technicians, medical specialties, civil engineering, public affairs, hospitality, law, drug counseling, mail operations, security forces, and search and rescue specialties.
The A-10 had been projected to be retired by 2019 and replaced by the F-35, but the A-10 fleet might possibly be retained through upgrades until at least 2028.
It is highly dependent on ISR, fused all-source intelligence, sophisticated attribution activities, situational awareness, and responsive C2.
Effective 1 July 2010, the AFFT is administered by the base Fitness Assessment Cell (FAC), and is required twice a year.
Their role is tactical rather than strategic, operating at the front of the battle rather than against targets deeper in the enemy's rear.
As U.S. forces stationed overseas continue to decline, global interests remain, making the unique mobility capabilities of the USAF even more in demand.
* EC-130H Compass Call
* E-3B, E-3C and E-3G Sentry
* C-17A Globemaster III
* RQ-4A Global Hawk
Many fighter aircraft, such as the F-16, are often used as 'bomb trucks', despite being designed for aerial combat.
The WC-130H aircraft are former weather reconnaissance aircraft, now reverted to the transport mission.
''Officers'' may be commissioned upon graduation from the United States Air Force Academy, upon graduation from another college or university through the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC) program, or through the Air Force Officer Training School (OTS).
A major goal of DCA operations, in concert with OCA operations, is to provide an area from which forces can operate, secure from air and missile threats.
Some of these traditions range from "Friday Name Tags" in flying units to an annual "Mustache Month."
Perhaps the one meaningful distinction at present is the question of range: a bomber is generally a long-range aircraft capable of striking targets deep within enemy territory, whereas fighter bombers and attack aircraft are limited to 'theater' missions in and around the immediate area of battlefield combat.
Because of their political and military importance, destructive power, and the potential consequences of an accident or unauthorized act, nuclear weapons and nuclear weapon systems require special consideration and protection against risks and threats inherent in their peacetime and wartime environments.
This program applies to materiel, personnel, and procedures that contribute to the safety, security, and control of nuclear weapons, thus assuring no nuclear accidents, incidents, loss, or unauthorized or accidental use (a Broken Arrow incident).
Communicate refers to developing and presenting information to domestic audiences to improve understanding.
This includes close air support, air interdiction, and armed reconnaissance missions.
Barrow died in April 2008.
In the case of AFSPC, AFSOC, PACAF, and USAFE units, forces are normally employed in-place under their existing CCDR.
It is highly dependent upon ISR, fused all-source intelligence, automated indications and warning, sophisticated attribution/characterization, situational awareness, assessment, and responsive C2.
The act created the ''National Military Establishment'' (renamed Department of Defense in 1949), which was composed of three subordinate Military Departments, namely the Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy, and the newly created Department of the Air Force.
These aircraft are used for search and rescue and combat search and rescue on land or sea.
Should deterrence fail, the President may authorize a precise, tailored response to terminate the conflict at the lowest possible level and lead to a rapid cessation of hostilities.
It is also the ability to develop and present information to foreign adversary audiences to affect their perceptions, will, behavior and capabilities in order to further US national security and/or shared global security interests.
Although the paradigm is changing, for most of its history, the Air Force, completely unlike its sister services, has been an organization in which mostly its officers fought, not its enlisted force, the latter being primarily a rear echelon support force.
During this event, the Military Training Instructors (MTI) act as mentors and enemy forces in a deployment exercise.
The fighter aircraft of the USAF are small, fast, and maneuverable military aircraft primarily used for air-to-air combat.
These missions may be clandestine, low visibility, or overt and through hostile, denied, or politically sensitive airspace.
The roles of the aircraft vary greatly among the different variants to include general monitoring (RC-26B), Ballistic missile monitoring (RC-135S), Electronic Intelligence gathering (RC-135U), Signal Intelligence gathering (RC-135V/W), and high altitude surveillance (U-2)
In response to the 2007 United States Air Force nuclear weapons incident, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates accepted in June 2009 the resignations of Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force General T. Michael Moseley.
Since Barrow's retirement, the Air Force warrant officer ranks, while still authorized by law, are not used.
This is worn with a light blue shirt (Shade 1550) and Shade 1620 herringbone patterned necktie.
This has been a tradition regarding call signs that dated to World War I.
Command and control functions are performed through an arrangement of personnel, equipment, communications, facilities, and procedures employed by a commander in planning, directing, coordinating, and controlling forces and operations in the accomplishment of the mission" (JP 1-02).
OCA is the preferred method of countering air and missile threats, since it attempts to defeat the enemy closer to its source and typically enjoys the initiative.
Until 1962, the Army and Air Force maintained one system of aircraft naming, while the U.S. Navy maintained a separate system.
These operations may require covert, clandestine, or low-visibility capabilities.
The assistance provided is designed to supplement or complement the efforts of the host nation civil authorities or agencies that may have the primary responsibility for providing humanitarian assistance" (JP 1-02).
On 5 June 2008, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates accepted the resignations of both the Secretary of the Air Force, Michael Wynne, and the Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, General T. Michael Moseley.
Prior to 1947, the responsibility for military aviation was shared between the Army (for land-based operations), the Navy (for sea-based operations from aircraft carriers and amphibious aircraft), and the Marine Corps (for close air support of infantry operations).
It should be emphasized that the core functions, by themselves, are not doctrinal constructs.
In practice, the U.S. Army Air Forces (USAAF) was virtually independent of the Army during World War II, but officials wanted formal independence.
Humanitarian assistance provided by US forces is limited in scope and duration.
The ground-attack aircraft of the USAF are designed to attack targets on the ground and are often deployed as close air support for, and in proximity to, U.S. ground forces.
Battlefield Air Operations is a unique set of combat proven capabilities (combat control, pararescue, combat weather, and tactical air control party) provided by regular and reserve component special operations forces (SOF) Battlefield Airmen who integrate, synchronize, and control manned and unmanned capabilities to achieve tactical, operational, and strategic objectives.
Collection activities span the Range of Military Operations (ROMO).
Utility aircraft are used basically for what they are needed for at the time.
Information Operations is the integrated employment of the capabilities of influence operations, electronic warfare operations, and network warfare operations, in concert with specified integrated control enablers, to influence, disrupt, corrupt, or usurp adversarial human and automated decision making while protecting one's own.
Second Air Force, a part of Air Education and Training Command, is responsible for nearly all enlisted technical training.
In spite of an urgent need for UAVs or drones to provide round the clock coverage for American troops during the Iraq War, the USAF did not establish a new career field for piloting them until the last year of that war and in 2014 changed its RPA training syllabus again, in the face of large aircraft losses in training, and in response to a GAO report critical of handling of drone programs.
Even that distinction is muddied by the availability of aerial refueling, which greatly increases the potential radius of combat operations.
Shape refers to conducting activities to affect the perceptions, will, behavior, and capabilities of partners, military forces, and relevant populations to further U.S. national security or shared global security interests.
Although the U-2 is designated as a 'utility' aircraft, it is a reconnaissance platform.
Specialized Refueling is the conduct of rapid, global refueling using specialized systems and tactics.
Air refueling significantly expands the options available to a commander by increasing the range, payload, persistence, and flexibility of receiver aircraft.
The DCA mission comprises both active and passive defense measures.
Specific concerns include a compounded inability for the Air Force to replace its aging fleet, and an overall reduction of strength and readiness.
The United States Air Force has had numerous recruiting slogans including "No One Comes Close" and ''Uno Ab Alto'' ("One From On High").
Nuclear surety ensures the safety, security and effectiveness of nuclear operations.
Tactical Level Command and Control is where individual battles and engagements are fought.
The ABU replaced the Battle Dress Uniform (BDU) previously worn by all U.S. military forces.
Agile Combat Support is the capability to effectively create, prepare, deploy, employ, sustain, and protect Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) Airmen, assets, and capabilities throughout the ROMO at a chosen initiative, speed, and tempo.
Today the USAF believes that it accomplishes the CAS mission "better than anyone" actually does.
Including the Air Force Reserve Command, as of 30 September 2006, USAF has ten major commands.
The U.S. Air Force is a military service organized within the Department of the Air Force, one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense.
The Above All campaign continues to support the message of "air, space and cyberspace" dominance.
When the Congress authorized the creation of two new senior enlisted ranks in 1958, Air Force officials privately concluded that these two new "super grades" could fill all Air Force needs then performed at the warrant officer level, although this was not publicly acknowledged until years later.
Currently, promotion from second lieutenant to first lieutenant is virtually guaranteed after two years of satisfactory service.
Air mobility is a national asset of growing importance for responding to emergencies and protecting American interests around the globe.
Above the pay grade of E-4 (i.e., pay grades E-5 through E-9) all ranks fall into the category of NCO and are further subdivided into "NCOs" (pay grades E-5 and E-6) and "Senior NCOs" (pay grades E-7 through E-9); the term "Junior NCO" is sometimes used to refer to staff sergeants and technical sergeants (pay grades E-5 and E-6).
The purpose of electronic warfare is to deny the opponent an advantage in the EMS and ensure friendly, unimpeded access to the EM spectrum portion of the information environment.
* A-10C Thunderbolt II
* C-130J and C-130J-30 Super Hercules
It has a $161 billion budget with 307,001 active duty personnel, 177,221 civilian personnel, 69,200 Air Force Reserve personnel, and 105,500 Air National Guard personnel.
The size of the active duty force in 2007 was roughly 64% of that of what the USAF was at the end of the first Gulf War in 1991.
The tactical level of war deals with how forces are employed, and the specifics of how engagements are conducted and targets attacked.
Precision Strike provides CCDRs with an integrated capability to find, fix, track, target, engage, and assess targets using a single weapons system or a combination of systems.
This core function includes all of the C2-related capabilities and activities associated with air, space, cyberspace, nuclear, and agile combat support operations to achieve strategic, operational, and tactical objectives.
However, Congress did allow for $208 million of reprogramming from fleet modernization to enable some portion of the third of the grounded fleet to resume operations.
Promotions among enlisted personnel and non-commissioned officers are generally designated by increasing numbers of insignia chevrons.
The goal of tactical level C2 is to achieve commander's intent and desired effects by gaining and keeping offensive initiative.
When required to support operational missions, the Secretary of Defense (SECDEF) directs the Secretary of the Air Force (SECAF) to execute a Change in Operational Control (CHOP) of these units from their administrative alignment to the operational command of a Regional Combatant Commander (CCDR).
Special operations are applicable across the ROMO.
DOPMA also establishes limits on the number of officers that can serve at any given time in the Air Force.
The Air Force inherited warrant officer ranks from the Army at its inception in 1947, but their place in the Air Force structure was never made clear.
Aviation Foreign Internal Defense operations directly execute US security and foreign policy as lead airpower elements that shape the battlefield and conduct stability operations to enable global reach and strike.
Because of budget constraints, the USAF planned to reduce the service's size from 360,000 active duty personnel to 316,000.
The Air Force has the largest ratio of general officers to total strength of all of the U.S. armed forces and this ratio has continued to increase even as the force has shrunk from its Cold War highs.
Although provision is made in Title 10 of the United States Code for the Secretary of the Air Force to appoint warrant officers, the Air Force does not currently use warrant officer grades, and is the only one of the U.S. Armed Services not to do so.
Military Information Support Operations are planned operations to convey selected information and indicators to foreign audiences to influence their emotions, motives, objective reasoning, and ultimately the behavior of foreign governments, organizations, groups, and individuals.
* MC-130J Commando II
USAF rank is divided between enlisted airmen, non-commissioned officers, and commissioned officers, and ranges from the enlisted Airman Basic (E-1) to the commissioned officer rank of General (O-10).
At the Strategic Level Command and Control, the US determines national or multinational security objectives and guidance, and develops and uses national resources to accomplish these objectives.
Operational C2 elements consist of personnel and equipment with specialized capability to plan, direct, coordinate, and control forces in the conduct of joint/combined special operations.
It includes detection and warning; chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear defense; camouflage, concealment, and deception; hardening; reconstitution; dispersion; redundancy; and mobility, counter-measures, and stealth.
The purpose of Nuclear Deterrence Operations (NDO) is to operate, maintain, and secure nuclear forces to achieve an assured capability to deter an adversary from taking action against vital US interests.
In the US Air Force, the distinction between bombers, fighters that are actually fighter-bombers, and attack aircraft has become blurred.
Passive defense is "measures taken to reduce the probability of and to minimize the effects of damage caused by hostile action without the intention of taking the initiative" (JP 1-02).
This process will repeat at the 16 year mark (for officers previously promoted early to major and lieutenant colonel) to the 21 year mark for promotion to full colonel.
Each C-NAF consists of a Commander, Air Force Forces (COMAFFOR) and AFFOR/A-staff, and an Air Operations Center (AOC).
The predecessor organizations in the Army of today's Air Force are:
Although most of the US Air Force's cargo aircraft were specially designed with the Air Force in mind, some aircraft such as the C-12 Huron (Beechcraft Super King Air) and C-146 (Dornier 328) are militarized conversions of existing civilian aircraft.
* KC-135R and KC-135T Stratotanker
Cultural and career issues in the U.S. Air Force have been cited as one of the reasons for the shortfall in needed UAV operators.
This is accomplished by applying the mission set (assess, train, advise, and assist foreign aviation forces) across a continuum of operating venues described as indirect assistance, direct assistance (not including combat) and combat operations.
