The Christian philosopher, John Philoponus, presented the philosophical arguments against the ancient Greek notion of an infinite past and future.
Many cultures have stories describing the origin of the world and universe.
These are called, respectively, the flat, open and closed universes.
Because most of the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus, which is made up of baryons, astronomers often use the term ''baryonic matter'' to describe ordinary matter, although a small fraction of this "baryonic matter" is electrons.
Discoveries in the early 20th century have suggested that the Universe had a beginning and that it is expanding at an increasing rate.
The earliest scientific models of the Universe were developed by ancient Greek and Indian philosophers and were geocentric, placing the Earth at the center of the Universe.
The Universe appears to be a smooth spacetime continuum consisting of three spatial dimensions and one temporal (time) dimension.
The word ''universe'' derives from the Old French word ''univers'', which in turn derives from the Latin word ''universum''.
Before 1998, it was expected that the rate of increase of the Hubble Constant would be decreasing as time went on due to the influence of gravitational interactions in the Universe, and thus there is an additional observable quantity in the Universe called the deceleration parameter which cosmologists expected to be directly related to the matter density of the Universe.
The cosmological constant can be formulated to be equivalent to vacuum energy.
Dark matter, a mysterious form of matter that has not yet been identified, accounts for 26.8% of the contents.
Over the centuries, improvements in astronomical observations and theories of motion and gravitation led to ever more accurate descriptions of the Universe.
Neutrinos rarely interact with anything, and are consequently rarely observed.
Assuming that the standard model of the Big Bang theory is correct, the age of the Universe is measured to be .
The stars are in fact much farther away than the distance that was generally assumed in ancient times, which is why stellar parallax is only detectable with precision instruments.
Air will immediately rush in to fill a void, and moreover, without resistance, it would do so indefinitely fast.
The Indian philosopher Kanada, founder of the Vaisheshika school, developed a notion of atomism and proposed that light and heat were varieties of the same substance.
However, the Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems show that a singularity should exist for very general conditions.
By analogy, an infinite plane has zero curvature but infinite area, whereas an infinite cylinder is finite in one direction and a torus is finite in both.
In another type of story, the Universe is created from the union of male and female deities, as in the Maori story of Rangi and Papa.
Therefore, solutions of the Einstein field equations describe the evolution of the Universe.
His hypotheses are that the fixed stars and the Sun remain unmoved, that the Earth revolves about the Sun on the circumference of a circle, the Sun lying in the middle of the orbit, and that the sphere of fixed stars, situated about the same center as the Sun, is so great that the circle in which he supposes the Earth to revolve bears such a proportion to the distance of the fixed stars as the center of the sphere bears to its surface"
After the initial expansion, the Universe cooled, allowing the first subatomic particles to form and then simple atoms.
The first to do so was Thales, who proposed this material to be water.
Nevertheless, even the most rapid traveler will not be able to interact with all of space.
The highly redshifted photons from this period form the cosmic microwave background.
An overall dimensionless length scale factor ''R'' describes the size scale of the Universe as a function of time; an increase in ''R'' is the expansion of the Universe.
It is assumed that galaxies are distributed uniformly and the same in all directions, meaning that the Universe has neither an edge nor a center.
Normal matter is entirely contained within the terrestrial sphere.
The size of the entire Universe is unknown, but there are many hypotheses about the composition and evolution of the Universe.
In this era, the expansion of the Universe is accelerating due to dark energy.
From approximately 10−6 seconds after the Big Bang, during a period is known as the hadron epoch, the temperature of the universe had fallen sufficiently to allow quarks to bind together into hadrons, and the mass of the Universe was dominated by hadrons.
The pre-Socratic Greek philosophers and Indian philosophers developed some of the earliest philosophical concepts of the Universe.
Understanding the singularity of the Big Bang likely requires a quantum theory of gravity, which has not yet been formulated.
Having no elements heavier than lithium, these stars also produced the first heavy elements through stellar nucleosynthesis.
In particular, the curvature of spacetime is directly related to the energy and momentum of whatever matter and radiation are present.
The Big Bang theory, the prevailing cosmological model describing the development of the Universe, states that space and time were created in the Big Bang and were given a fixed amount of energy and matter that becomes less dense as space expands.
The rejection of the heliocentric view was apparently quite strong, as the following passage from Plutarch suggests (''On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon''):
The observed abundance of the elements can be explained by combining the overall expansion of space with nuclear and atomic physics.
This supercluster spans over 500 million light years, while the Local Group spans over 10 million light years.
The observable universe depends on the location of the observer.
The Universe also appears to have neither net momentum nor angular momentum.
In developing the law of universal gravitation, Sir Isaac Newton (NS: 1643–1727) built upon Copernicus's work as well as observations by Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) and Johannes Kepler's (1571–1630) laws of planetary motion.
The success of such a model is largely due to the mathematical fact that any function (such as the position of a planet) can be decomposed into a set of circular functions (the Fourier modes).
A version of the model with a cosmological constant (Lambda) and cold dark matter, known as the Lambda-CDM model, is the simplest model that provides a reasonably good account of various observations about the Universe.
Newton believed that an infinite space uniformly filled with matter would cause infinite forces and instabilities causing the matter to be crushed inwards under its own gravity.
Some boron may have been formed at this time, but the next heavier element, carbon, was not be formed in significant amounts.
Although Heraclitus argued for eternal change, his contemporary Parmenides made the radical suggestion that all change is an illusion, that the true underlying reality is eternally unchanging and of a single nature.
On a mass–energy equivalence basis, the density of dark energy (~ 7 × 10−30 g/cm3) is much less than the density of ordinary matter or dark matter within galaxies.
His four-element model became very popular.
In other stories, the Universe emanates from fundamental principles, such as Brahman and Prakrti, the creation myth of the Serers, or the yin and yang of the Tao.
As noted by Copernicus himself, the notion that the Earth rotates is very old, dating at least to Philolaus (c. 450 BC), Heraclides Ponticus (c. 350 BC) and Ecphantus the Pythagorean.
In the 5th century AD, the Buddhist atomist philosopher Dignāga proposed atoms to be point-sized, durationless, and made of energy.
Most leptons and anti-leptons were then eliminated in annihilation reactions, leaving a small residue of leptons.
Hadrons are categorized into two families: baryons (such as protons and neutrons) made of three quarks, and mesons (such as pions) made of one quark and one antiquark.
Since the Planck epoch, the Universe has been expanding to its present form, possibly with a very brief period of cosmic inflation which caused the Universe to reach a much larger size in less than 10−32 seconds.
Further observational improvements led to the realization that our Solar System is located in the Milky Way galaxy and is one of many solar systems and galaxies.
Scalar fields having only a slight amont of spatial inhomogeneity would be difficult to distinguish from a cosmological constant.
This metric has only two undetermined parameters.
In particular, they noted the ability of matter to change forms (e.g., ice to water to steam) and several philosophers proposed that all the physical materials in the world are different forms of a single primordial material, or ''arche''.
However, it does follow as a fairly straightforward consequence from otherwise unrelated scientific observations and theories.
The ultimate fate of the Universe is still unknown, because it depends critically on the curvature index ''k'' and the cosmological constant ''Λ''.
Giant clouds later merged through gravity to form stars.
Over the centuries, more precise astronomical observations led Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) to develop the heliocentric model with the Sun at the center of the Solar System.
Like all elementary particles, photons are currently best explained by quantum mechanics and exhibit wave–particle duality, exhibiting properties of waves and of particles.
However, present observations cannot exclude the possibilities that the Universe has more dimensions and that its spacetime may have a multiply connected global topology, in analogy with the cylindrical or toroidal topologies of two-dimensional spaces.
Over time, the Universe and its contents have evolved; for example, the relative population of quasars and galaxies has changed and space itself has expanded.
Philoponus' arguments against an infinite past were used by the early Muslim philosopher, Al-Kindi (Alkindus); the Jewish philosopher, Saadia Gaon (Saadia ben Joseph); and the Muslim theologian, Al-Ghazali (Algazel).
The first coherent model was proposed by Eudoxus of Cnidos.
Other observations, such as the Hubble constant, the abundance of galaxy clusters, weak gravitational lensing and globular cluster ages, are generally consistent with these, providing a check of the model, but are less accurately measured at present.
There are however many differing beliefs in how these stories apply amongst those believing in a supernatural origin, ranging from a god directly creating the Universe as it is now to a god just setting the "wheels in motion" (for example via mechanisms such as the big bang and evolution).
Max Tegmark developed a four-part classification scheme for the different types of multiverses that scientists have suggested in various problem domains.
Astronomers calculate the age of the Universe by assuming that the Lambda-CDM model accurately describes the evolution of the Universe from a very uniform, hot, dense primordial state to its present state and measuring the cosmological parameters which constitute the model.
Some physicists have suggested various multiverse hypotheses, in which the Universe might be one among many universes that likewise exist.
The only other astronomer from antiquity known by name who supported Aristarchus's heliocentric model was Seleucus of Seleucia, a Hellenistic astronomer who lived a century after Aristarchus.
The relation is specified by the Einstein field equations, a system of partial differential equations.
Roughly a century before Copernicus, the Christian scholar Nicholas of Cusa also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis in his book, ''On Learned Ignorance'' (1440).
The size of the Universe is somewhat difficult to define.
De Mundo (composed before 250 BC or between 350 and 200 BC), stated, ''Five elements, situated in spheres in five regions, the less being in each case surrounded by the greater — namely, earth surrounded by water, water by air, air by fire, and fire by ether — make up the whole Universe''.
Eventually, at a time known as recombination, electrons and nuclei formed stable atoms, which are transparent to most wavelengths of radiation.
The existence and properties of dark matter are inferred from its gravitational effects on visible matter, radiation, and the large-scale structure of the Universe.
It may seem counter-intuitive that an infinite and yet infinitely dense Universe could be created in a single instant at the Big Bang when ''R''=0, but exactly that is predicted mathematically when ''k'' does not equal 1.
Dark matter neither emits nor absorbs light or any other electromagnetic radiation at any significant level.
The Big Bang model states that the earliest state of the Universe was extremely hot and dense and that it subsequently expanded.
According to the general theory of relativity, some regions of space may never interact with ours even in the lifetime of the Universe due to the finite speed of light and the ongoing expansion of space.
The earliest Greek philosophers noted that appearances can be deceiving, and sought to understand the underlying reality behind the appearances.
Al-Sijzi also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis.
supposing the heaven to remain at rest and the Earth to revolve in an oblique circle, while it rotates, at the same time, about its own axis"
The Universe encompasses all of life, all of history, and some philosophers and scientists suggest that it even encompasses ideas such as mathematics and logic.
A spacetime is the union of all events in the same way that a line is the union of all of its points, formally organized into a manifold.
Conversely, if the Universe were insufficiently dense, ''k'' would equal 0 or −1 and the Universe would expand forever, cooling off and eventually reaching the Big Freeze and the heat death of the Universe.
The equation describing how ''R'' varies with time is known as the Friedmann equation after its inventor, Alexander Friedmann.
Observations, including the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP), and Planck maps of the CMB, suggest that the Universe is infinite in extent with a finite age, as described by the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW) models.
The photon epoch started after most leptons and anti-leptons were annihilated at the end of the lepton epoch, about 10 seconds after the Big Bang.
When ''R'' changes, all the spatial distances in the Universe change in tandem; there is an overall expansion or contraction of space itself.
Seleucus' arguments for a heliocentric cosmology were probably related to the phenomenon of tides.
Because we cannot observe space beyond the edge of the observable universe, it is unknown whether the size of the Universe is finite or infinite.
According to one common terminology, each "soap bubble" of spacetime is denoted as a ''universe'', whereas our particular spacetime is denoted as ''the Universe'', just as we call our moon ''the Moon''.
The Universe also contains a mysterious energy called dark energy; the energy density of dark energy does not change over time.
The Greek astronomer Aristarchus of Samos was the first known individual to propose a heliocentric model of the Universe.
The basic elements of spacetime are events.
Gravity's effects are cumulative; by contrast, the effects of positive and negative charges tend to cancel one another, making electromagnetism relatively insignificant on cosmological length scales.
Typical galaxies range from dwarfs with as few as ten million (107) stars up to giants with one trillion (1012) stars.
However, in the present dark-energy era, it dominates the mass–energy of the universe because it is uniform across space.
where (''r'', θ, φ) correspond to a spherical coordinate system.
For example, the proton is formed of two up quarks and one down quark; the neutron is formed of two down quarks and one up quark; and the electron is a kind of lepton.
A hadron is a composite particle made of quarks held together by the strong force.
Today, ordinary matter, which includes atoms, stars, galaxies, and life, accounts for only 4.9% of the contents of the Universe.
The mass of the Universe was then dominated by photons as it entered the following photon epoch.
According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus was the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon, and that the height of the tides depends on the Moon's position relative to the Sun.
Of the hadrons, protons are stable, and neutrons bound within atomic nuclei are stable.
Democritus, and later philosophers—most notably Leucippus—proposed that the Universe is composed of indivisible atoms moving through void (vacuum), although Aristotle did not believe that to be feasible because air, like water, offers resistance to motion.
About 380,000 years after the Big Bang, the temperature of the Universe fell to the point where nuclei could combine with electrons to create neutral atoms.
Ordinary matter and the forces that act on matter can be described in terms of elementary particles.
In principle, it would be impossible to scientifically verify an identical Hubble volume.
Aristotle responded to these paradoxes by developing the notion of a potential countable infinity, as well as the infinitely divisible continuum.
Other contents are electromagnetic radiation (estimated to be from 0.005% to close to 0.01%) and antimatter.
The total amount of electromagnetic radiation generated within the universe has decreased by 1/2 in the past 2 billion years.
Ordinary matter is composed of two types of elementary particles: quarks and leptons.
Light from this era could now travel freely, and it can still be seen in the Universe as the cosmic microwave background (CMB).
In any given spacetime, an event is a unique position at a unique time.
In related stories, the Universe is created by a single entity emanating or producing something by him- or herself, as in the Tibetan Buddhism concept of Adi-Buddha, the ancient Greek story of Gaia (Mother Earth), the Aztec goddess Coatlicue myth, the ancient Egyptian god Atum story, and the Judeo-Christian Genesis creation narrative in which the Abrahamic God created the Universe.
They denied the existence of substantial matter and proposed that movement consisted of momentary flashes of a stream of energy.
An atom consists of an atomic nucleus, made up of protons and neutrons, and electrons that orbit the nucleus.
Spacetime events are not absolutely defined spatially and temporally but rather are known relative to the motion of an observer.
The lepton epoch was the period in the evolution of the early Universe in which the leptons dominated the mass of the Universe.
If the Big Bang that created our multiverse created an ensemble of multiverses, the wave function of the ensemble would be entangled in this sense.
Due to this expansion, scientists on Earth can observe the light from a galaxy 30 billion light years away even though that light has traveled for only 13 billion years; the very space between them has expanded.
These FLRW models thus support inflationary models and the standard model of cosmology, describing a flat, homogeneous universe presently dominated by dark matter and dark energy.
On the average, space is observed to be very nearly flat (close to zero curvature), meaning that Euclidean geometry is empirically true with high accuracy throughout most of the Universe.
Neutrinos stream throughout the Universe but rarely interact with normal matter.
It is the basis of current cosmological models of the Universe.
In 1998, the deceleration parameter was measured by two different groups to be consistent with −1 but not zero, which implied that the present-day rate of increase of the Hubble Constant is increasing over time.
Others consider each of several bubbles created as part of chaotic inflation to be separate ''Universes'', though in this model these universes all share a causal origin.
Approximately 10 seconds after the Big Bang, the temperature of the Universe had fallen to the point where lepton/anti-lepton pairs were no longer created.
The spatial region that we can affect and be affected by is the observable universe.
Though the original text has been lost, a reference in Archimedes' book ''The Sand Reckoner'' describes Aristarchus's heliocentric model.
As an example, the Milky Way is roughly 100,000 light years in diameter, and the nearest sister galaxy to the Milky Way, the Andromeda Galaxy, is located roughly 2.5 million light years away.
This instability was clarified in 1902 by the Jeans instability criterion.
Like Pythagoras, Plato believed that all things were composed of number, with Empedocles' elements taking the form of the Platonic solids.
The effects of this force are easily observable at the microscopic and at the macroscopic level because the photon has zero rest mass; this allows long distance interactions.
If the Universe were sufficiently dense, ''k'' would equal +1, meaning that its average curvature throughout is positive and the Universe will eventually recollapse in a Big Crunch, possibly starting a new Universe in a Big Bounce.
In principle, the other unconnected ''Universes'' may have different dimensionalities and topologies of spacetime, different forms of matter and energy, and different physical laws and physical constants, although such possibilities are purely speculative.
One solution to these paradoxes is the Charlier Universe, in which the matter is arranged hierarchically (systems of orbiting bodies that are themselves orbiting in a larger system, ''ad infinitum'') in a fractal way such that the Universe has a negligibly small overall density; such a cosmological model had also been proposed earlier in 1761 by Johann Heinrich Lambert.
The proper distance—the distance as would be measured at a specific time, including the present—between Earth and the edge of the observable universe is , making the diameter of the observable universe about .
An important parameter determining the future evolution of the Universe theory is the density parameter, Omega (Ω), defined as the average matter density of the universe divided by a critical value of that density.
An easily visualized metaphor is a group of separate soap bubbles, in which observers living on one soap bubble cannot interact with those on other soap bubbles, even in principle.
This horizon represents the boundary between the observable and the unobservable regions of the Universe.
Tegmark calculated our nearest so-called doppelgänger, is 1010115 meters away from us (a double exponential function larger than a googolplex).
Edmund Halley (1720) and Jean-Philippe de Chéseaux (1744) noted independently that the assumption of an infinite space filled uniformly with stars would lead to the prediction that the nighttime sky would be as bright as the Sun itself; this became known as Olbers' paradox in the 19th century.
General relativity generalizes special relativity and Newton's law of universal gravitation, providing a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time, or spacetime.
Observationally, the Universe appears to be flat (''k'' = 0), with an overall density that is very close to the critical value between recollapse and eternal expansion.
This model is well understood theoretically and supported by recent high-precision astronomical observations such as WMAP and Planck.
The more matter there is in the Universe, the stronger the mutual gravitational pull of the matter.
Other than neutrinos, a form of hot dark matter, dark matter has not been detected directly, making it one of the greatest mysteries in modern astrophysics.
Initially the temperature was high enough to allow the formation of hadron/anti-hadron pairs, which kept matter and antimatter in thermal equilibrium.
A term for "universe" among the ancient Greek philosophers from Pythagoras onwards was  ''tò pân'' ("the all"), defined as all matter and all space, and  ''tò hólon'' ("all things"), which did not necessarily include the void.
Dark energy, which is the energy of empty space and that is causing the expansion of the Universe to accelerate, accounts for the remaining 68.3% of the contents.
Anaximenes proposed the primordial material to be air on account of its perceived attractive and repulsive qualities that cause the ''arche'' to condense or dissociate into different forms.
The index ''k'' is defined so that it can be only 0, corresponding to flat Euclidean geometry, 1, corresponding to a space of positive curvature, or −1, a space of positive or negative curvature.
A Universe that is both homogeneous and isotropic looks the same from all vantage points and has no center.
Other Greek scientists, such as the Pythagorean philosopher Philolaus, postulated (according to Stobaeus account) that at the center of the Universe was a "central fire" around which the Earth, Sun, Moon and Planets revolved in uniform circular motion.
The modern era of physical cosmology began in 1917, when Albert Einstein first applied his general theory of relativity to model the structure and dynamics of the Universe.
Parmenides' idea seemed implausible to many Greeks, but his student Zeno of Elea challenged them with several famous paradoxes.
"Cleanthes a contemporary of Aristarchus and head of the Stoics  thought it was the duty of the Greeks to indict Aristarchus of Samos on the charge of impiety for putting in motion the Hearth of the Universe i.e.
The observable Universe contains approximately 300 sextillion (3) stars and more than 100 billion (1011) galaxies.
Effectively, the multiverse evolves as a universal wavefunction.
With the assumption of the cosmological principle that the Universe is homogeneous and isotropic everywhere, a specific solution of the field equations that describes the Universe is the metric tensor called the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric,
A toroidal Universe could behave like a normal Universe with periodic boundary conditions.
According to our current understanding, the Universe consists of spacetime, forms of energy (including electromagnetic radiation and matter), and the physical laws that relate them.
For comparison, the diameter of a typical galaxy is 30,000 light-years, and the typical distance between two neighboring galaxies is 3 million light-years.
As a matter of fact, the great majority of ordinary matter in the universe is unseen, since visible stars and gas inside galaxies and clusters account for less than 10 per cent of the ordinary matter contribution to the mass-energy density of the universe.
The present overall density of this type of matter is very low, roughly 4.5 × 10−31 grams per cubic centimetre, corresponding to a density of the order of only one proton for every four cubic meters of volume.
The least controversial category of multiverse in Tegmark's scheme is Level I, which describes distant spacetime events "in our own universe", but suggests that statistical analysis exploiting the anthropic principle provides an opportunity to test multiverse theories in some cases.
A significant astronomical advance of the 18th century was the realization by Thomas Wright, Immanuel Kant and others of nebulae.
There are dynamical forces acting on the particles in the Universe which affect the expansion rate.
Theories of an impersonal Universe governed by physical laws were first proposed by the Greeks and Indians.
The initial hot, dense state is called the Planck epoch, a brief period extending from time zero to one Planck time unit of approximately 10−43 seconds.
However, if the Universe contained too ''little'' matter then the expansion would accelerate too rapidly for planets and planetary systems to form.
The percent of all types matter and energy has changed over the history of the Universe.
The Milky Way is in the Local Group of galaxies, which in turn is in the Laniakea Supercluster.
The observable Universe is isotropic on scales significantly larger than superclusters, meaning that the statistical properties of the Universe are the same in all directions as observed from Earth.
It includes planets, moons, minor planets, stars, galaxies, the contents of intergalactic space, and all matter and energy.
Aristarchus thus believed the stars to be very far away, and saw this as the reason why stellar parallax had not been observed, that is, the stars had not been observed to move relative each other as the Earth moved around the Sun.
This model was also refined by Callippus and after concentric spheres were abandoned, it was brought into nearly perfect agreement with astronomical observations by Ptolemy.
This selects one of three possible geometries depending on whether Ω is equal to, less than, or greater than 1.
Ordinary matter commonly exists in four states (or phases): solid, liquid, gas, and plasma.
Spacetimes are the arenas in which all physical events take place—an event is a point in spacetime specified by its time and place.
This process, known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis, led to the present abundances of lighter nuclei, particularly hydrogen, deuterium, and helium.
Analyses of Type Ia supernovae indicate that the spatial expansion is accelerating.
However, over shorter length-scales, matter tends to clump hierarchically; many atoms are condensed into stars, most stars into galaxies, most galaxies into clusters, superclusters and, finally, large-scale galactic filaments.
The majority of mass in the Universe appears to exist in an unknown form called dark matter.
According to Aristotle's physical interpretation of the model, celestial spheres eternally rotate with uniform motion around a stationary Earth.
The Universe is bathed in highly isotropic microwave radiation that corresponds to a thermal equilibrium blackbody spectrum of roughly 2.72548 kelvin.
The Universe is composed almost completely of dark energy, dark matter, and ordinary matter.
However, advances in experimental techniques have revealed other previously theoretical phases, such as Bose–Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates.
The hypothesis that the large-scale Universe is homogeneous and isotropic is known as the cosmological principle.
An explanation for why the expansion of the Universe is accelerating remains elusive.
The remaining two interactions, the weak and strong nuclear forces, decline very rapidly with distance; their effects are confined mainly to sub-atomic length scales.
Spacetime also appears to have a simply connected topology, in analogy with a sphere, at least on the length-scale of the observable Universe.
