The building's plans were drawn in the early 1960s, before student activism prompted a concern for safety.
Another off-campus facility is the Inglis House, which the university has owned since the 1950s.
According to the Apollo 15 astronauts, several small U-M flags were brought on the mission.
Among undergraduates, 70 percent graduate with a bachelor's degree within four years, 86 percent graduate within five years and 88 percent graduating within six years.
Ultimately, the campaign raised $3.2 billion over 8 years.
It was designed in the late 1920s by Alister MacKenzie, the designer of Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia (home of The Masters Tournament).
The Institute for Social Research (ISR), the nation's longest-standing laboratory for interdisciplinary research in the social sciences, is home to the Survey Research Center, Research Center for Group Dynamics, Center for Political Studies, Population Studies Center, and Inter-Consortium for Political and Social Research.
These conflicts led to a series of one-day walkouts by the unions and their supporters.
There are organizations for almost every culture from the  Arab Student Association to  African Students Association to even the  Egyptian Student Association.
The largest residence hall has a capacity of 1,240 students, while the smallest accommodates 25 residents.
In the late 1960s U-M, together with Michigan State University and Wayne State University, founded the Merit Network, one of the first university computer networks.
After Michigan temporarily withdrew from the Western Conference in 1907, a new Michigan fight song "Varsity" was written in 1911 because the line "champions of the West" was no longer appropriate.
Though the student body generally leans toward left-wing politics, there are also conservative groups, such as Young Americans for Freedom, and non-partisan groups, such as the Roosevelt Institution.
The President of the University of Michigan is the principal executive officer of the university.
In 2006, U-M joined with Michigan State University and Wayne State University to create the University Research Corridor.
North Quad is also home to services such as the Language Resource Center and the Sweetland Center for Writing.
Some more notorious graduates of the University are 1910 convicted murderer Dr. Harvey Crippen, late 19th-century American serial killer Herman Mudgett, and "Unabomber" Ted Kaczynski.
Another major facility is the Matthaei Botanical Gardens, which is located on the eastern outskirts of Ann Arbor.
The university's involvement in the anti-missile Strategic Defense Initiative and investments in South Africa caused controversy on campus.
Those students who earn all A's for two or more consecutive terms in a calendar year are recognized as James B. Angell Scholars and are invited to attend the annual Honors Convocation, an event which recognizes undergraduate students with distinguished academic achievements.
The Michigan Research Community and the Women in Science and Engineering Residence Program are housed in Mosher-Jordan Hall.
As the Cold War and the Space Race took hold, U-M received numerous government grants for strategic research and helped to develop peacetime uses for nuclear energy.
Between the establishment of the University of Michigan in 1837 and 1850, the Board of Regents ran the university directly; although they were, by law, supposed to appoint a Chancellor to administer the university, they never did.
It is "technology-rich," and houses communication-related programs, including the School of Information, the Department of Communication Studies, and the Department of Screen Arts and Cultures.
In 1920 the university reorganized the College of Engineering and formed an advisory committee of 100 industrialists to guide academic research initiatives.
U-M also became the first American university to use the seminar method of study.
U-M also has all-time winning records against Michigan State, Notre Dame, and Ohio State.
With representatives from each of the University's colleges and schools, CSG represents students and manages student funds on the campus.
At the graduate level, the Rackham Graduate School serves as the central administrative unit of graduate education at the university.
The Medical School is partnered with the University of Michigan Health System, which comprises the university's three hospitals, dozens of outpatient clinics, and many centers for medical care, research, and education.
Waun ran for a second time in 2002, along with Matt Petering and Susan Fawcett.
Students at participating schools are also allowed "in-house" borrowing privileges at other schools' libraries.
The Michigan Union houses a majority of student groups, including the student government.
Notable writers who attended U-M include playwright Arthur Miller, essayists Susan Orlean and Sven Birkerts, journalists and editors Mike Wallace, Jonathan Chait of ''The New Republic'', Daniel Okrent, and Sandra Steingraber, food critics Ruth Reichl and Gael Greene, novelists Brett Ellen Block, Elizabeth Kostova, Marge Piercy, Brad Meltzer, Betty Smith, and Charles Major, screenwriter Judith Guest, Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Theodore Roethke, National Book Award winners Keith Waldrop and Jesmyn Ward, composer/author/puppeteer Forman Brown, and Alireza Jafarzadeh (a Middle East analyst, author, and TV commentator).
Many Broadway and musical theatre actors, including Gavin Creel, Andrew Keenan-Bolger, and his sister Celia Keenan-Bolger, attended U-M for musical theatre.
Over the course of the capital campaign, 191 additional professorships were endowed, bringing the university total to 471 as of 2009.
The '''University of Michigan''' ('''U-M''', '''UM''', '''UMich''', or '''U of M'''), frequently referred to simply as '''Michigan''',  is a public research university in Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States.
The court found that race may be considered as a factor in university admissions in all public universities and private universities that accept federal funding.
The university also emphasized the development of computer and information technology throughout the campus.
The Board of Regents, which governs the university and was established by the Organic Act of March 18, 1837, consists of eight members elected at large in biennial state elections for overlapping eight-year terms.
In response to a series of sit-ins in 1966 by ''Voice'', the campus political party of Students for a Democratic Society, U-M's administration banned sit-ins.
North Campus is the most contiguous campus, built independently from the city on a large plot of farm land—approximately —that the university bought in 1952.
The Lloyd Hall Scholars Program (LHSP)  is located in Alice Lloyd Hall.
The campus is served by the Duderstadt Center, which houses the Art, Architecture and Engineering Library.
The three universities are electronically interconnected via the Michigan LambdaRail (MiLR, pronounced 'MY-lar'), a high-speed data network providing 10 Gbit/s connections between the three university campuses and other national and international network connection points in Chicago.
Slated to run through December 2008, the university announced that the campaign had reached its target 19 months early in May 2007.
Most of the graduate and professional schools, including the Ross School of Business, the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, the Law School and the School of Dentistry, are on Central Campus.
Besides academic life, Michigan's athletic teams compete in Division I of the NCAA and are collectively known as the Wolverines.
Other libraries located on North Campus include the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and the Bentley Historical Library.
WOLV-TV is the student-run television station that is primarily shown on the university's cable television system.
The university has "very high" research activity and the "comprehensive" graduate program offers doctoral degrees in the humanities, social sciences, and STEM fields as well as professional degrees in medicine, law, and dentistry.
President George W. Bush publicly opposed the policy before the court issued a ruling.
There is also leased space in buildings scattered throughout the city, many occupied by organizations affiliated with the University of Michigan Health System.
Phelps also swam competitively for Club Wolverine, a swimming club associated with the university.
Its eight-member subset a cappella group, the University of Michigan Friars, which was founded in 1955, is the oldest currently running ''a cappella'' group on campus.
In 2014, undergraduates were enrolled in 12 schools: About 61 percent in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts; 21 percent in the College of Engineering; 5.3 percent in the Ross School of Business; 3.3 percent in the School of Kinesiology; 2.7 percent in the School of Music, Theatre & Dance; and 2 percent in the School of Nursing.
A change to the board's makeup would require amending the Michigan Constitution.
The Duderstadt Center also contains multiple computer labs, video editing studios, electronic music studios, an audio studio, a video studio, multimedia workspaces, and a 3D virtual reality room.
The University of Michigan Men's Glee Club, founded in 1859 and the second oldest such group in the country, is a men's chorus with over 100 members.
President Gerald Ford had it played by the United States Marine Band as his entrance anthem during his term as president from 1974 to 1977, in preference over the more traditional "Hail to the Chief", and the Michigan Marching Band performed a slow-tempo variation on the fight song at his funeral.
Among the early students in the School of Medicine was Jose Celso Barbosa, who in 1880 graduated as valedictorian and the first Puerto Rican to get a university degree in the United States.
Michigan Stadium is the largest college football stadium in the nation and one of the largest football-only stadiums in the world, with an official capacity of 107,601 (the extra seat is said to be "reserved" for Fritz Crisler) though attendance—frequently over 111,000 spectators—regularly exceeds the official capacity.
This is to certify that The University of Michigan Club of The Moon is a duly constituted unit of the Alumni Association and entitled to all the rights and privileges under the Association's Constitution."
The U-M Golf Course's signature No.
Among full-time students, the university has a first-time student retention rate of 97 percent.
U-M's contributions to aeronautics include aircraft designer Clarence "Kelly" Johnson of Lockheed Skunk Works fame, Lockheed president Willis Hawkins, and several astronauts including the all-U-M crews of both Gemini 4 and Apollo 15.
U-M counts among its matriculants twenty-one billionaires and prominent company founders and co-founders including Google co-founder Larry Page and Dr. J. Robert Beyster, who founded Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) in 1969.
With over 200 undergraduate majors, 100 doctoral and 90 master's programs, U-M conferred 6,490 undergraduate degrees, 4,951 graduate degrees, and 709 first professional degrees in 2011-2012.
Out-of-state undergraduate students pay between $36,001.38 and $43,063.38 annually for tuition alone while in-state undergraduate students paid between $11,837.38 and $16,363.38 annually.
They are members of the Big Ten Conference.
There are also several engineering projects teams, including the University of Michigan Solar Car Team, which has placed first in the North American Solar Challenge six times and third in the World Solar Challenge four times.
In the mid-1960s U-M researchers worked with IBM to develop a new virtual memory architectural model that became part of IBM's Model 360/67 mainframe computer (the 360/67 was initially dubbed the 360/65M where the "M" stood for Michigan).
Television director Mark Cendrowski (''The Big Bang Theory'') is also a Michigan graduate.
These clubs also help students make this large University into a smaller community to help find people with similar interests and backgrounds.
The Inglis House is a  mansion used to hold various social events, including meetings of the board of regents, and to host visiting dignitaries.
2016 Republican Presidential Candidate and retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson received his medical degree from the U-M medical school.
There is a shuttle service connecting the University Hospital, which lies between North and Central campuses, with other medical facilities throughout northeastern Ann Arbor.
Mike Duggan, Mayor of Detroit, earned his bachelor and law degree at Michigan, while Michigan Governor Rick Snyder earned his bachelor, M.B.A., and J.D.
In April 2014, the Supreme Court ruled in ''Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action'' that Proposal 2 did not violate the U.S. Constitution.
U-M was the original home of the JSTOR database, which contains about 750,000 digitized pages from the entire pre-1990 backfile of ten journals of history and economics, and has initiated a book digitization program in collaboration with Google.
Presently, the School of Natural Resources and Environment, School of Public Health, and School of Social Work only have graduate students.
Because Ann Arbor and Central Campus developed simultaneously, there is no distinct boundary between the city and university, and some areas contain a mixture of private and university buildings.
In Hollywood, famous alumni include actors Michael Dunn, James Earl Jones, David Alan Grier, actresses Lucy Liu, Gilda Radner, and Selma Blair, and filmmaker Lawrence Kasdan.
Michigan's body of living alumni (as of 2012) comprises more than 500,000.
The North Quad complex houses two additional living-learning communities: the Global Scholars Program and the Max Kade German Program.
The acceptance rate declined from 50.6% in 2010 to 26.2% in 2015.
Another student labor campaign organization recently established on campus is the United Students Against Sweatshops (USAS).
The plaque states: "The Alumni Association of The University of Michigan.
James Burrill Angell, who served as the university's president from 1871 to 1909, aggressively expanded U-M's curriculum to include professional studies in dentistry, architecture, engineering, government, and medicine.
Pop Superstar Madonna and rock legend Iggy Pop attended but did not graduate.
In recent years, annual numbers of applications for freshman admission have exceeded 50,000.
Much of that work, as well as research into alternative energy sources, is pursued via the Memorial Phoenix Project.
The newly organized International Impact program is housed in North Quad.
An East Medical Campus has recently been developed on Plymouth Road, with several university-owned buildings for outpatient care, diagnostics and outpatient surgery.
Students earning a minimum overall GPA of 3.4 who have demonstrated high academic achievement and capacity for independent work may be recommended for a degree "with Highest Honors," "with High Honors," or "with Honors."
The university also operates a large office building called Wolverine Tower in southern Ann Arbor near Briarwood Mall.
These communities focus on areas such as research through the Michigan Research Community, medical sciences, community service and the German language.
Four different Greek councils—the Interfraternity Council, Multicultural Greek Council, National Pan-Hellenic Council, and Panhellenic Association—represent most Greek organizations.
CSG was successful at reviving Homecoming activities, including a carnival and parade, for students after a roughly eleven-year absence in October 2007, and during the 2013-14 school year, was instrumental in persuading the University to rescind an unpopular change in student football seating policy at Michigan Stadium.
The University of Michigan Golf Course was included in a listing of top holes designed by what ''Sports Illustrated'' calls "golf's greatest course architect."
The song refers to the university as being "the Champions of the West."
With over 6,200 faculty members, 73 of whom are members of the National Academy and 471 of whom hold an endowed chair in their discipline, the university manages one of the largest annual collegiate research budgets of any university in the United States, totaling about $1 billion in 2009.
A member of Starkid, actor and singer Darren Criss, is a series regular on the television series ''Glee''.
Considered one of the foremost research universities in the United States, the university has very high research activity and its comprehensive graduate program offers doctoral degrees in the humanities, social sciences, and STEM fields (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) as well as professional degrees in architecture, business, medicine, law, pharmacy, nursing, social work, public health, and dentistry.
in 1939 and her doctoral degree in 1950, becoming the third African American woman to earn a PhD in mathematics.
Fraternities and sororities play a role in the university's social life; approximately 18 percent of undergraduates are involved in Greek life.
Membership numbers for the 2009-2010 school year reached the highest in the last two decades.
At the same time, the university attempted to maintain its high academic standing while keeping tuition costs affordable.
A common rally cry is "Let's Go Blue!,"  which had a complementary short musical arrangement written by former students Joseph Carl, a sousaphonist, and Albert Ahronheim, a drum major.
The University of Michigan's campus housing system can accommodate up to 10,900 people, or nearly 30 percent of the total student population at the university.
Before "The Victors" was officially the University's fight song, the song "There'll Be a Hot Time in the Old Town Tonight" was considered to be the school song.
In addition to the U-M Golf Course on South Campus, the university operates a second golf course on Geddes Road called Radrick Farms Golf Course.
The university is attempting to increase financial aid availability to students by devoting over $1.53 billion in endowment funds to support financial aid.
Each council has a different recruitment process.
Classical composer Frank Ticheli and Broadway composer Andrew Lippa attended.
Residence halls located on Central Campus are split up into two groups: the Hill Neighborhood and Central Campus.
The office was created by the Michigan Constitution of 1850, which also specified that the president was to be appointed by the Regents of the University of Michigan and preside at their meetings, but without a vote.
Degrees "with Highest Distinction" are recommended to students who rank in the top 3% of their class, "with High Distinction" to the next 7%, and "with Distinction" to the next 15%.
National Hockey League players Marty Turco, Chris Summers, Max Pacioretty, Carl Hagelin, Brendan Morrison, Jack Johnson, and Michael Cammalleri all played for U-M's ice hockey team.
Graduate students enrolled in the Rackham Graduate School are represented by the Rackham Student Government (RSG).
The largest number of doctoral students are enrolled in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts (2,076) and College of Engineering (1,496).
The student-run and led University of Michigan Pops Orchestra is another musical ensemble that attracts students from all academic backgrounds.
*The Law School publishes the well-regarded ''Michigan Law Review'' and six other law journals: The ''Michigan Journal of Environmental and Administrative Law'', ''University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform'', ''Michigan Journal of Race & Law'', ''Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review'', ''Michigan Journal of International Law'', and ''Michigan Journal of Gender and Law''.
The presence of a U-M flag on the moon is a long-held campus myth.
Notable among recent players is Tom Brady of the New England Patriots.
There are currently over 317 organizations under this category.
The university moved to Ann Arbor in 1837 onto  of what is now known as Central Campus.
The University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute and the Life Sciences Institute are located at the university.
The rate of new freshman enrollment has been fairly stable since 2010.
By enrollment, the three largest undergraduate units are the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, the College of Engineering, and the Ross School of Business.
The Correlates of War project, also located at U-M, is an accumulation of scientific knowledge about war.
This allowed time for proponents of affirmative action to decide legal and constitutional options in response to the initiative results.
Neurosurgeon and CNN chief medical correspondent Sanjay Gupta attended both college and medical school at U-M. Clarence Darrow attended law school at U-M at a time when many lawyers did not receive any formal education.
U-M has been included on Richard Moll's list of Public Ivies.
VYV also works to improve access to non-partisan voting-related information and increase student voter turnout.
The University was a founding member of the Association of American Universities.
Thomas E. Dewey, another Michigan alumnus, was the Governor of New York from 1943 to 1954, and was the Republican Party's presidential nominee in the 1944 and 1948 presidential elections.
Charter Number One.
There were disputes between U-M's administration and labor unions, notably with the Lecturers' Employees Organization (LEO) and the Graduate Employees Organization (GEO), the union representing graduate student employees.
U-M is home to the National Election Studies and the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index.
U-M students have won a total of 151 Olympic medals: 72 gold, 39 silver, and 40 bronze.
The university became a favored choice for bright Jewish students from New York in the 1920s and 1930s, when the Ivy League schools had quotas restricting the number of Jews to be admitted.
Founded in 1817 in Detroit as the ''Catholepistemiad'', or University of Michigania, 20 years before the Michigan Territory became a state, the University of Michigan is the state's oldest university.
What would become the university moved to Ann Arbor in 1837 thanks to Governor Stevens T. Mason.
South Campus is the site for the athletic programs, including major sports facilities such as Michigan Stadium, Crisler Center, and Yost Ice Arena.
U-M provides financial aid in the form of need-based loans, grants, scholarships, work study, and non-need based scholarships, with 77% of undergraduates in 2007 receiving financial aid.
North and Central Campuses each have unique bell towers that reflect the predominant architectural styles of their surroundings.
This effort was undertaken to highlight the capabilities of the state's three leading research institutions and drive the transformation of Michigan's economy.
More than 250 Michigan graduates have served as legislators as either a United States Senator (40 graduates) or as a Congressional representative (over 200 graduates), including former House Majority Leader Dick Gephardt and U.S. Representative Justin Amash, who represents Michigan's Third Congressional District.
Ten of the buildings on Central Campus were designed by Detroit-based architect Albert Kahn between 1904 and 1936.
In the first case, the court upheld the Law School admissions policy, while in the second it ruled against the university's undergraduate admissions policy.
The university is one of the founding members (1900) of the Association of American Universities.
The University of Michigan also encourages many cultural and ethnic student organizations on campus.
Housed in the Michigan Union, the Central Student Government (CSG) is the central student government of the University.
Former U-M student and noted architect Alden B. Dow designed the current Fleming Administration Building, which was completed in 1968.
The Wolverines have won a record 42 Big Ten championships.
In mid-2000, U-M embarked on a massive fund-raising campaign called "The Michigan Difference," which aimed to raise $2.5 billion, with $800 million designated for the permanent endowment.
Undergraduate students are able to participate in various research projects through the Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP) as well as the UROP/Creative-Programs.
The Michigan Union and Michigan League are student activity centers located on Central Campus; Pierpont Commons is on North Campus.
All four campus areas are connected by bus services, the majority of which connect the North and Central campuses.
The University of Michigan became more selective in the early 2010s.
As of the purchase date, the university's intentions for the space were not announced, but the expectation is that the new space will allow the university to ramp up its research and ultimately employ in excess of 2,000 people.
The university is engaged in a $2.5 billion construction campaign.
U-M had 40 consecutive winning seasons from 1968 to 2007, including consecutive bowl game appearances from 1975 to 2007.
Over 100 years old, the band performs at every home football game and travels to at least one away game a year.
Several academic journals are published at the university:
The admissions office states that it will attempt to achieve a diverse student body by looking at other factors, such as whether the student attended a disadvantaged school, and the level of education of the student's parents.
The men's ice hockey team, which plays at Yost Ice Arena, has won nine national championships, while the men's basketball team, which plays at the Crisler Center, has appeared in five Final Fours and won the national championship in 1989.
Although mainly used at sporting events, the fight song can be heard at other events.
*The Ross School of Business publishes the ''Michigan Journal of Business''.
U-M and other organizations were granted a stay from implementation of the law soon after that referendum.
The Health Sciences Scholars Program (HSSP) is located in Couzens Hall.
The first classes in Ann Arbor were held in 1841, with six freshmen and a sophomore, taught by two professors.
WCBN-FM (88.3 FM) is the student-run college radio station which plays in freeform format.
Judge Augustus B. Woodward specifically invited The Rev.
The University lists 1,438 student organizations.
In 10 of the past 14 years concluding in 2009, U-M has finished in the top five of the NACDA Director's Cup, a ranking compiled by the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics to tabulate the success of universities in competitive sports.
The occupation was ended by agreement after 7 hours.
South Campus is also the site of the Buhr library storage facility, Revelli Hall, home of the Michigan Marching Band, the Institute for Continuing Legal Education, and the Student Theatre Arts Complex, which provides shop and rehearsal space for student theatre groups.
Although none of these campaigns has been successful, a poll conducted by the State of Michigan in 1998 concluded that a majority of Michigan voters would approve of such a position if the measure were put before them.
With a history of student activism, some of the most visible groups include those dedicated to causes such as civil rights and labor rights.
U-M's golf course is located south of Michigan Stadium and Crisler Arena.
As of June 30, 2015, U-M's financial endowment (the "University Endowment Fund") was valued at $10.26 billion.
Women were first admitted in 1870.
There are 18 graduate schools and colleges, the largest of which are the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, the College of Engineering, the Law School, and the Ross School of Business.
Monteith became its first President and held seven of the professorships, and Richard was Vice President and held the other six professorships.
During World War II, U-M's research supported military efforts, such as U.S. Navy projects in proximity fuzes, PT boats, and radar jamming.
John Monteith and Father Gabriel Richard, a Catholic priest, to establish the institution.
Eleven students graduated in the first commencement in 1845.
By 1866, enrollment increased to 1,205 students, many of whom were Civil War veterans.
The University of Michigan consists of a flagship campus in Ann Arbor, with two regional campuses in Dearborn and Flint.
The two largest colleges at the University of Michigan are the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts (LS&A) and the College of Engineering.
U-M also has a technology transfer office, which is the university conduit between laboratory research and corporate commercialization interests.
Dow denied those rumors, claiming the small windows were designed to be energy efficient.
The University of Michigan's largest residence hall, Bursley Hall, is located on North Campus.
Through the 2008 Summer Olympic Games, 178 U-M students and coaches had participated in the Olympics, winning medals in every Summer Olympics except 1896, and winning gold medals in all but four Olympiads.
Approximately 95 percent of the university's incoming class of 2019 had an unweighted high school GPA of 3.5 and higher, with the average accepted unweighted GPA being a 3.85.
Today, the president's office is at the Ann Arbor campus, and the president has the privilege of living in the President's House, the university's oldest building located on Central Campus in Ann Arbor.
Marjorie Lee Browne received her M.S.
This group seeks to hold accountable multinational companies that exploit their workers in factories around the world where college apparel is produced.
