At the same time, the Top 200 Colleges and Universities in the World on University Web Ranking published by 4 International Colleges & Universities placed it at 8th.
They were Hans Georg Dehmelt, E. Donnall Thomas, Edwin G. Krebs, Edmond H. Fischer, Leland Hartwell and Linda Buck.
UW occupies over 500 buildings, with over 20 million gross square footage of space, including the University of Washington Plaza, the  UW Tower, over 26 university libraries, as well as numerous conference centers.
The choice was inspired by the first stanza of Lord Byron's ''The Destruction of Sennacherib'':
Like many college bands, the Husky band has several traditional songs that it has played for decades, including the official fight songs "Bow Down to Washington" and "Tequila", as well as fan-favorite "Africano".
* College of Built Environments
Current participation of ResearchChannel includes 36 universities, 15 research organizations, two corporate research centers and many other affiliates.
Among graduate programs, in 2015 ''U.S.
Then UW President Emmert signed the American College and University Presidents Climate Commitment.
The Washington men's crew gained international prominence by winning the gold medal at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, defeating the German and Italian crews much to the chagrin of Adolf Hitler who was in attendance.
The University opened campuses in Bothell and Tacoma in 1990.
UW students include 136 Fulbright Scholars, 35 Rhodes Scholars, 7 Marshall Scholars and 4 Gates Cambridge Scholars.
The football team is traditionally competitive, having won the 1960 and 1991 national title, to go along with eight Rose Bowl victories and an Orange Bowl title.
* School of Nursing
Ryan Brown (men's 800 meters) and Amy Lia (women's 1500 meters) won individual titles at the 2006 NCAA Track and Field Championships.
* School of Public Health
On February 3, 2015, it was announced that Young will be next President of Texas A&M University.
The middle 50% of high school GPA ranged from 3.64–3.93.
The university was also listed as a "Public Ivy" in Greene's Guides in 2001.
The Apple Cup game is an annual game against cross-state rival Washington State University that was first contested in 1900 with UW leading the all-time series, 65 wins to 31 losses and 6 ties.
"Last year, the University of Washington moved to a more comprehensive approach to admissions, in which the admissions staff reads the entire application and looks at grades within the context of the individual high school, rather than relying on computerized cutoffs."
Robert Neil is the former Head Football coach.
A $41 million remodel and expansion project began 2001 and the building was reopened in fall 2003 with a  addition to its northwest to the original  facility.
Their athletic teams are called the Huskies.
* Rural Health Education (RHE): Promotes health in rural areas of Washington state primarily through monthly health fairs.
The men's basketball team has been moderately successful, though recently the team has enjoyed a resurgence under coach Lorenzo Romar.
South Campus occupies the land between Pacific Street and the Lake Washington Ship Canal which used to be a golf course and is given over to the health sciences, oceanography, fisheries, and the University of Washington Medical Center.
When no site emerged, the legislature, encouraged by Denny, relocated the university to Seattle in 1858.
The report card identified the UW as one of 15 Overall College Sustainability Leaders among the 300 institutions surveyed.
Volunteers include students from a variety of backgrounds including: medical, pharmacy, and dental students.
* School of Dentistry
On May 1, 2009, the athletic department announced it was discontinuing both men's and women's swimming programs effective immediately due to budget cuts.
In 2009 the University opened an office in the Spanish city of León in collaboration with the local university.
The IFC looks over all 32 fraternities with 1900+ members and Panhellenic consists of all 18 sororities and 1900 members.
In ''Kiplinger'' magazine's 2014 "Best Values in Public Colleges" list, the university ranked 11th for in-state students and 28th for out-of-state students In 2011, the university ranked second among universities by number of undergraduate alumni currently serving as  Peace Corps volunteers, at 110.
* College of the Environment
In the heart of the city, it is among the most valuable pieces of real estate in Seattle and generates millions of US$ in revenue annually.
The University is governed by ten regents, one of whom is a student.
Arthur and Mary Denny donated eight acres, and fellow pioneers Edward Lander and Charlie and Mary Terry donated two acres to the university at a site on Denny's Knoll in downtown Seattle.
It is made up of two organizational bodies, the Interfraternity Council (IFC) and the Panhellenic Association.
UW students, sports teams, and alumni are called Washington Huskies, and often referred to metonymically as "Montlake," due to the campus's location on Montlake Boulevard N.E.
Washington is a member of the Association of American Universities.
Student Senate is one of two official student governed bodies and provides a broad-based discussion of issues.
* Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies
The regents tried and failed to sell the old campus, and eventually settled on leasing the area.
* Student Philanthropy Education Program: Partnered with the UW's nonprofit, the  UW Foundation, this group focuses on promoting awareness of philanthropy's importance through major events on campus.
In addition to athletic events, the band also plays at various other events such as commencement and convocation.
This included a detailed site plan and several buildings.
The university has three campuses: the primary and largest in the University District of Seattle and two others in Tacoma and Bothell.
UW research budget consistently ranks among the top 5 in both public and private universities in the United States.
It currently has jurisdiction over the University of Washington campus and University-owned housing, except for the Radford Court apartments in Sand Point.
The DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology) Center is a program run by the university which assists educational institutions to fully integrate all students, including those with disabilities, into Academic life.
The Beta (second) chapter of Phrateres collegiate philanthropic-social organization for women was established at the university in 1929.
Prominent examples are:
The University offers bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees through its 140 departments, themselves organized into various colleges and schools:
The undergraduate student government is the Associated Students of the University of Washington (ASUW) and the graduate student government is the Graduate and Professional Student Senate (GPSS).
The ASUW employs over 72 current University of Washington students, has over 500 volunteers, and spends $1.03 million annually to provide services and activities to the student body of 43,000 on campus.
This tract was bounded by 4th and 6th Avenues on the west and east and Union and Seneca Streets on the north and south.
It replaced the "Sun Dodger," an abstract reference to the local weather that was quickly dropped in favor of something more tangible.
The Association of Research Libraries ranked the UW library system between the top fifth and fifteenth in various categories.
* UW Farm: The UW farm grows crops on campus and advocates urban farming in the UW community.
Its operating expenses and research budget for fiscal year 2014–15 is expected to be $6.4 billion, continuing its historical record of being amongst the highest in the United States.
Housing and Food Services (HFS) spends several million dollars annually on locally produced, organic, and natural foods.
West Campus is less of a separate entity than the others, many of its facilities being on city streets, and stretches between 15th Avenue and Interstate 5 from the Ship Canal to N.E.
Odegaard instituted a vision of building a "community of scholars" and convinced the state of Washington legislatures to increase their investments towards the university.
In theTimes Higher Education World University Rankings (2016–17), it ranked 25th worldwide and its ''Times'' World Reputation Rankings for 2016 was 29th.
It was during this era in University of Washington history in which many Japanese Americans were sent away from the university to internment camps along the west coast of the United States as part of Executive Order 9066 following the attacks on Pearl Harbor.
The main campus is bounded on the west by 15th Avenue N.E., on the north by N.E.
In 2011, University of Washington ranked 8th among the world 2,000 universities in University Ranking by Academic Performance (URAP) published by Middle East Technical University.
Among the faculty, there are 151 members of American Association for the Advancement of Science, 68 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 67 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 53 members of the Institute of Medicine, 21 members of the National Academy of Engineering, 1 member of the National Academy of Public Administration, 6 Nobel Prize laureates, 2 Pulitzer Prize winners, 1 winner of the Fields Medal, 29 winners of the Presidential Early Career Awards in Science and Engineering, 15 Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigators, 15 MacArthur Fellows, 9 winners of the Gairdner Foundation International Award, 5 winners of the National Medal of Science, 5 winners of Albert Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research, 4 members of the American Philosophical Society, 2 winners of the National Book Award, and 2 winners of the National Medal of Arts.
He has also created an Environmental Stewardship Advisory Committee (ESAC), which recently created an inventory of UW's greenhouse gas emissions, an environmental stewardship coordinator position, and has formalized a policy on environmental stewardship to give full institutional support to the cause of campus sustainability.
The plan includes the construction of three six-story residence halls and two apartment complexes in the west section of campus, near the existing Terry and Lander Halls, in Phase I, the renovation of six existing residence halls in Phase II, and additional new construction in Phase III.
* College of Education
The band marches using a traditional high step, and it is one of only a few marching bands left in the United States to do so.
The sole surviving remnants of UW's first building are four , white, hand-fluted cedar, Ionic columns.
A special legislative committee headed by UW graduate Edmond Meany was created for the purpose of finding a new campus better able to serve the growing student population.
The Residence Hall Student Association (student government for the halls) is the second largest student organization on campus and helps plan fun events in the halls.
Among its facilities on campus are Husky Stadium (football, track and field), the Alaska Airlines Arena at Hec Edmundson Pavilion (basketball, volleyball, and gymnastics), Husky Ballpark (baseball), Husky Softball Stadium, The Bill Quillian Tennis Stadium, The Nordstrom Tennis Center, Dempsey Indoor (Indoor track and field, football) and the Conibear Shellhouse (rowing).
About 33% of all undergraduates are members of minority groups.
This major remodel of the athletic village will take decades to complete, as it will take place at the same time as a massive project by the Washington State Department of Transportation on nearby highways and bridges.
As a result, many Japanese American "soon-to-be" graduates were unable to receive their diplomas and be recognized for their accomplishment at the university until the University of Washington's commemoration ceremony for the Japanese Americans entitled The Long Journey Home held on May 18, 2008 at the main campus.
Originally the dogs were cared for by the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, followed by a 49-year tradition (1959–2008) of care by the Cross family (a UW professor followed by his son).
In the late 1960s, the University of Washington Police Department evolved from the University Safety and Security Division in response to anti-Vietnam War protests.
James Lepp was the 2005 NCAA men's golf champion.
Both campuses offer master's degree programs as well.
The cut-off income level that UW set is the highest in the nation, making top quality education available to more people.
The school struggled initially, closing three times: in 1863 for lack of students, and again in 1867 and 1876 due to shortage of funds.
In 1861, scouting began for an appropriate  site in Seattle to serve as the campus for a new university.
UW was also the host university of ResearchChannel program (now defunct), the only TV channel in the United States dedicated solely for the dissemination of research from academic institutions and research organizations.
Brad Walker was the 2005 NCAA men's Outdoor and Indoor Pole Vault champion.
On April 30, 1932 the ASUW assisted in the incorporation of the University Bookstore  which has been in continuous operation at the same location on University Way for over 70 years.
The University of Washington recruits faculty and staff from around the world.
The following year, the legislature passed articles formally incorporating the University and establishing a Board of Regents.
The cost for renovating the stadium was around $280 million with a seating capacity slightly lower than previous, at 70,138 seats.
To promote equal academic opportunity, especially for people of low income, UW launched ''Husky Promise'' in 2006.
With Romar as head coach, the team has been to six NCAA tournaments (2003–2004, 2004–2005, 2005–2006, 2008–2009, 2009–2010 and 2010–2011 seasons), 2 consecutive top 16 (sweet sixteen) appearances, and secured a No.
The plan for the A-Y-P Exposition prepared by John Charles Olmsted was later incorporated into the overall campus master plan and permanently affected the layout of the campus.
The ASUW Experimental College, part of the ASUW, was created in 1968 by several University of Washington students seeking to provide the campus and surrounding community with a selection of classes not offered on the university curriculum.
North of the building, the project eliminated three of the nine outdoor tennis courts with the expansion, but included an all-weather FieldTurf surface for an existing intramurals field.
It ranked 13th among 300 Best World Universities in 2011 compiled by Human Resources & Labor Review (HRLR) on Measurements of World's Top 300 Universities Graduates' Performance .
The school colors of purple and gold were adopted in 1892 by student vote.
GlobeMed at UW is partnered with The MINDS Foundation which supports education about and treatment for mental illness in rural India.
All new state-funded buildings and major renovations must meet a LEED standard of at least Silver.
Students Expressing Environmental Concern (SEED) is funded by HFS and is responsible for most of the sustainable changes made to HFS.
In 2006, the University of Washington research budget passed the $1.0 billion milestone.
Additionally, Washington senators, Henry M. Jackson and Warren G. Magnuson used their political clout to funnel federal research monies to the University of Washington and to this day, UW is among the top recipients of federal research funds in the United States.
In 1854, territorial governor Isaac Stevens recommended the establishment of a university in Washington.
On December 23, 2005, the men's basketball team won their 800th victory in Hec Edmundson Pavilion, the most wins for any NCAA team in its current arena.
The women have 10 national titles and two Olympic gold medals.
The Husky men are the 2015 national champions.
Their opponent that afternoon was Stanford.
From 1907 to 1917, Washington football teams were unbeaten in 64 consecutive games, an NCAA record.
Virtually all of the funding came from peer-reviewed research proposals.
Washington is an elected member of the American Association of Universities.
: Down the Rabbit Hole'', and ''21 and Over''.
Several major motion picture films were filmed on campus or used it as a backdrop, including ''The Sixth Man'', ''WarGames'', ''What the Bleep!?
* School of Oceanography
The previous President of the University of Washington was Michael K. Young.
And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea,
Tailgating by boat has been a Husky Stadium tradition since 1920 when the stadium was first built on the shores of Lake Washington.
University Way, known locally as "The Ave", lies nearby and is a focus for much student life at the university.
The IMA Center for intramural sports was built in 1968.
The sports teams participate in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I-A and in the Pac-12 Conference.
It is claimed that the wave was invented in October 1981 by Husky graduate Robb Weller and UW band director Bill Bissel.
In the ''Washington Monthly'' National University Rankings, University of Washington ranked 7th in 2015.
The ASUW was incorporated in the State of Washington on April 20, 1906.
In 2012, SmartMoney named the University of Washington as 6th best salary returns on tuition.
Several prominent Seattle-area residents, chief among them Methodist preacher Daniel Bagley, saw the siting of this University as a chance to add to the city's prestige.
However, Clara Antoinette McCarty Wilt became the first graduate of UW in 1876 when she graduated from UW with a bachelor's degree in science.
* The Graduate School
The University of Washington, Seattle campus, is situated on the shores of Union and Portage Bays, with views of the Cascade Range to the east and the Olympic Mountains to the west.
The University of Washington library system is the 18th largest library in the United States, with holdings of more than 7.5 million volumes.
They were able to convince early founder of Seattle and member of the territorial legislature Arthur A. Denny of the importance of Seattle winning the school.
Several new residence halls are planned for 2020, all of which are expected to meet silver or gold LEED standards.
Initially, these campuses offered curricula for students seeking bachelor's degrees who have already completed two years of higher education, but both schools have transitioned to four-year universities, accepting the first freshman class in the fall of 2006.
News'' ranked UW's programs in primary care first, family medicine first, rural medicine first, clinical psychology second, library and information sciences third, social work third, statistics third (Department of Biostatistics) and seventh (Department of Statistics), nursing fourth, computer science sixth, public health sixth, education sixth, public affairs ninth, pharmacy tenth, research medicine tenth, business 23rd, engineering 27th and law 28th.
* School of Medicine
The facility includes two swimming pools and indoor track.
The committee selected a site on Union Bay northeast of downtown, and the legislature appropriated funds for its purchase and subsequent construction.
As was the case at many American universities, this era was marked by high levels of student activism, with much of the unrest focused around civil rights and opposition to the Vietnam War.
The original Territorial University building was torn down in 1908 and its former site currently houses the Fairmont Olympic Hotel.
The event was organized by Seattle’s Swedish Consulate as part of ‘Sweden Week’.
In 1958, the men's crew furthered their lore with a shocking win over Leningrad Trud's world champion rowers at the Moscow Cup, resulting in the first American sporting victory on Soviet soil, and certainly the first time a Russian crowd gave any American team a standing ovation during the Cold War.
By the time Washington entered the Union in 1889, both Seattle and the University had grown substantially.
The Top American Research Universities ranked University of Washington 11th among the top 50 American universities in 2010 published by The Center for Measuring University Performance, Arizona State University.
The costumed "Harry the Husky" performs at sporting and special events, and a live Alaskan Malamute, currently named Dubs, has traditionally led the UW football team onto the field at the start of games.
Recent national champions include the softball team (2009), the men's rowing team (2015, 2014, 2013, 2012, 2011, 2009, 2007), NCAA Division I women's cross country team (2008), and the women's volleyball team (2005).
Notable alumni of the University of Washington include U.S. Olympic rower Joe Rantz (1936); architect Minoru Yamasaki (1934); US Senator Henry M. Jackson (JD 1935);  Baskin & Robbins co-founder Irv Robbins (1939); former actor, Hollywood Reporter columnist and TCM host Robert Osborne (1954);  glass artist Dale Chihuly (BA 1965); Pulitzer Prize-winning author Marilynne Robinson (PhD 1977), martial artist Bruce Lee; saxophonist Kenny G (1978); MySpace co-founder Chris DeWolfe (1988); and actor and comedian Joel McHale (1995, MFA 2000).
The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,
As of the 2011–12 autumn term, the university had 42,428 students, making it the largest university (in terms of student population) on the west coast.
The 1960s and 1970s are known as the "golden age" of the university due to the tremendous growth in students, facilities, operating budget and prestige under the leadership of Charles Odegaard from 1958 to 1973.
Rowing is a longstanding tradition at the University of Washington dating back to 1901.
In May 2010, the University of Washington's six Nobel laureates were honoured by Crown Princess Victoria of Sweden, at a special dinner held in Seattle.
Further growth came with the end of World War II and passage of the G.I.
* Information School
UW tied for third in 2010 (94 volunteers), first in 2009 (101 volunteers), first in 2008 (104 volunteers) and first in 2007 (113 volunteers).
In U.S. rankings ''U.S.
It is funded and supported by student fees, and provides services that directly and indirectly benefit them.
The results included an operating budget increase of $37 million in 1958, to over $400 million in 1973, and 35 new buildings that doubled the floor space of the university.
Then UW President, Mark Emmert, simply said that being "elitist is not in our DNA".
With this, up to 30 percent of undergraduate students may be eligible.
In the Global Language Monitor's rankings of universities by Internet presence, UW ranked 12th in 2012.
UW also disseminates knowledge through its proprietary UWTV channel and online.
UW opened officially on November 4, 1861, as the '''Territorial University of Washington'''.
News & World Report''.
Its most notable current regent is likely William H. Gates, Sr., father of Bill Gates.
In 2010, ''The Daily'' launched a half-hour weekly television magazine show, "The Daily's Double Shot," broadcast UWTV, Channel 27.
Families of income up to 65 percent of state median income or 235 percent of federal poverty level are eligible.
* School of Social Work
The University still owns what is now called the Metropolitan Tract.
* Washington Public Interest Research Group (WashPIRG): WashPIRG engages students in a variety of activism causes, including environmental projects on campus and the community.
Currently, the ASUW Student Senate has a legislative body of over 150 senators representing a diverse set of interests on and off campus.
Since 1977, there has been a Transition School and Early Entrance Program on campus.
Organizers of the 1909 Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition eyed the still largely undeveloped campus as a prime setting for their world's fair.
News and World Report'' among the top ten hospitals in the United States.
ACT composite scores for the middle 50% ranged from 25–31.
The University of Washington Husky Marching Band performs at many Husky sporting events including all football games.
UW is also the largest recipient of federal research funding among public universities and second among all public and private universities in the country, a position that the university has held each year since 1974.
* Students Expressing Environmental Dedication (SEED): SEED works with Housing and Food Services to increase the sustainability of the residence halls and dining areas.
Husky Stadium is used for Graduation.
At the heart of the university lies Red Square, which functions as the central hub of student interaction and hosts a variety of events annually.
The city of Seattle was one of several settlements in the mid to late 19th century vying for primacy in the newly formed Washington Territory.
Among freshman students who enrolled in fall 2014, SAT scores for the middle 50% ranged from 540–660 for critical reading, 580–700 for math, and 450–660 for writing.
The period between the wars saw significant expansion on the upper campus.
Meanwhile, QS World University Rankings (2016/17) ranked it 59th globally.
* The Dream Project: "The Dream Project teaches UW students to mentor first-generation and low-income students in King County high schools as they navigate the complex college-admissions process."
The husky was selected as the school mascot by student committee in 1922.
The university relocated from downtown to the new campus in 1895, moving into the newly built Denny Hall.
In 2014, teams from the University of Washington School of Oceanography and the UW Applied Physics Laboratory successfully completed construction of the first high-power underwater cabled observatory in the United States.
Meany and his colleague, Dean Herbert T. Condon, dubbed each of the columns "Loyalty," "Industry," "Faith" and "Efficiency," or "LIFE."
The university is an elected member of the Association of American Universities.
* College of Arts and Sciences
The subsequent post-war periods were times of dramatic growth for the University.
HFS does not use styrofoam containers for any of its facilities on campus, instead using compostable cups, plates, utensils, and packaging whenever possible.
As of February 2006, the UW joined a partnership with Seattle City Light as part of their Green Up Program.
In addition to on-campus housing the undergraduate student government, Associated Students of the University Washington, provides a free service to students, faculty, and staff looking to live off-campus called Off-Campus Housing Affairs.
The golf team plays at the Washington National Golf Club and until recently, the swimming team called the Weyerhaeuser Aquatic Center and the Husky pool home.
When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.
News & World Report'' ranked UW's undergraduate program tied for 52nd among "national universities" and tied for 16th among public universities in its 2016 rankings.
DO-IT's universal design philosophies may also be applied to professional organizations and conferences.
