The teams row out of College Boat Club, No.11 Boathouse Row.
From 1756 to 1898, the motto read ''Sine Moribus Vanae''.
According to the 2015 ARWU ranking, Penn is also the 8th and 9th best university in the world for economics/business and social sciences studies, respectively.
Franklin assembled a board of trustees from among the leading citizens of Philadelphia, the first such non-sectarian board in America.
Sometime later in its early history, Penn began to consider 1749 as its founding date; this year was referenced for over a century, including at the centennial celebration in 1849.
When it was pointed out that the motto could be translated as "Loose women without morals," the university quickly changed the motto to ''literae sine moribus vanae'' ("Letters without morals are useless").
The team existed on and off during the World Wars.
The Wharton School was home to several pioneering developments in business education.
Fisher Hassenfeld, Ware, and Riepe together make up one building called "The Quad."
The Performing Arts Council (PAC) oversees 45 student organizations in these areas.
The IAA serves as an umbrella organization for various conferences (UPMUNC, ILMUNC, and PIRC), as well as a host of other academic and social activities.
Penn's Libraries, with associated school or subject area: Annenberg (School of Communications), located in the Annenberg School; Biddle (Law), located in the Law School; Biomedical, located adjacent to the Robert Wood Johnson Pavilion of the Medical School; Chemistry, located in the 1973 Wing of the Chemistry Building; Dental Medicine; Engineering, located on the second floor of the Towne Building in the Engineering School; Fine Arts, located within the Fisher Fine Arts Library, designed by Frank Furness; Katz Center for Advanced Judaic Studies, located on Walnut Street at Washington Square; Lea Library, located within the Van Pelt Library; Lippincott (Wharton School), located on the second floor of the Van Pelt-Dietrich Library Center; Math/Physics/Astronomy, located on the third floor of David Rittenhouse Laboratory; Museum (Archaeology); Rare Books and Manuscripts; Van Pelt-Dietrich Library Center (Humanities and Social Sciences) – location of Weigle Information Commons; Veterinary Medicine, located in Penn Campus and New Bolton Center; and High Density Storage.
;Graduate and professional programs
It was initially planned to serve as a charity school as well; however, a lack of funds forced plans for the chapel and school to be suspended.
In 2014 a new 7-story glass and steel building was completed next to the Institute's historic 117-year-old brick building further expanding collaboration between the university and the Wistar Institute.
In 1899, the board of trustees voted to adjust the founding date earlier again, this time to 1740, the date of "the creation of the earliest of the many educational trusts the University has taken upon itself."
The PAC has four subcommittees: A Cappella Council; Dance Arts Council; Singer, Musicians, and Comedians (SMAC); and Theatre Arts Council (TAC-e).
The most recent Vagelos Integrated Program in Energy Research (VIPER) will be first offered for the class of 2016.
Among other distinguished alumni are the current or past presidents of Harvard University, Drew Gilpin Faust; the University of California, Mark Yudof; and Northwestern University, Morton O. Schapiro; poets William Augustus Muhlenberg, Ezra Pound, and William Carlos Williams, linguist and political theorist Noam Chomsky, architect Louis Kahn, cartoonist Charles Addams, actress Candice Bergen, theatrical producer Harold Prince, counter-terrorism expert and author Richard A. Clarke, pollster and strategist Frank Luntz, attorney Gloria Allred, journalist Joe Klein, fashion designer Tory Burch, recording artist John Legend, and football athlete and coach John Heisman.
News'' began reviewing such programs.
Since the University museum was founded in 1887, it has taken part in 400 research projects worldwide.
In 2007, Penn acquired about  between the campus and the Schuylkill River (the former site of the Philadelphia Civic Center and a nearby  site owned by the United States Postal Service).
Its economic impact on the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for 2015 amounted to $14.3 billion.
As reported by USA Today, Penn was ranked 1st in the United States by College Factual for 2015.
;''The Daily Pennsylvanian''
With 487 PhDs awarded in 2009, Penn ranks third in the Ivy League, only behind Columbia and Cornell (Harvard did not report data).
Richard Peters a fit person to superintend such an institution."
In addition to establishing the first medical school, the first university teaching hospital, the first business school, and the first student union, Penn was also the cradle of other significant developments.
Although Penn began operating as an academy or secondary school in 1751 and obtained its collegiate charter in 1755, it initially designated 1750 as its founding date; this is the year which appears on the first iteration of the university seal.
;Performing arts organizations
Penn's educational innovations include: the nation's first medical school in 1765; the first university teaching hospital in 1874; the Wharton School, the world's first collegiate school of business, in 1881; the first American student union building, Houston Hall, in 1896; the country's second school of veterinary medicine; and the home of ENIAC, the world's first electronic, large-scale, general-purpose digital computer in 1946.
The University of Pennsylvania rugby teams play in the Ivy Rugby Conference, and have finished as runners-up in both 15s and 7s.
At present the CA occupies part of the parsonage at Tabernacle United Church of Christ.
The composition of international students accepted in the Class of 2018 is: 43% from Asia; 15% from Africa and the Middle East; 20% from Europe; 15% from Canada and Mexico; 5% from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America; 3% from Australia and the Pacific Islands.
In the 2010–11 academic year alone 5 interdisciplinary research centers were created or substantially expanded; these include the Center for Health-care Financing, the Center for Global Women’s Health at the Nursing School, the $13&nbsp;million Morris Arboretum’s Horticulture Center, the $15&nbsp;million Jay H. Baker Retailing Center at Wharton, and the $13&nbsp;million Translational Research Center at Penn Medicine.
The museum has three gallery floors with artifacts from Egypt, the Middle East, Mesoamerica, Asia, the Mediterranean, Africa, and indigenous artifacts of the Americas.
It also has one of the highest numbers of post-doctoral appointees (933 in number for 2004–07), ranking third in the Ivy League (behind Harvard and Yale), and tenth nationally.
Several major scientific discoveries have also taken place at Penn.
In 1984, the university lost all editorial and financial control of ''The Daily Pennsylvanian'' when the newspaper became its own corporation.
The result was a schism, with Smith continuing to operate an attenuated version of the College of Philadelphia.
The first athletic team at Penn was its cricket team.
''The Atlantic'' also ranked Penn among the 10 most selective schools in the country.
Penn was one of the first academic institutions to follow a multidisciplinary model pioneered by several European universities, concentrating multiple "faculties" (e.g., theology, classics, medicine) into one institution.
In addition, the Vagelos Scholars Program in Molecular Life Sciences allows its students to either double major in the sciences or submatriculate and earn both a B.A.
It was installed in 1975 and is made of rolled sheets of milled steel.
During the 2015 World Meetings of Families, which included a visit from Pope Francis to Philadelphia, the Newman Center hosted over 900 Penn students and alumni.
Upon receiving a collegiate charter in 1755, the first classes for the ''College of Philadelphia'' were taught in the same building, in many cases to the same boys who had already graduated from The Academy of Philadelphia.
Dating back to 1857, The Christian Association (a.k.a.
News'' also includes Penn in its Most Popular National Universities list, and so does ''The Princeton Review'' in its Dream Colleges list.
commencement and convocation) throughout the year and was the first college band to perform at Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.
In 2007, ''The Daily Pennsylvanian'' won the Pacemaker Award administered by the Associated Collegiate Press.
Members of the faculty believed that an academic university should not be performing classified research and voted to re-examine the University agency which was responsible for the project on November 4, 1965.
''The Daily Pennsylvanian'' is an independent, student-run newspaper, which has been published daily since it was founded in 1885.
The most recent design, a modified version of the original seal, was approved in 1932, adopted a year later, and is still used for much of the same purposes as the original.
The organization brings prominent Christian figures to campus, including James Martin in September 2015.
All of Penn's schools and most of its research institutes are located on this campus.
Although a lot across Sixth Street from the old Pennsylvania State House (later renamed and famously known since 1776 as "Independence Hall"), was offered without cost by James Logan, its owner, the Trustees realized that the building erected in 1740, which was still vacant, would be an even better site.
In addition, the 1955 men's heavyweight crew is one of only four American university crews to win the Grand Challenge Cup at the Henley Royal Regatta.
The renowned cancer research center Wistar Institute is also located on campus.
Penn's motto is based on a line from Horace’s III.24 (Book 3, Ode 24), ''quid leges sine moribus vanae proficiunt?''
Module 6 is located at 38th & Walnut and includes spaces for 627 vehicles,  of storefront retail operations, a 9,500-ton chiller module and corresponding extension of the campus chilled water loop, and a 4,000-ton ice storage facility.
As a result, the Penn Libraries have extensive collections in several hundred languages.
In total, 28 Penn affiliates have won Nobel Prizes, of whom four are current faculty members and nine are alumni.
Bednarik went on to play for 12 years with the Philadelphia Eagles, becoming the NFL's last 60-minute man.
The university coat of arms features a dolphin on the red chief, adopted directly from the Franklin family's own coat of arms.
After moving around several times it relocated to its new building at 36th & Locust Streets (now the ARCH Building), which it occupied from 1928 until 2000.
Cricket had gained in popularity among the upper class from their travels abroad, and cricket clubs sprung up all across the Eastern Seaboard.
According to a 2014 study, 25 billionaires attended the University of Pennsylvania as undergraduates, the most billionaires of any university at the undergraduate level.
Penn also plans new connections between the campus and the city, including a pedestrian bridge.
The High Impact Universities research performance index ranks Penn 8th in the world, whereas the 2010 Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities (published by the Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan) ranks Penn 11th in the world for 2007, 2008, and 2010, and 9th for 2009.
Penn's library began in 1750 with a donation of books from cartographer Lewis Evans.
Classes were held in the mansion until 1829, when it was demolished.
It is located east of the Highline Green and stretches from Walnut Street to South Streets.
Penn can also boast some of the most important discoveries in the field of medicine.
It sits at the south entrance of Van Pelt Library and has button holes large enough to stand in.
Other notable businessmen and entrepreneurs who attended or graduated from the University of Pennsylvania include William S. Paley (former president of CBS), Warren Buffett (CEO of Berkshire Hathaway), Donald Trump, Donald Trump, Jr., and Ivanka Trump, Safra Catz (President and CFO of Oracle Corporation), Leonard Lauder (Chairman Emeritus of Estée Lauder Companies and son of founder Estée Lauder), Steven A. Cohen (founder of SAC Capital Advisors), Robert Kapito (president of BlackRock, the world's largest asset manager), and P. Roy Vagelos (former president and CEO of multinational pharmaceutical company Merck & Co.).
News''), mechanical engineering, chemical engineering and nanotechnology.
The school responded by launching a task force.
The Penn Cricket Team frequently toured Canada and the British Isles, and even defeated a combined Oxford-Cambridge team in 1895.
In recent decades they often have been league champions in football (14 times from 1982 to 2010) and basketball (22 times from 1970 to 2006).
At the undergraduate level, Wharton, Penn's business school, and Penn's nursing school have maintained their No.
It has produced three United States Supreme Court justices, William J. Brennan, Owen J. Roberts and James Wilson, Supreme Court justices of foreign states (e.g., Ronald Wilson of the High Court of Australia and Ayala Procaccia of the Israel Supreme Court), European Court of Human Rights judge Nona Tsotsoria, Irish Court of Appeal justice Gerard Hogan and founders of international law firms, e.g.
The International Affairs Association (IAA) was founded in 1963 as an organization to promote international affairs and diplomacy at Penn and beyond.
Within the ranks of Penn's most historic graduates are also eight signers of the Declaration of Independence and nine signers of the Constitution.
For the Class of 2018, entering in the fall of 2014, the University received a record of 35,868 applications and admitted 9.9 percent of the applicants (7% in the regular decision cycle), marking Penn's most selective admissions cycle in the history of the University.
The Olympic Boycott Games of 1980 were held at the University of Pennsylvania in response to Moscow's hosting of the 1980 Summer Olympics following the Soviet incursion in Afghanistan.
It offers double degree programs, unique majors, and academic flexibility.
Membership fluctuates between 80 and 100 students.
Twenty-eight Nobel laureates have been affiliated with Penn.
In most disciplines Penn professors' productivity is among the highest in the nation, and first in the fields of Epidemiology, Business, Communication Studies, Comparative Literature, Languages, Information Science, Criminal Justice and Criminology, Social Sciences and Sociology.
In 1779, not trusting then-provost the Rev.
The Module 6 Utility Plant and Garage at Penn was designed by BLT Architects and completed in 1995.
The school gained notoriety in 1993 for the water buffalo incident in which a student who told a noisy group of black students to "shut up, you water buffalo" was charged with violating the university's racial harassment policy.
The SCImago Institutions Rankings World Report 2012, which ranks world universities, national institutions and academies in terms of research output, ranks Penn 7th nationally among U.S. universities (and 2nd in the Ivy League behind Harvard) and 28th in the world overall (the first being France's Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique).
More recent gene research has led to the discovery of the genes for fragile X syndrome, the most common form of inherited mental retardation, spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, a disorder marked by progressive muscle wasting, and Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, a progressive neurodegenerative disease that affects the hands, feet, and limbs.
The University also owns the  Morris Arboretum in Chestnut Hill in northwestern Philadelphia, the official arboretum of the state of Pennsylvania.
The University of Pennsylvania Glee Club, founded in 1862, is one of the oldest continually operating collegiate choruses in the United States.
Sixty hours' worth of video footage depicting animal cruelty was stolen from the lab.
The Penn Newman Catholic Center (the 'Newman Center') was founded in 1893 with the mission of supporting students, faculty, and staff in their religious endeavors.
News & World Report'', Penn's most selective programs include its law school, the health care schools (medicine, dental medicine, nursing, Social Work and veterinary), and its business school.
In doing so, they became the first Philadelphia team to beat a non-Philadelphia team in CRC history, with a 14-12 win over the University of Texas in the Shield semi-final.
The Institute of Contemporary Art, which is based on Penn's campus, showcases various art exhibitions throughout the year.
Among the many discoveries are conjoint analysis, widely used as a predictive tool especially in market research, Simon Kuznets's method of measuring Gross National Product, the Penn effect (the observation that consumer price levels in richer countries are systematically higher than in poorer ones), and the "Wharton Model" developed by Nobel-laureate Lawrence Klein to measure and forecast economic activity.
In 1984, the Head Lab at the University of Pennsylvania was raided by members of the Animal Liberation Front.
The surrounding neighborhood includes several restaurants and pubs, a large upscale grocery store, and a movie theater on the western edge of campus.
Under the deanship of William Draper Lewis, the law school was also one of the first schools to emphasize legal teaching by full-time professors instead of practitioners, a system that is still followed today.
It was also home to many other educational innovations.
Penn borders Drexel University and is near the University of the Sciences in Philadelphia.
In 1801, the University moved to the unused Presidential Mansion at 9th and Market Streets, a building that both George Washington and John Adams had declined to occupy while Philadelphia was the temporary national capital.
A request for one was first recorded in a meeting of the trustees in 1753 during which some of the Trustees “desired to get a Common Seal engraved for the Use of the Corporation.” However, it was not until a meeting in 1756 that “a public Seal for the College with a proper device and Motto” was requested to be engraved in silver.
The College of Arts and Sciences is the undergraduate division of the School of Arts and Sciences.
The Palestra has hosted more NCAA Tournament basketball games than any other facility.
Penn was also the first university to award a PhD to an African-American woman, Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander, in 1921 (in economics).
, the club now utilize the state-of-the-art facilities at Penn Park.
Gradually, over the second half of the 20th century, the school raised its profile, became more selective, and dramatically increased its endowment.
It established the first research center in a business school in 1921 and the first center for entrepreneurship center in 1973, and it regularly introduced novel curricula for which ''BusinessWeek'' wrote, "Wharton is on the crest of a wave of reinvention and change in management education."
A larger-than-life white button, known as "The Button", is another popular sculpture.
James Harry Covington (co-founder of Covington & Burling), Martin Lipton (co-founder of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen, & Katz), and George Wharton Pepper (U.S.
The first phase, comprising a park and athletic facilities, opened in the fall of 2011.
All three schools shared the same Board of Trustees and were considered to be part of the same institution.
Penn's research tradition has historically been complemented by innovations that shaped higher education.
At first, when the Ivy League was being organized, the athletic directors of the other seven schools protested, fearing Penn's football prowess and arguing that its students' relatively weaker academic credentials would give it an unfair advantage in recruiting athletes.
Twenty-nine of the boycotting nations participated in the Boycott Games.
A joint program of Penn’s School of Arts and Sciences and the School of Engineering and Applied Science, VIPER leads to dual Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science in Engineering degrees by combining majors from each school.
Founded in 1985, the Company is known for its strong technique, innovative student choreography, and vivid stage presence.
The College of Arts and Sciences' English Department is also consistently ranked in the top five humanities programs in the country, ranking 4th in the most current US News report.
Penn was also ranked 18th of all U.S. colleges and universities in terms of R&D expenditures in fiscal year 2013 by the National Science Foundation.
Senator from Pennsylvania and founder of Pepper Hamilton).
The current club has its roots in the 1960s.
The ''Princeton Review'' ranks Penn as the 6th most selective school in the United States.
The museum's first project was an excavation of Nippur, a location in current day Iraq.
A charity school also was chartered July 13, 1753 in accordance with the intentions of the original "New Building" donors, although it lasted only a few years.
In fiscal year 2015 Penn's research budget was $851 million.
Penn Rowing has produced a long list of famous coaches and Olympians, including Susan Francia, John B. Kelly Jr., Joe Burk, Rusty Callow, Harry Parker, and Ted Nash.
All three standouts were subsequently elected to the College Football Hall of Fame, as was their coach, George Munger (a star running back at Penn in the early '30s).
Dubbed the Postal Lands, the site extends from Market Street on the north to Penn's Bower Field on the south, including the former main regional U.S.
Many East Coast universities and colleges fielded cricket teams with the University of Pennsylvania and Haverford College being two of the best in the country.
In 1740, a group of Philadelphians joined together to erect a great preaching hall for the traveling evangelist George Whitefield, who toured the American colonies delivering open air sermons.
According to Franklin's autobiography, it was in 1743 when he first had the idea to establish an academy, "thinking the Rev.
The Mines ParisTech International Professional Ranking, which ranks universities on the basis of the number of alumni listed among CEOs in the 500 largest worldwide companies, ranks Penn 11th worldwide, and 2nd nationally behind Harvard.
Penn's arts and science programs are all well regarded, with many departments ranked among the nation's top 10.
June 16, 1755, the "College of Philadelphia" was chartered, paving the way for the addition of undergraduate instruction.
Penn's "One University" policy allows undergraduates access to courses at all of Penn's undergraduate and graduate schools, except the medical, veterinary and dental schools.
The Arts House Dance Company is one of the council's most prominent groups.
With over 400 members, it is the largest student-funded organization on campus.
All of Penn's schools exhibit very high research activity.
Twelve percent of the undergraduate Class of 2018 were international students.
''The Academy of Philadelphia'', a secondary school for boys, began operations in 1751 in an unused church building at 4th and Arch Streets which had sat unfinished and dormant for over a decade.
It has grown into a system of 15 libraries (13 are on the contiguous campus) with 400 full-time equivalent (FTE) employees and a total operating budget of more than $48&nbsp;million.
After being located in downtown Philadelphia for more than a century, the campus was moved across the Schuylkill River to property purchased from the Blockley Almshouse in West Philadelphia in 1872, where it has since remained in an area now known as University City.
It hosted the first commercially televised football game, was once the home field of the Philadelphia Eagles, and was the site of early Army – Navy games.
In their 2016/17 editions, Penn was ranked 18th in the world by the ''QS World University Rankings'', 18th by the ''Academic Ranking of World Universities'' (ARWU), and 13th by the ''Times Higher Education World University Rankings''.
Twelve years later, then-provost William Smith sailed to England to raise additional funds to increase the collection size.
Penn's endowment, at $10.1 billion as of June 30, 2015, is the ninth-largest university endowment in the United States.
Many of the nearby homes and apartments in the area surrounding the campus are often rented by undergraduate students moving off campus after their first year, as well as by graduate and professional students.
According to a ''US News'' article in 2010, Penn is tied for second (tied with Dartmouth College and Tufts University) for the number of undergraduate alumni who are current Fortune 100 CEOs.
At the first meeting of the 24 members of the Board of Trustees (November 13, 1749) the issue of where to locate the school was a prime concern.
Over its history the university has also produced many distinguished alumni.
The Penn Men's Rugby Football Club is recognized as one of the oldest collegiate rugby teams in America.
They participate in the Ivy League and Division&nbsp;I (Division&nbsp;I FCS for football) in the NCAA.
According to ''U.S.
Quakers Rugby played on national TV at the 2013 Collegiate Rugby Championship, a college rugby tournament played every June at PPL Park in Philadelphia and broadcast live on NBC.
The official seal of the Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania serves as the signature and symbol of authenticity on documents issued by the corporation.
He advocated an innovative concept of higher education, one which would teach both the ornamental knowledge of the arts and the practical skills necessary for making a living and doing public service.
Penn is considered a "very high research activity" university.
Nine of the Nobel laureates have won the prize in the last decade.
At the graduate level, based on admission statistics from ''U.S.
The acceptance rate for international students applying for the class of 2018 was 429 out of 6,428 (6.7%).
It is a painted aluminum sculpture and was installed in 1998.
The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute's Sinai Scholars Society Academic Symposium is a prestigious event that brings together Jewish college students with noted Jewish academics for a day of in-depth discussion and debate at the university.
Penn also counts 115 members of the United States National Academies, 79 members of the Academy of Arts and Sciences, eight National Medal of Science laureates, 108 Sloan Fellows, 30 members of the American Philosophical Society, and 170 Guggenheim Fellowships.
''Forbes'' ranked Penn 17th, based on a variety of criteria.
The Mask and Wig Club is the oldest all-male musical comedy troupe in the country.
Other schools with undergraduate programs include the School of Nursing and the School of Engineering and Applied Science (SEAS).
;Undergraduate programs
In the 2010 QS Global 200 Business Schools Report, Penn was ranked 2nd in North America.
The College Houses include W.E.B.
1, 2 or 3 rankings since ''U.S.
The university has also contributed major advancements in the fields of economics and management.
Following the First World War cricket began to experience a serious decline as baseball became the preferred sport of the warmer months; however, to this day the University still fields a cricket team.
Its most famous object is the goat rearing into the branches of a rosette-leafed plant, from the royal tombs of Ur.
Penn basketball is steeped in tradition.
Over the next decade, the site will become the home to educational, research, biomedical, and mixed-use facilities.
The inside contains seven stacked books on a desk with the titles of subjects of the trivium and a modified quadrivium, components of a classical education: Theologia, Astronomia, Philosophia, Mathematica, Logica, Rhetorica, Grammatica.
The proposed program of study could have become the nation's first modern liberal arts curriculum, although it was never implemented because William Smith, an Anglican priest who was provost at the time, and other trustees preferred the traditional curriculum.
Every College House at the University of Pennsylvania has at least four members of faculty in the roles of House Dean, Faculty Master, and College House Fellows.
Undergraduates at Penn may also take courses at Bryn Mawr, Haverford, and Swarthmore, under a reciprocal agreement known as the Quaker Consortium.
;Religious organizations
In the latter half of the nineteenth century and in the early twentieth Philadelphia was the center of cricket in the United States.
Postal Building at 30th and Market Streets, now the regional office for the U.S. Internal Revenue Service.
Founders of technology companies include Ralph J. Roberts (co-founder of Comcast), Elon Musk (founder of PayPal, Tesla Motors, and SpaceX), Leonard Bosack (co-founder of Cisco), David Brown (co-founder of Silicon Graphics) and Mark Pincus (founder of Zynga, the company behind Farmville).
The video footage was released to PETA who edited the tapes and created the documentary ''Unnecessary Fuss''.
Among its professional schools, the schools of business, communication, dentistry, medicine, nursing, and veterinary medicine rank in the top 5 nationally (see ''U.S.
Bruce Montgomery, its best-known and longest-serving director, led the club from 1956 until 2000.
Penn alumni also have a strong presence in financial and economic life.
The outer ring of the current seal is inscribed with “Universitas Pennsylvaniensis,” the Latin name of the University of Pennsylvania.
These professors hold endowed professorships and joint appointments between Penn's schools.
In 2007, the men's team won its third consecutive Ivy League title and then lost in the first round of the NCAA Tournament to Texas A&M.
Dual-degree programs which lead to the same multiple degrees without participation in the specific above programs are also available.
During the 1890s, Penn's famed coach and alumnus George Washington Woodruff introduced the quarterback kick, a forerunner of the forward pass, as well as the place-kick from scrimmage and the delayed pass.
