Other schools of Vedanta include Nimbarka's ''Dvaitadvaita'', Vallabha's ''Suddhadvaita'' and Chaitanya's ''Acintya Bhedabheda''.
Ramanuja strenuously refuted Shankara's works.
* "Aham brahmāsmi" - "I am Brahman" (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad)
The first German translation appeared in 1832 and Roer's English version appeared in 1853.
Two concepts that are of paramount importance in the Upanishads are ''Brahman'' and ''Atman''.
The main Shakta Upanishads, for example, mostly discuss doctrinal and interpretative differences between the two principal sects of a major Tantric form of Shaktism called Shri Vidya upasana.
Subala, Mantrika, Niralamba, Paingala, Adhyatma, Muktika
Ātmā, Sūrya, Prāṇāgnihotra
Ramanuja, just as Madhva claims for Dvaita sub-school, states that Vishishtadvaita is grounded in the Upanishads.
There are exceptions to the anonymous tradition of the Upanishads and other Vedic literature.
In contrast, Upanishadic focus was the individual, the self (atman, soul), self-knowledge, and the means of an individual's moksha (freedom, liberation in this life or after-life).
The  Upanishad parodies those who indulge in the acts of sacrifice by comparing them with a procession of dogs chanting ''Om!
In the Upanishads, states Radhakrishnan, knowledge is a means to freedom, and philosophy is the pursuit of wisdom by a way of life.
Schelling and other philosophers associated with German idealism were dissatisfied with Christianity as propagated by churches.
In the Upanishads, Māyā is the perceived changing reality and it co-exists with Brahman which is the hidden true reality.
Vajrasūchi, Maha, Sāvitrī
They were fascinated with the Vedas and the Upanishads.
Yoga philosophy and practice, adds Jayatilleke, is "not entirely absent in the Early Upanishads".
While some Upanishads have been deemed 'monistic', others, including the Katha Upanishad, are dualistic.
The poet T. S. Eliot, inspired by his reading of the Upanishads, based the final portion of his famous poem ''The Waste Land'' (1922) upon one of its verses.
The opposition to the ritual is not explicit in the oldest Upanishads.
Advayatāraka, Haṃsa, Triśikhi, Maṇḍalabrāhmaṇa
Colebrooke was aware of 170 Upanishads.
Radhakrishnan, on the other hand, suggests that Shankara's views of Advaita were straightforward developments of the Upanishads and the ''Brahmasutra'', and many ideas of Shankara derive from the Upanishads.
The French translation was never published.
Sadhale's catalog from 1985, the  lists 223 Upanishads.
Anyone who worships a divinity other than the Self is called a domestic animal of the gods in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad.
The Maitri Upanishad states,
The mukhya Upanishads are the most important and highlighted.
Patrick Olivelle gives the following chronology for the early Upanishads, also called the Principal Upanishads:
The schools of Vedānta seek to answer questions about the relation between atman and Brahman, and the relation between Brahman and the world.
It states that the over-lordship of the earth may be acquired by sacrificing a horse.
He summarizes the current Indological opinion to be that the Brhadaranyaka, Chandogya, Isha, Taittiriya, Aitareya, Kena, Katha, Mundaka, and Prasna Upanishads are all pre-Buddhist and pre-Jain, while Svetasvatara and Mandukya overlap with the earliest Buddhist and Jain literature.
Radhakrishnan states, "almost all the early literature of India was anonymous, we do not know the names of the authors of the Upanishads".
The Upanishads form one of the three main sources for all schools of Vedanta, together with the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahmasutras.
King also suggests that there are clear differences between Shankara's writings and the ''Brahmasutra'', and many ideas of Shankara are at odds with those in the Upanishads.
The Upanishads contain four sentences, the Mahāvākyas (Great Sayings), which were used by Shankara to establish the identity of Atman and Brahman as scriptural truth:
New Upanishads, beyond the 108 in the Muktika canon, continued to be composed through the early modern and modern era, though often dealing with subjects which are unconnected to the Vedas.
''Maya'', or "illusion", is an important idea in the Upanishads, because the texts assert that in the human pursuit of blissful and liberating Self-knowledge, it is ''Maya'' which obscures, confuses and distracts an individual.
Māyā not only deceives people about the things they think they know; more basically, it limits their knowledge."
Brahman in Hinduism, states Paul Deussen, as the "creative principle which lies realized in the whole world".
Atman is the spiritual essence in all creatures, their real innermost essential being.
Atharvasiras, Atharvaśikha, Bṛhajjābāla, Śarabha, Bhasma, Gaṇapati
In south India, the collected list based on Muktika Upanishad, and published in Telugu language, became the most common by the 19th-century and this is a list of 108 Upanishads.
The Maitri is one of the Upanishads that inclines more toward dualism, thus grounding classical Samkhya and Yoga schools of Hinduism, in contrast to the non-dualistic Upanishads at the foundation of its Vedanta school.
Gaudapada was the first person to expound the basic principles of the Advaita philosophy in a commentary on the conflicting statements of the Upanishads.
In similar fashion, Vedic gods such as the ''Agni'', ''Aditya'', ''Indra'', ''Rudra'', ''Visnu'', ''Brahma'' and others become equated in the Upanishads to the supreme, immortal and incorporeal Brahman-Atman of the Upanishads, god becomes synonymous with Self, and is declared to be everywhere, inmost being of each human being and within every living creature.
The first Sanskrit to English translation of the Aitareya Upanishad was made by Colebrooke, in 1805 and the first English translation of the Kena Upanishad was made by Rammohun Roy in 1816.
Stephen Phillips places the early Upanishads in the 800 to 300 BCE range.
Brahman is the material, efficient, formal and final cause of all that exists.
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan states that the Upanishads have dominated Indian philosophy, religion and life ever since their appearance.
Kaivalya, Kālāgnirudra, Dakṣiṇāmūrti, Rudrahṛdaya, Pañcabrahma
The third school of Vedanta is the Vishishtadvaita, which was founded by Ramanuja.
The German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer read the Latin translation and praised the Upanishads in his main work, ''The World as Will and Representation'' (1819), as well as in his ''Parerga and Paralipomena'' (1851).
These "new Upanishads" number in the hundreds, cover diverse range of topics from physiology to renunciation to sectarian theories.
Some state that Brahman (Highest Reality, Universal Principle, Being-Consciousness-Bliss) is identical with ''Atman'', while others state ''Atman'' is part of Brahman but not identical.
Other dictionary meanings include "esoteric doctrine" and "secret doctrine".
Taittiriya, Katha, Śvetāśvatara, Maitrāyaṇi
Muṇḍaka, Māṇḍūkya, Praśna
* According to Advaita Vedanta, there is no difference.
* "Tat tvam asi" - "That Thou art" (Chandogya Upanishad)
These are further divided into Upanishads associated with Shaktism (goddess Shakti), Sannyasa (renunciation, monastic life), Shaivism (god Shiva), Vaishnavism (god Vishnu), Yoga, and ''Sāmānya'' (general, sometimes referred to as Samanya-Vedanta).
While the hymns of the Vedas emphasize rituals and the Brahmanas serve as a liturgical manual for those Vedic rituals, the spirit of the Upanishads is inherently opposed to ritual.
Śāṇḍilya, Pāśupata, Mahāvākya
Scholars are uncertain about the exact centuries in which the Upanishads were composed.
In north India, a list of 52 Upanishads has been most common.
The various philosophical theories in the early Upanishads have been attributed to famous sages such as Yajnavalkya, Uddalaka Aruni, Shvetaketu, Shandilya, Aitareya, Balaki, Pippalada and Sanatkumara.
The word ''Atman'' means the inner self, the soul, the immortal spirit in an individual, and all living beings including animals and trees.
As a result of the influence of these writers, the Upanishads gained renown in Western countries.
On occasions, the Upanishads extend the task of the Aranyakas by making the ritual allegorical and giving it a philosophical meaning.
The Brahman is the ultimate reality and the Atman is individual self (soul).
About half of the Sannyasa Upanishads were likely composed in 14th- to 15th-century CE.
The Moghul Emperor Akbar's reign (1556–1586) saw the first translations of the Upanishads into Persian.
These texts state that the inmost core of every person is not the body, nor the mind, nor the ego, but ''Atman'' – "Soul" or "Self".
Max Muller as well as Paul Deussen translate the word ''Upanishad'' in these verses as "secret doctrine", Robert Hume translates it as "mystic meaning", while Patrick Olivelle translates it as "hidden connections".
They note that there is no historical evidence of the philosophers of the two schools meeting, and point out significant differences in the stage of development, orientation and goals of the two philosophical systems.
Of the remainder, some 95 Upanishads are part of the Muktika canon, composed from about the last centuries of 1st-millennium BCE through about 15th-century CE.
According to Eknath Easwaran, the Upanishads are snapshots of towering peaks of consciousness.
Indologist Patrick Olivelle says that "in spite of claims made by some, in reality, any dating of these documents early Upanishads that attempts a precision closer than a few centuries is as stable as a house of cards".
Women, such as Maitreyi and Gargi participate in the dialogues and are also credited in the early Upanishads.
Along with the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahmasutra, the ''mukhya'' Upanishads (known collectively as the ''Prasthanatrayi'') provide a foundation for the several later schools of Vedanta, among them, two influential monistic schools of Hinduism.
While over two dozen of the minor Upanishads are dated to pre-3rd century CE, many of these new texts under the title of "Upanishads" originated in the first half of the 2nd millennium CE, they are not Vedic texts, and some do not deal with themes found in the Vedic Upanishads.
These lists associated each Upanishad with one of the four Vedas, many such lists exist, and these lists are inconsistent across India in terms of which Upanishads are included and how the newer Upanishads are assigned to the ancient Vedas.
There is confidence about the early Upanishads being the product of the geographical center of ancient Brahmanism, comprising the regions of Kuru-Panchala and Kosala-Videha together with the areas immediately to the south and west of these.
''Atman'' is the predominantly discussed topic in the Upanishads, but they express two distinct, somewhat divergent themes.
* The three other early prose Upanisads—Taittiriya, Aitareya, and Kausitaki come next; all are probably pre-Buddhist and can be assigned to the 6th to 5th centuries BCE.
* The Brhadaranyaka and the Chandogya are the two earliest Upanishads.
The second group includes many middle and later Upanishads, where their authors professed theories based on yoga and personal experiences.
The development of thought in these Upanishadic theories contrasted with Buddhism, since the Upanishadic inquiry assumed there is a soul (Atman), while Buddhism assumed there is no soul (''Anatta''), states Jayatilleke.
The Upanishads describe the universe, and the human experience, as an interplay of Purusha (the eternal, unchanging principles, consciousness) and Prakṛti (the temporary, changing material world, nature).
They were composed between the last centuries of the 1st millennium BCE through the early modern era (~1600 CE).
Mundaka thereafter asserts this is foolish and frail, by those who encourage it and those who follow it, because it makes no difference to man's current life and after-life, it is like blind men leading the blind, it is a mark of conceit and vain knowledge, ignorant inertia like that of children, a futile useless practice.
The 108 Upanishads as recorded in the  are shown in the table below.
They contain a plurality of ideas.
Here 'illusion' does not mean that the world is not real and simply a figment of the human imagination.
Some of the Upanishads are categorized as "sectarian" since they present their ideas through a particular god or goddess of a specific Hindu tradition such as Vishnu, Shiva, Shakti, or a combination of these such as the Skanda Upanishad.
There is no fixed list of the ''Upanishads'' as newer ones, beyond the Muktika anthology of 108 Upanishads, have continued to be discovered and composed.
Gavin Flood dates many of the twenty Yoga Upanishads to be probably from the 100 BCE to 300 CE period.
All these Upanisads were composed probably in the last few centuries BCE.
West, have argued that the Ancient Greek philosophy was influenced by, and borrowed some core concepts from, the Upanishads.
Other major translations of the Upanishads have been by Robert Ernest Hume (13 Principal Upanishads), Paul Deussen (60 Upanishads), Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (18 Upanishads), and Patrick Olivelle (32 Upanishads in two books).
The text of three, the ''Chhagaleya, Arsheya'' and ''Saunaka'', were incomplete and inconsistent, likely poorly maintained or corrupted.
The authorship of most Upanishads is uncertain and unknown.
The early Upanishads all predate the Common Era, five of them in all likelihood pre-Buddhist (6th century BCE), down to the Maurya period.
There are more than 200 known ''Upanishads'', one of which, '''' Upanishad, predates 1656 CE and contains a list of 108 canonical Upanishads, including itself as the last.
The Mundaka Upanishad declares how man has been called upon, promised benefits for, scared unto and misled into performing sacrifices, oblations and pious works.
The ''mukhya'' Upanishads are found mostly in the concluding part of the ''Brahmanas'' and ''Aranyakas'' and were, for centuries, memorized by each generation and passed down orally.
This region covers modern Bihar, Nepal, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, eastern Rajasthan and northern Madhya Pradesh.
* According to Vishishtadvaita the jīvātman is a part of Brahman, and hence is similar, but not identical.
It is eternal, it is ageless.
The remainder 95 to 98 are called "minor Upanishads", and were likely composed between the last centuries of the 1st-millennium BCE and about mid 2nd-millennium CE.
The Chandogya Upanishad was probably composed in a more Western than an Eastern location in Indian subcontinent, possibly somewhere in the western region of the Kuru-Panchala country.
Gaudapada's Advaita ideas were further developed by Shankara.
The general area of the composition of the early Upanishads was northern India, the region bounded on the west by the upper Indus valley, on the east by lower Ganges region, on the north by the Himalayan foothills, and on the south by the Vindhya mountain range.
The Upanishads are the foundation of Hindu philosophical thought and its diverse traditions.Michael McDowell and Nathan Brown (2009), World Religions, Penguin, ISBN 978-1592578467, pages 208-210 Of the Vedic corpus, they alone are widely known, and the central ideas of the Upanishads are at the spiritual core of Hindus.
It then goes on to say that spiritual autonomy can only be achieved by renouncing the universe which is conceived in the image of a horse.
However, according to Deussen, the Persian translators took great liberties in translating the text and at times changed the meaning.
Atman is that which one is at the deepest level of one's existence.
The Tantra content of these texts also weaken its identity as an Upaniṣad for non-Tantrikas.
Compared to the Principal Upanishads, the new Upanishads recorded in the  belong to an entirely different region, probably southern India, and are considerably relatively recent.
''Maya'' means that the world is not as it seems; the world that one experiences is misleading as far as its true nature is concerned."
Aitareya, Kauśītāki
The Upanishads include sections on philosophical theories that have been at the foundation of Indian traditions.
The earliest ones such as the Brihadaranyaka and Chandogya Upanishads date to the early centuries of the 1st millennium BCE, and the latest to around the mid 2nd-millennium CE during a period of Islamic invasions and political instability.
Shankara in his discussions of the Advaita Vedanta philosophy referred to the early Upanishads to explain the key difference between Hinduism and Buddhism, stating that Hinduism asserts "Atman (Soul, Self) exists", while Buddhism asserts that there is "no Soul, no Self".Steven Collins (1994), Religion and Practical Reason (Editors: Frank Reynolds, David Tracy), State Univ of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791422175, page 64; Quote: "Central to Buddhist soteriology is the doctrine of not-self (Pali: anattā, Sanskrit: anātman, the opposed doctrine of ātman is central to Brahmanical thought).
The concepts of Brahman (Ultimate Reality) and Ātman (Soul, Self) are central ideas in all the Upanishads, and "Know your Ātman" their thematic focus.
Madhva, much like Adi Shankara claims for Advaita, states that his theistic Dvaita Vedanta is grounded in the Upanishads.
They are edited texts, some of whose sources are much older than others.
The Upanishads are treatises on Brahman-knowledge, that is knowledge of Ultimate Hidden Reality, and their presentation of philosophy presumes, "it is by a strictly personal effort that one can reach the truth".
The Latin version was the initial introduction of Upanishadic thought to Western scholars.
The Upanishads refer to the knowledge of ''Atman'' as "true knowledge" (''Vidya''), and the knowledge of ''Maya'' as "not true knowledge" (''Avidya'', Nescience, lack of awareness, lack of true knowledge).
Anquetil Duperron, a French Orientalist received a manuscript of the ''Oupanekhat'' and translated the Persian version into French and Latin, publishing the Latin translation in two volumes in 1801–1802 as ''Oupneck'hat''.
One group, which includes Early Upanishads along with some Middle and Late Upanishads, were composed by metaphysicians who used rational arguments and empirical experience to formulate their speculations and philosophical premises.
The Kaushitaki Upanishad asserts that "external rituals such as Agnihotram offered in the morning and in the evening, must be replaced with inner Agnihotram, the ritual of introspection", and that "not rituals, but knowledge should be one's pursuit".
The Upanishads insisted on oneness of soul, excluded all plurality, and therefore, all proximity in space, all succession in time, all interdependence as cause and effect, and all opposition as subject and object.
Brahman is "the infinite source, fabric, core and destiny of all existence, both manifested and unmanifested, the formless infinite substratum and from which the universe has grown".
Ātman is a central idea in all the Upanishads, and "Know your Ātman" their thematic focus.
However other scholars, such as Arthur Berriedale Keith, J. Burnet and A.R.
These Americans, such as Emerson and Thoreau, were not satisfied with traditional Christian mythology and therefore embraced Schelling's interpretation of Kant's Transcendental idealism, as well as his celebration of the romantic, exotic, mystical aspect of the Upanishads.
The Dvaita school was founded by Madhvacharya.
The Upanishads are commonly referred to as ''Vedānta'', variously interpreted to mean either the "last chapters, parts of the Veda" or "the object, the highest purpose of the Veda".
The Shvetashvatara Upanishad, for example, includes closing credits to sage ''Shvetashvatara'', and he is considered the author of the Upanishad.
Advaita is considered the most influential sub-school of the ''Vedanta'' school of Hindu philosophy.
This ancient debate flowered into various dual, non-dual theories in Hinduism.
Ancient Upanishads have long enjoyed a revered position in Hindu traditions, and authors of numerous sectarian texts have tried to benefit from this reputation by naming their texts as Upanishads.
However, Max Mueller's 1879 and 1884 editions were the first systematic English treatment to include the 12 Principal Upanishads.
The many extant lists of authentic ''Shakta Upaniṣads'' vary, reflecting the sect of their compilers, so that they yield no evidence of their "location" in Tantric tradition, impeding correct interpretation.
Paul Deussen in his review of the Upanishads, states that the texts emphasize Brahman-Atman as something that can experienced, but not defined.
While significant attempts have been made recently to identify the exact locations of the individual Upanishads, the results are tentative.
The 19th-century transcendentalists noted the influence of the Upanishads in western philosophy.
Max Muller, in his review of the Upanishads, summarizes the lack of systematic philosophy and the central theme in the Upanishads as follows,
The Upanishads are respected not because they are considered revealed (''Shruti''), but because they present spiritual ideas that are inspiring.
Put very briefly, this is the Buddhist doctrine that human beings have no soul, no self, no unchanging essence.
King states that Gaudapada's main work, Māṇḍukya Kārikā, is infused with philosophical terminology of Buddhism, and uses Buddhist arguments and analogies.
According to Wendy Doniger, "to say that the universe is an illusion (māyā) is not to say that it is unreal; it is to say, instead, that it is not what it seems to be, that it is something constantly being made.
For example, the Brihadaranyaka interprets the practice of horse-sacrifice or ''ashvamedha'' allegorically.
Scholars believe that early Upanishads, were interpolated and expanded over time, because of the differences within manuscripts of the same Upanishad discovered in different parts of South Asia, differences in non-Sanskrit version of the texts that have survived, and differences within each text in terms of the meter, the style, the grammar and the structure.Patrick Olivelle (2014), The Early Upanishads, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195124354, pages 583-640F Rusza (2010), The authorlessness of the philosophical sūtras, Acta Orientalia, Volume 63, Number 4, pages 427-442 The texts as they exist now are believed to be the work of many authors.
During the modern era, the ancient Upanishads that were embedded texts in the Vedas, were detached from the Brahmana and Aranyaka layers of Vedic text, compiled into separate texts and these were then gathered into anthologies of Upanishads.
These traditions sought to link their texts as Vedic, by asserting their texts to be an Upanishad, thereby a ''Śruti''.
Also of note, late author Thomas McEviley who wrote the Shape of Ancient Thought, discusses the similarities between Indian and Greek thought, also has done a short documentary (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8HAiTfOSP_w).
";Edward Roer (Translator), , pages 2-4Katie Javanaud (2013),  Is The Buddhist 'No-Self' Doctrine Compatible With Pursuing Nirvana?, Philosophy Now;John C. Plott et al (2000), Global History of Philosophy: The Axial Age, Volume 1, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120801585, page 63, Quote: "The Buddhist schools reject any Ātman concept.
The Upanishads have been translated into various languages including Persian, Italian, Urdu, French, Latin, German, English, Dutch, Polish, Japanese, Spanish and Russian.
The idea put forth by the Upanishadic seers that Atman and Brahman are One and the same is one of the greatest contributions made to the thought of the world.
* The two late prose Upanisads, the Prasna and the Mandukya, cannot be much older than the beginning of the common era.
Various mechanisms for such a transmission of knowledge have been conjectured including Pythagoras traveling as far as India; Indian philosophers visiting Athens and meeting Socrates; Plato encountering the ideas when in exile in Syracuse; or, intermediated through Persia.
He found his own philosophy was in accord with the Upanishads, which taught that the individual is a manifestation of the one basis of reality.
Due to the wide variety of philosophical teachings contained in the Upanishads, various interpretations could be grounded on the Upanishads.
Āśrama, Nārada-parivrājaka, Paramahaṃsa parivrājaka, Parabrahma
The older Upanishads launch attacks of increasing intensity on the ritual.
Witzel identifies the center of activity in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad as the area of Videha, whose king, Janaka, features prominently in the Upanishad.
Wadia, believe that the two systems developed independently.
Most of these sectarian Upanishads, for example the Rudrahridaya Upanishad and the Mahanarayana Upanishad, assert that all the Hindu gods and goddesses are the same, all an aspect and manifestation of Brahman, the Vedic concept for metaphysical ultimate reality before and after the creation of the Universe.
For Schopenhauer, that fundamentally real underlying unity is what we know in ourselves as "will".
* The Kena is the oldest of the verse Upanisads followed by probably the Katha, Isa, Svetasvatara, and Mundaka.
Sarvasāra, Śukarahasya, Skanda, Garbha, Śārīraka, Ekākṣara, Akṣi
Juan Mascaró, a professor at the University of Barcelona and a translator of the Upanishads, states that the Upanishads represents for the Hindu approximately what the New Testament represents for the Christian, and that the message of the Upanishads can be summarized in the words, "the kingdom of God is within you".
Tripura, Saubhāgya-lakshmi, Bahvṛca|
Wadia writes that Plato's metaphysics were rooted in ''this'' life and his primary aim was to develop an ideal state.
Sītā, Devī, Tripurātapini, Bhāvana
Visistadvaita is a synthetic philosophy bridging the monistic Advaita and theistic Dvaita systems of Vedanta.
+ Veda-Upanishad association
* "Prajñānam brahma" - "Consciousness is Brahman" (Aitareya Upanishad)
This view of the soul and self are similar, states Deussen, to those found in the dialogues of Plato and elsewhere.
Advaita literally means non-duality, and it is a monistic system of thought.
The  Upanishad's list of 108 Upanishads groups the first 13 as ''mukhya'', 21 as Sāmānya Vedānta, 20 as Sannyāsa, 14 as Vaishnava, 12 as Shaiva, 8 as Shakta, and 20 as Yoga.
Nārāyaṇa, Kali-Saṇṭāraṇa
More than 200 Upanishads are known, of which the first dozen or so are the oldest and most important and are referred to as the principal or main (''mukhya'') Upanishads.
Schopenhauer used to keep a copy of the Latin ''Oupnekhet'' by his side and commented,
The one reality or ''ekam sat'' of the Vedas becomes the ''ekam eva advitiyam''  or "the one and only and sans a second" in the Upanishads.
In the United States, the group known as the Transcendentalists were influenced by the German idealists.
Hendrick Vroom explains, "the term ''Maya'' in the Upanishads has been translated as 'illusion,' but then it does not concern normal illusion.
Patrick Olivelle and other scholars date seven of the twenty Sannyasa Upanishads to likely have been complete sometime between the last centuries of the 1st-millennium BCE to 300 CE.
The former manifests itself as Ātman (Soul, Self), and the latter as Māyā.
Amṛtabindu, Tejobindu, Amṛtanāda, Kṣurika, Dhyānabindu, Brahmavidyā, Yogatattva, Yogaśikhā, Yogakuṇḍalini, Varāha
The two texts are pre-Buddhist; they may be placed in the 7th to 6th centuries BCE, give or take a century or so.
The Upanishadic age was characterized by a pluralism of worldviews.
In fourth chapter of the Kaushitaki Upanishad, a location named Kashi (modern Varanasi) is mentioned.
According to Jayatilleke, the thinkers of Upanishadic texts can be grouped into two categories.
Nṛsiṃhatāpanī, Mahānārāyaṇa (Tripād vibhuti), Rāmarahasya, Rāmatāpaṇi, Gopālatāpani, Kṛṣṇa, Hayagrīva, Dattātreya, Gāruḍa
Jābāla, Paramahaṃsa, Bhikṣuka, Turīyātītavadhuta, Yājñavalkya, Śāṭyāyaniya|
