In contrast, in the northern hemisphere maximum speeds as high as 240&nbsp;m/s are observed near +50° latitude.
At some latitudes, such as about 60 degrees south, visible features of the atmosphere move much faster, making a full rotation in as little as 14 hours.
In Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese, its name is literally translated as the "sky king star" ().
At the beginning of the 21st century, when the northern polar region came into view, the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) and Keck telescope initially observed neither a collar nor a polar cap in the northern hemisphere.
The mechanism of these physical changes is still not clear.
An early explanation—that bright clouds are easier to identify in its dark part, whereas in the southern hemisphere the bright collar masks them – was shown to be incorrect.
At opposition, Uranus is visible to the naked eye in dark skies, and becomes an easy target even in urban conditions with binoculars.
Its diameter is slightly larger than Neptune's at roughly four times that of Earth.
Bode concluded that its near-circular orbit was more like a planet than a comet.
Nevertheless there are differences between the clouds of each hemisphere.
The rotational period of the interior of Uranus is 17&nbsp;hours, 14&nbsp;minutes.
By 1783, Herschel acknowledged this to Royal Society president Joseph Banks: "By the observation of the most eminent Astronomers in Europe it appears that the new star, which I had the honour of pointing out to them in March 1781, is a Primary Planet of our Solar System."
Hydrogen and helium constitute only a small part of the total, with between 0.5 and 1.5&nbsp;Earth masses.
Voyager&nbsp;2 arrived during the height of Uranus's southern summer and could not observe the northern hemisphere.
In 1986, NASA's Voyager&nbsp;2 interplanetary probe encountered Uranus.
They are ice–rock conglomerates composed of roughly 50% ice and 50% rock.
The middle layer of the Uranian atmosphere is the stratosphere, where temperature generally increases with altitude from 53&nbsp;K in the tropopause to between 800 and 850&nbsp;K at the base of the thermosphere.
A narrow band straddling the latitudinal range from −45 to −50° is the brightest large feature on its visible surface.
The mixing ratio is much lower in the upper atmosphere due to its extremely low temperature, which lowers the saturation level and causes excess methane to freeze out.
In April 2006, images of the new rings from the Keck Observatory yielded the colours of the outer rings: the outermost is blue and the other one red.
This fluid, which has a high electrical conductivity, is sometimes called a water–ammonia ocean.
Presently available data does not allow science to determine which model is correct.
No heavier ions have been detected.
In recognition of his achievement, King George III gave Herschel an annual stipend of £200 on condition that he move to Windsor so that the Royal Family could look through his telescopes.
A later proposal, ⛢, is a hybrid of the symbols for Mars and the Sun because Uranus was the Sky in Greek mythology, which was thought to be dominated by the combined powers of the Sun and Mars.
File:Uranus rings discovery.gif|Animation about the discovering occultation in 1977.
Ultimately, Bode's suggestion became the most widely used, and became universal in 1850 when HM Nautical Almanac Office, the final holdout, switched from using ''Georgium Sidus'' to ''Uranus''.
A similar periodic variation, with maxima at the solstices, has been noted in microwave measurements of the deep troposphere begun in the 1960s.
Sir William Herschel observed Uranus on 13 March 1781 from the garden of his house at 19 New King Street in Bath, Somerset, England (now the Herschel Museum of Astronomy), and initially reported it (on 26 April 1781) as a comet.
Methane molecules account for 2.3% of the atmosphere by molar fraction below the methane cloud deck at the pressure level of 1.3&nbsp;bar (130&nbsp;kPa); this represents about 20 to 30&nbsp;times the carbon abundance found in the Sun.
The Uranian satellite system is the least massive among those of the giant planets; the combined mass of the five major satellites would be less than half that of Triton (largest moon of Neptune) alone.
This value indicates that it is made primarily of various ices, such as water, ammonia, and methane.
Although Uranus is known to have a bright south polar region, the north pole is fairly dim, which is incompatible with the model of the seasonal change outlined above.
Another hypothesis is that some form of barrier exists in Uranus's upper layers that prevents the core's heat from reaching the surface.
The tropopause region is responsible for the vast majority of Uranus's thermal far infrared emissions, thus determining its effective temperature of .
Ariel is thought to have once been held in a 4:1 resonance with Titania.
The spacecraft studied the structure and chemical composition of Uranus's atmosphere, including its unique weather, caused by its axial tilt of 97.77°.
Each pole gets around 42&nbsp;years of continuous sunlight, followed by 42&nbsp;years of darkness.
Voyager&nbsp;2 also discovered two additional faint rings, bringing the total number to eleven.
In fact the magnetic dipole is shifted from the Uranus's centre towards the south rotational pole by as much as one third of the planetary radius.
The troposphere is thought to have a highly complex cloud structure; water clouds are hypothesised to lie in the pressure range of  (5 to 10 MPa), ammonium hydrosulfide clouds in the range of  (2 to 4 MPa), ammonia or hydrogen sulfide clouds at between 3 and 10&nbsp;bar (0.3 to 1&nbsp;MPa) and finally directly detected thin methane clouds at  (0.1 to 0.2&nbsp;MPa).
The largest of Uranus's satellites, Titania, has a radius of only 788.9&nbsp;km, or less than half that of the Moon, but slightly more than Rhea, the second-largest satellite of Saturn, making Titania the eighth-largest moon in the Solar System.
Its effects include a drag on small particles orbiting Uranus, causing a general depletion of dust in the Uranian rings.
File:Tropospheric profile Uranus new.svg|Temperature profile of the Uranian troposphere and lower stratosphere.
Spectroscopy has also uncovered traces of water vapour, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide in the upper atmosphere, which can only originate from an external source such as infalling dust and comets.
Detailed analysis of the visible and microwave data revealed that the periodical changes of brightness are not completely symmetrical around the solstices, which also indicates a change in the meridional albedo patterns.
Thirteen distinct rings are presently known, the brightest being the ε ring.
Berlin astronomer Johann Elert Bode described Herschel's discovery as "a moving star that can be deemed a hitherto unknown planet-like object circulating beyond the orbit of Saturn".
The troposphere is a dynamic part of the atmosphere, exhibiting strong winds, bright clouds and seasonal changes.
Why Uranus's internal temperature is so low is still not understood.
The helium molar fraction, i.e.
A different convention is sometimes used, in which a body's north and south poles are defined according to the right-hand rule in relation to the direction of rotation.
Recent observation also discovered that cloud features on Uranus have a lot in common with those on Neptune.
The lines "Then felt I like some watcher of the skies/When a new planet swims into his ken", from John Keats's "On First Looking Into Chapman's Homer", are a reference to Herschel's discovery of Uranus.
It would take about twenty years to get to the Uranian system after departing Saturn.
The northern clouds are smaller, sharper and brighter.
Herschel notified the Astronomer Royal, Nevil Maskelyne, of his discovery and received this flummoxed reply from him on 23 April: "I don't know what to call it.
heat) part of the spectrum is  times the solar energy absorbed in its atmosphere.
Miranda has fault canyons 20&nbsp;kilometres deep, terraced layers, and a chaotic variation in surface ages and features.
Remote-sensing capability extends down to roughly 300&nbsp;km below the 1 bar (100 kPa) level, with a corresponding pressure around 100&nbsp;bar (10&nbsp;MPa) and temperature of 320&nbsp;K. The tenuous thermosphere extends over two planetary radii from the nominal surface, which is defined to lie at a pressure of 1 bar.
Its angular diameter is between 3.4 and 3.7&nbsp;arcseconds, compared with 16 to 20&nbsp;arcseconds for Saturn and 32 to 45&nbsp;arcseconds for Jupiter.
I have not yet seen any coma or tail to it".
For example, the dark spots common on Neptune had never been observed on Uranus before 2006, when the first such feature dubbed Uranus Dark Spot was imaged.
For example, convection may take place in a set of compositionally different layers, which may inhibit the upward heat transport; perhaps double diffusive convection is a limiting factor.
The ice giants, with only a few Earth masses of nebular gas, never reached that critical point.
Extensional processes associated with upwelling diapirs are the likely origin of Miranda's 'racetrack'-like coronae.
These new rings are so far from Uranus that they are called the "outer" ring system.
The Uranian thermosphere, together with the upper part of the stratosphere, corresponds to the ionosphere of Uranus.
Stratospheric temperature measurements beginning in the 1970s also showed maximum values near the 1986 solstice.
A New Frontiers Uranus Orbiter has been evaluated and recommended in the study, ''The Case for a Uranus Orbiter''.
One proposed explanation for this dearth of features is that Uranus's internal heat appears markedly lower than that of the other giant planets.
The brightening of the sunlit hemisphere is thought to result from the local thickening of the methane clouds and haze layers located in the troposphere.
Near the summer and winter solstices, Uranus's hemispheres lie alternately either in full glare of the Sun's rays or facing deep space.
The temperature falls from about 320&nbsp;K at the base of the nominal troposphere at −300&nbsp;km to 53&nbsp;K at 50&nbsp;km.
For more concepts see Proposed Uranus missions.
It is also named in Nahuatl as "Xiuhtēuccītlalli", after the god Xiuhtecuhtli.
The Uranian ionosphere is denser than that of either Saturn or Neptune, which may arise from the low concentration of hydrocarbons in the stratosphere.
For a short period from March to May 2004, large clouds appeared in the Uranian atmosphere, giving it a Neptune-like appearance.
Determining the nature of this seasonal variation is difficult because good data on Uranus's atmosphere have existed for less than 84 years, or one full Uranian year.
The concentration of hydrocarbons in the Uranian stratosphere above the haze is significantly lower than in the stratospheres of the other giant planets.
This sighting is generally considered doubtful, because the rings are quite faint, and in the two following centuries none were noted by other observers.
There may be a layer of ionic water where the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions, and deeper down superionic water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions move freely within the oxygen lattice.
Near the solstice, one pole faces the Sun continuously and the other faces away.
Bode argued that the name should follow the mythology so as not to stand out as different from the other planets, and that Uranus was an appropriate name as the father of the first generation of the Titans.
Other changes in the southern polar region can be explained by changes in the lower cloud layers.
It is also named in Māori as ''Rangipō''.
A Uranus orbiter and probe was recommended by the 2013–2022 Planetary Science Decadal Survey published in 2011; the proposal envisages launch during 2020–2023 and a 13-year cruise to Uranus.
At the other side of Uranus's orbit the orientation of the poles towards the Sun is reversed.
Uranus's magnetosphere contains charged particles: mainly protons and electrons, with a small amount of H2+ ions.
Uranus's satellites have relatively low albedos; ranging from 0.20 for Umbriel to 0.35 for Ariel (in green light).
Uranus's core density is around 9&nbsp;g/cm3, with a pressure in the centre of 8&nbsp;million&nbsp;bars (800 GPa) and a temperature of about 5000&nbsp;K. The ice mantle is not in fact composed of ice in the conventional sense, but of a hot and dense fluid consisting of water, ammonia and other volatiles.
This trajectory took ''Voyager&nbsp;1'' out the plane of the ecliptic, ending its planetary science mission.
This flyby remains the only investigation of Uranus carried out from a short distance and no other visits are planned.
Finnish-Swedish astronomer Anders Johan Lexell, working in Russia, was the first to compute the orbit of the new object and its nearly circular orbit led him to a conclusion that it was a planet rather than a comet.
The troposphere is the lowest and densest part of the atmosphere and is characterised by a decrease in temperature with altitude.
This indeed happened in 2007 when it passed an equinox: a faint northern polar collar arose, and the southern collar became nearly invisible, although the zonal wind profile remained slightly asymmetric, with northern winds being somewhat slower than southern.
The weak cooling efficiency due to the lack of hydrocarbons in the stratosphere above 0.1&nbsp;mBar pressure level may contribute too.
Their small mass and high temperatures explain why the corona extends as far as 50&nbsp;000&nbsp;km, or two Uranian radii, from its surface.
The more gas they held onto, the larger they became; the larger they became, the more gas they held onto until a critical point was reached, and their size began to increase exponentially.
Launched in 1977, Voyager&nbsp;2 made its closest approach to Uranus on January 24, 1986, coming within 81,500&nbsp;kilometres of the cloudtops, before continuing its journey to Neptune.
Sir William Herschel announced its discovery on 13 March 1781, expanding the known boundaries of the Solar System for the first time in history and making Uranus the first planet discovered with a telescope.
The difference between its minimum and maximum distance from the Sun is 1.8 AU, larger than that of any other planet, though not as large as that of dwarf planet Pluto.
The remainder of the non-ice mass (0.5 to 3.7&nbsp;Earth masses) is accounted for by rocky material.
The names of these satellites are chosen from characters in the works of Shakespeare and Alexander Pope.
The labelling of this pole as "south" uses the definition currently endorsed by the International Astronomical Union, namely that the north pole of a planet or satellite is the pole that points above the invariable plane of the Solar System, regardless of the direction the planet is spinning.
For instance, if substantial amounts of hydrogen and rocky material are mixed in the ice mantle, the total mass of ices in the interior will be lower, and, correspondingly, the total mass of rocks and hydrogen will be higher.
The Uranian atmosphere can be divided into three layers: the troposphere, between altitudes of −300 and 50&nbsp;km and pressures from 100 to 0.1&nbsp;bar (10&nbsp;MPa to 10&nbsp;kPa); the stratosphere, spanning altitudes between 50 and 4000&nbsp;km and pressures of between  (10&nbsp;kPa to 10&nbsp;µPa); and the thermosphere extending from 4,000&nbsp;km to as high as 50,000&nbsp;km from the surface.
The Uranian system has a unique configuration among those of the planets because its axis of rotation is tilted sideways, nearly into the plane of its solar orbit.
File:Uranuslight.jpg|Uranus's aurorae against its equatorial rings, imaged by the Hubble telescope.
The lifetime of clouds spans several orders of magnitude.
In Nahuatl, Uranus is known as "Ilhuicateōcītlalli", named after the word for "sky", "ilhuicatl".
The ring system was definitively discovered on March 10, 1977 by James L. Elliot, Edward W. Dunham, and Jessica Mink using the Kuiper Airborne Observatory.
Auroral activity is insignificant as compared to Jupiter and Saturn.
One result of this axis orientation is that, averaged over the Uranian year, the polar regions of Uranus receive a greater energy input from the Sun than its equatorial regions.
In addition to molecular hydrogen, the thermosphere-corona contains many free hydrogen atoms.
The rings are composed of extremely dark particles, which vary in size from micrometres to a fraction of a metre.
Neptune has a similarly displaced and tilted magnetic field, suggesting that this may be a common feature of ice giants.
The outermost layer of the Uranian atmosphere is the thermosphere and corona, which has a uniform temperature around 800 to 850&nbsp;K. The heat sources necessary to sustain such a high level are not understood, as neither the solar UV nor the auroral activity can provide the necessary energy to maintain these temperatures.
The bulk compositions of Uranus and Neptune are different from those of Jupiter and Saturn, with ice dominating over gases, hence justifying their separate classification as ice giants.
Like the five classical planets, Uranus is visible to the naked eye, but it was never recognised as a planet by ancient observers because of its dimness and slow orbit.
The speculation is that Uranus is becoming more Neptune-like during its equinoctial season.
Along with methane, trace amounts of various hydrocarbons are found in the stratosphere of Uranus, which are thought to be produced from methane by photolysis induced by the solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
Uranus had been observed on many occasions before its recognition as a planet, but it was generally mistaken for a star.
William Herschel described a possible ring around Uranus in 1789.
File:Uranian rings scheme.png|Uranus has a complicated planetary ring system, which was the second such system to be discovered in the Solar System after Saturn's.
Uranus is similar in composition to Neptune, and both have different bulk chemical composition from that of the larger gas giants Jupiter and Saturn.
The first to be proposed, ♅, was suggested by Lalande in 1784.
With time, discrepancies began to appear between the predicted and observed orbits, and in 1841, John Couch Adams first proposed that the differences might be due to the gravitational tug of an unseen planet.
One hypothesis is that, unlike the magnetic fields of the terrestrial and gas giants, which are generated within their cores, the ice giants' magnetic fields are generated by motion at relatively shallow depths, for instance, in the water–ammonia ocean.
the number of helium atoms per molecule of gas, is  in the upper troposphere, which corresponds to a mass fraction .
Why this sudden upsurge in activity occurred is not fully known, but it appears that Uranus's extreme axial tilt results in extreme seasonal variations in its weather.
The Uranian axis of rotation is approximately parallel with the plane of the Solar System, with an axial tilt of 97.77° (as defined by prograde rotation).
It made the first detailed investigations of its five largest moons and discovered 10 new ones.
It is as likely to be a regular planet moving in an orbit nearly circular to the sun as a Comet moving in a very eccentric ellipsis.
They appear to lie at a higher altitude.
Like the other giant planets, Uranus has a ring system, a magnetosphere, and numerous moons.
When he presented his discovery to the Royal Society, he continued to assert that he had found a comet, but also implicitly compared it to a planet:
The total mass of ice in Uranus's interior is not precisely known, because different figures emerge depending on the model chosen; it must be between 9.3&nbsp;and 13.5&nbsp;Earth masses.
Swedish astronomer Erik Prosperin proposed the name ''Neptune'', which was supported by other astronomers who liked the idea to commemorate the victories of the British Royal Naval fleet in the course of the American Revolutionary War by calling the new planet even ''Neptune George III'' or ''Neptune Great Britain''.
is also a promising Uranus horseshoe librator candidate.
In Thai, its official name is ''Dao Yurenat'' (ดาวยูเรนัส), as in English.
In comparison, the magnetic field of Earth is roughly as strong at either pole, and its "magnetic equator" is roughly parallel with its geographical equator.
Heavier hydrocarbons and carbon dioxide have mixing ratios three orders of magnitude lower.
Although Herschel continued to describe his new object as a comet, other astronomers had already begun to suspect otherwise.
When Voyager&nbsp;2 flew by Uranus in 1986, it observed a total of ten cloud features across the entire planet.
In contrast to the other planets, whose motions around the Sun resemble that of spinning tops, Uranus's motion can be visualised as that of a ball rolling on the ecliptic plane near solstices and of a spinning rifle bullet near equinoxes.
Herschel "engaged in a series of observations on the parallax of the fixed stars", using a telescope of his own design.
The interior of Uranus is mainly composed of ices and rock.
Many argue that the differences between the ice giants and the gas giants extend to their formation.
Neptune, which is Uranus's near twin in size and composition, radiates 2.61 times as much energy into space as it receives from the Sun, but Uranus radiates hardly any excess heat at all.
The hydrocarbons occupy a relatively narrow layer at altitudes of between 100 and 300&nbsp;km corresponding to a pressure range of 10 to 0.1&nbsp;mbar (1000 to 10 kPa) and temperatures of between 75 and 170&nbsp;K. The most abundant hydrocarbons are methane, acetylene and ethane with mixing ratios of around 10−7 relative to hydrogen.
Crantor moves inside Uranus's co-orbital region on a complex, temporary horseshoe orbit.
Some small clouds live for hours; at least one southern cloud may have persisted since the Voyager flyby.
The particle population is strongly affected by the Uranian moons, which sweep through the magnetosphere, leaving noticeable gaps.
For this reason, scientists often classify Uranus and Neptune as "ice giants" to distinguish them from the gas giants.
Observations show that the ionosphere occupies altitudes from 2&nbsp;000&nbsp;to 10&nbsp;000&nbsp;km.
Wind speeds can reach 250 metres per second (900&nbsp;km/h, 560&nbsp;mph).
All except two rings of Uranus are extremely narrow – they are usually a few kilometres wide.
In 2007, when Uranus passed its equinox, the southern collar almost disappeared, and a faint northern collar emerged near 45° of latitude.
The third-most-abundant component of Uranus's atmosphere is methane .
The rings are probably quite young; the dynamics considerations indicate that they did not form with Uranus.
They include ethane , acetylene , methylacetylene , and diacetylene .
Its average distance from the Sun is roughly 3 billion&nbsp;km (about 20 AU).
Closer to the poles, the winds shift to a prograde direction, flowing with Uranus's rotation.
'''Uranus''' is the seventh planet from the Sun.
Voyager's observations revealed that Uranus's magnetic field is peculiar, both because it does not originate from its geometric centre, and because it is tilted at 59° from the axis of rotation.
For the sake of convenience, a revolving oblate spheroid set at the point at which atmospheric pressure equals 1&nbsp;bar (100 kPa) is conditionally designated as a "surface".
Recent simulations of planetary migration have suggested that both ice giants formed closer to the Sun than their present positions, and moved outwards after formation (the Nice model).
There is no mesosphere.
It is called a southern "collar".
Uranus's atmosphere is similar to Jupiter's and Saturn's in its primary composition of hydrogen and helium, but it contains more "ices" such as water, ammonia, and methane, along with traces of other hydrocarbons.
In 1789, Bode's Royal Academy colleague Martin Klaproth named his newly discovered element uranium in support of Bode's choice.
The French astronomer Pierre Lemonnier observed Uranus at least twelve times between 1750 and 1769, including on four consecutive nights.
Although the model considered above is reasonably standard, it is not unique; other models also satisfy observations.
Methane has prominent absorption bands in the visible and near-infrared (IR), making Uranus aquamarine or cyan in colour.
This surface is used throughout this article as a zero point for altitudes.
Such a mission is aided by the ease with which a relatively big mass can be sent to the systemover 1500&nbsp;kg with an Atlas 521 and 12-year journey.
The standard model of Uranus's structure is that it consists of three layers: a rocky (silicate/iron–nickel) core in the centre, an icy mantle in the middle and an outer gaseous hydrogen/helium envelope.
On 17 March he noted, "I looked for the Comet or Nebulous Star and found that it is a Comet, for it has changed its place".
From 1995 to 2006, Uranus's apparent magnitude fluctuated between +5.6 and +5.9, placing it just within the limit of naked eye visibility at +6.5.
In 1986, Voyager&nbsp;2 found that the visible southern hemisphere of Uranus can be subdivided into two regions: a bright polar cap and dark equatorial bands.
Southern hemisphere
Uranus's south pole was pointed almost directly at the Sun at the time of Voyager&nbsp;2's flyby in 1986.
Wind speeds increase with the distance from the equator, reaching zero values near ±20° latitude, where the troposphere's temperature minimum is located.
Uranus is the only planet whose name is derived from a figure from Greek mythology, from the Latinised version of the Greek god of the sky Ouranos.
It is the coldest planetary atmosphere in the Solar System, with a minimum temperature of , and has a complex, layered cloud structure with water thought to make up the lowest clouds and methane the uppermost layer of clouds.
Wind speeds continue to increase reaching maxima at ±60° latitude before falling to zero at the poles.
Another possible explanation for the magnetosphere's alignment is that there are oceans of liquid diamond in Uranus's interior that would deter the magnetic field.
The Solar System is hypothesised  to have formed from a giant rotating ball of gas and dust known as the presolar nebula.
The lowest temperature recorded in Uranus's tropopause is 49&nbsp;K (−224&nbsp;°C), making Uranus the coldest planet in the Solar System.
The fluid interior structure of Uranus means that it has no solid surface.
It also studied the magnetic field, its irregular structure, its tilt and its unique corkscrew magnetotail caused by Uranus's sideways orientation.
Consensus on the name was not reached until almost 70 years after the planet's discovery.
The abundance ratio of water is around 7.
Ethane and acetylene tend to condense in the colder lower part of stratosphere and tropopause (below 10&nbsp;mBar level) forming haze layers, which may be partly responsible for the bland appearance of Uranus.
The temperatures in the coldest upper region of the troposphere (the tropopause) actually vary in the range between 49 and 57&nbsp;K depending on planetary latitude.
The abundances of less volatile compounds such as ammonia, water, and hydrogen sulfide in the deep atmosphere are poorly known.
Unlike Jupiter's, Uranus's aurorae seem to be insignificant for the energy balance of the planetary thermosphere.
The object was soon universally accepted as a new planet.
In Mongolian, its name is ''Tengeriin Van'' (Тэнгэрийн ван), translated as "King of the Sky", reflecting its namesake god's role as the ruler of the heavens.
