Under the right conditions of temperature and pressure, the reaction of solid  with gaseous uranium hexafluoride () can form the intermediate fluorides of , , and .
It is a silvery-white metal in the actinide series of the periodic table.
Isotope separation concentrates (enriches) the fissionable uranium-235 for nuclear weapons and most nuclear power plants, except for gas cooled reactors and pressurised heavy water reactors.
Prices went from about $10/lb in May 2003 to $138/lb in July 2007.
in Bakouma a sub-prefecture in the prefecture of Mbomou in Central African Republic.
Radiological effects are generally local because alpha radiation, the primary form of 238U decay, has a very short range, and will not penetrate skin.
The most important oxidation states of uranium are uranium(IV) and uranium(VI), and their two corresponding oxides are, respectively, uranium dioxide () and uranium trioxide ().
Kazakhstan continues to increase production and may have become the world's largest producer of uranium by 2009 with an expected production of 12,826&nbsp;tonnes, compared to Canada with 11,100&nbsp;t and Australia with 9,430&nbsp;t. In the late 1960s, UN geologists also discovered major uranium deposits and other rare mineral reserves in Somalia.
The X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, formerly known as the Clinton Pile and X-10 Pile, was the world's second artificial nuclear reactor (after Enrico Fermi's Chicago Pile) and was the first reactor designed and built for continuous operation.
The Radiation Exposure Compensation Act, a 1990 law in the USA, required $100,000 in "compassion payments" to uranium miners diagnosed with cancer or other respiratory ailments.
perchloric acid/sodium hydroxide).
In sufficient concentration, these isotopes maintain a sustained nuclear chain reaction.
''Citrobacter'' species absorb uranyl ions when given glycerol phosphate (or other similar organic phosphates).
Uranium-235 has a half-life of about 7.13 years, and uranium-234 has a half-life of about 2.48 years.
A ''Sphingomonas'' sp.
Elevated uranium urine concentrations, perturbations in biochemical and neuropsychological testing
Conjunctivitis, irritation inflammation, edema, ulceration of conjunctival sacs
Stable below 1800&nbsp;°C,  is prepared by subjecting a heated mixture of UC and  to mechanical stress.
''Scientific American'' reported in February 2006 that in some of the facilities security consisted of chain link fences which were in severe states of disrepair.
Tank armor and other removable vehicle armor can also be hardened with depleted uranium plates.
Fuel used for United States Navy reactors is typically highly enriched in uranium-235 (the exact values are classified).
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the permissible exposure limit for uranium exposure in the workplace as 0.25&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.
During the later stages of World War II, the entire Cold War, and to a lesser extent afterwards, uranium-235 has been used as the fissile explosive material to produce nuclear weapons.
This generates the heat in nuclear power reactors, and produces the fissile material for nuclear weapons.
Reduction of  with hydrogen at 1000&nbsp;°C produces uranium trifluoride ().
Some organisms, such as the lichen ''Trapelia involuta'' or microorganisms such as the bacterium ''Citrobacter'', can absorb concentrations of uranium that are up to 300 times the level of their environment.
Low-grade uranium ore mined typically contains 0.01 to 0.25% uranium oxides.
Two crystal modifications of uranium hydride exist: an α form that is obtained at low temperatures and a β form that is created when the formation temperature is above 250&nbsp;°C.
To be considered 'depleted', the uranium-235 isotope concentration should be no more than 0.3%.
Dry weight concentrations of uranium in plants range from 5 to 60 parts per billion, and ash from burnt wood can have concentrations up to 4 parts per million.
The interactions of carbonate anions with uranium(VI) cause the Pourbaix diagram to change greatly when the medium is changed from water to a carbonate containing solution.
Hydrochloric and nitric acids dissolve uranium, but non-oxidizing acids other than hydrochloric acid attack the element very slowly.
It is estimated that 5.5 million tonnes of uranium exists in ore reserves that are economically viable at US$59 per lb of uranium, while 35 million tonnes are classed as mineral resources (reasonable prospects for eventual economic extraction).
During the Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States, huge stockpiles of uranium were amassed and tens of thousands of nuclear weapons were created using enriched uranium and plutonium made from uranium.
Uranium-235 is important for both nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons, because it is the only uranium isotope existing in nature on Earth in any significant amount that is fissile.
strain BSAR-1 has been found to express a high activity alkaline phosphatase (PhoK) that has been applied for bioprecipitation of uranium as uranyl phosphate species from alkaline solutions.
In a breeder reactor, uranium-238 can also be converted into plutonium through the following reaction:
Uranium is not absorbed through the skin, and alpha particles released by uranium cannot penetrate the skin.
There is a 300-fold increase in the amount of uranium recoverable for each tenfold decrease in ore grade.
Uranium miners have a higher incidence of cancer.
239U decays by beta emission to neptunium-239, also a beta-emitter, that decays in its turn, within a few days into plutonium-239.
The reduction of  by hydrogen produces uranium trichloride () while the higher chlorides of uranium are prepared by reaction with additional chlorine.
Such bombs are jacketed in a non-fissile (unenriched) uranium case, and they derive more than half their power from the fission of this material by fast neutrons from the nuclear fusion process.
Before (and, occasionally, after) the discovery of radioactivity, uranium was primarily used in small amounts for yellow glass and pottery glazes, such as uranium glass and in Fiestaware.
The resulting , a white solid, is highly reactive (by fluorination), easily sublimes (emitting a vapor that behaves as a nearly ideal gas), and is the most volatile compound of uranium known to exist.
* γ (body-centered cubic) from 775&nbsp;°C to melting point—this is the most malleable and ductile state.
'''Uranium''' is a chemical element with symbol '''U''' and atomic number&nbsp;92.
Confirmation of this hypothesis came in 1939, and later work found that on average about 2.5 neutrons are released by each fission of the rare uranium isotope uranium-235.
Salts of many oxidation states of uranium are water-soluble and may be studied in aqueous solutions.
Uranium salts are mordants of silk or wool.
Further work found that the far more common uranium-238 isotope can be transmuted into plutonium, which, like uranium-235, is also fissile by thermal neutrons.
There are also five other trace isotopes: uranium-239, which is formed when 238U undergoes spontaneous fission, releasing neutrons that are captured by another 238U atom; uranium-237, which is formed when 238U captures a neutron but emits two more, which then decays to neptunium-237; uranium-233, which is formed in the decay chain of that neptunium-237; and finally, uranium-236 and -240, which appear in the decay chain of primordial plutonium-244.
Very pure uranium is produced through the thermal decomposition of uranium halides on a hot filament.
The uranium-based Little Boy device became the first nuclear weapon used in war when it was detonated over the Japanese city of Hiroshima on 6 August 1945.
A uranium atom has 92 protons and 92 electrons, of which 6 are valence electrons.
As little as 15&nbsp;lb (7&nbsp;kg) of uranium-235 can be used to make an atomic bomb.
Severe nasal congestion and hemorrhage, lung lesions and fibrosis, edema and swelling, lung cancer
The gas centrifuge process, where gaseous uranium hexafluoride () is separated by the difference in molecular weight between 235UF6 and 238UF6 using high-speed centrifuges, is the cheapest and leading enrichment process.
Uranium glass fluoresces green in ultraviolet light.
In 1972, the French physicist Francis Perrin discovered fifteen ancient and no longer active natural nuclear fission reactors in three separate ore deposits at the Oklo mine in Gabon, West Africa, collectively known as the Oklo Fossil Reactors.
The  ion represents the uranium(VI) state and is known to form compounds such as uranyl carbonate, uranyl chloride and uranyl sulfate.
The decay series of 235U, which is called the actinium series, has 15 members and eventually decays into lead-207.
Increased reports of cancers
Uranyl () ions, such as from uranium trioxide or uranyl nitrate and other hexavalent uranium compounds, have been shown to cause birth defects and immune system damage in laboratory animals.
The precipitation ability was enhanced by overexpressing PhoK protein in ''E.
Depleted uranium is also used as a shielding material in some containers used to store and transport radioactive materials.
The discovery and isolation of radium in uranium ore (pitchblende) by Marie Curie sparked the development of uranium mining to extract the radium, which was used to make glow-in-the-dark paints for clock and aircraft dials.
This leaves uranium-238 bonded to fluorine and allows uranium-235 metal to precipitate from the solution.
Uranium metal is used for X-ray targets in the making of high-energy X-rays.
The 1789 discovery of uranium in the mineral pitchblende is credited to Martin Heinrich Klaproth, who named the new element after the planet Uranus.
Yellowcake is then calcined to remove impurities from the milling process before refining and conversion.
Many contemporary uses of uranium exploit its unique nuclear properties.
Phase relationships in the uranium-oxygen system are complex.
This compound can be prepared from uranium dioxide and uranium hydride by the following process:
Swollen vacuolated epidermal cells, damage to hair follicles and sebaceous glands
When finely divided, it can react with cold water; in air, uranium metal becomes coated with a dark layer of uranium oxide.
Due to its high density, this material is found in inertial guidance systems and in gyroscopic compasses.
At high impact speed, the density, hardness, and pyrophoricity of the projectile enable the destruction of heavily armored targets.
See Nuclear proliferation.
also forms complexes with various organic chelating agents, the most commonly encountered of which is uranyl acetate.
Relative concentrations of the different chemical forms of uranium in a non-complexing aqueous medium (e.g.
The ore deposit is 1.7 billion years old; then, uranium-235 constituted about 3% of the total uranium on Earth.
Particles with short residence times in a calciner will generally be less oxidized than those with long retention times or particles recovered in the stack scrubber.
Since the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, an estimated 600&nbsp;short tons (540&nbsp;metric tons) of highly enriched weapons grade uranium (enough to make 40,000 nuclear warheads) have been stored in often inadequately guarded facilities in the Russian Federation and several other former Soviet states.
This money was used for improvements and security enhancements at research and storage facilities.
Initially, two major types of fission bombs were built: a relatively simple device that uses uranium-235 and a more complicated mechanism that uses plutonium-239 derived from uranium-238.
One effect of these reactions is increased solubility of uranium in the pH range 6 to 8, a fact that has a direct bearing on the long term stability of spent uranium dioxide nuclear fuels.
The constant rates of decay in these decay series makes the comparison of the ratios of parent to daughter elements useful in radiometric dating.
Elevated levels of protein excretion, urinary catalase and diuresis
This property makes uranium hydrides convenient starting materials to create reactive uranium powder along with various uranium carbide, nitride, and halide compounds.
Uranium concentrate is handled and contained so as to ensure that people do not inhale or ingest it.
Australia has 31% of the world's known uranium ore reserves and the world's largest single uranium deposit, located at the Olympic Dam Mine in South Australia.
Plants absorb some uranium from soil.
Depleted uranium (238U) is used in kinetic energy penetrators and armor plating.
This left a prodigious quantity of uranium as a waste product, since it takes three tonnes of uranium to extract one gram of radium.
To be considered 'enriched', the uranium-235 fraction should be between 3% and 5%.
In 2012, ORNL researchers announced the successful development of a new absorbent material dubbed HiCap which performs surface retention of solid or gas molecules, atoms or ions and also effectively removes toxic metals from water, according to results verified by researchers at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.
Police in Asia, Europe, and South America on at least 16 occasions from 1993 to 2005 have intercepted shipments of smuggled bomb-grade uranium or plutonium, most of which was from ex-Soviet sources.
Calcined uranium yellowcake, as produced in many large mills, contains a distribution of uranium oxidation species in various forms ranging from most oxidized to least oxidized.
Uranium is found in hundreds of minerals, including uraninite (the most common uranium ore), carnotite, autunite, uranophane, torbernite, and coffinite.
Uranium-233 is made from thorium-232 by neutron bombardment, usually in a nuclear reactor, and 233U is also fissile.
Significant concentrations of uranium occur in some substances such as phosphate rock deposits, and minerals such as lignite, and monazite sands in uranium-rich ores (it is recovered commercially from sources with as little as 0.1% uranium).
May be due to combined chemical exposure rather than DU alone
Uranium metal can also be prepared through electrolysis of  or
Uranium-238 is fissionable by fast neutrons, and is ''fertile'', meaning it can be transmuted to fissile plutonium-239 in a nuclear reactor.
Working in a lab below the stands of Stagg Field at the University of Chicago, the team created the conditions needed for such a reaction by piling together 400&nbsp;short tons (360&nbsp;metric tons) of graphite, 58&nbsp;short tons (53&nbsp;metric tons) of uranium oxide, and six short tons (5.5 metric tons) of uranium metal, a majority of which was supplied by Westinghouse Lamp Plant in a makeshift production process.
For natural uranium, about 49% of its alpha rays are emitted by each of 238U atom, and also 49% by 234U (since the latter is formed from the former) and about 2.0% of them by the 235U.
Moderate to severe focal tubular atrophy; vacuolization of Leydig cells
After one day, one gram of bacteria can encrust themselves with nine grams of uranyl phosphate crystals; this creates the possibility that these organisms could be used in bioremediation to decontaminate uranium-polluted water.
Relative concentrations of the different chemical forms of uranium in an aqueous carbonate solution.
Inhibition of periodontal bone formation; and alveolar wound healing
Uranium nitrides obtained by direct exposure of the metal to nitrogen include uranium mononitride (UN), uranium dinitride (), and diuranium trinitride ().
Both UC and  are formed by adding carbon to molten uranium or by exposing the metal to carbon monoxide at high temperatures.
Uranium deposits seem to be log-normal distributed.
Decrease in RBC count and hemoglobin concentration
The CANDU and Magnox designs are the only commercial reactors capable of using unenriched uranium fuel.
An alternative laser method of enrichment is known as atomic vapor laser isotope separation (AVLIS) and employs visible tunable lasers such as dye lasers.
Normal functioning of the kidney, brain, liver, heart, and other systems can be affected by uranium exposure, because, besides being weakly radioactive, uranium is a toxic metal.
An additional 4.6 billion tonnes of uranium are estimated to be in sea water (Japanese scientists in the 1980s showed that extraction of uranium from sea water using ion exchangers was technically feasible).
While the vast majority of carbonates are insoluble in water (students are often taught that all carbonates other than those of alkali metals are insoluble in water), uranium carbonates are often soluble in water.
Uranium miners have more first born female children
A team led by Enrico Fermi in 1934 observed that bombarding uranium with neutrons produces the emission of beta rays (electrons or positrons from the elements produced; see beta particle).
The most common forms of uranium oxide are triuranium octoxide () and .
The security of those weapons and their fissile material following the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991 is an ongoing concern for public health and safety.
Commercial-grade uranium can be produced through the reduction of uranium halides with alkali or alkaline earth metals.
, dissolved in molten calcium chloride () and sodium chloride (NaCl) solution.
Uranium decays slowly by emitting an alpha particle.
Dry weight concentrations of uranium in food plants are typically lower with one to two micrograms per day ingested through the food people eat.
Henri Becquerel discovered radioactivity by using uranium in 1896.
In this process, uranium hexafluoride is repeatedly diffused through a silver-zinc membrane, and the different isotopes of uranium are separated by diffusion rate (since uranium 238 is heavier it diffuses slightly slower than uranium-235).
In 1841, Eugène-Melchior Péligot, Professor of Analytical Chemistry at the Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers (Central School of Arts and Manufactures) in Paris, isolated the first sample of uranium metal by heating uranium tetrachloride with potassium.
According to an interview from the article, one facility had been storing samples of enriched (weapons grade) uranium in a broom closet before the improvement project; another had been keeping track of its stock of nuclear warheads using index cards kept in a shoe box.
Orthorhombic, space group No.
The major application of uranium in the military sector is in high-density penetrators.
Only 0.5% is absorbed when insoluble forms of uranium, such as its oxide, are ingested, whereas absorption of the more soluble uranyl ion can be up to 5%.
Its density is about 70% higher than that of lead, and slightly lower than that of gold or tungsten.
Uranium metal has three allotropic forms:
It occurs naturally in low concentrations of a few parts per million in soil, rock and water, and is commercially extracted from uranium-bearing minerals such as uraninite.
Uranium-238 is the most stable isotope of uranium, with a half-life of about 4.468 years, roughly the age of the Earth.
Uranium-238 is usually an α emitter (occasionally, it undergoes spontaneous fission), decaying through the "Uranium Series" of nuclear decay, which has 18 members, into lead-206, by a variety of different decay paths.
This has caused a big increase in spending on exploration, with US$200 million being spent worldwide in 2005, a 54% increase on the previous year.
Uranium is a naturally occurring element that can be found in low levels within all rock, soil, and water.
Body-centered cubic, lattice parameter ''a''&nbsp;=&nbsp;352.4&nbsp;pm.
While the CDC has published one study that no human cancer has been seen as a result of exposure to natural or depleted uranium, exposure to uranium and its decay products, especially radon, are widely known and significant health threats.
Incorporated uranium becomes uranyl ions, which accumulate in bone, liver, kidney, and reproductive tissues.
He determined that a form of invisible light or rays emitted by uranium had exposed the plate.
Myocarditis resulting from the uranium ingestion, which ended six months after ingestion
The most common isotopes in natural uranium are uranium-238 (which has 146 neutrons and accounts for over 99%) and uranium-235 (which has 143 neutrons).
Two major types of atomic bombs were developed by the United States during World War II: a uranium-based device (codenamed "Little Boy") whose fissile material was highly enriched uranium, and a plutonium-based device (see Trinity test and "Fat Man") whose plutonium was derived from uranium-238.
Klaproth assumed the yellow substance was the oxide of a yet-undiscovered element and heated it with charcoal to obtain a black powder, which he thought was the newly discovered metal itself (in fact, that powder was an oxide of uranium).
After entering the bloodstream, the absorbed uranium tends to bioaccumulate and stay for many years in bone tissue because of uranium's affinity for phosphates.
Yellow glass with 1% uranium oxide was found in a Roman villa on Cape Posillipo in the Bay of Naples, Italy, by R. T. Gunther of the University of Oxford in 1912.
Another fissile isotope, uranium-233, can be produced from natural thorium and is also important in nuclear technology.
Later, a much more complicated and far more powerful type of fission/fusion bomb (thermonuclear weapon) was built, that uses a plutonium-based device to cause a mixture of tritium and deuterium to undergo nuclear fusion.
Uranium ore is mined in several ways: by open pit, underground, in-situ leaching, and borehole mining (see uranium mining).
Commercial nuclear power plants use fuel that is typically enriched to around 3% uranium-235.
+Compilation of 2004 review on uranium toxicity
He named the newly discovered element after the planet Uranus, (named after the primordial Greek god of the sky), which had been discovered eight years earlier by William Herschel.
An excess risk of lung cancer among Navajo uranium miners, for example, has been documented and linked to their occupation.
An ensuing arms race during the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union produced tens of thousands of nuclear weapons that used uranium metal and uranium-derived plutonium-239.
On 2 December 1942, as part of the Manhattan Project, another team led by Enrico Fermi was able to initiate the first artificial self-sustained nuclear chain reaction, Chicago Pile-1.
The proteobacterium ''Geobacter'' has also been shown to bioremediate uranium in ground water.
In nature, uranium is found as uranium-238 (99.2742%) and uranium-235 (0.7204%).
Elevated uranium urine concentrations
The discovery of the radioactivity of uranium ushered in additional scientific and practical uses of the element.
The gaseous diffusion process had been the leading method for enrichment and was used in the Manhattan Project.
This leads to an increase in mobility and availability of uranium to groundwater and soil from nuclear wastes which leads to health hazards.
Uranium-235 was the first isotope that was found to be fissile.
Vomiting, diarrhea, albuminuria
The experiments leading to the discovery of uranium's ability to fission (break apart) into lighter elements and release binding energy were conducted by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in Hahn's laboratory in Berlin.
perchloric acid/sodium hydroxide).
If too many of these neutrons are absorbed by other uranium-235 nuclei, a nuclear chain reaction occurs that results in a burst of heat or (in special circumstances) an explosion.
'', use uranium for their growth and convert U(VI) to U(IV).
Uranium oxyhalides are water-soluble and include , , , and .
The concentration and amount of uranium-235 needed to achieve this is called a 'critical mass'.
Triuranium octoxide is (depending on conditions) the most stable compound of uranium and is the form most commonly found in nature.
Most neutrons released by a fissioning atom of uranium-235 must impact other uranium-235 atoms to sustain the nuclear chain reaction.
Uranium has the second highest atomic weight of the primordially occurring elements, lighter only than plutonium.
This ammunition consists of depleted uranium (DU) alloyed with 1–2% other elements, such as titanium or molybdenum.
Uranium-234, which is a member of the "Uranium Series", decays to lead-206 through a series of relatively short-lived isotopes.
Uranium dioxide is the form in which uranium is most commonly used as a nuclear reactor fuel.
Uranium metal reacts with almost all non-metal elements (with an exception of the noble gases) and their compounds, with reactivity increasing with temperature.
Argonne National Laboratory's Experimental Breeder Reactor I, located at the Atomic Energy Commission's National Reactor Testing Station near Arco, Idaho, became the first nuclear reactor to create electricity on 20 December 1951.
The main risk of exposure to depleted uranium is chemical poisoning by uranium oxide rather than radioactivity (uranium being only a weak alpha emitter).
: + 4 HF →  + 2  (500&nbsp;°C, endothermic)
Houses or structures that are over uranium deposits (either natural or man-made slag deposits) may have an increased incidence of exposure to radon gas.
These discoveries led numerous countries to begin working on the development of nuclear weapons and nuclear power.
The molecular laser isotope separation method employs a laser beam of precise energy to sever the bond between uranium-235 and fluorine.
Uranium carbides and uranium nitrides are both relatively inert semimetallic compounds that are minimally soluble in acids, react with water, and can ignite in air to form .
The price of uranium has risen since 2001, so enrichment tailings containing more than 0.35% uranium-235 are being considered for re-enrichment, driving the price of depleted uranium hexafluoride above $130 per kilogram in July 2007 from $5 in 2001.
Binucleated cells with micronuclei, Inhibition of cell cycle kinetics and proliferation; Sister chromatid induction, tumorigenic phenotype
Lise Meitner and her nephew, the physicist Otto Robert Frisch, published the physical explanation in February 1939 and named the process "nuclear fission".
Uranium in a non-complexing aqueous medium (e.g.
: +  →  (350&nbsp;°C, endothermic)
This trend continued through 2006, when expenditure on exploration rocketed to over $774 million, an increase of over 250% compared to 2004.
No exposure assessment data available
This waste product was diverted to the glazing industry, making uranium glazes very inexpensive and abundant.
Extensive measures must be employed to extract the metal from its ore. High-grade ores found in Athabasca Basin deposits in Saskatchewan, Canada can contain up to 23% uranium oxides on average.
Known examples include: , , , and .
This is because a U(VI) cation is able to bind two terminal oxides and three or more carbonates to form anionic complexes.
