Duany and Plater-Zyberk believe that in traditional neighborhoods the nearness of the workplace to retail and restaurant space that provides cafes and convenience stores with daytime customers is an essential component to the successful balance of urban life.
Producers (including developers) have responded rapidly to households’ demands.
The focus is almost exclusively on recreational shopping rather than daily goods.
Housing subdivisions are large tracts of land consisting entirely of newly built residences.
Under Herbert Morrison's 1934 leadership of the London County Council, the first formal proposal was made by the Greater London Regional Planning Committee "to provide a reserve supply of public open spaces and of recreational areas and to establish a green belt or girdle of open space".
He proposed using "accessibility" and "functional open space" as indicators.
Because the advent of sprawl meant more land for lower costs, home owners had more land at their disposal, and the development of the residential lawn after the Second World War became commonplace in suburbs, notably, but not exclusively in North America.
The function and size is also distinct from the strip mall.
''Ceteris paribus, urban intensification which increases population density will reduce per capita car use, with benefits to the global environment, but will also increase concentrations of motor traffic, worsening the local environment in those locations where it occurs.''
But it was not just urbanized areas in the U.S. that lost population and sprawled substantially.
Land for sprawl is often taken from fertile agricultural lands, which are often located immediately surrounding cities; the extent of modern sprawl has consumed a large amount of the most productive agricultural land, as well as forest, desert and other wilderness areas.
In fact, the most polluted air is on crowded highways, where people in suburbs tend to spend more time.
Walkability is an important concept in sustainable urban design.
By the mid-19th century, the first major suburban areas were springing up around London as the city (then the largest in the world) became more overcrowded and unsanitary.
The creation in the early 20th century of country clubs and golf courses completed the rise of lawn culture in the United States.
An influential study in 1989 by Peter Newman and Jeff Kenworthy compared 32 cities across North America, Australia, Europe and Asia.
Lawns now take up a significant amount of land in suburban developments, contributing in no small part to sprawl.
Fast food chains are often built early in areas with low property values where the population is expected to boom and where large traffic is predicted, and set a precedent for future development.
These developments tend to be low-density; the buildings are single-story and there is ample space for parking and access for delivery vehicles.
Some strip malls are undergoing a transformation into Lifestyle centers; entailing investments in common areas and facilities (plazas, cafes) and shifting tenancy from daily goods to recreational shopping.
Living in larger, more spread out spaces generally makes public services more expensive.
This threatens both the quality and quantity of water supplies.
Reviewing the evidence on urban intensification, smart growth and their effects on travel behaviour Melia et al.
Usually, the developer is required to set aside a certain percentage of the developed land for public use, including roads, parks and schools.
Furthermore, they state that the closeness of the workplace to homes also gives people the option of walking or riding a bicycle to work or school and that without this kind of interaction between the different components of life the urban pattern quickly falls apart.
Compact neighborhoods can foster casual social interactions among neighbors, while sprawl creates barriers.
Shopping malls also tend to serve a wider (regional) public and require higher-order infrastructure such as highway access and can have floorspaces in excess of a million square feet (ca.
The issue has at times been debated between the major political parties.
Such developments are typically separated by large green belts, i.e.
She mentions that the lack of a common definition, the need for more quantitative measures "a broader view both in time and space, and greater comparison with alternative urban forms" would be necessary to draw firmer conclusions and conduct more fruitful debates.
Within cities, studies from across many countries (mainly in the developed world) have shown that denser urban areas with greater mixture of land use and better public transport tend to have lower car use than less dense suburban and ex-urban residential areas.
According to data in "Cities and Automobile Dependence" by Kenworthy and Laube (1999), urbanized area population losses occurred while there was an expansion of sprawl between 1970 and 1990 in Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Brussels, Belgium; Copenhagen, Denmark; Frankfurt, Hamburg and Munich, Germany; and Zurich, Switzerland, albeit without the dismantling of infrastructure that occurred in the United States.
* Second, because these people rely more on bicycling, walking and transit than on driving, they tend to focus more of their commerce on locally owned neighborhood businesses that are convenient for them to reach.
tracts of undeveloped land, resulting in an average density far lower even than the low density described in the previous paragraph.
Residents of low-density areas spend a higher proportion of their income on transportation than residents of high density areas.
This character is reflected in the spacious landscaping of the parking lots and walkways and clear signage of the retail establishments.
* First, is that on average the people living the closest to these business districts have more money to spend locally because they don't spend as much on their cars.
Similar developments in the UK are called Retail Parks.
Sprawl increases water pollution as rain water picks up gasoline, motor oil, heavy metals, and other pollutants in runoff from parking lots and roads.
Walkability has many health, environmental, and economic benefits.
New provisions for compensation in the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act allowed local authorities around the country to incorporate green belt proposals in their first development plans.
Businesses in areas of some towns where bicycle use is high are thriving.
In Continental Europe the term "peri-urbanisation" is often used to denote similar dynamics and phenomena, although the term urban sprawl is currently being used by the European Environment Agency.
NumbersUSA, a national organization advocating immigration reduction, also opposes urban sprawl, and its executive director, Roy Beck, specializes in the study of this issue.
Areas to the west of Westminster were increasingly built up for the wealthy, to live in the suburbs of the city.
In 1919, with the expectation of a postwar housing boom, Metropolitan Railway Country Estates Limited was formed and went on to develop estates at Kingsbury Garden Village near Neasden, Wembley Park, Cecil Park and Grange Estate at Pinner and the Cedars Estate at Rickmansworth and create places such as Harrow Garden Village.
These two authors used three geographic rings limited to a  radius around the CBD:  or less, 3 to , and 10 to .
The study has been criticised for its methodology but the main finding that denser cities, particularly in Asia, have lower car use than sprawling cities, particularly in North America, has been largely accepted although the relationship is clearer at the extremes across continents than it is within countries where conditions are more similar.
H.G Wells even predicted in 1902 that within a hundred years most of southern England would have been subsumed into one gigantic conurbation centred in London.
But others associate it with decentralization (spread of population without a well-defined centre), discontinuity (leapfrog development, as defined below), segregation of uses, and so forth.
The term "urban sprawl" was first used in an article in ''The Times'' in 1955 as a negative comment on the state of London's outskirts.
Buildings usually have fewer stories and are spaced farther apart, separated by lawns, landscaping, roads or parking lots.
Many critics concede that sprawl produces some negative externalities; however there is some dispute about the most effective way to reduce these negative effects.
He argued that a better way to identify sprawl was to use indicators rather than characteristics because this was a more flexible and less arbitrary method.
In addition to describing a particular form of urbanization, the term also relates to the social and environmental consequences associated with this development.
Another prominent form of retail development in areas characterized by sprawl is the shopping mall.
What constitutes sprawl may be considered a matter of degree and will always be somewhat subjective under many definitions of the term.
By the early twentieth century then, amid increasing middle-class affluence, large low-density suburbs of semi-detached houses had sprung up all around the city, doubling the area of built-up London in the interwar period alone, despite the population increase being just 10 percent.
Factors influencing walkability include the presence or absence and quality of footpaths, sidewalks or other pedestrian right-of-ways, traffic and road conditions, land use patterns, building accessibility, and safety, among others.
The Sierra Club, the San Francisco Bay Area's Greenbelt Alliance, 1000 Friends of Oregon and counterpart organizations nationwide, and other environmental organizations oppose sprawl and support investment in existing communities.
Those not opposed to low density development argue that traffic intensities tend to be less, traffic speeds faster and, as a result, ambient air pollution is lower.
Other problems include flooding, which results from increased impervious surfaces for roads and parking; increased temperatures from heat islands, which leads to a significantly increased risk of mortality in elderly populations;
They are also referred to as developments.
This usually holds true even after controlling for socio-economic factors such as differences in household composition and income.
However, other academics such as Reid Ewing argue that while a large segment of people prefer suburban living that does not mean that sprawl itself is preferred by consumers, and that a large variety of suburban environments satisfy consumer demand, including areas that mitigate the worst effects of sprawl.
Strip malls consisting mostly of big box stores or category killers are sometimes called "power centers" (U.S.).
Today, the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area is denser than any other in the country.
One of the primary debates around suburban sprawl is the extent to which sprawl is the result of consumer preference.
Gordon and his frequent collaborator, Harry Richardson have argued that "The principle of consumer sovereignty has played a powerful role in the increase in America’s wealth and in the welfare of its citizens.
This is a 20th and 21st century phenomenon generated by the current custom of requiring a developer to provide subdivision infrastructure as a condition of development.
Providing services such as water, sewers, and electricity is also more expensive per household in less dense areas.
The codification of Green Belt policy and its extension to areas other than London came with the historic Circular 42/55 inviting local planning authorities to consider the establishment of Green Belts.
Private developers generally do not have such power (although they can sometimes find local governments willing to help), and often choose to develop on the tracts that happen to be for sale at the time they want to build, rather than pay extra or wait for a more appropriate location.
Subdivisions often incorporate curved roads and cul-de-sacs.
Overall density is often lowered by "leapfrog development".
The term urban sprawl is highly politicized, and almost always has negative connotations.
Eric Schlosser, in his book ''Fast Food Nation'', argues that fast food chains accelerate suburban sprawl and help set its tone with their expansive parking lots, flashy signs, and plastic architecture (65).
The international cases of sprawl often draw into question the definition of the term and what conditions are necessary for urban growth to be considered sprawl.
It was again included in an advisory Greater London Plan prepared by Patrick Abercrombie in 1944.
According to Nancy Chin, a large number of effects of sprawl have been discussed in the academic literature in some detail; however, the most contentious issues can be reduced "to an older set of arguments, between those advocating a planning approach and those advocating the efficiency of the market."
However, the relationship between higher densities and increased social pathology has been largely discredited.
This point was generally reached when the city reached a certain stage of economic development.
Planning policies that increase population densities in urban areas do tend to reduce car use, but the effect is a weak one, so doubling the population density of a particular area will not halve the frequency or distance of car use.
Spatial mismatch is defined as the situation where poor urban, predominantly minority citizens are left without easy access to entry-level jobs, as a result of increasing job sprawl and limited transportation options to facilitate a reverse commute to the suburbs.
Ewing has also argued that suburban development does not, per se constitute sprawl depending on the form it takes, although Gordon & Richardson have argued that the term is sometimes used synonymously with suburbanization in a pejorative way.
Then, with continued economic growth and the expanding networks of public transport, people (particularly the middle class) would then slowly migrate towards the suburbs, gradually softening the population density gradient.
A dramatic increase in the city's urban sprawl began in the 19th century, when labourers flocked from the countryside to work in the new factories that were then springing up.
The first urban growth boundary in the U.S. was in Fayette County, Kentucky in 1958.
Some downtowns have responded to this challenge by building shopping centres of their own (Frieden and Sagelyn 1989).
The Brookings Institution has published multiple articles on the topic.
In addition, the reduced physical activity implied by increased automobile use has negative health consequences.
It is argued that human beings, while social animals, need significant amounts of social space or they become agitated and aggressive.
One of the major environmental problems associated with sprawl is habitat loss and subsequent reduction in biodiversity.
In Mexico, for example, new housing development at the urban periphery is single-use but not low-density.
Due to the pejorative meaning of the term, few openly support urban sprawl as such.
New Urbanist architectural firm Duany Plater-Zyberk & Company claim that housing subdivisions "are sometimes called villages, towns, and neighbourhoods by their developers, which is misleading since those terms denote places that are not exclusively residential."
Duany Plater Zyberk & Company believe that this reinforces a destructive pattern of growth in an endless quest to move away from the sprawl that only results in creating more of it.
However, evaluating walkability is challenging because it requires the consideration of many subjective factors.
There is widespread disagreement about what constitutes sprawl and how to quantify it.
Shopping malls are often detrimental to downtown shopping centres of nearby cities since the shopping malls act as a surrogate for the city centre (Crawford 1992).
The term has become a rallying cry for managing urban growth.
In 2002, these 37 urbanized areas supported around 40% of the total American population.
'''Urban sprawl''' or '''suburban sprawl''' describes the expansion of human populations away from central urban areas into low-density, monofunctional and usually car-dependent communities, in a process called suburbanization.
Presently, the NRI classifies approximately 100,000 more square kilometres (40,000 square miles) (an area approximately the size of Kentucky) as developed than the Census Bureau classifies as urban.
Critics of sprawl maintain that sprawl erodes quality of life.
Although the effects can be mitigated through careful maintenance of native vegetation, the process of ecological succession and public education, sprawl represents one of the primary threats to biodiversity.
Initially, the surplus land was managed by the Land Committee, and, from the 1880s, the land was developed and sold to domestic buyers in places like Willesden Park Estate, Cecil Park, near Pinner and at Wembley Park.
It has been shown to be a growing trend in America's metropolitan areas.
It is criticized for causing environmental degradation, and intensifying segregation and undermining the vitality of existing urban areas and attacked on aesthetic grounds.
Sprawl significantly predicts chronic medical conditions and health-related quality of life, but not mental health disorders.
One confounding factor, which has been the subject of many studies, is residential self-selection: people who prefer to drive tend to move towards low density suburbs, whereas people who prefer to walk, cycle or use transit tend to move towards higher density urban areas, better served by public transport.
James Howard Kunstler has argued that poor aesthetics in suburban environments make them "places not worth caring about", and that they lack a sense of history and identity.
Sprawl tends to replace public spaces with private spaces such as fenced-in backyards.
Ewing's approach has been criticized for assuming that sprawl is defined by negative characteristics.
Also, bicycles are permitted in public transit.
However, Los Angeles has become more dense over the past half-century, principally due to small lot zoning and a high demand for housing due to population growth.
Gordon & Richardson for example argue that the costs of building new public transit is disproportionate to the actual environmental or economic benefits, that land use restrictions will increase the cost of housing and restrict economic opportunity, that infill possibilities are too limited to make a major difference to the structure of American cities, and that the government would need to coerce most people to live in a way that they do not want to in order to substantially change the impact of sprawl.
Bicycles and transit are contributing in two important ways toward the success of businesses:
A major catalyst in the growth in urban sprawl came from the opening of the Metropolitan Railway in the 1860s.
The American Institute of Architects and the American Planning Association recommend against sprawl and instead endorses smart, mixed-use development, including buildings in close proximity to one another that cut down on automobile use, save energy, and promote walkable, healthy, well-designed neighborhoods.
It is often the result of urban disinvestment, the geographic freedom of employment location allowed by predominantly car-dependent commuting patterns of many American suburbs, and many companies' desire to locate in low-density areas that are often more affordable and offer potential for expansion.
In areas of sprawl commercial use is generally segregated from other uses.
The concept of Circular flow land use management has been developed in Europe to reduce land take by urban sprawl through promoting inner-city and brownfield development.
This refers to a situation where commercial, residential, institutional and industrial areas are separated from one another.
The degree to which different land uses are mixed together is often used as an indicator of sprawl in studies of the subject.
For example, some commentators measure sprawl only with the average number of residential units per acre in a given area.
Reid Ewing has shown that sprawl has typically been characterized as urban developments exhibiting at least one of the following characteristics: low-density or single-use development, strip development, scattered development, and/or leapfrog development (areas of development interspersed with vacant land).
Residents of more sprawling areas are generally at greater risk of dying in a car crash due to increased exposure to driving.
Nonetheless, some urban areas like Detroit have expanded geographically even while losing population.
Some, such as Peter Gordon, a professor of planning and economics at the University of Southern California's School of Urban Planning and Development, argue that most households have shown a clear preference for low-density living and that this is a fact that should not be ignored by planners.
It is a giant step backward to interfere with this effective process unless the benefits of intervention substantially exceed its cost."
Some studies have found that, when self-selection is controlled for, the built environment has no significant effect on travel behaviour.
Urban sprawl may be partly responsible for the decline in social capital in the United States.
This compares to the year 1998 - 23.3%, 34.2%, and 42.5% in those respective rings.
However, air in modern suburbs is not necessarily cleaner than air in urban neighborhoods.
Consequently, large tracts of land are devoted to a single use and are segregated from one another by open space, infrastructure, or other barriers.
Some people believe that increased population density encourages crime and anti-social behavior.
However, London had been sprawling out of its medieval confines within the City since the 18th century, when the city experienced its first great urban surge.
In the U.S. and Canada, these vary from strip malls, which refer to collections of buildings sharing a common parking lot, usually built on a high-capacity roadway with commercial functions (i.e., a "strip").
This does not necessarily imply that suburban sprawl causes high car use, however.
Others, for example Kenneth T. Jackson have argued that since low-density housing is often (notably in the U.S.A.) subsidized in a variety of ways, consumers' professed preferences for this type of living may be over-stated.
In Sydney, the ratio of the price of a house relative to income is 9:1.
In the past, when a local government built all the streets in a given location, the town could expand without interruption and with a coherent circulation system, because it had condemnation power.
For example, there is considerable land consumed by urban sprawl in Mexico City, in the national capital region that surrounds Delhi, in Beijing, the new desert developments of 6 October City, and New Cairo to the west and east of Cairo (respectively), in Antananarivo (the capital of Madagascar), in Karachi, in Islamabad Capital Territory, in Johannesburg, in Mumbai and in eastern parts of South Africa.
Wendell Cox and Randal O'Toole are leading figures supporting lower density development.
American public policy analyst Randal O'Toole of the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank, has argued that sprawl, thanks to the automobile, gave rise to affordable suburban neighborhoods for middle class and lower class individuals, including non-whites.
However, some market oriented commentators believe that the current patterns of sprawl are in fact the result of distortions of the free market.
These subdivisions may offer only a few places to enter and exit the development, causing traffic to use high volume collector streets.
While cities such as Los Angeles are well known for sprawling suburbs, policies and public opinion are changing.
Many parts of the San Francisco Bay Area have also adopted urban growth boundaries; 25 of its cities and 5 of its counties have urban growth boundaries.
This trend has slowed somewhat in recent years, as more people have regained an interest in urban living.
At the same time, the urban cores of these and nearly all other major cities in the United States, Western Europe, and Japan that did not annex new territory experienced the related phenomena of falling household size and, particularly in the U.S., "white flight", sustaining population losses.
On average, suburban residents generate more per capita pollution and carbon emissions than their urban counterparts because of their increased driving.
Kansas City, Missouri is often cited as an example of ideal low-density development, with congestion below the mean and home prices below comparable Midwestern cities.
As a result, the places where people live, work, shop, and recreate are far from one another, usually to the extent that walking, transit use and bicycling are impractical, so all these activities generally require an automobile.
In London, this point was reached in the first half of the 19th century, in Paris toward the end of the century and in New York City at the turn of the 20th.
Many of these were adopted with the support and advocacy of Greenbelt Alliance, a non-profit land conservation and urban planning organization.
Currently, according to the 2000 Census, approximately 2.6 percent of the U.S. land area is urban.
The RAC estimates that the average cost of operating a car in the UK is £5,000 a year, most of which stems from financing costs and depreciation.
Los Angeles was one of the world's first low density urbanized areas, resulting from its large geographic metropolitan area.
Arguments opposing urban sprawl include concrete effects such as health and environmental issues as well as abstract consequences including neighborhood vitality.
After the creation of this boundary, the population density of the urbanized area increased somewhat (from 1,135 in 1970 to 1,290 per km² in 2000).
Urban sprawl is disruptive to native flora & fauna and introduces invasive plants into their environments.
Kneebone's study showed the following nationwide breakdown for the largest metropolitan areas in 2006: 21.3% of jobs located in the inner ring, 33.6% of jobs in the 3-10 mile ring, and 45.1% in the 10-35 mile ring.
Transit-oriented development, in which higher-density mixed-use areas are permitted or encouraged near transit stops is encouraging more compact development in certain areas-particularly those with light and heavy rail transit systems.
Numerous studies link increased population density with increased aggression.
The study shows CBD employment share shrinking, and job growth focused in the suburban and exurban outer metropolitan rings.
Definitions of sprawl vary; researchers in the field acknowledge that the term lacks precision.
Specific measurements of what constitutes low-density is culturally relative; for example, in the United States 2-4 houses per acre might be considered low-density while in the UK 8-12 would still be considered low-density.
He notes that efforts to combat sprawl often result in subsidizing development in wealthier and whiter neighborhoods while condemning and demolishing poorer minority neighborhoods.
These findings led them to propose the paradox of intensification, which states:
All trips, no matter how short, must enter the collector road in a suburban system.
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death for Americans between the ages of five and twenty-four and is the leading accident-related cause for all age groups.
In 2005, author Michael Stoll defined job sprawl simply as jobs located more than  radius from the CBD, and measured the concept based on year 2000 U.S. Census data.
The impact of low density development in many communities is that developed or "urbanized" land is increasing at a faster rate than the population is growing.
Those who criticize sprawl tend to argue that sprawl creates more problems than it solves and should be more heavily regulated, while proponents argue that markets are producing the economically most efficient settlements possible in most situations, even if problems may exist.
In the years following World War II, when vehicle ownership was becoming widespread, public health officials recommended the health benefits of suburbs due to soot and industrial fumes in the city center.
Urban sprawl has class and racial implications in many parts of the world; the relative homogeneity of many sprawl developments may reinforce class and racial divides through residential segregation.
Sprawl leads to increased driving, and increased driving leads to vehicle emissions that contribute to air pollution and its attendant negative impacts on human health.
Job sprawl is another land use symptom of urban sprawl and car-dependent communities.
Since car usage becomes endemic and public transport often becomes significantly more expensive, city planners are forced to build highway and parking infrastructure, which in turn decreases taxable land and revenue, and decreases the desirability of the area adjacent to such structures.
Thus urban sprawl is subsidized by the tax code.
More recent studies using more sophisticated methodologies have generally refuted these findings: density, land use and public transport accessibility can influence travel behaviour, although social and economic factors, particularly household income, usually exert a stronger influence.
Job sprawl has been documented and measured in various ways.
Other ways of measuring the concept with more detailed rings around the CBD include a 2001 article by Edward Glaeser and Elizabeth Kneebone's 2009 article, which show that sprawling urban peripheries are gaining employment while areas closer to the CBD are losing jobs.
As forest cover is cleared and covered with impervious surfaces (concrete and asphalt) in the suburbs, rainfall is less effectively absorbed into the groundwater aquifers.
(See  demographia's report.)
Gordon & Richardson have argued that the conversion of agricultural land to urban use is not a problem due to the increasing efficiency of agricultural production; they argue that aggregate agricultural production is still more than sufficient to meet global food needs despite the expansion of urban land use.
Spatial mismatch is related to job sprawl and economic environmental justice.
(2011) found support for the arguments of both supporters and opponents of smart growth measures to counteract urban sprawl.
defined sprawl as "uncoordinated growth: the expansion of community without concern for its consequences, in short, unplanned, incremental urban growth which is often regarded unsustainable."
Urban sprawl is not limited to developed countries, and may be more prevalent in developing countries.
The state of Oregon enacted a law in 1973 limiting the area urban areas could occupy, through urban growth boundaries.
A review by Czech and colleagues finds that urbanization endangers more species and is more geographically ubiquitous in the mainland United States than any other human activity.
Suburban districts also sprung up around the city centre to accommodate those who wanted to escape the squalid conditions of the industrial town.
Due to the larger area consumed by sprawling suburbs compared to urban neighborhoods, more farmland and wildlife habitats are displaced per resident.
This term refers to the relationship, or lack thereof, between subdivisions.
The difference in the NRI classification is that it includes rural development, which by definition cannot be considered to be "urban" sprawl.
They argue that sprawl generates enough benefits for consumers that they continue to choose it as a form of development over alternative forms, as demonstrated by the continued focus on sprawl type developments by most developers.
wrote in 2010 that despite a dispute over the precise definition of sprawl there is a "general consensus that urban sprawl is characterized by an unplanned and uneven pattern of growth, driven by multitude of processes and leading to inefficient resource utilization."
