Among the sizeable Armenian community in Montevideo, the dominant religion is Christianity, specifically Armenian Apostolic.
The book continues to influence young writers.
Uruguay is also the third-best ranked in the world in e-Participation.
The Port of Montevideo, handling over 1.1 million containers annually, is the most advanced container terminal in South America.
Venezuela has a deal to sell Uruguay up to 40,000 barrels of oil a day under preferential terms.
Despite this agreement, Colorado rule was threatened by the failed Tricolor Revolution in 1875 and  Revolution of the Quebracho in 1886.
A prominent exponent of Uruguayan art was abstract painter and sculptor Carlos Páez Vilaró.
Uruguay won gold at the 1924 Paris Olympic Games and again in 1928 in Amsterdam.
The landscape features mostly rolling plains and low hill ranges (''cuchillas'') with a fertile coastal lowland.
The port of Nueva Palmira is a major regional merchandise transfer point and houses both private and government-run terminals.
The candombe is a folk dance performed at Carnival, especially Uruguayan Carnival, mainly by Uruguayans of African ancestry.
The formal coalition ended in November 2002, when the Blancos withdrew their ministers from the cabinet, although the Blancos continued to support the Colorados on most issues.
Uruguay has a largely uniform temperature throughout the year, with summers being tempered by winds off the Atlantic; severe cold in winter is unknown.
Blending elements of art and nature the work of the landscape architect  has also earned international prominence.
''El País'', the paper of the rival Blanco Party, has the largest circulation.
Nine straddle cranes allow for 80 to 100 movements per hour.
The first Sanguinetti administration implemented economic reforms and consolidated democracy following the country's years under military rule.
Artigas organized the Federal League under his protection, consisting of six provinces, four of which later became part of Argentina.
Pressure groups (consisting mainly of businessmen, ''hacendados'', and industrialists) were organized and had a strong influence on government.
Uruguay has no official religion; church and state are officially separated, and religious freedom is guaranteed.
Montevideo, which was used as a supply station by the Brazilian navy, experienced a period of prosperity and relative calm during the war.
The era from independence until 1904 was marked by regular military conflicts and civil wars between the Blanco and Colorado Parties.
Carrasco Airport was initially inaugurated in 1947 and in 2009, Puerta del Sur, the airport owner and operator, with an investment of $165 million, commissioned Rafael Viñoly Architects to expand and modernize the existing facilities with a spacious new passenger terminal to increase capacity and spur commercial growth and tourism in the region.
The legislative power is constituted by the General Assembly, composed of two chambers: the Chamber of Representatives, consisting of 99 members representing the 19 departments, elected based on proportional representation; and the Chamber of Senators, consisting of 31 members, 30 of whom are elected for a five-year term by proportional representation and the Vice-President, who presides over the chamber.
The constitutional government of General Lorenzo Batlle y Grau (1868–72) suppressed Revolution of the Lances by the Blancos.
In accordance with the 1851 treaties, Brazil intervened militarily in Uruguay as often as it deemed necessary.
José Enrique Rodó (1871–1917), a modernist, is considered Uruguay's most significant literary figure.
Notable amongst Latin American playwrights is Florencio Sánchez (1875–1910), who wrote plays about contemporary social problems that are still performed today.
Under the influence of the innovative Colorado reformer José Batlle y Ordóñez (1903–1911), complete separation of church and state was introduced with the new constitution of 1917.
Official statistics from Uruguay's Agriculture and Livestock Ministry indicate that meat and sheep farming in Uruguay occupies 59.6% of the land.
Folk music is called canto popular and includes some guitar players and singers such as Alfredo Zitarrosa, José Carbajal "El Sabalero", Daniel Viglietti, Los Olimareños, and Numa Moraes.
Surfaced roads connect Montevideo to the other urban centers in the country, the main highways leading to the border and neighboring cities.
In 1806 and 1807, the British army attempted to seize Buenos Aires and Montevideo as part of the Napoleonic Wars.
In response to the annexation, the Thirty-Three Orientals, led by Juan Antonio Lavalleja, declared independence on 25 August 1825 supported by the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata (present-day Argentina).
By 1879, the total population of the country was over 438,500.
In December 2010, Uruguayan Major General Gloodtdofsky, was appointed Chief Military Observer and head of the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan.
Montevideo rewarded Brazil's support by signing treaties that confirmed Brazil's right to intervene in Uruguay's internal affairs.
Other languages include Portuguese and Portuñol (a mixture of Spanish and Portuguese).
A wave of bands appeared in Montevideo, including Los Shakers, Los Mockers, Los Iracundos, Los Moonlights, and Los Malditos, who became major figures in the so-called Uruguayan Invasion of Argentina.
Telecommunications in Uruguay are more developed than in most other Latin American countries, being the first country in the Americas to achieve complete digital telephony coverage in 1997.
Its natural harbor soon developed into a commercial area competing with Río de la Plata's capital, Buenos Aires.
The indigenous peoples' fierce resistance to conquest, combined with the absence of gold and silver, limited their settlement in the region during the 16th and 17th centuries.
This division of power lasted until the President Jose Batlle y Ordonez instituted his political reforms which caused the last uprising by Blancos in 1904 that ended with the Battle of Masoller and death of Blanco leader Aparicio Saravia.
A transition period (1886–90) followed, during which politicians began recovering lost ground and some civilian participation in government occurred.
In 1816, a force of 10,000 Portuguese troops invaded the Banda Oriental from Brazil; they took Montevideo in January 1817.
Uruguay's exports markets have been diversified in order to reduce dependency on Argentina and Brazil.
"Ceibo" or Erythrina crista is the national flower in Uruguay.
The Colorado effort to reduce Blancos to only three departments caused a Blanco uprising of 1897, that ended with creation of 16 departments out of which Blancos now had control over six.
Sweet treats, including ''crème caramel'' with ''dulce de leche'' and ''alfajores'' (shortbread cookies), are favorites for desserts or afternoon snacks.
Uruguay is a unitary state: justice, education, health, security, foreign policy and defense are all administered nationwide.
The Colorados favored the exiled Argentine liberal Unitarios, many of whom had taken refuge in Montevideo while the Blanco president Manuel Oribe was a close friend of the Argentine ruler Manuel de Rosas.
Most Uruguayans of European ancestry are descendants of 19th and 20th century immigrants from Spain and Italy (about one-quarter of the population is of Italian origin), and to a lesser degree France, Germany and Britain.
Nevertheless, a Carlos Gardel museum was established in 1999 in Valle Edén, near Tacuarembó.
Football is the most popular sport in Uruguay.
In 1865, the Triple Alliance was formed by the emperor of Brazil, the president of Argentina, and the Colorado general Venancio Flores, the Uruguayan head of government whom they both had helped to gain power.
Uruguay has two uncontested boundary disputes with Brazil, over Isla Brasilera and the  Invernada River region near Masoller.
The last passenger train rolled into Montevideo on 2 January 1988.
Enlistment is voluntary in peacetime, but the government has the authority to conscript in emergencies.
Commercial ties between the two countries have expanded substantially in recent years, with the signing of a bilateral investment treaty in 2004 and a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement in January 2007.
In 2014, Tabaré Vázquez was elected to a non-consecutive second presidential term, which began on March 1, 2015.
The conflict would last 13 years and become known as the Guerra Grande (the Great War).
In 2004, Uruguayans elected Tabaré Vázquez as president, while giving the Broad Front a majority in both houses of Parliament.
Uruguay then became a zone of contention between the Spanish and Portuguese empires.
Uruguay ranked 27th in the Freedom House "Freedom in the World" index.
The Administración de Ferrocarriles del Estado is the autonomous agency in charge of rail transport and the maintenance of the railroad network.
The system is government-owned, and there have been controversial proposals to partially privatize since the 1990s.
Cargo trains would continue for loads more than 120 tons, but bus transportation became the "economic" alternative for travellers.
Rock and roll first broke into Uruguayan audiences with the arrival of the Beatles and other British bands in the early 1960s.
The tradition of the gaucho has been an important element in the art and folklore of both Uruguay and Argentina.
Popular Uruguayan rock bands include La Vela Puerca, No Te Va Gustar, El Cuarteto de Nos, Once Tiros, La Trampa, Chalamadre, Snake, Buitres, and Cursi.
Uruguay's rate of population growth is much lower than in other Latin American countries.
It is regarded as a high-income country (top group) by the UN.
In 2007, Uruguay had cattle herds totalling 12 million head, making it the country with the highest number of cattle per capita at 3.8.
In 1933, Terra organized a coup d'état, dissolving the General Assembly and governing by decree.
Under pressure from organized labor and the National Party, Baldomir advocated free elections, freedom of the press, and a new constitution.
On 15 March 2011, Uruguay became the seventh South American nation to officially recognize a Palestinian state, although there was no specification for the Palestinian state's borders as part of the recognition.
The siege of Montevideo, which began in February 1843, would last nine years.
Nearly 95% of Uruguay's electricity comes from renewable energy.
Locally produced soft drinks, beer, and wine are commonly served, as is ''clericó'', a mixture of fruit juice and wine.
A rivalry between the port of Montevideo and the port of Buenos Aires, dating back to the times of the Spanish Empire, has been described as a "port war".
The first international match outside the British Isles was played between Uruguay and Argentina in Montevideo in July 1902.
Montevideo was founded as a military stronghold by the Spanish in the early 18th century, signifying the competing claims over the region.
The Post-Impressionist painter Pedro Figari achieved international renown for his pastel studies of subjects in Montevideo and the countryside.
As of February 2010, Uruguay had 1,136 military personnel deployed to Haiti in support of MINUSTAH and 1,360 deployed in support of MONUC in the Congo.
Uruguay won the inaugural tournament on home soil in 1930 and again in 1950, famously defeating home favourites Brazil in the final match.
While unemployment is still at a low level, the IMF observed a rise in inflationary pressures, and Uruguay's GDP expanded by 10.4% for the first half of 2010.
Colorado Party candidate Jorge Batlle, aided by the support of the National Party, defeated Broad Front candidate Tabaré Vázquez.
The siege of Montevideo was lifted and the Guerra Grande finally came to an end.
One of the most famous tangos, "La cumparsita" (1917), was written by the Uruguayan composer Gerardo Matos Rodríguez.
This led to the 500-day-long Cisplatine War.
The Triple Alliance declared war on the Paraguayan leader Francisco Solano López and the resulting Paraguayan War ended with the invasion of Paraguay and its defeat by the armies of the three countries.
The dramatic shift, taking less than ten years and without government funding, lowered electricity costs and slashed the country's carbon footprint.
In statements, the Uruguayan government indicated its firm commitment to the Middle East peace process, but refused to specify borders "to avoid interfering in an issue that would require a bilateral agreement".
Around 200 Uruguayans are known to have been killed and disappeared,  with hundreds more illegally detained and tortured during the 12-year civil-military rule of 1973 to 1985.
''The Economist'' named Uruguay "country of the year" in 2013, acknowledging the innovative policy of legalizing the production, sale and consumption of cannabis.
Uruguay won its independence between 1811 and 1828, following a four-way struggle between Spain, Portugal, Argentina and Brazil.
The first permanent Spanish settlement was founded in 1624 at Soriano on the Río Negro.
A dense fluvial network covers the country, consisting of four river basins, or deltas: the Río de la Plata Basin, the Uruguay River, the Laguna Merín and the Río Negro.
Montevideo was founded by the Spanish in the early 18th century as a military stronghold in the country.
Drawing on Switzerland and its use of the initiative, the Uruguayan Constitution also allows citizens to repeal laws or to change the constitution by popular initiative, which culminates in a nationwide referendum.
His inauguration coincided with the effects of the Great Depression, and the social climate became tense as a result of the lack of jobs.
PLUNA was the flag carrier of Uruguay, and was headquartered in Carrasco.
The Laguna del Sauce Airport, located  from Punta del Este, was remodeled in 1997, and runways have been renovated through a private investment concession.
A 2008 survey by the INE of Uruguay showed Catholicism as the main religion, with 45.7% of the population; 9.0% are non-Catholic Christians, 0.6% are Animists or Umbandists (an Afro-Brazilian religion), and 0.4% Jewish.
A 2010 Latinobarómetro poll found that, within Latin America, Uruguayans are among the most supportive of democracy and by far the most satisfied with the way democracy works in their country.
Batlle had two terms (1903–07 and 1911–15) during which, taking advantage of the nation's stability and growing economic prosperity, he instituted major reforms, such as a welfare program, government participation in many facets of the economy, and a plural executive.
''Búsqueda'' is Uruguay's most important weekly news magazine and serves as an important forum for political and economic analysis.
As would be expected with its abundance of water, high humidity and fog are common.
Since May 2009, homosexuals have been allowed to serve openly in the military after the defence minister signed a decree stating that military recruitment policy would no longer discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.
There are two Montevideo-based football clubs, Nacional and Peñarol, who are successful in domestic and South American tournaments and have won three Intercontinental Cups each.
Montevideo was occupied by a British force from February to September 1807.
With  of continental land and  of jurisdictional water and small river islands, Uruguay is the second smallest sovereign nation in South America (after Suriname) and the third smallest territory (French Guiana is the smallest).
The small numbers of Uruguay's Indians and their fierce resistance to proselytism reduced the influence of the ecclesiastical authorities.
There were confrontations in which police and leftists died.
Diego Forlán was presented with the Golden Ball award as the best player of the 2010 tournament.
As a result, Artigas broke with Buenos Aires and besieged Montevideo, taking the city in early 1815.
The political scene in Uruguay became split between two parties: the conservative Blancos (Whites) headed by the second President Manuel Oribe, representing the agricultural interests of the countryside; and the liberal Colorados (Reds) led by the first President Fructuoso Rivera, representing the business interests of Montevideo.
The Brazilian intervention in May 1851 on behalf of the Colorados, combined with the uprising, changed the situation and Oribe was defeated.
However, these border disputes have not prevented both countries from having friendly diplomatic relations and strong economic ties.
This method has been used several times over the past 15 years: to confirm a law renouncing prosecution of members of the military who violated human rights during the military regime (1973–1985); to stop privatization of public utilities companies; to defend pensioners' incomes; and to protect water resources.
Uruguay terminated the agreement in 2006 following the early repayment of its debt but maintained a number of the policy commitments.
Uruguay exported 1,414 football players during the 2000s, almost as many players as Brazil and Argentina.
Uruguay's long tradition of freedom of the press was severely curtailed during the years of military dictatorship.
Uruguay's best-known contemporary writer is Eduardo Galeano, author of ''Las venas abiertas de América Latina'' (1971; "Open Veins of Latin America") and the trilogy ''Memoria del fuego'' (1982–87; "Memory of Fire").
Uruguay is ranked first in Latin America in democracy, peace, lack of corruption, e-government, and is first in South America when it comes to press freedom, size of the middle class and prosperity.
Uruguayans have access to more than 100 private daily and weekly newspapers, more than 100 radio stations, and some 20 terrestrial television channels, and cable TV is widely available.
This establishment of the policy of co-participation represented the search for a new formula of compromise, based on the coexistence of the party in power and the party in opposition.
Uruguay has won the Copa América (an international tournament for South American nations and guests) more than any other country, their victory in 2011 making a total of 15 Copa Américas won.
According to FAOSTAT, Uruguay is one of the world's largest producers of soybeans (9th), greasy wool (12th), horse meat (14th), beeswax (14th), and quinces (17th).
In 2004, the Uruguayan musician and actor Jorge Drexler won an Academy Award for composing the song "Al otro lado del río" from the movie ''The Motorcycle Diaries'', which narrated the life of Che Guevara.
Often locals can be seen carrying leather cases containing a thermos of hot water, the traditional hollowed gourd called a ''mate'' or ''guampa'', a metal straw called a ''bombilla'', and the dried yerba mate leaves.
For most of Uruguay's history, the Partido Colorado has been in government.
So far, the disputed areas remain ''de facto'' under Brazilian control, with little to no actual effort by Uruguay to assert its claims.
Government forces emerged victorious, leading to the end of the co-participation politics that had begun in 1872.
Popular bands of the Uruguayan Invasion sang in English.
30.1% reported believing in a god, but not belonging to any religion, while 14% were Atheist or Agnostic.
From 1963 to 1985, an estimated 320,000 Uruguayans emigrated.
appropriate, in areas where on-site sanitation is used.
However, in the Uruguayan general election, 2009, the Broad Front won an absolute majority in Parliamentary elections, and José Mujica of the Broad Front defeated Luis Alberto Lacalle of the Blancos to win the presidency.
In the rankings for June 2012, Uruguay were ranked the second best team in the world, according to the FIFA world rankings, their highest ever point in football history, falling short of the first spot to the Spain national football team.
The members of the Supreme Court are elected by the General Assembly; the members of the Bench are selected by the Supreme Court with the consent of the Senate; and the judges are directly assigned by the Supreme Court.
A migration law passed in 2008 gives immigrants the same rights and opportunities that nationals have, with the requisite of proving a monthly income of $650.
Since bilateral relations with Argentina are considered a priority, Uruguay denies clearance to British naval vessels bound for the Falkland Islands, and prevents them from calling in at Uruguayan territories and ports for supplies and fuel.
It ranks second in the region on economic freedom, income equality, per-capita income and inflows of FDI.
Uruguayans of many classes and backgrounds enjoy reading ''historietas'', comic books that often blend humour and fantasy with thinly veiled social criticism.
Argentina and Brazil are Uruguay's most important trading partners: Argentina accounted for 20% of total imports in 2009.
The nation's first constitution was adopted on 18 July 1830.
Between the years 2007 and 2009, Uruguay was the only country in the Americas that did not technically experience a recession (two consecutive downward quarters).
The guitar is the preferred musical instrument, and in a popular traditional contest called the ''payada'' two singers, each with a guitar, take turns improvising verses to the same tune.
In 2010, Uruguay's export-oriented agricultural sector contributed to 9.3% of the GDP and employed 13% of the workforce.
President Jorge Pacheco declared a state of emergency in 1968, followed by a further suspension of civil liberties in 1972.
The Brazilian Empire became independent from Portugal in 1822.
Casapueblo is a "livable sculpture" and draws thousands of visitors from around the world.
In 1845, Britain and France intervened against Rosas to restore commerce to normal levels in the region.
In 1938, general elections were held and Terra's brother-in-law, General Alfredo Baldomir, was elected president.
Rivera declared war on Rosas in 1839.
Uruguay has a small but growing film industry, and movies such as ''Whisky'' by Juan Pablo Rebella and Pablo Stoll (2004), Marcelo Bertalmío's ''Los días con Ana'' (2000; "Days with Ana") and Ana Díez's ''Paisito'' (2008), about the 1973 military coup, have earned international honours.
A quarter of the population is less than 15 years old and about a sixth are aged 60 and older.
Many of its provisions were suspended in 1973, but re-established in 1985.
The mean annual precipitation is generally greater than , decreasing with distance from the sea coast, and is relatively evenly distributed throughout the year.
Although it sells only about 16,000 copies a week, its estimated readership exceeds 50,000.
The 1999 national elections were held under a new electoral system established by a 1996 constitutional amendment.
Uruguay is home to an estimated 3.42 million people, of whom 1.8 million live in the metropolitan area of its capital and largest city, Montevideo.
A new constitution was promulgated in 1934, transferring powers to the president.
Freedom of speech and media are guaranteed by the constitution, with qualifications for inciting violence or "insulting the nation".
The United States and Uruguay have also cooperated on military matters, with both countries playing significant roles in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Their efforts proved ineffective and, by 1849, tired of the war, both withdrew after signing a treaty favorable to Rosas.
People of African descent make up an even smaller proportion of the total.
Most farms (25,500 out of 39,120) are family-managed; beef and wool represent the main activities and main source of income for 65% of them, followed by vegetable farming at 12%, dairy farming at 11%, hogs at 2%, and poultry also at 2%.
The growing, use, and sale of cannabis was legalized on 11 December 2013, making Uruguay the first country in the world to fully legalize marijuana.
Low commodity prices and economic difficulties in Uruguay's main export markets (starting in Brazil with the devaluation of the real, then in Argentina in 2002), caused a severe recession; the economy contracted by 11%, unemployment climbed to 21%, and the percentage of Uruguayans in poverty rose to over 30%.
The economy saw a steep upswing, above all in livestock raising and exports.
In 1949, the government nationalized the railways, along with the electric trams and the Montevideo Waterworks Company.
The ''Admiral Graf Spee'' took refuge in Montevideo, claiming sanctuary in a neutral port, but was later ordered out.
He never lived in Uruguay.Bocaz, Luis (March 1986).
Most were killed in Argentina and other neighbouring countries, with 36 of them having been killed in Uruguay.
'''Uruguay''' (; ), officially the '''Oriental Republic of Uruguay''' (), is a country in the southeastern region of South America.
Besides stressing the importance of upholding spiritual over materialistic values, it also stresses resisting cultural dominance by Europe and the United States.
Construction of a controversial pulp paper mill in 2007, on the Uruguayan side of the Uruguay River, caused protests in Argentina over fears that it would pollute the environment and lead to diplomatic tensions between the two countries.
On his first day in office in March 1985, Sanguinetti re-established complete freedom of the press.
In 2009, José Mujica, a former left-wing militant who spent almost 15 years in prison during the country's military rule, emerged as the new President as the Broad Front won the election for a second time.
Immigrants used to speak a mixture of Spanish and Italian known as 'cocoliche' and some of the words are still commonly used by the population.
Seasonal variations are pronounced, but extremes in temperature are rare.
The mobile phone market is shared by the state-owned ANTEL and two private companies, Movistar and Claro.
3,825 residence permits were awarded in 2009, compared with 1,216 in 2005.
From about the same period came the romantic poetry of Juan Zorrilla de San Martín (1855–1931), who wrote epic poems about Uruguayan history.
After the Guerra Grande, there was a sharp rise in the number of immigrants, primarily from Italy and Spain.
Uruguay ranks first in the world on a per capita basis for its contributions to the United Nations peacekeeping forces, with 2,513 soldiers and officers in 10 UN peacekeeping missions.
Vázquez stuck to economic orthodoxy.
The Reporters Without Borders worldwide press freedom index has ranked Uruguay as 37th of 178 reported countries in 2010.
The heaviest precipitation occurs during the autumn months, although more frequent rainy spells occur in winter.
The absence of mountains, which act as weather barriers, makes all locations vulnerable to high winds and rapid changes in weather as fronts or storms sweep across the country.
Uruguay adopted its current constitution in 1967.
Located entirely within a temperate zone, Uruguay has a climate that is relatively mild and fairly uniform nationwide.
Uruguay's early 19th century history was shaped by ongoing fights for dominance in the Platine region, between British, Spanish, Portuguese and other colonial forces.
During this authoritarian period, the government took steps toward the organization of the country as a modern state, encouraging its economic and social transformation.
In 1669–71, the Portuguese built a fort at Colonia del Sacramento.
In Spanish colonial times, and for some time thereafter, Uruguay and some neighbouring territories were called the Cisplatina and '''' ("East Bank of the river Uruguay"), then for a few years the "Eastern Province", and after independence ultimately became '''', translated either as the "Oriental Republic of Uruguay" or the "Eastern Republic of Uruguay".
It remained subject to foreign influence and intervention throughout the 19th century, with the military playing a recurring role in domestic politics until the late 20th century.
The besieged Uruguayans called on resident foreigners for help, which led to a French and an Italian legion being formed, the latter led by the exiled Giuseppe Garibaldi.
