*''Recognition rather than recall'': Minimize the user's memory load by making objects, actions, and options visible.
By understanding and researching the interaction between product and user, the ''usability expert'' can also provide insight that is unattainable by traditional company-oriented market research.
Also referred to as user observation, it is useful for specifying user requirements and studying currently used tasks and subtasks.
Once there is a benchmark, other designs can be compared to it to determine the usability of the system.
It does ''not'' specify the details of how to implement or carry out the usability methods described.
Ultimately, iterative design works towards meeting goals such as making the system user friendly, easy to use, easy to operate, simple, etc.
ISO/TR 16982:2002 ("Ergonomics of human-system interaction&mdash;Usability methods supporting human-centered design") is an International Standards Organization (ISO) standard that provides information on human-centered usability methods that can be used for design and evaluation.
Cognitive processor cycle time
A newer approach uses a wireless projection of the mobile device screen onto the computer desktop screen of the respondent, who can then be recorded through their webcam, and thus a combined Video-in-Video view of the participant and the screen interactions viewed simultaneously while incorporating the verbal think aloud commentary of the respondents.
Usability consultant Jakob Nielsen and computer science professor Ben Shneiderman have written (separately) about a framework of system acceptability, where usability is a part of "usefulness" and is composed of:
To encourage co-operative problem-solving between the two subjects, and the attendant discussions leading to it, the tests can be designed to make the subjects dependent on each other by assigning them complementary areas of responsibility (e.g.
Instead, he advocates the term "intuitable," i.e., "that users could intuit the workings of an application by seeing it and using it."
Alan Cooper introduced the concept of using personas as a part of interactive design in 1998 in his book ''The Inmates Are Running the Asylum'', but had used this concept since as early as 1975.
Cognitive models can be used to improve user interfaces or predict problem errors and pitfalls during the design process.
According to Jakob Nielsen, "Studies of user behavior on the Web find a low tolerance for difficult designs or slow sites.
Long-term memory is believed to have an infinite capacity and decay time.
These types of studies are useful for validating suspected usability issues.
When choosing a method, consider cost, time constraints, and appropriateness.
In the user-driven or participatory design paradigm, some of the users become actual or de facto members of the design team.
It is widely used based on its speed and cost-effectiveness.
Anyone who aims to make tools easier to use and more effective for their desired function within the context of work or everyday living can benefit from studying usability principles and guidelines.
For a brief overview of methods, see Comparison of usability evaluation methods or continue reading below.
For those seeking to extend their training, the Usability Professionals' Association offers online resources, reference lists, courses, conferences, and local chapter meetings.
Another more expensive but more insightful method is to have a panel of potential users work closely with the design team from the early stages.
The main users of ISO/TR 16982:2002 are project managers.
It is a family of techniques that analyzes the user complexity of interactive systems.
;Subjects-in-tandem or co-discovery
It therefore addresses technical human factors and ergonomics issues only to the extent necessary to allow managers to understand their relevance and importance in the design process as a whole.
Rather, there are empirical methods that can be used during system development or after the system is delivered, usually a more inopportune time.
The guidance in ISO/TR 16982:2002 can be tailored for specific design situations by using the lists of issues characterizing the context of use of the product to be delivered.
Usability testing is the measurement of ease of use of a product or piece of software.
Qualitative studies are best used as exploratory research, in small sample sizes but frequent, even daily iterations.
It involves an investigator observing users as they work in the field.
ISO/TR 16982:2002 is restricted to methods that are widely used by usability specialists and project managers.
The tester and team must define a target population for testing, schedule participants to come into the lab, decide on how the users behaviors will be measured, construct a test script and have participants engage in a verbal protocol (e.g., think aloud).
In iterative design, interaction with the designed system is used as a form of research for informing and evolving a project, as successive versions, or iterations of a design are implemented.
Field observations are taken at a site of a possible user, which track the artifacts of work such as Post-It notes, items on desktop, shortcuts, and items in trash bins.
*''Error prevention'': Even better than good error messages is a careful design that prevents a problem from occurring in the first place.
As part of this change, ISO is renumbering some parts of the standard so that it can cover more topics, e.g.
Selection of appropriate usability methods should also take account of the relevant life-cycle process.
While conducting usability tests, designers must use usability metrics to identify what it is they are going to measure, or the usability metrics.
It also helps to ensure that information is organized on the site in a way that is logical to users.
To create standards, companies often implement experimental design techniques that create baseline levels.
Usability practitioners are sometimes trained as industrial engineers, psychologists, kinesiologists, systems design engineers, or with a degree in information architecture, information or library science, or Human-Computer Interaction (HCI).
This can help remove hesitation to change the design, since it is implemented before any real programming begins.
*''Consistency and standards'': Users should not have to wonder whether different words, situations, or actions mean the same thing.
Otherwise, most casual users simply leave the site and browse or shop elsewhere.
This position is sometimes illustrated with the remark that "The only intuitive interface is the nipple; everything else is learned."
Either eliminate error-prone conditions or check for them and present users with a confirmation option before they commit to the action.
He continues, however, "But even that is a less than useful goal since only 25 percent of the population depends on intuition to perceive anything."
Additionally, this style of user testing also provides an opportunity to segment feedback by demographic, attitudinal and behavioral type.
Along with user and task analysis, a third analysis is often used: understanding users' environments (physical, social, cultural, and technological environments).
Selection rules specify which method satisfies a given goal, based on context.
This technique turns marketing data on target user population into a few physical concepts of users to create empathy among the design team, with the final aim of tailoring a product more closely to how the personas will use it.
Others view these topics as tangential, with ergonomics focusing on physiological matters (e.g., turning a door handle) and usability focusing on psychological matters (e.g., recognizing that a door can be opened by turning its handle).
It is important to distinguish between usability testing and usability engineering.
The experts focus on a list of areas in design that have been shown to be troublesome for users.
Usability methods can be further classified into the subcategories below.
In addition, the more interaction in the team, the faster the usability issues are resolved.
It details the advantages, disadvantages, and other factors relevant to using each usability method.
Rapid Iterative Testing and Evaluation (RITE) is an iterative usability method similar to traditional "discount" usability testing.
Usability describes the quality of user experience across websites, software, products, and environments.
Used in the product definition stage, a group of 6 to 10 users are gathered to discuss what they desire in a product.
Support undo and redo.
Similar to the Subjects-in-Tandem method, it is useful in pinpointing problems and is relatively simple to set up.
This includes testing the system for both learnability and usability.
Cognitive walkthrough is a method of evaluating the user interaction of a working prototype or final product.
Usually recorded on video, they provide task completion time and allow for observation of attitude.
These categories are measured by the percent that complete the task, how long it takes to complete the tasks, ratios of success to failure to complete the task, time spent on errors, the number of errors, rating scale of satisfactions, number of times user seems frustrated, etc.
The approach includes component-specific quantitative measures based on user interaction recorded in log files, and component-based usability questionnaires.
Certain methods use data from users, while others rely on usability experts.
When evaluating user interfaces for usability, the definition can be as simple as "the perception of a target user of the effectiveness (fit for purpose) and efficiency (work or time required to use) of the Interface".
There are usability evaluation methods for all stages of design and development, from product definition to final design modifications.
These are ten general principles for user interface design.
Participants review items from a Web site and then group these items into categories.
), and user satisfaction are also typically done with smaller groups of subjects.
The types of usability prototypes may vary from using paper models, index cards, hand drawn models, or storyboards.
Usability includes methods of measuring usability, such as needs analysis and the study of the principles behind an object's perceived efficiency or elegance.
Several evaluation methods, including personas, cognitive modeling, inspection, inquiry, prototyping, and testing methods may contribute to understanding potential users and their perceptions of how well the product or process works.
Often it is quite difficult to distinguish the source of the design errors, and what the user did wrong.
ISO definition, below), in addition to being solely a characteristic of the user interface (cf.
This approach also provides a vehicle to easily solicit feedback from users in remote areas.
Qualitative usually allows for observing respondent's screens and verbal think aloud commentary (Screen Recording Video, SRV), and for a richer level of insight also include the webcam view of the respondent (Video-in-Video, ViV, sometimes referred to as Picture-in-Picture, PiP)
(See Evaluation Methods).
Usability inspection is a review of a system based on a set of guidelines.
It is important in this stage to use quantitative usability specifications such as time and errors to complete tasks and number of users to test, as well as examine performance and attitudes of the users testing the system.
Usability is also important in website development (web usability).
Usability tests involve typical users using the system (or product) in a realistic environment see simulation.
ISO 9241 is a multi-part standard that covers a number of aspects of people working with computers.
It is used to evaluate the system's ease of learning.
In consistency inspection, expert designers review products or projects to ensure consistency across multiple products to look if it does things in the same way as their own designs.
However, effective usability tests will not generate a solution to the problems, but provide modified design guidelines for continued testing.
*''User control and freedom'': Users often choose system functions by mistake and will need a clearly marked "emergency exit" to leave the unwanted state without having to go through an extended dialogue.
;Pluralistic inspection
The changed interface is then tested with the remaining users.
The data collected are qualitative and useful for defining the problem.
: Mobile gaming has experienced 20x growth in 2010-2012) has generated a need for unmoderated remote usability testing on mobile devices, both for websites but especially for app interactions.
Follow real-world conventions, making information appear in a natural and logical order.
One methodology consists of shipping cameras and special camera holding fixtures to dedicated testers, and having them record the screens of the mobile smart-phone or tablet device, usually using an HD camera.
Cost constraints, size, and design constraints usually lead the designer to creating a prototype of the system.
Decay half-life of visual image storage
Variables that affect these can include subject age, aptitudes, ability, and the surrounding environment.
This process can be repeated several times until the team is satisfied with the final concept.
Sometimes it is useful to break a task down and analyze each individual aspect separately.
Qualitative design phases, such as general usability (can the task be accomplished?
As with other non-functional requirements, usability cannot be directly measured but must be quantified by means of indirect measures or attributes such as, for example, the number of reported problems with ease-of-use of a system.
These metrics are often variable, and change in conjunction with the scope and goals of the project.
It explains the implications of the stage of the life cycle and the individual project characteristics for the selection of usability methods and provides examples of usability methods in context.
These usability evaluation methods involve testing of subjects for the most quantitative data.
A usability study may be conducted as a primary job function by a ''usability analyst'' or as a secondary job function by designers, technical writers, marketing personnel, and others.
More often though they are people who are trained in specific applied fields who have taken on a usability focus within their organization.
This phrase was coined in 1976 as a quantitative literature review.
The data gathered is not usually quantitative, but can help get an idea of a target group's opinion.
*''Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors'': Error messages should be expressed in plain language (no codes), precisely indicate the problem, and constructively suggest a solution.
Additional observations of the users give designers insight on navigation difficulties, controls, conceptual models, etc.
;Human processor model
And they don't want to learn how to use a home page.
Subjects-in-tandem (also called co-discovery) is the pairing of subjects in a usability test to gather important information on the ease of use of a product.
Goals are what the user must accomplish.
Rapid prototyping is a method used in early stages of development to validate and refine the usability of a system.
Once the data for a participant has been collected the usability engineer and team decide if they will be making any changes to the prototype prior to the next participant.
The design team should be user-driven and it should be in direct contact with potential users.
This process helps generate many different, diverse ideas, and ensures that the best ideas from each design are integrated into the final concept.
Unlike many other usability methods or types of labs studies, benchmark studies more closely resemble true experimental psychology lab studies, with greater attention to detail on methodology, study protocol and data analysis.
It can be used to quickly and cheaply evaluate user-interface designs without the need for an expensive working model.
framework of system acceptability, also below, which separates ''usefulness'' into ''usability'' and ''utility'').
;Heuristic evaluation
Various academic programs focus on usability.
Cognitive modeling involves creating a computational model to estimate how long it takes people to perform a given task.
Heuristic evaluation was developed to aid in the design of computer user-interface design.
A focus group is a focused discussion where a moderator leads a group of participants through a set of questions on a particular topic.
There are a variety of usability evaluation methods.
In contrast, usability engineering (UE) is the research and design process that ensures a product with good usability.
A method is a sequence of operators that accomplish a goal.
As more people inspect the scenario for problems, the higher the probability to find problems.
In human-computer interaction and computer science, usability studies the elegance and clarity with which the interaction with a computer program or a web site (web usability) is designed.
Task analysis can also mean figuring out what more specific tasks users must do to meet those goals and what steps they must take to accomplish those tasks.
The number of subjects being tested can also affect usability metrics, as it is often easier to focus on specific demographics.
Each of the aforementioned factors are not mutually exclusive; rather they should be understood to work in conjunction to form the overall workplace environment.
This process is intended to ultimately improve the quality and functionality of a design.
This is a very common method and often does not appear to be a survey, but just a warranty card.
This has made usability more popular and widely recognized in recent years, as companies see the benefits of researching and developing their products with user-oriented methods instead of technology-oriented methods.
When written carefully and given to actual users who have experience with the product and knowledge of design, surveys provide useful feedback on the strong and weak areas of the usability of a design.
Some experts such as Jef Raskin have discouraged using this term in user interface design, claiming that easy to use interfaces are often easy because of the user's exposure to previous similar systems, thus the term 'familiar' should be preferred.
;Consistency inspection
Pluralistic Inspections are meetings where users, developers, and human factors people meet together to discuss and evaluate step by step of a task scenario.
The first part to be renumbered was part 10 in 2006, now part 110.
Personas are the archetypes that represent actual groups of users and their needs, which can be a general description of person, context, or usage scenario.
The object of use can be a software application, website, book, tool, machine, process, vehicle, or anything a human interacts with.
Instructions for use of the system should be visible or easily retrievable whenever appropriate.
Many of the common objectives of usability studies, such as trying to understand user behavior or exploring alternative designs, must be put aside.
Remote usability testing (also known as unmoderated or asynchronous usability testing) involves the use of a specially modified online survey, allowing the quantification of user testing studies by providing the ability to generate large sample sizes, or a deep qualitative analysis without the need for dedicated facilities.
Often an instructor is present to prompt the user into being more vocal as they work.
*''Match between system and the real world'': The system should speak the users' language, with words, phrases and concepts familiar to the user, rather than system-oriented terms.
*''Help and documentation'': Even though it is better if the system can be used without documentation, it may be necessary to provide help and documentation.
An operator is an action performed in pursuit of a goal.
Iterative design is a design methodology based on a cyclic process of prototyping, testing, analyzing, and refining a product or process.
Sometimes this can occur after observing as few as 1 participant.
Heuristic evaluation is a usability engineering method for finding and assessing usability problems in a user interface design as part of an iterative design process.
Motor processor cycle time
Benchmarking creates standardized test materials for a specific type of design.
Participants in a card sorting session are asked to organize the content from a Web site in a way that makes sense to them.
Additionally, it can provide insight into the user's attitude, which can not usually be discerned from a survey or questionnaire.
It is the most popular of the usability inspection methods, as it is quick, cheap, and easy.
A drawback of this approach is that the finger movements of the respondent can obscure the view of the screen, in addition to the bias and logistical issues inherent in shipping special hardware to selected respondents.
tactile and haptic interaction.
* Software interface
Task analysis means learning about users' goals and users' ways of working.
There's no such thing as a training class or a manual for a Web site.
Personas are fictitious characters created to represent a site or product's different user types and their associated demographics and technographics.
Finally, "reviewing or demonstrating" a system before the user tests it can result in misleading results.
The emphasis of empirical measurement is on measurement, both informal and formal, which can be carried out through a variety of evaluation methods.
The most typical time to create personas is at the beginning of designing so that designers have a tangible idea of who the users of their product will be.
Some think of usability as the software specialization of the larger topic of ergonomics.
There is no consensus about the relation of the terms ergonomics (or human factors) and usability.
Thus, by determining which guidelines are violated, the usability of a device can be determined.
Many studies have been done to estimate the cycle times, decay times, and capacities of each of these processors.
The growth in mobile and associated platforms and services (e.g.
Based on the results of testing the most recent iteration of a design, changes and refinements are made.
For example, after observing and interviewing users, the usability expert may identify needed functionality or design flaws that were not anticipated.
Card sorting helps to learn how users think about the content and how they would organize the information on the Web site.
;Remote usability testing for mobile devices
In the user-centered design paradigm, the product is designed with its intended users in mind at all times.
Each component may be measured subjectively against criteria, e.g., Principles of User Interface Design, to provide a metric, often expressed as a percentage.
Each person works independently, and when finished, shares concepts with the group.
After conducting usability tests, it is important for a designer to record what was observed, in addition to why such behavior occurred and modify the model according to the results.
ISO defines usability as "The extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context of use."
Several usability consultancy companies have emerged, and traditional consultancy and design firms offer similar services.
Regardless to how carefully a system is designed, all theories must be tested using usability tests.
Aiming for "intuitive" interfaces (based on reusing existing skills with interaction systems) could lead designers to discard a better design solution only because it would require a novel approach.
The ultimate goal of analyzing these metrics is to find/create a prototype design that users like and use to successfully perform given tasks.
As the designs become more complex, the testing must become more formalized.
Perceptual processor cycle time
Usability is a non-functional requirement.
It is often very difficult for designers to conduct usability tests with the exact system being designed.
Meta-analysis is a statistical procedure to combine results across studies to integrate the findings.
The term ''user friendly'' is often used as a synonym for ''usable'', though it may also refer to accessibility.
Although originally titled ''Ergonomic requirements for office work with visual display terminals (VDTs)'', it has been retitled to the more generic ''Ergonomics of Human System Interaction''.
It is widely used in consumer electronics, communication, and knowledge transfer objects (such as a cookbook, a document or online help) and mechanical objects such as a door handle or a hammer.
Complex computer systems find their way into everyday life, and at the same time the market is saturated with competing brands.
