RSL remains the only Utah major league sports team to have won a national championship, having won the MLS Cup in 2009.
'''66%''' ''233,655
In addition to these testimonies, ''The Confessions of John D. Lee'', written by John D. Lee—alleged "Scape goat" for the Mountain Meadow Massacre—also came out in 1877.
Utah was the single most Republican-leaning state in the country in every presidential election from 1976 to 2004, measured by the percentage point margin between the Republican and Democratic candidates.
The airport has non-stop service to over 100 destinations throughout the United States, Canada, and Mexico, as well as to Paris.
The views common amongst this group are heavily influenced by labor politics, particularly of the New Deal Era.
This is the strongest tornado ever recorded in Utah.
Utah's Constitution has been amended many times since its inception.
It was created with the Compromise of 1850, and Fillmore, named after President Millard Fillmore, was designated the capital.
The corroborative testimonies coming out of Utah from Mormons and former Mormons influenced Congress and the people of the United States.
Utah is one of the 15 states that have not ratified the U.S.
Utah's ski resorts are primarily located in northern Utah near Salt Lake City, Park City, Ogden, and Provo.
Salt Lake City hosted the 2002 Winter Olympics.
Most, if not all, of the members of the U.S. government opposed the polygamous practices of the Mormons.
'''52%''' ''158,787
Much of the scenic southern and southeastern landscape (specifically the Colorado Plateau region) is sandstone, specifically Kayenta sandstone and Navajo sandstone.
, the state's unemployment rate was 3.5%.
Though the LDS Church officially maintains a policy of neutrality in regards to political parties, the church's doctrine has a strong regional influence on politics.
The Utah Court of Appeals handles cases from the trial courts.
This is symbolized by the beehive on the Utah flag, and the state's motto, "Industry".
Utah's laws in regard to alcohol, tobacco and gambling are strict.
The Utah Transit Authority (UTA), which operates TRAX, also operates a bus system that stretches across the Wasatch Front, west into Grantsville, and east into Park City.
The Utah Indoor Clean Air Act is a statewide smoking ban, that prohibits smoking in many public places.
Since becoming a state in 1896, Utah has had only two non-Mormon governors.
Utah is much more conservative than the United States as a whole, particularly on social issues.
'''56.0%''' ''422,357''
Utah's state parks are scattered throughout Utah; from Bear Lake State Park at the Utah/Idaho border to Edge of the Cedars State Park Museum deep in the Four Corners region, and everywhere in between.
'''63%''' ''356,238
The LDS Church discontinued plural marriage in 1890, and in 1896 Utah gained admission to the Union.
Self-identified Latter-day Saints are more likely to vote for the Republican ticket than non-Mormons, and Utah is one of the most Republican states in the nation.
* Catholic Church 10%
With new church converts coming from the East and around the world, Church leaders often assigned groups of church members as missionaries to establish other settlements throughout the West.
One of the provisions of the Act was the repeal of women's suffrage; full suffrage was not returned until Utah was admitted to the Union in 1896.
Today, Utah State Parks manages 43 parks and several undeveloped areas totaling over  of land and more than  of water.
In central Utah, coal production accounts for much of the mining activity.
Salt Lake City became the hub of a "far-flung commonwealth" of Mormon settlements.
The dry weather is a result of the state's location in the rain shadow of the Sierra Nevada in California.
Pacific Island languages including Chamorro, Hawaiian, Ilocano, Indonesian, and Samoan
One exception to this aridity is Snake Valley, which is (relatively) lush due to large springs and wetlands fed from groundwater derived from snow melt in the Snake Range, Deep Creek Range, and other tall mountains to the west of Snake Valley.
Some areas of the Wasatch Range in the path of the lake-effect receive up to  per year.
One of Utah's defining characteristics is the variety of its terrain.
The treaty was ratified by the United States Senate on March 11.
They folded again in 2013.
Utah State Parks is also home to the state's off highway vehicle office, state boating office and the trails program.
For example, the Republican Party of Utah opposes almost all abortions while Utah Democrats take a more liberal approach, although more conservative than their national counterparts.
Utah votes predominantly Republican.
Temperatures dropping below  should be expected on occasion in most areas of the state most years, although some areas see it often (for example, the town of Randolph averages about 50 days per year with temperatures dropping that low).
This terrain is the central feature of protected state and federal parks such as Arches, Bryce Canyon, Canyonlands, Capitol Reef, and Zion national parks, Cedar Breaks, Grand Staircase-Escalante, Hovenweep, and Natural Bridges national monuments, Glen Canyon National Recreation Area (site of the popular tourist destination, Lake Powell), Dead Horse Point and Goblin Valley state parks, and Monument Valley.
After the discovery of the lake, hundreds of American and Canadian traders and trappers established trading posts in the region.
The Ancestral Pueblo people built their homes through excavations in mountains, and the Fremont people built houses of straw before disappearing from the region around the 15th century.
Beaverdam Wash in far southwestern Utah is the lowest point in the state, at .
Other attractions include Monument Valley, the Great Salt Lake, the Bonneville Salt Flats, and Lake Powell.
Throughout the remainder of the 19th century, Mormon pioneers established hundreds of other settlements in Utah, Idaho, Nevada, Arizona, Wyoming, California, Canada, and Mexico – including in Las Vegas, Nevada; Franklin, Idaho (the first European settlement in Idaho); San Bernardino, California; Mesa, Arizona; Star Valley, Wyoming; and Carson Valley, Nevada.
The Great Salt Lake Desert is the driest area of the state, with less than .
Historical mining towns include Mercur in Tooele County, Silver Reef in Washington County, Eureka in Juab County, Park City in Summit County and numerous coal mining camps throughout Carbon County such as Castle Gate, Spring Canyon, and Hiawatha.
According to the Corporation for National and Community Service, Utah had an average of 884,000 volunteers between 2008 and 2010, each of whom contributed 89.2 hours per volunteer.
Property taxes are assessed and collected locally.
Tourism is a major industry in Utah.
'''57.7%''' ''531,190''
+ Salt Lake County Mayor
All justices and judges, like those on the Utah Supreme Court, are subject to retention election after appointment.
, 62.2% of Utahns are counted as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Average January high temperatures range from around  in some northern valleys to almost  in St. George.
Four more Republicans, Rob Bishop, Chris Stewart, Jason Chaffetz, and Mia Love, represent Utah in the United States House of Representatives.
Both of Utah's U.S.
Statehood was officially granted on January 4, 1896.
Equal Rights Amendment.
According to the 2007 State New Economy Index, Utah is ranked the top state in the nation for Economic Dynamism, determined by "the degree to which state economies are knowledge-based, globalized, entrepreneurial, information technology-driven and innovation-based".
Compared to other Republican-dominated states in the Mountain West such as Wyoming, Utah politics have a more moralistic and less libertarian character according to David Magleby.
In addition, Utah features seven national monuments (Cedar Breaks, Dinosaur, Grand Staircase-Escalante, Hovenweep, Natural Bridges, Rainbow Bridge, and Timpanogos Cave), two national recreation areas (Flaming Gorge and Glen Canyon), seven national forests (Ashley, Caribou-Targhee, Dixie, Fishlake, Manti-La Sal, Sawtooth, and Uinta-Wasatch-Cache), and numerous state parks and monuments.
In September 1857, about 120 American settlers of the Baker–Fancher wagon train, en route to California from Arkansas, were murdered by Utah Territorial Militia and some Paiute Native Americans in the Mountain Meadows massacre.
Rugby has been growing quickly in the state of Utah, growing from 17 teams in 2009 to 70 teams , including with over 3,000 players, and more than 55 high school varsity teams.
Although at other times of year its air quality is good, winter inversions give Salt Lake City some of the worst wintertime pollution in the country.
The Moab area, in the southeastern part of the state, is known for its challenging mountain biking trails, including Slickrock.
The 103-mile (163&nbsp;km) stretch from Salina to Green River is the longest stretch of interstate in the country without services and, when completed in 1970, was the longest stretch of entirely new highway constructed in the U.S. since the Alaska Highway was completed in 1943.
Former Olympic venues including Utah Olympic Park and Utah Olympic Oval are still in operation for training and competition and allows the public to participate in numerous activities including ski jumping, bobsleigh, and speed skating.
Brigham Young was among the first to send a message, along with Abraham Lincoln and other officials.
The arid desert land was deemed by the Mormons as desirable as a place where they could practice their religion without harassment.
These settlements were characteristic of the boom and bust cycle that dominated mining towns of the American West.
The city of Ogden, Utah was named after Peter Skene Ogden, a Canadian explorer who traded furs in the Weber Valley.
Approximately 62% of Utahns are reported to be members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or LDS (Mormons), which greatly influences Utahn culture and daily life (although only 41.6% are active members of the faith).
Trial level courts are the district courts and justice courts.
Utah ranks 47th in teenage pregnancy, lowest in percentage of births out of wedlock, lowest in number of abortions per capita, and lowest in percentage of teen pregnancies terminated in abortion.
Sandy was one of the fastest-growing cities in the country at that time.
However, the low humidity and high elevation typically leads to large temperature variations, leading to cool nights most summer days.
+ Governor elections results
The Mormons were still pushing for the establishment of a State of Deseret with the new borders of the Utah Territory.
Beginning in the early 20th century, with the establishment of such national parks as Bryce Canyon National Park and Zion National Park, Utah became known for its natural beauty.
The war is unique among Indian Wars because it was a three-way conflict, with mounted Timpanogos Utes led by Antonga Black Hawk fighting federal and LDS authorities.
The Utah Jazz of the National Basketball Association play at Vivint Smart Home Arena in Salt Lake City.
Beginning in 1865, Utah's Black Hawk War developed into the deadliest conflict in the territory's history.
In 1821, the year Mexico achieved its independence from Spain, the region became known as part of its territory of Alta California.
The Utah Supreme Court is the court of last resort in Utah.
Over 70 percent of the land is either BLM land, Utah State Trustland, or U.S. National Forest, U.S. National Park, U.S. National Monument, National Recreation Area or U.S. Wilderness Area.
After early financial struggles and scandal, the 2002 Olympics eventually became among the most successful Winter Olympics in history from a marketing and financial standpoint.
Connor established Fort Douglas just  east of Salt Lake City and encouraged his people to discover mineral deposits to bring more non-Mormons into the territory.
Utah is the 13th-largest by area, 31st-most-populous, and 10th-least-densely populated of the 50 United States.
Much of eastern Utah is part of the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation.
Utah features a dry, semi-arid to desert climate, although its many mountains feature a large variety of climates, with the highest points in the Uinta Mountains being above the timberline.
Early in the Mexican–American War in late 1846, the United States had taken control of New Mexico and California.
Although the LDS Church has officially repudiated such statements on many occasions, Democratic candidates—including LDS Democrats—believe that Republicans capitalize on the perception that the Republican Party is doctrinally superior.
A  2012 study found that the proportion of winter (January–March) precipitation falling as snow has decreased by 9% during the last half century, a combined result from a significant increase in rainfall and a minor decrease in snowfall.
Utah contains 5 metropolitan areas (Logan, Ogden-Clearfield, Salt Lake City, Provo-Orem, and St. George), and 6 micropolitan areas (Brigham City, Heber, Vernal, Price, Richfield, and Cedar City).
In 2004, Republican George W. Bush won every county in the state and Utah gave him his largest margin of victory of any state.
These Native American tribes are subgroups of the Ute-Aztec Native American ethnicity and were sedentary.
The LDS Church maintains an official policy of neutrality with regard to political parties and candidates.
43.0%    ''320,141''
He won election to a full four-year term in 2012, defeating Democratic Businessman Peter Cooke with 68% of the vote.
27.7%    ''253,514''
* Mainline Protestants 6%
In terms of "small business friendliness", in 2014 Utah emerged as number one, based on a study drawing upon data from over 12,000 small business owners.
Minerals mined in Utah include copper, gold, silver, molybdenum, zinc, lead, and beryllium.
Utah government, like most U.S. states, is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.
The growth has been inspired in part by the 2008 movie Forever Strong.
The data shows that depression rates in Utah are no higher than the national average.
In 2010 the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) reported that the three largest denominational groups in Utah are The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 1,910,504 adherents; the Catholic Church with 160,125 adherents, and the Southern Baptist Convention with 12,593 adherents.
Thousands of years before the arrival of European explorers, the Ancestral Puebloans and the Fremont people lived in what is now known as Utah.
In the 1970s growth was phenomenal in the suburbs of the Wasatch Front.
There is a growing Jewish presence in the state including Chabad and Rohr Jewish Learning Institute.
Like most of the western and southwestern states, the federal government owns much of the land in Utah.
19.7%    ''186,503''
Western Utah is mostly arid desert with a basin and range topography.
As of close of business December 26, more than 1,225 marriage licenses were issued, with at least 74 percent, or 905 licenses, issued to gay and lesbian couples.
* Black Protestant Churches 1%
The dry, powdery snow of the Wasatch Range is considered some of the best skiing in the world (the state license plate claims "the Greatest Snow on Earth").
The state bans the sale of fruity alcoholic drinks at grocery stores and convenience stores.
In 2001, Utah Governor Mike Leavitt approved a new state slogan, "Utah!
David Magleby, dean of Social and Behavioral Sciences at Brigham Young University, a lifelong Democrat and a political analyst, asserts that the Republican Party actually has more conservative positions than the LDS Church.
The Green Line begins in West Valley City, passes through downtown Salt Lake City, and ends at Salt Lake City International Airport.
Utah's Monument Valley has been location to several productions, such as ''127 Hours'' (2010), Tim Burton's ''Planet of the Apes'' (2001), and ''Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid'' (1969).
Amtrak's ''California Zephyr'', with one train in each direction daily, runs east-west through Utah with stops in Green River, Helper, Provo, and Salt Lake City.
Utah has seen an increase in tourism since the 2002 Winter Olympics.
Meanwhile, observed snow depth across Utah has decreased and is accompanied by consistent decreases in snow cover and surface albedo.
Utah is the least populous U.S. state to have a major professional sports league franchise.
Utah is bordered by Colorado to the east, Wyoming to the northeast, Idaho to the north, Arizona to the south, and Nevada to the west.
'''77.6%''' ''734,049''
A November 2010 article in ''Newsweek'' magazine highlighted Utah and particularly the Salt Lake City area's economic outlook, calling it "the new economic Zion", and examined how the area has been able to bring in high-paying jobs and attract high-tech corporations to the area during a recession.
However, many of the other major population centers such as Provo, Logan and St. George tend to be predominantly Mormon as well as many suburban and rural areas.
In addition, Weber State and Southern Utah (SUU) compete in the Big Sky Conference of the FCS.
Today mining activity still plays a major role in the state's economy.
The state Attorney General's office was granted a stay of the ruling by the United States Supreme Court on January 6, 2014 while the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals considers the case.
Herbert was elected to serve out the remainder of the term in a special election in 2010, defeating Democratic nominee Salt Lake County Mayor Peter Corroon with 64% of the vote.
Preparation for the Olympics spurred the development of the light-rail system in the Salt Lake Valley, known as TRAX, and the re-construction of the freeway system around the city.
Weather systems with the potential to produce precipitation in Utah have decreased in number with those producing snowfall decreasing at a considerably greater rate.
Members of the LDS Church were viewed as un-American and rebellious when news of their polygamous practices spread.
Dixie is quickly becoming a popular recreational and retirement destination, and the population is growing rapidly.
'''48%''' ''157,287
Notably, Ann Eliza Young—tenth wife to divorce Brigham Young, women's advocate, national lecturer and author of ''Wife No.
The religious body with the largest number of congregations is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (with 4,815 congregations).
They competed originally at the Maverik Center in West Valley City, and later at EnergySolutions Arena.
The constitution of Utah was enacted in 1895.
On average there are fewer than 40 days of thunderstorm activity during the year, although these storms can be briefly intense when they do occur.
On Second Amendment issues, the state GOP has been at odds with the LDS Church position opposing concealed firearms in places of worship and in public spaces.
In the mid-18th century, other Uto-Aztecan tribes, including the Goshute, the Paiute, the Shoshone, and the Ute people, also settled in the region.
The ski resorts have increased in popularity, and many of the Olympic venues built along the Wasatch Front continue to be used for sporting events.
This was a boon to the local economy as the army sold everything in camp for pennies on the dollar before marching back east to join the war.
His book gives a witnessed account of his life in Utah, both the good and the bad.
The Utah Legislature meets each year in January for an annual forty-five-day session.
Utah granted full voting rights to women in 1870, 26 years before becoming a state.
Beginning in the late 19th century with the state's mining boom (including the Bingham Canyon Mine, among the world's largest open pit mines), companies attracted large numbers of immigrants with job opportunities.
In 1857, particularly heinous accusations of abdication of government and general immorality were stated by former associate justice William W. Drummond, among others.
Relations have often been strained between the LDS population and the non-LDS population.
Between 2007 and 2011 Deer Valley in Park City, has been ranked the top ski resort in North America in a survey organized by ''Ski Magazine''.
Utah was Mexican territory when the first pioneers arrived in 1847.
TRAX, a light rail system in the Salt Lake Valley, consists of three lines.
When the supposed rebellion should be quelled, Alfred Cumming would take the place of Brigham Young as territorial governor.
Utah features many cultural attractions such as Temple Square, the Sundance Film Festival, the Red Rock Film Festival, the DOCUTAH Film Festival, and the Utah Shakespearean Festival.
In the 1890 Manifesto, the LDS Church banned polygamy.
Same-sex marriages commenced again in Utah that day.
Both of these women, Ann Eliza and Fanny, testify to the happiness of the very early Church members before polygamy began to be practiced.
In 2011, 28.6% of Utah's population younger than the age of one were ethnic minorities, meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white.
From such films, most US residents recognize such natural landmarks as Delicate Arch and "the Mittens" of Monument Valley.
Watched by over 2 billion viewers, the Games ended up with a profit of $40 million.
The Navajo Nation also extends into southeastern Utah.
Dry lightning strikes and the general dry weather often spark wildfires in summer, while intense thunderstorms can lead to flash flooding, especially in the rugged terrain of southern Utah.
Utah also has the 14th highest median average income and the least income inequality of any U.S. state.
In Southern Utah, Brian Head Ski Resort is located in the mountains near Cedar City.
Great Salt Lake, Utah Lake, Sevier Lake, and Rush Lake are all remnants of this ancient freshwater lake, which once covered most of the eastern Great Basin.
Utah's temperatures are extreme, with cold temperatures in winter due to its elevation, and very hot summers statewide (with the exception of mountain areas and high mountain valleys).
'''66%''' ''501,925
The city of Provo, Utah was named for one, Étienne Provost, who visited the area in 1825.
This figure equates to $3.8 billion of service contributed, ranking Utah number one for volunteerism in the nation.
Utah is home to world-renowned ski resorts, made popular by the light, fluffy snow, and winter storms which regularly dump 1 to 3 feet of overnight snow accumulation.
Approximately 75 percent of the population of the state live in this corridor, and population growth is rapid.
The per capita personal income was $45,700 in 2012.
Management of transportation and urbanization are major issues in politics, as development consumes agricultural land and wilderness areas, with density of uses creating air pollution.
Political scientist and pollster Dan Jones explains this disparity by noting that the national Democratic Party is associated with liberal positions on gay marriage and abortion, both of which the LDS Church is against.
Utah is  the only state with a majority population belonging to a single church.
Young had an expansionist's view of the territory that he and the Mormon pioneers were settling, calling it Deseret – which according to the Book of Mormon was an ancient word for "honeybee".
Economies are dominated by mining, oil shale, oil, and natural gas-drilling, ranching, and recreation.
SkyWest Airlines is also headquartered in St. George and maintains a hub at Salt Lake City.
Since the days of the Utah Territory mining has played a major role in Utah's economy.
The Blue Line (formerly Salt Lake/Sandy Line) begins in the suburb of Draper and ends in Downtown Salt Lake City.
They developed irrigation to support fairly large pioneer populations along Utah's Wasatch front (Salt Lake City, Bountiful and Weber Valley, and Provo and Utah Valley).
The state sales tax has a base rate of 6.45 percent, with cities and counties levying additional local sales taxes that vary among the municipalities.
'''75.0%''' ''503,693''
The Democrats of Summit County are the by-product of the migration of wealthy families from California in the 1990s to the ski resort town of Park City; their views are generally supportive of the economic policies favored by unions and the social policies favored by the liberals.
T. B. H. Stenhouse, former Utah Mormon polygamist, Mormon missionary for thirteen years and a Salt Lake City newspaper owner, finally left Utah and wrote ''The Rocky Mountain Saints''.
European trappers and fur traders explored some areas of Utah in the early 19th century from Canada and the United States.
It is known as Utah's Dixie because early settlers were able to grow some cotton there.
