Mill seems to have been unaware that Bentham had used the term 'utilitarian' in his 1781 letter to George Wilson and his 1802 letter to Étienne Dumont.
And it is plausible to suppose that if his motivation had been different in that respect, he would have enjoyed the cathedral much less."
Finally, whilst motives may not play a role in determining the morality of an action, this does not preclude utilitarians from fostering particular motives if doing so will increase overall happiness.
Robert Goodin takes yet another approach and argues that the demandingness objection can be "blunted" by treating utilitarianism as a guide to public policy rather than one of individual morality.
Moore's strategy was to show that it is intuitively implausible that pleasure is the sole measure of what is good.
Mill's approach is to argue that the pleasures of the intellect are intrinsically superior to physical pleasures.
'''Utilitarianism''' is a theory in normative ethics holding that the best moral action is the one that maximizes utility.
It has been argued that rule utilitarianism collapses into act utilitarianism, because for any given rule, in the case where breaking the rule produces more utility, the rule can be refined by the addition of a sub-rule that handles cases like the exception.
Others have rejected that pleasure has positive value and have advocated negative utilitarianism, which defines utility only in terms of suffering.
Bentham is, however, credited with founding utilitarianism when he wrote ''An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.''
Consequently, "the decay of population is the greatest evil that a state can suffer; and the improvement of it the object which ought, in all countries, to be aimed at in preference to every other political purpose whatsoever."
Perhaps aware that Hutcheson eventually removed his algorithms for calculating the greatest happiness because they "appear'd useless, and were disagreeable to some readers", Bentham contends that there is nothing novel or unwarranted about his method, for "in all this there is nothing but what the practice of mankind, wheresoever they have a clear view of their own interest, is perfectly conformable to."
In Satisficing Consequentialism,  Michael Slote argues for a form of utilitarianism where "an act might qualify as morally right through having good enough consequences, even though better consequences could have been produced."
Mill says, "As between his own happiness and that of others, utilitarianism requires him to be as strictly impartial as a disinterested and benevolent spectator."
Just because in this moment religion has some positive consequences, says Marx, does not mean that viewed historically it is not a regressive institution that should be abolished.
Bentham makes short work of it.
In Nicomachean Ethics (Book 1 Chapter 5), Aristotle says that identifying the good with pleasure is to prefer a life suitable for beasts.
It has been claimed that Paley was not a very original thinker and that the philosophical part of his treatise on ethics is "an assemblage of ideas developed by others and is presented to be learned by students rather than debated by colleagues. "
This is considered in ''The Theory of Legislation'', where Bentham distinguishes between evils of the first and second orders.
It would be nonsense to say that it was not in the interests of a stone to be kicked along the road by a schoolboy.
"Each person's potential loss has the same significance to me, only as a loss to that person alone.
It is responsible for formulating and, if necessary, reformulating the general moral rules.
The former view is the one adopted by Bentham and Mill, and (I believe) by the Utilitarian school generally: and is obviously most in accordance with the universality that is characteristic of their principle...it seems arbitrary and unreasonable to exclude from the end, as so conceived, any pleasure of any sentient being."
With the driest naivete he takes the modern shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man.
Pessimistic representatives of negative utilitarianism can be found in the environment of Buddhism.
This distinction between a "specific rule utilitarianism" (which collapses into act utilitarianism) and "general rule utilitarianism" forms the basis of Hare's two-level utilitarianism.
Bentham's book ''An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation'' was printed in 1780 but not published until 1789.
Russell Hardin rejects such arguments.
It was already accepted that it is necessary to use rules to help you choose the right action because the problems of calculating the consequences on each and every occasion would almost certainly result in you frequently choosing something less than the best course of action.
The necessity of this conclusion is rejected by Fred Feldman who argues that "the conflict in question results from an inadequate formulation of the utilitarian doctrines; motives play no essential role in it…(and that)… Precisely the same sort of conflict arises even when MU is left out of consideration and AU is applied by itself."
He wrote in his ''System of Logic'' I iv.
However, if you have decided to have a child, then you have an obligation to give birth to the happiest child you can."
People sometimes have irrational preferences.
A person's satisfaction is not part of any greater satisfaction."
Jack is motivated to see, as nearly as possible, everything in the cathedral.
The difficulty in interpretation centres around trying to explain why, since it is consequences that matter, intentions should play a role in the assessment of the morality of an action but motives should not.
However, he accepts that this is usually because the intellectual pleasures are thought to have circumstantial advantages, i.e.
However, with intention the situation is more complex.
The principle of utility was no discovery of Bentham.
As Alastair Norcross has said, "suppose that Homer is faced with the painful choice between saving Barney from a burning building or saving both Moe and Apu from the building…it is clearly better for Homer to save the larger number, precisely because it is a larger number… Can anyone who really considers the matter seriously honestly claim to believe that it is worse that one person die than that the entire sentient population of the universe be severely mutilated?
The theological utilitarians had the option of grounding their pursuit of happiness in the will of God; the hedonistic utilitarians needed a different defence.
Let a beggar, pressed by hunger, steal from a rich man's house a loaf, which perhaps saves him from starving, can it be possible to compare the good which the thief acquires for himself, with the evil which the rich man suffers?
The question then arises as to when, if at all, it might legitimate to break the law.
The philosophy has been applied to modern issues including the suffering of non-human animals.
In his 1990 edition of ''Animal Liberation'', Peter Singer said that he no longer ate oysters and mussels, because although the creatures might not suffer, they might, it's not really known, and it's easy enough to avoid eating them in any case (and this aspect of seeking better alternatives is a prominent part of utilitarianism).
He argues that one of the main reasons for introducing rule utilitarianism was to do justice to the general rules that people need for moral education and character development and he proposes that "a difference between act-utilitarianism and rule-utilitarianism can be introduced by limiting the specificity of the rules, i.e., by increasing their generality."
This pursuit of happiness is given a theological basis:
With such rubbish has the brave fellow, with his motto, "null a dies sine linea", piled up mountains of books.
''Traité de legislation civile et pénale'' was published in 1802 and then later retranslated back into English by Hildreth as ''The Theory of Legislation'', although by this time significant portions of Dumont's work had already been retranslated and incorporated into Sir John Bowring's edition of Bentham's works, which was issued in parts between 1838 and 1843.
Hall and Popkin defend Mill against this accusation pointing out that he begins Chapter Four by asserting that "questions of ultimate ends do not admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term" and that this is "common to all first principles."
Kagan suggests that such a procedure might be justified on the grounds that "a general requirement to promote the good would lack the motivational underpinning necessary for genuine moral requirements" and, secondly, that personal independence is necessary for the existence of commitments and close personal relations and that "the value of such commitments yields a positive reason for preserving within moral theory at least some moral independence for the personal point of view."
Given what Bentham says about second order evils it would be a serious misrepresentation to say that he and similar act utilitarians would be prepared to punish an innocent person for the greater good.
Some school level textbooks and at least one UK examination board make a further distinction between strong and weak rule utilitarianism.
Harsanyi argues that the objection overlooks the fact that "people attach considerable utility to freedom from unduly burdensome moral obligations… most people will prefer a society with a more relaxed moral code, and will feel that such a society will achieve a higher level of average utility—even if adoption of such a moral code should lead to some losses in economic and cultural accomplishments (so long as these losses remain within tolerable limits).
The description ideal utilitarianism was first used by Hastings Rashdall in ''The Theory of Good and Evil'' (1907), but it is more often associated with G. E. Moore.
Singer writes: "The capacity for suffering and enjoying things is aprerequisite for having interests at all, a condition that must be satisfied before we can speak of interests in any meaningful way.
Spending more time in the cathedral than he had originally planned resulted in him missing his dinner, doing several hours of night driving, which he hates, and having trouble finding a place to sleep.
More recently, a similar view has been expressed by Smart, who argued that all other things being equal a universe with two million happy people is better than a universe with only one million happy people.
However, it is not clear that this distinction is made in the academic literature.
A defence of Mill against all three charges, with a chapter devoted to each, can be found in Necip Fikri Alican’s ''Mill’s Principle of Utility: A Defense of John Stuart Mill’s Notorious Proof'' (1994).
In ''An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation'' Bentham wrote "the question is not, Can they reason?
In ''Principles'' (1973), R. M. Hare accepts that rule utilitarianism collapses into act utilitarianism but claims that this is a result of allowing the rules to be "as specific and un-general as we please."
Hare argues that in practice, most of the time, we should be following the general principles:
In Chapter VII, Bentham says: "The business of government is to promote the happiness of the society, by punishing and rewarding… In proportion as an act tends to disturb that happiness, in proportion as the tendency of it is pernicious, will be the demand it creates for punishment."
Harsanyi adds two caveats.
The now forgotten significance of Paley can be judged from the title of Thomas Rawson Birks's 1874 work ''Modern Utilitarianism or the Systems of Paley, Bentham and Mill Examined and Compared''.
In this, he pre-figured the hedonic calculus of Bentham.
Some claim that John Gay developed the first systematic theory of utilitarian ethics.
Hooker describes two aspects to the problem: act utilitarianism requires ''huge'' sacrifices from those who are relatively better off and also requires sacrifice of your own good even when the aggregate good will be only ''slightly'' increased.
The pattern is the same in each case...
Utilitarianism is a form of consequentialism, which states that the consequences of any action are the only standard of right and wrong.
Whatever is useful to this queer normal man, and to his world, is absolutely useful.
He says, "utilitarianism values the happiness of people, not the production of units of happiness.
Utilitarianism is distinctly different from other forms of consequentialism such as egoism as it considers all interests equally.
A stone does not have interests because it cannot suffer.
Jonathan Dancy rejects this interpretation on the grounds that Mill is explicitly making intention relevant to an assessment of the act not to an assessment of the agent.
More recently, Hardin has made the same point.
On the other hand, measuring the utility of a population based on the average utility of that population avoids Parfit's repugnant conclusion but causes other problems.
In a later article, McCloskey says:
Gay's theological utilitarianism was developed and popularized by William Paley.
Accordingly, one has no positive obligation to have children.
As opposed to this hedonistic view, some define utility with relation to preference satisfaction whereas others believe that a range of values can be included in its definition.
In ''An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue'' (1725), Hutcheson says when choosing the most moral action, virtue is in proportion to the number of people a particular action brings happiness to.
What ought I to do?"
Taurek's argument looks at a trade off situation:  "The situation is that I have a supply of some life-saving drug.
Mill also acknowledges that "many who are capable of the higher pleasures, occasionally, under the influence of temptation, postpone them to the lower.
Smart and McCloskey initially used the terms 'extreme' and 'restricted' utilitarianism but eventually everyone settled on the terms 'act' and 'rule' utilitarianism.
He adds that, "from every kind of motive, may proceed actions that are good, others that are bad, and others that are indifferent."
The objection arises when utilitarianism is mistakenly taken to be a decision-making procedure rather than a criterion of what is right.
The utilitarian philosopher Peter Singer and many other animal rights activists have continued to argue that the well-being of all sentient beings ought to be seriously considered.
Yet the alleged fallacies in the proof continue to attract scholarly attention in journal articles and book chapters.
Others have said that pleasure is not commensurable across people with varying identities and thus the idea of aggregating utility is impossible.
He adds that, if a person was to take the contrary view, then "I think it is self-evident that he would be wrong."
A response to this criticism is to point out that whilst seeming to resolve some problems it introduces others.
The basic concern here is cogent:  while one can understand why more pain or sadness is worse for an individual subject since someone experiences that greater pain or sorrow.
John Stuart Mill expanded this concept of utility to include not only the quantity, but quality of pleasure, while focusing on rules, instead of individual moral actions.
In Chapter IV, Bentham introduces a method of calculating the value of pleasures and pains, which has come to be known as the hedonic calculus.
The moral weight of suffering can be increased by using a "compassionate" utilitarian metric, so that the result is the same as in prioritarianism.
Applying carefully selected rules at the social level and encouraging appropriate motives at the personal level is, so it is argued, likely to lead to a better overall outcome even if on some individual occasions it leads to the wrong action when assessed according to act utilitarian standards.
It is usual to say that Mill is committing a number of fallacies.
Mill recognizes that these "competent judges" will not always agree, and states that, in cases of disagreement, the judgment of the majority is to be accepted as final.
In ''The Open Society and its Enemies'' (1945), Karl Popper argued that the principle "maximize pleasure" should be replaced by "minimize pain".
As Shelly Kagan says, "Given the parameters of the actual world, there is no question that …(maximally)… promoting the good would require a life of hardship, self-denial, and austerity…a life spent promoting the good would be a severe one indeed."
The journal stated that taxation of the wealthy is the best way to make use of the disposable income they receive.
According to utilitarianism, the forms of life that are unable to experience anything akin to either enjoyment or discomfort are denied moral status, because it is impossible to increase the happiness or reduce the suffering of something that cannot feel happiness or suffer.
Paley had justified the use of rules and Mill says:
However, Singer not only argues that one ought to donate a significant proportion of one's income to charity, but also that this money should be directed to the most cost-effective charities, in order to bring about the greatest good for the greatest number, consistent with utilitarian thinking.
Hume studied under Francis Hutcheson, and it was he who first introduced a key utilitarian phrase.
Critics say that this combination of requirements leads to utilitarianism making unreasonable demands.
Rosen warns that descriptions of utilitarianism can bear "little resemblance historically to utilitarians like Bentham and J. S. Mill" and can be more "a crude version of act utilitarianism conceived in the twentieth century as a straw man to be attacked and rejected."
The moral impulse of utilitarianism is constant, but our decisions under it are contingent on our knowledge and scientific understanding."
Few could stand by and watch a child drown; many can ignore the avoidable deaths of children in Africa or India.
Samuel Scheffler takes a different approach and amends the requirement that everyone be treated the same.
Bentham says that the value of a pleasure or pain, considered by itself, can be measured according to its intensity, duration, certainty/uncertainty and propinquity/remoteness.
However, McCloskey asks, what about the rule "punish an innocent person when and only when to do so is not to weaken the existing institution of punishment and when the consequences of doing so are valuable"?
But in virtue of what should we take five people's pain or sorrow (all else being equal) as worse if no single person experiences that pain or sorrow?
Adams concludes that "right action, by act-utilitarian standards, and right motivation, by motive-utilitarian standards, are incompatible in some cases."
Peter Singer, for example, argues that donating some of one's income to charity could help to save a life or cure somebody from a poverty-related illness, which is a much better use of the money as it brings someone in extreme poverty far more happiness than it would bring to oneself if one lived in relative comfort.
The well-being of strangers counts just as much as that of friends, family or self.
Thus, the aggregation of utility becomes futile as both pain and happiness are intrinsic to and inseparable from the consciousness in which they are felt, rendering impossible the task of adding up the various pleasures of multiple individuals.
In all probability, it was not a distinction that Mill was particularly trying to make and so the evidence in his writing is inevitably mixed.
He simply reproduced in his dull way what Helvétius and other Frenchmen had said with esprit in the 18th century.
Since Sidgwick raised the question it has been studied in detail and philosophers have argued that using either total or average happiness can lead to objectionable results.
It is a mistake to think that Bentham is not concerned with rules.
Mill's distinction between higher and lower pleasures might suggest that he gave more status to humans but in ''The Methods of Ethics'', philosopher Henry Sidgwick says "We have next to consider who the "all" are, whose happiness is to be taken into account.
Act utilitarianism not only requires everyone to do what they can to maximize utility, but to do so without any favouritism.
Although utilitarianism is usually thought to start with Jeremy Bentham, there were earlier writers who presented theories that were strikingly similar.
This seems to tip the balance in favour of saying that Mill is best classified as an act utilitarian.
Parallel considerations in other realms are dismissed with eminently good sense.
Adams refers to Sidgwick's observation that "Happiness (general as well as individual) is likely to be better attained if the extent to which we set ourselves consciously to aim at it be carefully restricted."
Accordingly, whilst two actions may outwardly appear to be the same they will be different actions if there is a different intention.
It is not that some people are archangels and others proles, but rather that "we all share the characteristics of both to limited and varying degrees and at different times."
No matter what the nature of the being, the principle of equality requires that its suffering be counted equally with the like suffering—in so far as rough comparisons can be made—of any other being.
In ''Ethics'' (1912), Moore rejected a purely hedonistic utilitarianism and argued that there is a range of values that might be maximized.
Few human creatures would consent to be changed into any of the lower animals, for a promise of the fullest allowance of a beast's pleasures; no intelligent human being would consent to be a fool, no instructed person would be an ignoramus, no person of feeling and conscience would be selfish and base, even though they should be persuaded that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal is better satisfied with his lot than they are with theirs…  A being of higher faculties requires more to make him happy, is capable probably of more acute suffering, an certainly accessible to it at more points, than one of an inferior type; but in spite of these liabilities, he can never really wish to sink into what he feels to be a lower grade of existence… It is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied.
G. E. Moore writing in 1903 said:
He suggests that many of the problems arise under the traditional formulation because the conscientious utilitarian ends up having to make up for the failings of others and so contributing more than their fair share.
Are we to extend our concern to all the beings capable of pleasure and pain whose feelings are affected by our conduct?
Dennett points out that not only is it impossible to assign a precise utility value to the incident, it is impossible to know whether, ultimately, the near-meltdown that occurred was a good or bad thing.
For example, bringing a moderately happy person into a very happy world would be seen as an immoral act; aside from this, the theory implies that it would be a moral good to eliminate all people whose happiness is below average, as this would raise the average happiness.
But one of the six requires all of the drug if he is to survive.
The accusation that hedonism is "doctrine worthy only of swine" has a long history.
However, rule utilitarianism proposes a more central role for rules that was thought to rescue the theory from some of its more devastating criticisms, particularly problems to do with justice and promise keeping.
It is possible that Bentham was spurred on to publish after he saw the success of Paley's ''The Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy''.
The question, however, is not what we usually do, but what we ought to do, and it is difficult to see any sound moral justification for the view that distance, or community membership, makes a crucial difference to our obligations."
The concept is also important in animal rights advocate Richard Ryder's rejection of utilitarianism, in which he talks of the "boundary of the individual", through which neither pain nor pleasure may pass.
When we are "playing God or the ideal observer", we use the specific form, and we will need to do this when we are deciding what general principles to teach and follow.
The importance of happiness as an end for humans has long been recognized.
Those of the first order are the more immediate consequences; those of the second are when the consequences spread through the community causing "alarm" and "danger".
Nevertheless, his book ''The Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy'' (1785) was a required text at Cambridge and Smith says that Paley's writings were "once as well known in American colleges as were the readers and spellers of William McGuffey and Noah Webster in the elementary schools."
It is true there are cases in which, if we confine ourselves to the effects of the first order, the good will have an incontestable preponderance over the evil.
"It is indisputable that the being whose capacities of enjoyment are low, has the greatest chance of having them fully satisfied; and a highly-endowed being will always feel that any happiness which he can look for, as the world is constitute, is imperfect."
Dancy notes that this does not explain why intentions count but motives do not.
And if, exactly in proportion as human beings raise their heads out of the slough of selfishness, they do not with one voice answer "immoral," let the morality of the principle of utility be for ever condemned."
Mill makes a similar point and explicitly says that "motive has nothing to do with the morality of the action, though much with the worth of the agent.
Adams illustrates his theory by telling a fictitious story about Jack, a lover of art, visiting Chartres cathedral.
But this is absurd.
From then on, articles have debated this interpretation of Mill.
To deal with this, Harsanyi distinguishes between "manifest" preferences and "true" preferences.
By "extreme" utilitarian, McCloskey is referring to what later came to be called "act" utilitarianism.
Hare does not specify when we should think more like an "archangel" and more like a "prole" as this will, in any case, vary from person to person.
The objection that "utilitarianism does not take seriously the distinction between persons" came to prominence in 1971 with the publication of John Rawls' ''A Theory of Justice''.
Originally, Jeremy Bentham, the founder of Utilitarianism, defined utility as the aggregate pleasure after deducting suffering of all involved in any action.
Let us take, for example, the physical desire of satisfying hunger.
But it is the intention, that is, the foresight of consequences, which constitutes the moral rightness or wrongness of the act."
If a being is not capable of suffering, or of experiencing enjoyment or happiness, there is nothing to be taken into account."
He adds that humans tend to be speciesist (discriminatory against non-humans) in ethical matters, and argues that, on utilitarianism, speciesism cannot be justified as there is no rational distinction that can be made between the suffering of humans and the suffering of nonhuman animals; all suffering ought to be reduced.
To know what is useful for a dog, one must study dog-nature.
This is the view taken by Peter Singer, who says: "No doubt we do instinctively prefer to help those who are close to us.
Marx's accusation is twofold.
William Shaw suggests that the problem can be avoided if a distinction is made between potential people, who need not concern us, and actual future people, who should concern us.
Mill was brought up as a Benthamite with the explicit intention that he would carry on the cause of utilitarianism.
"greater permanency, safety, uncostliness, &c." Instead, Mill will argue that some pleasures are intrinsically better than others.
Moore admits that it is impossible to prove the case either way, but he believed that it was intuitively obvious that even if the amount of pleasure stayed the same a world that contained such things as beauty and love would be a better world.
On act utilitarian grounds he should have ignored them.
In ''The Methods of Ethics'', Henry Sidgwick asked, "Is it total or average happiness that we seek to make a maximum?"
It is the latter that preference utilitarianism tries to satisfy.
Adams argues that Jack will only have skipped the less interesting bits of the cathedral if "he had been less interested in seeing everything in the cathedral than in maximizing utility.
is capable of being desired, to the claim that (2) it is desirable, i.e.
A third interpretation is that an action might be considered a complex action consisting of several stages and it is the intention that determines which of these stages are to be considered part of the action.
One possibility "involves supposing that the 'morality' of the act is one thing, probably to do with the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the agent, and its rightness or wrongness another."
Utility is defined in various ways, but is usually related to the well-being of sentient entities.
In the mid-twentieth century a number of philosophers focused on the place of rules in utilitarian thinking.
Individuals have wants, not mankind; individuals seek satisfaction, not mankind.
Forms of hedonism were put forward by Aristippus and Epicurus; Aristotle argued that eudaimonia is the highest human good and Augustine wrote that "all men agree in desiring the last end, which is happiness."
King uses this insight to adapt utilitarianism, and it may help reconcile Bentham's philosophy with deontology and virtue ethics.
The second caveat is that antisocial preferences, such as sadism, envy and resentment, have to be excluded.
Some believe that one's intentions are also ethically important.
But this is quite compatible with a full appreciation of the intrinsic superiority of the higher."
In an introduction to an anthology of these articles, the editor was able to say: "The development of this theory was a dialectical process of formulation, criticism, reply and reformulation; the record of this process well illustrates the co-operative development of a philosophical theory."
Happiness was also explored in depth by Aquinas.
Daniel Dennett describes this as the Three Mile Island effect.
The above story invites the reply that the sheriff would not frame the innocent because of the rule "do not punish an innocent person"; it also invites the reply that these issues need to be resolved, and riots might very well have positive utility in the long run by drawing attention and thus resources to the racial situation.
"I cannot give a satisfactory account of the meaning of judgments of this kind," he writes (p.&nbsp;304).
This says that the money creates utility for the most people by funding government services.
This process holds for all cases of exceptions, and so the "rules" have as many "sub-rules" as there are exceptional cases, which, in the end, makes an agent seek out whatever outcome produces the maximum utility.
One response to the problem is to accept its demands.
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, articles were published both for and against the new form of utilitarianism, and through this debate the theory we now call rule utilitarianism was created.
In addition, it is necessary to consider "the tendency of any act by which it is produced" and, therefore, to take account of the act's fecundity, or the chance it has of being followed by sensations of the same kind and its purity, or the chance it has of not being followed by sensations of the opposite kind.
A mouse, on the other hand, does have an interest in not being tormented, because it will suffer if it is.
