Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav in February 2013 gave the final clearance for Lucknow Metro and the commencement of civil works started on 27 September 2014.
Greater Noida Cricket Stadium is another newly built international cricket stadium.
Its capital shifted twice between Agra and Allahabad.
The state has the largest railway network in the country and the sixth highest railway density.
The Lucknow Metro is being constructed in the city of Lucknow as an alternative mode of transport.
It is situated on the northern spout of India and shares an international boundary with Nepal.
In 2009–10, the tertiary sector of the economy (service industries) was the largest contributor to the gross domestic product of the state, contributing 44.8% of the state domestic product compared to 44% from the primary sector (agriculture, forestry, and tourism) and 11.2% from the secondary sector (industrial and manufacturing).
During the reign of Harshavardhana (590–647), the Kannauj empire reached its zenith.
The lower Doab, which is referred as Braj Bhumi, or the land of Braj, is home to the speakers of Braj Bhasha.
From 1991 to 2001 its population increased by over 26%.
Awadhi cuisine is from the city of Lucknow.
The state's 2001–2011 decennial growth rate (including Uttrakhand) was 20.09%, higher than the national rate of 17.64%.
The state has more than 32 large and small rivers; of them, the Ganges, Yamuna, Saraswati, Sarayu, Betwa, and Ghaghara are larger and of religious importance in Hinduism.
The region's folk heritage includes songs called rasiya (especially popular in Braj), which celebrate the divine love of Radha and Krishna.
Other universities in the state include Banaras Hindu University, University of Allahabad, University of Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh University of Medical Sciences, Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and Technology, Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar University, Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj University, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Avadh University, Madan Mohan Malaviya University of Technology, Gautam Buddha University, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gorakhpur University, Indian Veterinary Research Institute Bareilly, IMT Ghaziabad, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Institute of Medical Sciences, Dr. A.P.J.
Linguistically, the state spreads across the Central, East-Central, and Eastern zones of the Indo-Aryan languages, the major native languages of the state being Awadhi, Bhojpuri, Bundeli, Braj Bhasha, Kannauji and the vernacular form of Khariboli.
Rohilkhand University, Bundelkhand University, Narendra Dev University of Agriculture and Technology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Veer Bahadur Singh Purvanchal University, Siddharth University, Allahabad State University and Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti Urdu, Arabi~Farsi University.
The party formed the government in 1993, 2003 and 2012.
In December, 1992 the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya was demolished by radical activists, leading to widespread violence across India.
Sherwani is a more formal male dress and is frequently worn along with chooridar on festive occasions.
The valley areas have fertile and rich soil.
During the 11th five-year plan (2007–2012), the average gross state domestic product (GSDP) growth rate was 7.28%, lower than 15.5%, the average for all states of the country.
Initially, another blast was reported inside the stationary Shivganga Express bound for Delhi.
The literacy rate of the state at the 2011 census was 70%, which was below the national average of 74%.
The state has provided seven of India's prime ministers and is the source of the largest number of seats in the Lok Sabha.
Lath mar Holi is a local celebration of the Hindu festival of Holi.
Many communities in various parts of India claim descent from the migrants of Kannauj.
The Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands support cattle.
The governor remains a ceremonial head of the state, while the Chief Minister and his council are responsible for day-to-day government functions.
Many communities have their own particular style of cuisines, such as the Jains, Kayasths and Muslims.
Lucknow is another football venue in Uttar Pradesh which in lucknow football Stadium.
The state contributes 80 seats to the Lok Sabha and 31 seats to the Rajya Sabha of the Indian Parliament.
called Patna Bird Sanctuary.
Upon completing the required coursework, students may enroll in general or professional degree programs.
Sugarcane is the most important cash crop as the state is country’s largest producer of  Sugar.
About 70% of India's sugar comes from Uttar Pradesh.
A large number of other dialects exist.
Among the wide variety of fishes, the most common ones are mahaseer and trout.
Tropical thorny forests, consisting of widely scattered thorny trees, mainly babool are mostly found in the southwestern parts of the state.
Students choose from one of three streams, namely liberal arts, commerce, or science.
The new state was called the 'North Western Provinces of Agra and Oudh', which in 1902 was renamed as the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh.
The most common birds which are found in the state are doves, peafowl, junglefowl, black partridges, house sparrows, songbirds, blue jays, parakeets, quails, bulbuls, comb ducks, kingfishers, woodpeckers, snipes, and parrots.
It spanned from Punjab in the north and Gujarat in the west to Bengal in the east and Odisha in the south.
The cuisine consists of both vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes.
Uttar Pradesh has produced musicians, including Anup Jalota, Baba Sehgal, Girija Devi, Gopal Shankar Misra, Hari Prasad Chaurasia, Kishan Maharaj, Vikash Maharaj Naushad Ali, Ravi Shankar, Shubha Mudgal, Siddheshwari Devi, Talat Mehmood, and Ustad Bismillah Khan.
The kingdom of Kosala, in the Mahajanapada era, was located within the regional boundaries of modern-day Uttar Pradesh.
The population density is 828 people per square kilometre, making it one of the most densely populated states in the country.
Although UP later became the fifth largest state of India, NWPA was one of the smallest states of the British Indian empire.
Estimates released by the Planning Commission for the year 2009-10 revealed that Uttar Pradesh had 59&nbsp;million people below the poverty line, the most for any state in India.
Major manufacturing products include engineering products, electronics, electrical equipment, cables, steel, leather, textiles, jewellery, frigates, automobiles, railway coaches, and wagons.
Awadhi cuisine is world-famous for dishes such as kebab, biryani, keema and nihari.
The Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation was established in 1972 to provide economical, reliable, and comfortable transportation in the state with connecting services to adjoining states and boasts as being the only State Transport Corporation that runs in profit in the entire nation.
Starting from Bengal in the second half of the 18th century, a series of battles for north Indian lands finally gave the British East India Company accession over the state's territories.
Both Hindi and Urdu are spoken by both Hindus and Muslims.
Several species of trees, large and small mammals, reptiles, and insects are found in the belt of temperate upper mountainous forests.
The President of India appoints the chief justice of the High Court of the Uttar Pradesh judiciary on the advice of the chief justice of the Supreme Court of India as well as the Governor of Uttar Pradesh.
Control over this region was of vital importance to the power and stability of all of India's major empires, including the Maurya (320–200 BC), Kushan (AD 100–250), Gupta (350–600), and Gurjara-Pratihara (650–1036) empires.
In the Mughal era, Uttar Pradesh became the heartland of the empire.
In the afternoon of 23 November 2007, within a span of 25 minutes, six consecutive serial blasts occurred in the Lucknow, Varanasi, and Faizabad courts, in which 28 people were killed and several others injured.
The cuisine is strongly influenced by the cuisine of Central Asia, and has in turn strongly similarities to the regional cuisines of Kashmir and the Punjab region.
Uttar Pradesh hosted modern educational institutions such as the Benaras Hindu University, Aligarh Muslim University and the Darul Uloom Deoband.
The Lucknow Airport is the second busiest airport in North India after the Indira Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi.
Moist deciduous trees grow in the upper Gangetic plain, especially along its riverbanks.
The bawarchis and rakabdars of Awadh gave birth to the dum style of cooking or the art of cooking over a slow fire, which has become synonymous with Lucknow today.
Several texts and hymns of the Vedic literature were composed in Uttar Pradesh.
With 359 manufacturing clusters cement is top sector of SMEs in UP.
''The Pioneer'' was founded in Allahabad in 1865 by George Allen.
In 1540 an Afghan, Sher Shah Suri, took over the reins of Uttar Pradesh after defeating the Mughal king Humanyun.
Vernacular newspapers such as those in Hindi, Nepali, Gujarati, Odia, Urdu, and Punjabi are also read by a select readership.
After the revolt failed, the British attempted to divide the most rebellious regions by reorganising the administrative boundaries of the region, splitting the Delhi region from 'NWFP of Agra' and merging it with Punjab, while the Ajmer- Marwar region was merged with Rajputana and Oudh was incorporated into the state.
Since 2006, there have been a number of terrorist attacks, including explosions in a landmark holy place, a court and a temple.
They suffer from waterlogging and large-scale user tracts.
Under the 10+2+3 plan, after completing secondary school, students typically enroll for 2 years in a junior college, also known as pre-university, or in schools with a higher secondary facility affiliated with the Uttar Pradesh Board of High School and Intermediate Education or a central board.
All cities are connected to state highways, and all district headquarters are being connected with four lane roads which carry traffic between major centres within the state.
Recently, cricket has become more popular than field hockey.
The 2006 Varanasi bombings were a series of bombings that occurred across the Hindu holy city of Varanasi on 7 March 2006.
The Siwalik Range which forms the southern foothills of the Himalayas, slopes down into a boulder bed called 'bhadhar'.
Krishna, another divine king of Hindu legend, who plays a key role in the Mahabharata epic and is revered as the eighth reincarnation (Avatar) of the Hindu god Vishnu, is said to have been born in the city of Mathura, in Uttar Pradesh.
Most of the invaders of south India passed through the Gangetic plains of what is today Uttar Pradesh.
Lucknow Metro Rail Corporation (LMRC) has been recently awarded for ‘Best Metro for Excellence in Innovative Designs’ in the fifth Annual Metro Rail Summit 2016.
Food grain production in the state in 2014-15 stood at 47,773.4 thousand tonnes.
Mughlai cuisine is a style of cooking developed in the Indian subcontinent by the imperial kitchens of the Mughal Empire.
Lucknow, the capital of the state, has several beautiful historical monuments.
During the Quit India Movement of 1942, Ballia district overthrew the colonial authority and installed an independent administration under Chittu Pandey.
The first blast occurred in the premises of the Varanasi civil court and collectorate between 13:05 and 13:07.
Uttar Pradesh has been called India's under-achiever, because it has provided India with eight prime ministers while remaining a poor state.
The first in the eastern tract consisting of 14 districts which are subject to periodical floods and droughts and have been classified as scarcity areas.
It boasts 42 national highways, with a total length of 4,942&nbsp;km (9.6% of the total NH length in India).
Men often sport head-gear like topi or pagri.
There have also been pre-historical finds in Uttar Pradesh from the Middle and Upper Paleolithic dated to 21–31 thousand years old and Mesolithic/Microlithic hunter-gatherer's settlement, near Pratapgarh, from around 10550–9550 BC.
The Deputy Conservator of Forests, an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service, also serves the government.
To promote tourism, the Directorate of Tourism was established in the 1972 with a Director General who is an I.A.S.
The religion-wise percentage of the population in 2011 was Hindus 79.69, Muslims 19.25, Sikhs 0.30, Jains 0.11, Buddhists 0.10, Christians 0.18 and Others 0.30.
Major district roads provide a secondary function of linking between main roads and rural roads.
The conflict between Rohillas and Marathas came to an end on 18December 1788 with the arrest of Ghulam Qadir, the grandson of Najeeb-ud-Daula, who was defeated by the Maratha general Mahadaji Scindia.
The service sector comprises travel and tourism, hotel industry, real estate, insurance and financial consultancies.
Further south, the Bundelkhand region people speaks Bundelkhandi.
According to a recent report of World Bank on Ease of Doing Business in India, Uttar Pradesh was ranked among the top 10 states and first among Northern states.
Modern human hunter-gatherers have been in Uttar Pradesh since between around 85 and 73 thousand years ago.
Since Uttar Pradesh sends the largest number of legislators to the national Parliament, it is often considered to be one of the most important states with respect to Indian politics.
The All India Kisan Sabha (AIKS) was formed at the Lucknow session of the Congress on 11 April 1936, with the famous nationalist Swami Sahajanand Saraswati elected as its first President, in order to address the longstanding grievances of the peasantry and mobilise them against the zamindari landlords attacks on their occupancy rights, thus sparking the Farmers movements in India.
According to Hindu legend, the divine king Rama of the Ramayana epic reigned in Ayodhya, the capital of Kosala.
Other blasts followed at the Varanasi Cantonment Railway Station near the waiting area next to the travel office.
Uttar Pradesh has more than 45 universities, including 5 central universities, 28 state universities, 8 deemed universities, 2 IITs, 1 IIM in Lucknow, 1 NIT in Allahabad, 2 IIITs, 1 National Law University in Lucknow and several polytechnics, engineering colleges and industrial training institutes.
At a distance of 80&nbsp;km from Varanasi, Ghazipur is famous not only for its Ghats on the Ganges but also for the tomb of Lord Cornwallis, the 18th century Governor of East India Company ruled Bengal Presidency.
It was commonly referred to as the United Provinces or its acronym UP.
The larger Gangetic Plain region is in the north; it includes the Ganges-Yamuna Doab, the Ghaghra plains, the Ganges plains and the Terai.
These formed the core of Hindu-Buddhist-Muslim education until the rise of British colonialism.
With the use of advance signalling based on CBTC, French Multinational Alstom is manufacturing the Metro Train in South India.
Uttar Pradesh has more metropolitan cities than any other state in India.
The Himalayas border the state on the north, but the plains that cover most of the state are distinctly different from those high mountains.
Sanskrit-based learning formed the major part of education from the Vedic to the Gupta periods.
Sonebhadra, a district in eastern Uttar Pradesh, has large-scale industries.
The blasts came a week after the Uttar Pradesh police and central security agencies busted Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists who had planned to abduct Rahul Gandhi.
The state is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy, a feature the state shares with other Indian states.
Hindi became the language of state administration with the Uttar Pradesh Official Language Act of 1951.
Uttar Pradesh is the third largest Indian state by economy, with a GDP of .
Kathak, a classical dance form, owes its origin to the state of Uttar Pradesh.
The state has an abundance of natural resources.
The Samajwadi Party government has been working to bring an industrial revolution in the state as industrial growth in Uttar Pradesh contributes to Indian economy
This plain supports a wide variety of plants and animals.
Doordarshan is the state-owned television broadcaster.
It can also boast of routinely having 3 or 4 players on the national side.
The tomb is maintained by the Archaeological Survey of India.
The state is well connected to its nine neighbouring states and almost all other parts of India through the national highways (NH).
There has been an increase in private investments under the leadership of Akhilesh Yadav in the first four years.
Kannauj was several times invaded by the south Indian Rashtrakuta Dynasty from the 8th century to the 10th century.
In central Uttar Pradesh, people speak the Awadhi dialect and Bhojpuri is spoken in the east, Bhojpuri speakers have a similar culture to those living in the neighbouring state of Bihar.
The Governor of Uttar Pradesh is appointed for a period of five years and appoints the Chief Minister and his council of ministers, who are vested with legislative powers.
He was bestowed the title of ''Hemchandra Vikramaditya'' (title of Vikramāditya adopted from vedic times) at his formal coronation took place at Purana Quila in Delhi on 7 October 1556.
In 2011, state's cabinet ministers headed by the then Chief Minister Mayawati announced the separation of Uttar Pradesh into four different states of Purvanchal, Bundelkhand, Avadh Pradesh and Paschim Pradesh with twenty eight, seven, twenty three and seventeen districts respectively, later the proposal was turned down when Mulayam Singh Yadav lead Samajwadi Party came to power in the 2012 election.
As per 2011 census, Uttar Pradesh, the most populous state in India, is home to the maximum number of Hindu and Muslim population.
Awadh has been greatly influenced by Mughal cooking techniques, and the cuisine of Lucknow bears similarities to those of Central Asia, Kashmir, Punjab and Hyderabad; and the city is known for Nawabi foods.
The literacy rate for men is 79% and for women 59%.
Green Park Stadium in Kanpur, the only internationally recognised cricket stadium in the state, has witnessed some of India's most famous victories.
The value of human development index in Uttar Pradesh has steadily increased over time.
Uttar Pradesh has the highest road density in India, (1,027&nbsp;km per 1000&nbsp;km2) and the largest surfaced urban-road network in the country (50,721&nbsp;km).
Medicinal plants are found in the wild and are also grown in plantations.
Buddha Purnima, which marks the birth of Gautama Buddha, is a major Hindu and Buddhist festival, while Christmas is celebrated by the minority Christian population.
Uttar Pradesh continued to be central to Indian politics and was especially important in modern Indian history as a hotbed of the Indian independence movement.
The state is sometimes called the 'Hindi heartland of India'.
Many species are vulnerable to poaching despite regulation by the government.
There is intensive cultivation on terraced hill slopes, but irrigation facilities are deficient.
The railway stations of Lucknow NR, Kanpur Central, Varanasi Junction, Agra Cantt, Gorakhpur and Mathura Junction were included in the Indian Railways list of 50 world-class railway stations.
The subordinate judiciary or the district courts are categorised into two divisions viz.
The state has been affected by repeated episodes of caste and communal violence.
A number of newspapers and periodicals are published in Hindi, English, and Urdu.
Uttar Pradesh is known for its extensive avifauna.
It is characterised by hard rock strata and a varied topography of hills, plains, valleys and plateaus.
Uttar Pradesh government is a democratically elected body in India with the Governor as its constitutional head.
The state is attracting foreign direct investment which has mostly come in the software and electronics fields; Noida and Lucknow are becoming a major hub for the information technology (IT) industry and houses the headquarters of most of the major corporate, media and financial institutions.
The Indian Mujahidin has claimed responsibility of these blasts in an email sent to TV stations five minutes before the blast.
Notable scholars who were born, worked or studied in the geographic area of the state include Harivansh Rai Bachchan, Motilal Nehru, Harish Chandra and Indira Gandhi.
Wheat is the state's principal food crop and sugarcane is the main commercial crop.
Traditional styles of dress include colourful draped garments&nbsp;– such as sari for women and dhoti or lungi for men&nbsp;– and tailored clothes such as salwar kameez for women and kurta-pyjama for men.
The party believes in creating a socialist society and works on the principal of equality.
This festival is organised on a larger scale every 12th year and is called the Kumbha Mela, where over 10 million Hindu pilgrims congregate in one of the largest gatherings of people in the world.
In 2011 the recorded forest area in the state was  which is about 6.88% of the state's geographical area.
The historically important towns of Sarnath and Kushinagar is near to gorakhpur and are located not far from Varanasi.
Hindi is used as a medium of instruction in most of the schools except those affiliated to the CBSE or the Council for ICSE boards.
After the death of Islam Shah Suri, his prime minister Hemu became the ''de facto'' ruler of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and the western parts of Bengal.
This theoretically allows the judiciary to interpret the law based solely on the legislation enacted by Parliament without other influences on their decisions.
Uttar Pradesh has a large population and a high population growth rate.
After India's independence, the United Provinces were renamed "Uttar Pradesh" in 1950.
As of July 2012, due to financial constraints and directions from the state government, lending activities have been suspended except for State Government Schemes.
The Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation (UPFC) was established in the year 1954 under the SFCs Act of 1951 mainly to develop small and medium scale industries in the state.
People make distinctive sweetmeats from milk products, including khurchan, peda, gulabjamun, petha, makkhan malai, and chamcham.
These districts have the highest density of population which gives the lowest per capita land.
The Subordinate judicial service of the judiciary at Uttar Pradesh is controlled by the District Judge.
Under the leadership of Akhilesh Yadav, Uttar Pradesh has exceeded 11th five-year plan targets and has established several Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and generated 6.5 lakh employment opportunities across the state.
Diwali (celebrated between mid-October and mid-December) and Rama Navami are popular festivals in Uttar Pradesh.
At the local level, the state has a large number of village councils (''panchayats''), which are similar to those found in other Indian states.
Uttar Pradesh gives access to three World Heritage Sites: the Taj Mahal, Agra Fort, and the nearby Fatehpur Sikri.
Uttar Pradesh Cricket Association (UPCA) has headquarters in Kanpur.
More small-scale industrial units are situated in Uttar Pradesh than in any other state, with 12 percent of over 2.3 million units.
'''Uttar Pradesh''' (, Hindi : उत्तर प्रदेश literally "Northern Province"),  abbreviated as '''UP''', is the most populous state in the Republic of India as well as the most populous country subdivision in the world.
While the Uttar Pradesh civil judicial services comprises the Civil Judges (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistraes and civil judges (Senior Division)/Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Uttar Pradesh higher judicial service comprises civil and sessions judges.
These blocks consists of urban units viz.
In the 2012 election, the largest number of seats went to the Samajwadi Party with 224 seats.
People of Uttar Pradesh regard their language a very important part of their cultural identity.
Large tracts of these forests have been cleared for cultivation.
Varanasi is an ancient city famous for its ghats.
The sluggish rivers of the bhabhar deepen in this area, their course running through a tangled mass of thick undergrowth.
It included parts of central India, north of the Narmada River and it encompassed the entire Indo-Gangetic plain.
Most people in Uttar Pradesh speak a dialect of Hindustani, which in its written forms is referred to as Urdu or Hindi depending on the script employed.
In 1974 the Uttar Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation was established to look after the commercial tourist activities.
The Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies was founded as an autonomous organisation by the national ministry of culture.
Abdul Kalam Technical University, M.J.P.
Other festivals are Vijayadashami, Makar Sankranti, Vasant Panchami, Ayudha Puja, Ganga Mahotsava, Janmashtami, Sardhana Christian Fair, Maha Shivaratri, Mahavir Jayanti, Moharram, Bārah Wafāṭ, Eid, Bakreed, Chhath puja, Lucknow Mahotsav, Kabob and Hanuman Jayanti.
There are 14 municipal corporations, while Noida is specially administered by a statuary authority.
The absolute urban population of the state is 44.4 million, which constitutes 11.8% of the total urban population of India, the second highest of any state.
The sex ratio in 2011, at 908 women to 1000 men, was lower than the national figure of 933.
The state has also proposed creating the Taj International Airport at Kurikupa near Hirangaon, Tundla in Firozabad district.
Many people still drink the traditional drink chaach (traditional Butter milk) with meals.
Five distinct dialect regions have been identified.
Allahabad is the headquarters of the North Central Railway and Gorakhpur is the headquarters of the North Eastern Railway.
Lucknow is the capital city of Uttar Pradesh.
Villages with domesticated cattle, sheep, and goats and evidence of agriculture began as early as 6000 BC, and gradually developed between c. 4000 and 1500 BC&nbsp; beginning with the Indus Valley Civilisation and Harappa Culture to the Vedic period; extending into the Iron Age.
Dial-up access is provided throughout the state by BSNL and other providers.
At least 28 people were killed and as many as 101 others were injured.
