Uzbekistan is also a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) and hosts the SCO’s Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure (RATS) in Tashkent.
54% of Muslims are non-denominational Muslims, 18% are Sunnis and 1% are Shias.
When Uzbekistan gained independence in 1991, there was concern that Muslim fundamentalism would spread across the region.
A majority of Uzbeks are non-denominational Muslims.
During the Soviet period, Russians and Ukrainians constituted more than half the population of Tashkent.
Until the late 1980s, the plant was one of the leading airplane production centers in the USSR.
Uzbekistan has a high literacy rate, with about 99.3% of adults above the age of 15 being able to read and write.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, significant emigration of ethnic Russians has taken place, mostly for economic reasons.
There are also small groups of Armenians in Uzbekistan, mostly in Tashkent and Samarkand.
Uzbekistan's economy relies mainly on commodity production, including cotton, gold, uranium, and natural gas.
Uzbekistan's signature dish is palov (''plov'' or ''osh''), a main course typically made with rice, pieces of meat, and grated carrots and onions.
In 1993 Uzbekistan shifted back to the Latin script, which was modified in 1996 and is being taught in schools since 2005.
Uzbekistan has GNI per capita (US$1,900 in current dollars in 2013, giving a PPP equivalent of US$3,800).
Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan are currently the only two countries in Central Asia with a subway system.
Orderly succession, prosperity, and internal peace prevailed in the Chaghatai lands, and the Mongol Empire as a whole remained a strong and united kingdom (Ulus Batiy, Sattarkhan).
Russian is an important language for interethnic communication, especially in the cities, including much day-to-day technical, scientific, governmental and business use.
The economic policies have repelled foreign investment, which is the lowest per capita in the CIS.
Uzbekistan's external position has been strong since 2003.
Before the arrival of the Russians, present Uzbekistan was divided between Emirate of Bukhara and khanates of Khiva and Kokand.
According to Central Depository as of January 2013 par value of outstanding shares of Uzbek emitters exceeded 9 trillion.
For example, the station ''Metro Kosmonavtov'' built in 1984 is decorated using a space travel theme to recognise the achievements of mankind in space exploration and to commemorate the role of Vladimir Dzhanibekov, the Soviet cosmonaut of Uzbek origin.
1 September was proclaimed the National Independence Day.
Despite criticism, this seems to be a sign of improving relationships between Uzbekistan and the West.
In the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand and spread into Central Asia.
Tea always accompanies a meal, but it is also a drink of hospitality that is automatically offered: green or black to every guest.
According to the UNDP (United Nations Development Program), climate risk management in Uzbekistan needs to consider its ecological safety.
In the early 14th century, however, as the empire began to break up into its constituent parts.
The Tajik language is widespread in the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand because of their relatively large population of ethnic Tajiks.
Other notable national dishes include shurpa (''shurva'' or ''shorva''), a soup made of large pieces of fatty meat (usually mutton), and fresh vegetables; norin and langman, noodle-based dishes that may be served as a soup or a main course; manti, chuchvara, and somsa, stuffed pockets of dough served as an appetizer or a main course; dimlama, a meat and vegetable stew; and various kebabs, usually served as a main course.
During his reign and the reigns of his immediate descendants, a wide range of religious and palatial construction masterpieces were undertaken in Samarqand and other population centres.
The CACO consists of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.
He would often 'sprint' in the final kilometre and had a reputation as being dangerous in these bunch sprints as he would weave from side to side.
Finally, in 1940, the Cyrillic alphabet was introduced by Soviet authorities and was used until the fall of Soviet Union.
Interludes of spoken Sufi poetry interrupt the music, typically beginning at a lower register and gradually ascending to a climax before calming back down to the beginning tone.
Uzbekistan has a wide mix of ethnic groups and cultures, with the Uzbek being the majority group.
Uzbekistan is Central Asia's most populous country.
The U.S. State Department's International Religious Freedom Report 2004 reports that 0.2% of the population are Buddhist (these being ethnic Koreans).
Pakhtakor hold the record for most Uzbekistan champion title with 10.
Official tariffs are combined with unofficial, discriminatory charges resulting in total charges amounting to as much as 100 to 150% of the actual value of the product, making imported products virtually unaffordable.
There is a great deal of grain farming in Uzbekistan, so breads and noodles are of importance and Uzbek cuisine has been characterized as "noodle-rich".
Uzbekistan is the home of the International Kurash Association.
Ayran, a chilled yogurt drink, is popular in summer, but does not replace hot tea.
There is a large airplane plant that was built during the Soviet era&nbsp;– Tashkent Chkalov Aviation Manufacturing Plant or ТАПОиЧ in Russian.
Although he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan, Timur became the ''de facto'' ruler of Transoxiana and proceeded to conquer all of western Central Asia, Iran, the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and the southern steppe region north of the Aral Sea.
The number of listed companies as of January 2013 exceeds 110.
By 1935 only one synagogue out of 30 was left in Samarkand; nevertheless, underground community life continued during the Soviet era.
In 1999, Uzbekistan joined the GUAM alliance (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova), which was formed in 1997 (making it GUUAM), but pulled out of the organization in 2005.
As a result of this trade on what became known as the Silk Route, Bukhoro and Samarqand eventually became extremely wealthy cities, and at times Transoxiana (Mawarannahr) was one of the most influential and powerful Persian provinces of antiquity.
Uzbekistan has an ethnic Korean population that was forcibly relocated to the region by Stalin from the Soviet Far East in 1937–1938.
Westminster University and Inha University Tashkent maintains a campus in Tashkent offering English language courses across several disciplines.
Uzbekistan was an active supporter of U.S. efforts against worldwide terrorism and joined the coalitions that have dealt with both Afghanistan and Iraq.
During this period, most of present Uzbekistan was part of Chagatai Khanate except Khwarezm was part of Golden Horde.
Since 2003 annual inflation rates averaged less than 10%.
While officially a democratic republic, non-governmental human rights organizations define Uzbekistan as "an authoritarian state with limited civil rights".
On 27 October 1924 the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic was created.
The current champions (2014) are Pakhtakor.
Uzbeks constitute 81% of the population, followed by Russians (5.4%), Tajiks (4.0%), Kazakhs (3.0%), and others (6.5%).
A conquest was supposedly of little help to Alexander as popular resistance was fierce, causing Alexander's army to be bogged down in the region that became the northern part of the Hellenistic Greco-Bactrian Kingdom.
There were between 25,000 and 60,000 Tajik slaves in Bukhara alone in 1821.
Despite the potential for serious fragmentation, the Mongol law of the Mongol Empire maintained orderly succession for several more generations, and control of most of Transoxiana stayed in the hands of the direct descendants of Chagatai Khan, the second son of Genghis Khan.
Nevertheless, it is generally assumed among Uzbekistan's population that the government will stand firm in maintaining its close ties with the Russian Federation and in its theory that the 2004–2005 protests in Uzbekistan were promoted by the USA and UK.
However, it is opposed to reintegration and withdrew from the CIS collective security arrangement in 1999.
The month of October 2006 also saw a decrease in the isolation of Uzbekistan from the West.
The government of Uzbekistan restricts foreign imports in many ways, including high import duties.
Chess is quite popular in Uzbekistan.
After Uzbekistan got split up from the Soviet Union, Uzbekistan created its own football, rugby union, basketball and futsal national teams.
The third elections for the bicameral 150-member Oliy Majlis, the Legislative Chamber, and the 100-member Senate for five-year terms, were held on 27 December 2009.
Uzbekistan also shares a short border (less than ) with Afghanistan to the south.
Excise taxes are applied in a highly discriminatory manner to protect locally produced goods.
For many centuries the region of Uzbekistan was ruled by the Persian empires, including the Parthian and Sassanid Empires, as well as by other empires, for example those formed by the Turko-Persian Hephthalite and Turkic Gokturk peoples.
In the 9th and 10th centuries, Transoxiana was included into the Samanid State.
A number of CIS countries are officially exempt from Uzbekistan import duties.
Amir Timur initiated an exchange of medical discoveries and patronized physicians, scientists and artists from the neighbouring countries such as India; His grandson Ulugh Beg was one of the world's first great astronomers.
Since that time, Uzbekistan has participated in the CIS peacekeeping force in Tajikistan and in UN-organized groups to help resolve the Tajikistan and Afghanistan conflicts, both of which it sees as posing threats to its own stability.
The state in the hands of the bureaucracy has remained a dominant influence in the economy.
Later, Transoxiana saw the incursion of the Turkic-ruled Karakhanids, as well as the Seljuks (Sultan Sanjar) and Kara-Khitans.
Most international observers refused to participate in the process and did not recognize the results, dismissing them as not meeting basic standards.
By 1970 there were 103,000 Jews registered in the republic.
Shashmaqam is closely related to Azerbaijani Mugam and Uyghur muqam.
With dissolution of the Soviet Union its manufacturing equipment became outdated; most of the workers were laid off.
Sufids rules Khwarezm as vassals of alternatively Timurids, Golden Horde and Uzbek Khanate till Persian occupation in 1510.
The use of alcohol is less widespread than in the West, but wine is comparatively popular for a Muslim nation as Uzbekistan is largely secular.
Uzbekistan's football clubs regularly participates in the AFC Champions League and the AFC Cup.
Members of the lower house are to be "full-time" legislators.
Among the CIS countries, it is the 4th largest by area and the 2nd largest by population.
By supporting such people, he imbued his empire with a rich Perso-Islamic culture.
Many say that it was the most liberated musical experience in their lives.
According to the reports, the most widespread violations are torture, arbitrary arrests, and various restrictions of freedoms: of religion, of speech and press, of free association and assembly.
A concern has been expressed and a request for an independent investigation of the events has been made by the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, the OSCE Chairman-in-Office and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
Russian is the main language of over 14% of the population and is spoken as a second language by many more.
The Timurid state quickly split in half after the death of Timur.
The expectation was that a country long denied freedom of religious practice would undergo a very rapid increase in the expression of its dominant faith.
The car production is supported by the government and the Korean auto company Daewoo.
It is a unitary, constitutional, presidential republic, comprising twelve provinces, one autonomous republic and a capital city.
However, with only 76% of the under-15 population currently enrolled in education (and only 20% of the 3–6 year olds attending pre-school), this figure may drop in the future.
In 2011, Uzbekistan was the world's seventh-largest producer and fifth-largest exporter of cotton as well as the seventh largest world producer of gold.
Corruption permeates the society and grows more rampant over time: Uzbekistan's 2005 Corruption Perception Index was 137 out of 159 countries, whereas in 2007 Uzbekistan was 175th out of 179 countries.
The relationship between Uzbekistan and the United States began to deteriorate after the so-called "colour revolutions" in Georgia and Ukraine (and to a lesser extent Kyrgyzstan).
The last US troops left Uzbekistan in November 2005.
Chagaev defended his title twice before losing it to Vladimir Klitschko in 2009.
However, Islamic observance is increasing in the region.
Uzbekistan has 14 wineries, the oldest and most famous being the Khovrenko Winery in Samarkand (established in 1927).
The Republican Stock Exchange (RSE) opened in 1994.
The use of child labour in Uzbekistan has led several companies, including Tesco, C&A, Marks & Spencer, Gap, and H&M, to boycott Uzbek cotton.
The military structure is largely inherited from the Turkestan Military District of the Soviet Army, although it is going through a reform to be based mainly on motorized infantry with some light and special forces.
Nevertheless, many signs and notices (including official government boards in the streets) are still written in Uzbek Cyrillic script.
The classical music in Uzbekistan is very different to pop music.
Much of the water was and continues to be used for the irrigation of cotton fields, a crop requiring a large amount of water to grow.
Uzbekistan also has its own Tennis Federation called the "UTF" (Uzbekistan Tennis Federation) that was created in 2002.
In late July 2005, the government of Uzbekistan ordered the United States to vacate an air base in Karshi-Kanabad (near Uzbekistan's border with Afghanistan) within 180 days.
Uzbekistan also maintains the world's second highest rate of modern slavery with 3.97% of the country's population working as modern slaves.
Despite the declared objective of transition to a market economy, its government continues to maintain economic controls which imports in favour of domestic "import substitution".
In May 2007 UzDaewooAuto, the car maker, signed a strategic agreement with General Motors-Daewoo Auto and Technology (GMDAT, see GM Uzbekistan also).
The Uzbek national gas company, Uzbekneftegas, ranks 11th in the world in natural gas production with an annual output of .
The use of Russian in remote rural areas has always been limited, and today most school children have no proficiency in Russian even in urban centres.
In the 1940s, the Crimean Tatars, along with the Volga Germans, Chechens, Pontic Greeks, Kumaks and many other nationalities were deported to Central Asia.
Michael Kolganov, sprint canoer, was world champion and won an Olympic bronze in K-1 500-meter.
By the fifth century BC, the Bactrian, Soghdian, and Tokharian states dominated the region.
Abdoujaparov has won the green jersey points contest in the Tour de France three times.
It is also a regionally significant producer of natural gas, coal, copper, oil, silver and uranium.
Among the achievements of the scholars during this period were the development of trigonometry into its modern form (simplifying its practical application to calculate the phases of the moon), advances in optics, in astronomy, as well as in poetry, philosophy, art, calligraphy and many others, which set the foundation for the Muslim Renaissance.
Although banned, the folk musical groups continued to play their music in their own ways and spread it individually as well.
During World War II tens of thousands of Jews from the European parts of the Soviet Union arrived in Uzbekistan as refugees or were exiled by Stalin.
The greatest Chaghataid writer, Ali-Shir Nava'i, was active in the city of Herat (now in northwestern Afghanistan) in the second half of the 15th century.
The name, which translates as ''six maqams'' refers to the structure of the music, which contains six sections in six different Musical modes, similar to classical Persian traditional music.
Its 31,576,400 citizens comprise nearly half the region's total population.
Train links connect many towns in Uzbekistan, as well as neighboring former republics of the Soviet Union.
Foreign exchange reserves amounted in 2010 to 13 billion US$.
The country's official language is Uzbek, a Turkic language written in the Latin alphabet and spoken natively by approximately 85% of the population; however, Russian remains in widespread use.
A small community of several thousand remains today in the country: some 7,000 live in Tashkent, 3,000 in Bukhara and 700 in Samarkand.
Before Uzbekistan's independence in 1991, the country used to be part of the Soviet Union football, rugby union, basketball, ice hockey, and handball national teams.
In that period some 50,000 Jews lived in Samarkand and 20,000 in Bukhara.
Post secondary school, students routinely attend trade or technical colleges.
Today, the majority of Uzbeks are admixed and can trace their ancestry to the Mongols and the Iranian peoples.
Uzbekistan experienced rampant inflation of around 1000% per year immediately after independence (1992–1994).
The country counted nearly 1.5 million Russians, 12.5% of the population, in the 1970 census.
However, Uzbekistan demanded that the U.S. withdraw from the airbases after the Andijan massacre and the U.S. reaction to this massacre.
The press in Uzbekistan practices self-censorship and foreign journalists have been gradually expelled from the country since the Andijan massacre of 2005 when government troops fired into crowds of protesters killing 187 according to official reports and estimates of several hundred by unofficial and witness accounts.
It is also believed by some Uzbeks that the protests in Andijan were brought about by the U.K. and U.S. influences in the area of Andijan.
At cotton-harvest time, all students and teachers are still mobilized as unpaid labour to help in the fields.
Fewer than 5,000 Jews remained in Uzbekistan in 2007.
Its size increased from 69 deputies (members) in 1994 to 120 in 2004–05, and currently stands at 150.
There are two international schools operating in Uzbekistan, both in Tashkent: The British School catering for elementary students only, and Tashkent International School, a K-12 international curriculum school.
However, strict currency controls and the tightening of borders have lessened the effect of this measure.
Elections for the new bicameral parliament took place on 26 December.
Uzbekistan is a dry, landlocked country.
After decline of Golden Horde, Khwarezm was briefly ruled by Sufi Dynasty till Timur's conquest of it in 1388.
However, non-governmental human rights watchdogs, such as IHF, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, as well as United States Department of State and Council of the European Union define Uzbekistan as "an authoritarian state with limited civil rights" and express profound concern about "wide-scale violation of virtually all basic human rights".
Black tea is preferred in Tashkent, but both green and black teas are taken daily, without milk or sugar.
However, a 2009 Pew Research Center report stated that Uzbekistan's population is 96.3% Muslim.
The government has accepted the arms control obligations of the former Soviet Union, acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (as a non-nuclear state), and supported an active program by the U.S. Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) in western Uzbekistan (Nukus and Vozrozhdeniye Island).
Previously close to Washington (which gave Uzbekistan half a billion dollars in aid in 2004, about a quarter of its military budget), the government of Uzbekistan has recently restricted American military use of the airbase at Karshi-Khanabad for air operations in neighboring Afghanistan.
The EU announced that it was planning to send a delegation to Uzbekistan to talk about human rights and liberties, after a long period of hostile relations between the two.
Karakalpak language, is also a Turkic language closer to Kazakh, is spoken in the Republic of Karakalpakstan and has an official status there.
Agriculture employs 26% of Uzbekistan's labour force and contributes 18% of its GDP (2012 data).
At this time, cities such as Bukhoro (Bukhara) and Samarqand (Samarkand) emerged as centres of government and high culture.
Uzbekistan has an area of .
After the Russian revolution in 1917, and the establishment of the Soviet regime, Jewish religious life was restricted.
''Oshi nahor'', or morning ''plov'', is served in the early morning (between 6 am and 9 am) to large gatherings of guests, typically as part of an ongoing wedding celebration.
In 1501 the Uzbek forces began a wholesale invasion of Transoxiana.
For instance, an office of Ombudsman was established in 1996.
Shash maqam is the main component of the classical genre of music.
The climate in the Republic of Uzbekistan is continental, with little precipitation expected annually (100–200 millimetres, or 3.9–7.9&nbsp;inches).
According to IMF estimates, the GDP in 2008 will be almost double its value in 1995 (in constant prices).
The nation is 88% Muslim (mostly Sunni, with a 5% Shi'a minority), 9% Eastern Orthodox and 3% other faiths.
The end of Soviet power in Uzbekistan did not bring an upsurge of fundamentalism, as many had predicted, but rather a gradual re-acquaintance with the precepts of the faith.
In real terms, this means that there are currently 1.2 million modern slaves in Uzbekistan.
Football is the most popular sport in Uzbekistan.
The new high-speed electric train Talgo 250, called ''Afrosiyob'', was manufactured by Patentes Talgo S.L.
Uzbekistan lies between latitudes 37° and 46° N, and longitudes 56° and 74° E. It stretches  from west to east and  from north to south.
The Government of Uzbekistan spends about 3.7% of GDP on the military but has received a growing infusion of Foreign Military Financing (FMF) and other security assistance funds since 1998.
It is promoted as one of the cleanest systems in the former Soviet Union.
Uzbekistan joined the new Central Asian Cooperation Organisation (CACO) in 2002.
The Bukharan Jews have lived in Central Asia, mostly in Uzbekistan, for thousands of years.
Tennis is also a very popular sport in Uzbekistan, especially after Uzbekistan's independence in 1991.
Uzbekistan is home to former racing cyclist Djamolidine Abdoujaparov.
Ruslan Chagaev is a professional boxer representing Uzbekistan in the WBA.
The Mongol conquest under Genghis Khan during the 13th century would bring about a change to the region.
File:RuslanChagaev.jpg|Ruslan Chagaev
Islam is by far the dominant religion in Uzbekistan, as Muslims constitute 90% of the population while 5% of the population follow Russian Orthodox Christianity, and 5% of the population follow other religions according to a 2009 US State Department release.
The official position is summarised in a memorandum "The measures taken by the government of the Republic of Uzbekistan in the field of providing and encouraging human rights" and amounts to the following: the government does everything that is in its power to protect and to guarantee the human rights of Uzbekistan's citizens.
The Uzbeks intermixed with Sarts, a Turko-Persian population of Central Asia.
While official unemployment is very low, underemployment – especially in rural areas – is estimated to be at least 20%.
Import substitution is an officially declared policy and the government proudly reports a reduction by a factor of two in the volume of consumer goods imported.
Islam Karimov, ruler of Uzbekistan since independence, died on September 2, 2016.
The referendum passed, and Islam Karimov's term was extended by an act of parliament to December 2007.
The inflation rates were brought down to 50% in 1997 and then to 22% in 2002.
Most work in the cotton industry.
Along with many Commonwealth of Independent States or CIS economies, Uzbekistan's economy declined during the first years of transition and then recovered after 1995, as the cumulative effect of policy reforms began to be felt.
After the area came under Russian rule in 1868, Jews were granted equal rights with the local population.
Uzbekistan joined the Commonwealth of Independent States in December 1991.
The chief minority groups were Russians (8%), Tajiks (5–30%), Kazakhs (4%), Tatars (2.5%) and Karakalpaks (2%).
The stations are exceedingly ornate.
In the 8th century, Transoxiana, the territory between the Amudarya and Syrdarya rivers, was conquered by the Arabs (Ali ibn Sattor) who enriched the region with the Early Renaissance.
The kingdom was replaced with the Yuezhi dominated Kushan Empire in the 1st century BC.
Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, it declared independence as the Republic of Uzbekistan on 31 August 1991 (officially celebrated the following day).
The reports maintain that the violations are most often committed against members of religious organizations, independent journalists, human rights activists and political activists, including members of the banned opposition parties.
There were 94,900 Jews in Uzbekistan in 1989 (about 0.5% of the population according to the 1989 census), but now, since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, most Central Asian Jews left the region for the United States, Germany, or Israel.
Karimova-Tillyaeva and her team have been instrumental in promoting inter-cultural dialogue by increasing European society’s awareness of Uzbekistan’s cultural and historical heritage.
The gradualist reform strategy has involved postponing significant macroeconomic and structural reforms.
