During the Napoleonic invasion, the Valencians had sent representatives to the Cortes of Cádiz, where a liberal, anti-seigneurial national constitution was drafted.
This was due to the manager of the Valencian factory of the Great Trading Company of Ravensburg in Swabia.
Thus began six years (1814–1820) of absolutist rule, but the constitution was reinstated during the Trienio Liberal, a period of three years of liberal government in Spain from 1820–1823.
In the early 20th century Valencia was an industrialised city.
UNESCO has recognised the Silk Exchange market ''(La Llotja de la Seda)'', erected in early Valencian Gothic style, as a World Heritage Site.
The investigation was effectively reopened and the accident is currently under re-examination.
A black market in rationed goods existed for over a decade.
* The ''Jardines del Real'' or ''Jardines de Viveros'' (Real Gardens), they are located in the Pla del Real district, on just the former site of the Real Palace.
Later, during the so-called Catalan Revolt (1640–1652), Valencia contributed to the cause of Philip IV with militias and money, resulting in a period of further economic hardship exacerbated by the arrival of troops from other parts of Spain.
The two Muslim dynasties would rule Valencia for more than a century.
Furthermore, education entirely in Valencian is offered in more than 70 state-owned schools in the city, as well as by the University of Valencia across all disciplines.
Valencia's port is the biggest on the Mediterranean western coast, the first of Spain in container traffic  and the second of Spain in total traffic, handling 20% of Spain's exports.
The Moorish mosque, which had been converted into a Christian Church by the conqueror, was deemed unworthy of the title of the cathedral of Valencia, and in 1262 Bishop Andrés de Albalat laid the cornerstone of the new Gothic building, with three naves; these reach only to the choir of the present building.
Valencia Airport is situated  west of Valencia city centre.
To prevent further disasters, the river was eventually diverted to a new course.
At the end of the 15th century this confraternity separated from the hospital, and continued its work under the name of "Cofradia para el ámparo de los desamparados".
The 2007 America's Cup yachting races were held at Valencia in June and July 2007 and attracted huge crowds.
He also created a new law for the city, the Furs of Valencia, which were extended to the rest of the Kingdom of Valencia.
The Roman historian Florus says that Brutus transferred the soldiers who had fought under him to that province.
The additions made to the back of the cathedral detract from its height.
It contains many paintings by eminent artists.
I hope you continue to govern in the same harmony, all working and living together in this noble land.
Small and medium-sized industries are an important part of the local economy, and before the current crisis unemployment was lower than the Spanish average.
Concurrent population growth made Valencia the most populous city in the Crown of Aragon.
She is thought to have signed the death warrants of 100 former rebels personally, and sources indicate that as many as 800 executions may have occurred.
He was associated with the radical, or progressive, wing of Spanish liberalism and became its symbol and champion after taking credit for the victory over the Carlists in 1839.
Because of his hatred of the city of Orihuela, which had bombarded and looted Valencia during the War of Succession, the cardinal resigned the viceroyalty in protest against the actions of Philip, who finally relented and returned the capital to Valencia.
Both teams share the Jardín del Turia stadium.
The Republican party of Blasco Ibáñez responded to these demands and gained enormous popular support, dominating the ruling council between 1901 and 1923.
Marshal Suchet began a long siege of the city in October 1811, and after intense bombardment forced it to surrender on 8 January 1812.
The urban area of Valencia extending beyond the administrative city limits has a population of between 1,561,000 and 1,564,145.
Sunshine duration hours are 2,696 per year, from 155 (average nearly 5 hours of sunshine duration at day) in December to 315 (average above 10 hours of sunshine duration at day) in July.
The public water supply network was completed in 1850, and in 1858 the architects Sebastián Monleón Estellés, Antonino Sancho, and Timoteo Calvo drafted a general expansion project for the city that included demolishing its ancient walls (a second version was printed in 1868).
During this period of upheaval in the provinces he declared that all the estates of the Church, its congregations, and its religious orders were national property—though in Valencia, most of this property was subsequently acquired by the local bourgeoisie.
Average relative humidity is 60% in April to 68% in August.
The Valencia Metro derailment occurred on 3 July 2006 at 1&nbsp;pm.
In the warmest month – August, the maximum temperature during the day typically ranges from , about  at night.
Valencia is integrated into an industrial area on the ''Costa del Azahar'' (Orange Blossom Coast).
A fervent follower of the absolutist cause, Elío had played an important role in the repression of the supporters of the Constitution of 1812.
The effects have been more noticeable in the city proper, whereas the language has remained active in the rural and metropolitan areas.
Small businesses predominated, but with the rapid mechanisation of industry larger companies were being formed.
At the 2015 election a leftist coalition headed by new mayor Joan Ribó of Coalició Compromís
For some months there was a revolutionary atmosphere, gradually neutralised by the government.
The town grew, and during the reign of Abd al-Aziz a new city wall was built, remains of which are preserved throughout the Old City ''(Ciutat Vella)'' today.
Also at this time Valencia received the name ''Medina al-Turab'' (City of Sand).
Services and infrastructure—including municipal water supply, paved roads, and gas distribution—were substantially improved, and a large-scale construction project was initiated at the port.
The club is currently owned by Peter Lim, a Singaporean businessman who bought the club in 2014.
The economy began to recover in the early 1960s, and the city experienced explosive population growth through immigration spurred by the jobs created with the implementation of major urban projects and infrastructure improvements.
This was a typical Roman city in its conception, as it was located in a strategic location near the sea on a river island crossed by the Via Augusta, the imperial road that connected the province to Rome, the capital of the empire.
In 711 the Muslims occupied the city, introducing their language, religion and customs; they implemented improved irrigation systems and the cultivation of new crops as well, being capital of the Taifa of Valencia.
Other exports include oranges, furniture, ceramic tiles, fans, textiles and iron products.
The city remained in the hands of Christian troops until 1102, when the Almoravids retook the city and restored the Muslim religion.
Queen Germaine favoured harsh treatment of the ''agermanats''.
The city is also home to many pro-Valencian political and civil organisations.
March is transitional, the temperature often exceeds , with an average temperature of  during the day and  at night.
During the War of the Spanish Succession, Valencia sided with Charles of Austria.
In painting and sculpture, Flemish and Italian trends had an influence on artists such as Lluís Dalmau, Peris Gonçal and Damià Forment.
There is a large fountain at the northern end.
43 people were killed and more than ten were seriously injured.
The Port of Valencia is the 5th busiest container port in Europe and the busiest container port on the Mediterranean Sea.
Balansiyya had a rebirth of sorts with the beginning of the Taifa of Valencia kingdom in the 11th century.
In the Valencia City Council elections from 1991 to 2015 the City Council was governed by the People's Party of Spain ''(Partido Popular)'' (PP) and Mayor Rita Barberá Nolla who became mayor by a pact made with the Valencian Union.
For this, he was arrested in 1820 and executed in 1822 by garroting.
In 1357, the arch that connects it with the cathedral was built.
Pomponius Mela called it one of the principal cities of the Tarraconensis province.
With the Byzantine invasion of the southwestern Iberian peninsula in 554 the city acquired strategic importance.
The vicereine Germaine of Foix brutally repressed the uprising and its leaders, and this accelerated the authoritarian centralisation of the government of Charles I.
On the death of King Ferdinand VII in 1833, Baldomero Espartero became one of the most ardent defenders of the hereditary rights of his daughter, Isabella II.
During Franco's regime speaking or teaching Valencian was prohibited; in a significant reversal it is now compulsory for every schoolchild in Valencia.
The reign of Isabella II as an adult (1843–1868) was a period of relative stability and growth for Valencia.
However, the trade union CC.OO.
Valencian has been historically repressed in favour of Spanish.
Agricultural activities are still carried on in the municipality, even though of relatively minor importance with only 1.9% of the working population and 3973 hectares planted mostly in orchards and citrus groves.
The plaza is triangular in shape, with a large cement lot at the southern end, normally surrounded by flower vendors.
Institutional buildings and streets are named in Valencian.
It also bore a strong anti-Islamic aspect, as rebels rioted against Aragon's population of mudéjars and imposed forced conversions to Christianity.
This boom was reflected in the growth of artistic and cultural pursuits.
Its influence in commerce, education, entertainment, media, fashion, science and the arts contributes to its status as one of the world's "Gamma"-rank global cities.
English soldiers advanced as far as Requena on the road to Madrid.
The various productions of Santiago Calatrava, a renowned structural engineer, architect, and sculptor and of the architect Félix Candela have contributed to Valencia's international reputation.
The old riverbed is now a verdant sunken park called the 'Garden of the Turia' ''(Jardí del Túria or Jardín del Turia)'' that allows cyclists and pedestrians to traverse much of the city without the use of roads; overhead bridges carry motor traffic across the park.
In its early stages the movement inclined to the romanticism of the poet Teodor Llorente, and resisted the more assertive remonstrances of Constantine Llombart, founder of the still extant cultural society, ''Lo Rat Penat'', which is dedicated to the promotion and dissemination of the Valencian language and culture.
It is spelled according to Catalan etymology, though its pronunciation is closer to Vulgar Latin.
The archiepiscopal palace, a grain market in the time of the Moors, is simple in design, with an inside cloister and a handsome chapel.
Abd al-Rahman I, the first emir of Cordoba, ordered the city destroyed in 755 during his wars against other nobility, but several years later his son, Abdullah, had a form of autonomous rule over the province of Valencia.
;Christian Reconquest
Valencian recovered its official status, prestige and use in education after the transition to democracy in 1978.
The team's stadium is the Mestalla; its city rival Levante UD also plays in the highest division after gaining promotion in 2010, its stadium is Estadi Ciutat de València.
From 1609 through 1614, the Spanish government systematically forced Moriscos to leave the kingdom for Muslim North Africa.
Despite this lack of support, Milans del Bosch only surrendered at 5 a.m. on the next day, 24 February.
Following the discovery of the Americas, the European economy was oriented towards the Atlantic to the detriment of the Mediterranean trade.
The Firebats have been national champions three times and have represented Valencia and Spain in the European playoffs since 2005.
The English held the city for 16 months and defeated several attempts to expel them.
On 9 July 2006, during Mass at Valencia's Cathedral, Our Lady of the Forsaken Basilica, Pope Benedict XVI used, at the World Day of Families, the ''Santo Caliz'', a 1st-century Middle-Eastern artifact that some Catholics believe is the Holy Grail.
The crisis deepened during the 17th century with the expulsion in 1609 of the Jews and the Moriscos, descendants of the Muslim population that converted to Christianity under threat of exile from Ferdinand and Isabella in 1502.
Among these were the War of the Union, a citizen revolt against the excesses of the monarchy, led by Valencia as the capital of the kingdom — and the war with Castile, which forced the hurried raising of a new wall to resist Castilian attacks in 1363 and 1364.
During his rule, he converted nine mosques into churches and installed the French monk Jérôme as bishop of the See of Valencia.
The ''Tribunal de las Aguas'' (Water Court), a court dating from Moorish times that hears and mediates in matters relating to irrigation water, sits at noon every Thursday outside the ''Puerta de Apostoles'' (Portal of the Apostles).
With the abolition of the charters of Valencia and most of its institutions, and the conformation of the kingdom and its capital to the laws and customs of Castile, top civil officials were no longer elected, but instead were appointed directly from Madrid, the king's court city, the offices often filled by foreign aristocrats.
The Republic (1931–1939) opened the way for democratic participation and the increased politicisation of citizens, especially in response to the rise of Conservative Front power in 1933.
In 1409, a hospital was founded and placed under the patronage of Santa María de los Inocentes; to this was attached a confraternity devoted to recovering the bodies of the unfriended dead in the city and within a radius of  around it.
Ausiàs March was one of the first poets to use the everyday language Valencian, instead of the troubadour language, Occitan.
The ''agermanats'' are comparable to the ''comuneros'' of neighbouring Castile, who fought a similar revolt against Charles from 1520–1522.
The city's economy is service-oriented, as nearly 84% of the working population is employed in service sector occupations.
During the 20th century Valencia remained the third most populous city of Spain as its population tripled, rising from 213,550 inhabitants in 1900 to 739,014 in 2000.
The largest plaza in Valencia is the ''Plaza del Ayuntamiento''; it is home to the City Hall ''(Ayuntamiento)'' on its western side and the central post office ''(Edificio de Correos)'' on its eastern side, a cinema that shows classic movies, and many restaurants and bars.
On 13 January 1937 the city was first shelled by a vessel of the Fascist Italian Navy, which was blockading the port by the order of Benito Mussolini.
December, January and February are the coldest months, with average temperatures around  during the day and  at night.
The city surrendered on 7 August; Alfonso XII was proclaimed king on 29 December 1874, and arrived in Valencia on 11 January 1875 on his way to Madrid, marking the end of the first republic.
The mutineers seized the Citadel, a Supreme Junta government took over, and on 26–28 June, Napoleon's Marshal Moncey attacked the city with a column of 9,000 French imperial troops in the First Battle of Valencia.
The two sections remain divided by a wall that projects far into the water to maintain clean water for the America's Cup side.
Its urban area extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of around 1.5-1.6&nbsp;million people.
Beside the cathedral is the chapel dedicated to the Our Lady of the Forsaken ''(Virgen de los desamparados or Mare de Déu dels Desamparats)''.
The Palau de Justícia is an example of the affluence manifested in the most prosperous times of Bourbon rule (1758–1802) during the rule of Charles III.
The Music Palace ''(Palau De La Música) (:es:Palacio de la Música de Valencia)'' is another noteworthy example of modern architecture in Valencia.
By the Nueva Planta decrees ''(Decretos de Nueva Planta)'' the ancient Charters of Valencia were abolished and the city was governed by the Castilian Charter.
Neither proposed project received final approval, but they did serve as a guide, though not closely followed, for future growth.
The declining power of the Almoravids coincided with the rise of a new dynasty in North Africa, the Almohads, who seized control of the peninsula from the year 1145, although their entry into Valencia was deterred by Ibn Mardanis, King of Valencia and Murcia until 1171, at which time the city finally fell to the North Africans.
The labor movement gradually consolidated its union organisation, while the conservative factions rallied around the Valencian Regional Right.
Generally, temperatures similar to those experienced in the northern part of Europe in summer last about 8 months, from April to November.
In Gothic times, it seems to have been dedicated to the Holy Saviour; the Cid dedicated it to the Blessed Virgin; King James I of Aragon did likewise, leaving in the main chapel the image of the Blessed Virgin, which he carried with him and is reputed to be the one now preserved in the sacristy.
A silver reredos, which was behind the altar, was carried away in the war of 1808, and converted into coin to meet the expenses of the campaign.
The new century was marked in Valencia with a major event, the Valencian regional exhibition of 1909 ''(La Exposición Regional Valenciana de 1909''), which emulated the national and universal expositions held in other cities.
In 1986, because of its cultural, historical, and ecological value, the ''Generalitat Valenciana'' declared it a natural park.
The capital of the Kingdom of Valencia was moved to Orihuela, an outrage to the citizens of Valencia.
During Visigothic times Valencia was an episcopal See of the Catholic Church, albeit a suffragan diocese subordinate to the archdiocese of Toledo, comprising the ancient Roman province of Carthaginensis in Hispania.
Calatrava is also responsible for the bridge named after him in the centre of the city.
On the outbreak of the First Carlist War, the government sent him to the front, where he severely defeated the Carlists in many encounters.
After the victory of the Bourbons at the Battle of Almansa on 25 April 1707, the English army evacuated Valencia and Philip V ordered the repeal of the privileges of Valencia as punishment for the kingdom's support of Charles of Austria.
The 18th-century restoration rounded the pointed arches, covered the Gothic columns with Corinthian pillars, and redecorated the walls.
Severe spending cuts have been introduced by the city authorities.
The old river bed was abandoned for years, and successive Francoist mayors proposed making it a motorway, but that option was finally rejected with the advent of democracy and fervent neighbourhood protests.
The best expression of this dynamic was in the regional exhibitions, including that of 1909 held next to the pedestrian avenue ''L'Albereda'' (''Paseo de la Alameda''), which depicted the progress of agriculture and industry.
Here, during my reign, Easter processions went out and Christians professed their religion freely, as our Quran recognises Christ and the Virgin.
Valencia was founded as a Roman colony by the consul Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus in 138 BC, and called ''Valentia Edetanorum''.
In more recent history, the establishment of Franco's military and administrative apparatus in Valencia further excluded Valencian from public life.
Ferdinand refused and went to Valencia instead of Madrid.
He followed this act by dissolving the two chambers of the Spanish Parliament on 10 May.
In the coldest month – January, the maximum temperature typically during the day ranges from , the minimum temperature typically at night ranges from .
Both the Valencian government spokesman Vicente Rambla and Mayor Rita Barberá called the accident a "fortuitous" event.
The king abolished the Constitution of 1812.
It was divided into two parts—one was unchanged while the other section was modified for the America's Cup festivities.
The January average is comparable to temperatures expected for May and September in the major cities of northern Europe.
Valencia was selected in 2003 to host the historic America's Cup yacht race, the first European city ever to do so.
Major monuments include Valencia Cathedral, the ''Torres de Serrans'', the ''Torres de Quart'' (:es:Torres de Quart), the ''Llotja de la Seda'' (declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1996), and the ''Ciutat de les Arts i les Ciències'' (City of Arts and Sciences), an entertainment-based cultural and architectural complex designed by Santiago Calatrava and Félix Candela.
Philip ordered the Cortes to meet with the Viceroy of Valencia, Cardinal Luis de Belluga, who opposed the change of capital because of the proximity of Orihuela, a religious, cultural and now political centre, to Murcia (capital of another viceroyalty and his diocese).
Among the most architecturally successful buildings of the era were those designed in the Art Nouveau style, such as the North Station ''(Gare du Nord)'' and the Central and Columbus markets.
In Valencian, the grave accent   contrasts with the acute accent  —but the word ''València'' is an exception to this rule.
The final race in 2012 European Grand Prix saw an extremely popular winner, since home driver Fernando Alonso won for Ferrari in spite of starting halfway down the field.
Holy Week celebrations in Valencia are considered some of the most colourful in Spain.
The Valencian Community motorcycle Grand Prix ''(Gran Premi de la Comunitat Valenciana de motociclisme)'' is part of the Grand Prix motorcycle racing season at the Circuit Ricardo Tormo (also known as ''Circuit de Valencia'').
The tower is about  high and is topped with a belfry (1660–1736).
However, the city still maintains an important industrial base, with 5.5% of the population employed in this sector.
Valencia is also the home of the Asociación Española de Rugby League, who are the governing body for Rugby League in Spain.
Valencia was also third in industrial and economic development; notable milestones include urban expansion of the city in the latter 1800s, the creation of the Banco de Valencia in 1900, construction of the Central and Columbus markets, and the construction of the Gare du Nord railway station, completed in 1921.
Valencia is also internationally famous for its football club, Valencia C.F., which won the Spanish league in 2002 and 2004 (the year it also won the UEFA Cup), for a total of six times, and was a UEFA Champions League runner-up in 2000 and 2001.
Despite the differentiated denomination, the distinct dialectal traits and political tension between Catalonia and the Valencian Country, Catalan and Valencian are mutually intelligible and are considered two varieties of the same language.
Among his administrative acts he ordered the building of a luxurious palace, the Russafa, on the outskirts of the city in the neighbourhood of the same name.
The establishment of the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera in 1923 tempered social unrest for some years, but not the growing political radicalisation of the working classes.
The 15th-century ''Serrano'' and ''Quart'' towers are part of what was once the wall surrounding the city.
In 1894 the ''Círculo de Bellas Artes de Valencia'' (Circle of Fine Arts in Valencia) was founded.
The Jews who occupied the area around the waterfront had progressed economically and socially, and their quarter gradually expanded its boundaries at the expense of neighbouring parishes.
Valencia had to become accustomed to being an occupied city, living with the presence of troops quartered in the Citadel near the convent of Santo Domingo and in other buildings such as the Lonja, which served as a barracks until 1762.
:"In the city of Valencia live Muslims, the nobles of my people, along with Christians and Jews.
There are two paintings by Francisco Goya in the San Francesco chapel.
By gradual sound changes, ''Valentia''  has become ''Valencia''  (i.e.
The old course of the river continues, dry, through the city centre, almost to the sea.
Many local landmarks were restored, including the ancient Towers of the medieval city (''Serrano'' Towers and ''Quart'' Towers), and the San Miguel de los Reyes monastery (:es:Monasterio de San Miguel de los Reyes), which now holds a conservation library.
The Blessed Virgin was proclaimed patroness of the city under the title of ''Virgen de los desamparados'' (Virgin of the Forsaken), and Archbishop Pedro de Urbina, on 31 June 1652, laid the cornerstone of the new chapel of this name.
In the 15th century the dome was added and the naves extended back of the choir, uniting the building to the tower and forming a main entrance.
There are also a number of well-preserved traditional Catholic festivities throughout the year.
The large factory of Ford Motor Company lies in a suburb of the city, Almussafes.
Its base was added in Medieval Times and consists of fine gold, alabaster and gem stones.
Whole sections of the old city, for example the Carmen Quarter, have been extensively renovated.
Faced with this loss of business, Valencia suffered a severe economic crisis.
Valencia was one of the most influential cities on the Mediterranean in the 15th and 16th centuries.
City life in Valencia carried on in a revolutionary climate, with frequent clashes between liberals and republicans, and the constant threat of reprisals by the Carlist troops of General Cabrera.
It did not have the revolutionary fervor of the movement in cities like Alcoy, as it was initiated by the bourgeoisie, but the Madrid government sent General Martinez-Campos to stifle the rebellion by force of arms and subjected Valencia to an intense bombardment.
Under his progressive government the old regime was tenuously reconciled to his liberal policies.
On 9 October, King James, followed by his retinue and army, took possession of the city.
Around the corner is the Plaça de la Reina, with the Cathedral, orange trees, and many bars and restaurants.
The city was heavily bombarded by air and sea, necessitating the construction of over two hundred bomb shelters to protect the population.
So far no remains have been found.
The Louis Vuitton stage drew 1,044,373 visitors and the America's Cup match drew 466,010 visitors to the event.
When he returned on 24 March 1814 from exile in France, the Cortes requested that he respect the liberal Constitution of 1812, which seriously limited royal powers.
After the death of Almanzor and the unrest that followed, Muslim Al-Andalus disintegrated into numerous small states known as taifas, one of which was the Taifa of Valencia, which existed for four distinct periods: 1010 – 1065, 1075 – 1099, 1145 – 1147, and 1229 – 1238.
Some of the most emblematic buildings of the city were built during this period, including the Serranos Towers (1392), the Lonja (1482), the Miguelete and the Chapel of the Kings of the Convent of Santo Domingo.
Literature flourished with the patronage of the court of Alfonso the Magnanimous, supporting authors like Ausiàs March, Roiç de Corella, and Isabel de Villena.
The principal mosque was purified and the Mass was celebrated.
The Bourbon forces burned important cities like Xativa, where pictures of the Spanish Bourbons in public places are hung upside down as a protest to this day.
The city has numerous convention centres and venues for trade events, among them the Feria Valencia Convention and Exhibition Centre ''(Institución Ferial de Valencia)'' and the ''Palau de congres'' (Conference Palace), and several 5-star hotels to accommodate business travelers.
Valencia is a bilingual city: Valencian and Spanish are the two official languages.
* The ''Jardin Botanico'' (Botanical Gardens).
World War I (1914–1918) greatly affected the Valencian economy, causing the collapse of its citrus exports.
The centre of the city was located in the present-day neighbourhood of the Plaza de la Virgen.
The Cardo corresponds to the existing Calle de Salvador, Almoina, and the Decumanus corresponds to Calle de los Caballeros.
Inside the council chamber are preserved the portraits of all the prelates of Valencia.
A few centuries later, coinciding with the first waves of the invading Germanic peoples (Suevi, Vandals and Alans, and later the Visigoths) and the power vacuum left by the demise of the Roman imperial administration, the church assumed the reins of power in the city and replaced the old Roman temples with religious buildings.
The Valencian people rose in arms against them on 23 May 1808, aroused by such characters as Vicent Doménech el Palleter.
Thenceforth the city entered a new historical stage in which a new society and a new language developed, forming the basis of the character of the Valencian people as they are known today.
