Sigurd cuts the mail from her, and she awakes.
The "Ride of the Valkyries" () (1856) is the popular term for the beginning of act 3 of ''Die Walküre'', one of  Richard Wagner's best-known pieces, (the piece is well known in popular culture for its use in the 1979 film Apocalypse Now).
He finds one particularly striking; this valkyrie is detailed later in a prose narrative as Sváva, king Eylimi's daughter, who "often protected him in battles".
The inscription says that "I cut cure-runes", and also "help-runes", once against elves, twice against trolls, thrice against thurs and then a mention of a valkyrie occurs:
:as blood-red rack races overhead;
In chapter 48, poetic terms for "battle" include "weather of weapons or shields, or of Odin or valkyrie or war-kings or their clash or noise", followed by examples of compositions by various skalds that have used the name of valkyries in said manner (Þorbjörn Hornklofi uses "Skögul's din" for "battlefield", Bersi Skáldtorfuson uses "Gunnr's fire" for "sword" and "Hlökk's snow" for "battle", Einarr Skúlason uses "Hildr's sail" for "shield" and "Göndul's crushing wind" for "battle" and Einarr skálaglamm uses "Göndul's din").
Valkyries are attested in the ''Poetic Edda'', a book of poems compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources; the ''Prose Edda'' and ''Heimskringla'' (by Snorri Sturluson), and ''Njáls saga'', a Saga of Icelanders, all written in the 13th century.
:good fortune comes to men from there;
Viking Age stylized silver amulets depicting women with long gowns, their hair pulled back, sometimes bearing forth drinking horns have been discovered throughout Scandinavia.
A narrative relates that Sigrdrífa explains to Sigurd that there were two kings fighting one another.
They live together for seven winters, until the women fly off to go to a battle and do not return.
:and scour the beakers,
:with beaks all gory, at break of morning?
:Then light shone from Logafell,
The goddess Freyja and her afterlife field Fólkvangr, where she receives half of the slain, has been theorized as connected to the valkyries.
In stanza 7, Sigrún uses the phrase "fed the gosling of Gunn's sisters".
In chapter 57, within a list of names of ásynjur (and after alternate names for the goddess Freyja are provided), a further section contains a list of "Odin's maids"; valkyries: Hildr, Göndul, Hlökk, Mist, Skögul.
:—the noise of spears grew loud—they protected the prince;
The woman wakes, sits up, looks at Sigurd, and the two converse in two stanzas of verse.
:Against the harmful ''skag''-valkyrie,
:dew fell into the deep valleys,
:clean the beer-cups,
At the beginning of the poem ''Helgakviða Hundingsbana II'', a prose narrative says that King Sigmund (son of Völsung) and his wife Borghild (of Brálund) have a son named Helgi, who they named for Helgi Hjörvarðsson (the antagonist of the earlier ''Helgakviða Hjörvarðssonar'').
Sigurd removes the helmet of the warrior, and sees the face of a woman.
A prose narrative explains that the woman is named Sigrdrífa and that she is a valkyrie.
Each valkyrie holds on to what she has in her hands.
The valkyrie name ''Herja'' has been theorised as pointing to a connection to the name of the goddess ''Hariasa'', who is attested from a stone from 187 CE.
The woman's corslet is so tight that it seems to have grown into the woman's body.
:Their byrnies were drenched in blood;
Hilda R. Davidson compares the incantation to the Old English ''Wið færstice'' charm and theorises a similar role for them both.
The Tjängvide image stone from the island of Gotland, Sweden features a rider on an eight-legged horse, which may be Odin's eight-legged horse Sleipnir, being greeted by a female, which may be a valkyrie at Valhalla.
In stanza 30 of the poem ''Völuspá'', a völva (a travelling seeress in Germanic society) tells Odin that "she saw" valkyries coming from far away who are ready to ride to "the realm of the gods".
Näsström notes that, just like Odin, Freyja receives slain heroes who have died on the battlefield, and that her house is Sessrumnir (which she translates as "filled with many seats"), a dwelling that Näsström posits likely fills the same function as Valhalla.
The battle over, the valkyrie Sigrún ("victory-rune"), informs him from her horse that her father Högni has betrothed her to Höðbroddr, the son of king Granmar of the Hniflung clan, who Sigrún deems unworthy.
:as is each man of eating and of home.
:in which just before daybreak,
:for coming of slain men?
This is followed by "I send you, I look at you, wolfish perversion, and unbearable desire, may distress descend on you and ''jöluns'' wrath.
Dörruð goes to the hut, and looks through a chink in the wall.
:as we valkyries war-songs chanted.
:I thought I cleared Valhǫll,
:the horses were trembling, from their manes
:What sort of dream is that, Odin?
File:Valkyrie.jpg|A silver figure of a woman holding a drinking horn found in Birka, Björkö, Uppland, Sweden.
:Three times nine girls, but one girl rode ahead,
Helgi and Sváva are betrothed and love one another dearly.
Simek states that due to the shift of concept, the valkyries became popular figures in heroic poetry, and during this transition were stripped of their "demonic characteristics and became more human, and therefore become capable of falling in love with mortals ...." Simek says that the majority of the names of the valkyries point to a warlike function, that most of valkyrie names do not appear to be very old, and that the names "mostly come from poetic creativity rather than from real folk-belief."
And then an additional four names; Hrund, Eir, Hrist and Skuld.
The epilogue details that "there was a belief in the pagan religion, which we now reckon is an old wives' tale, that people could be reincarnated" and that "Helgi and Sigrun were thought to have been reborn" as another Helgi and valkyrie couple; Helgi as Helgi Haddingjaskaði and Sigrún as the daughter of Halfdan; the valkyrie Kára.
The valkyrie, previously described as fair and beautiful, then speaks to the gore-drenched and corpse-reeking raven:
The figurine portrays a woman with long hair in a ponytail carrying a sword and a shield.
Sinfjötli accuses Guðmundr of having once been female, and gibes that Guðmundr was "a witch, horrible, unnatural, among Odin's valkyries", adding that all of the einherjar "had to fight, headstrong woman, on your account".
Sigurd approaches it, and there he sees a ''skjaldborg'' with a banner flying overhead.
:to strew the bench,
The 11th century runestone U 1163 features a carving of a female bearing a horn that has been interpreted as the valkyrie Sigrdrífa handing the hero Sigurd (also depicted on the stone) a drinking horn.
The previously silent Helgi speaks; he refers to the valkyrie as "bright-face lady", and asks her what gift he will receive with the name she has bestowed upon him, but he will not accept it if he cannot have her as well.
The poem begins with a request for silence among noblemen so that the skald may tell the deeds of Harald Fairhair.
On the mountain Sigurd sees a great light, "as if fire were burning, which blazed up to the sky".
Two, daughters of King Hlödvér, are named Hlaðguðr svanhvít ("swan-white") and Hervör alvitr (possibly meaning "all-wise" or "strange creature"); the third, daughter of Kjárr of Valland, is named Ölrún (possibly meaning "beer rune").
Simek points to a connection between the name ''Idisiaviso'', the role of the Idisi in one of the two Merseburg Incantations and valkyries.
Sigurd asks Sigrdrífa to share with him her wisdom of all worlds.
:hail in the high woods;
In Norse mythology, a '''valkyrie''' (from Old Norse ''valkyrja'' "chooser of the slain") is one of a host of female figures who choose those who may die in battle and those who may live.
The second stanza lists: Ráðgríðr, Göndul, Svipul, Geirskögul, Hildr, Skeggöld, Hrund, Geirdriful, Randgríðr, Þrúðr, Reginleif, Sveið, Þögn, Hjalmþrimul, Þrima and Skalmöld.
They bring drink and see to the table and the ale cups."
:'What kind of a dream is it,' said Óðinn,
The name ''Herfjötur'' has been theorised as pointing to the ability of the valkyries to place fetters.
There, the deceased warriors become einherjar (Old Norse "single (or once) fighters").
Simek says that the valkyries were closely associated with Odin, and that this connection existed in an earlier role as "demons of death".
Sigurd asks for her name, and the woman gives Sigurd a horn of mead to help him retain her words in his memory.
There, early one morning, the brothers find three women spinning linen on the shore of the lake Úlfsjár ("wolf lake"), and "near them were their swan's garments; they were valkyries".
A battle rages with great slaughter, and part of the description employs the kenning "Skögul's-stormblast" for "battle".
Never shall you sit, never shall you sleep ... (that you) love me as yourself."
:bade valkyries rise up,
The composition is by an anonymous author from the 10th century and is referred to as ''Eiríksmál''.
High adds that Gunnr ("war"), Róta, and Skuld—the last of the three he refers to as "the youngest norn"—"always ride to choose the slain and decide the outcome of battle".
Further into the poem, Atli flytes with the female jötunn Hrímgerðr.
:men to the bright-eyed one, her who the birds' speech knew well.
The word ''valkyrie'' derives from Old Norse ''valkyrja'' (plural ''valkyrjur''), which is composed of two words; the noun ''valr'' (referring to the slain on the battlefield) and the verb ''kjósa'' (meaning "to choose").
:"'Tis owing to us that the issue was won
The völva follows this with a list of six valkyries: Skuld (Old Norse, possibly "debt" or "future") who "bore a shield", Skögul ("shaker"), Gunnr ("war"), Hildr ("battle"), Göndul ("wand-wielder") and Geirskögul ("Spear-Skögul").
These examples indicate that Freyja was a war-goddess, and she even appears as a valkyrie, literally 'the one who chooses the slain'."
Chapter 49 gives similar information when referring to weapons and armor (though the term "death-maidens"—Old Norse ''valmeyjar''—instead of "valkyries" is used here), with further examples.
Sváva stays at home with King Eylimi, and Helgi goes raiding, and to this the narrative adds that Sváva "was a valkyrie just as before".
In poetry, valkyries appear in "Die Walküren" by H. Heine (appearing in ''Romanzero'', 1847), "Die Walküren" (1864) by H. v. Linge, "Sköldmon" (appearing in ''Gömda Land'', 1904).
Selecting half of those who die in battle, the valkyries bring their chosen to the afterlife hall of the slain, Valhalla, ruled over by the god Odin (the other half go to the goddess Freyja's afterlife field Fólkvangr).
:heroes' coming from the world,
Britt-Mari Näsström points out the description in ''Gylfaginning'' where it is said of Freyja "whenever she rides into battle she takes half of the slain", and interprets ''Fólkvangr'' as "the field of the Warriors".
In chapter 49, High describes that when Odin and his wife Frigg arrived at the funeral of their slain son Baldr, with them came the valkyries and also Odin's ravens.
In the poem, Úlfr describes mythological scenes depicted in a newly built hall, including valkyries and ravens accompanying Odin at Baldr's funeral feast:
Simek says that this original concept was "superseded by the shield girls—Irish female warriors who lived on like the ''einherjar'' in Valhall."
Valkyries also appear as lovers of heroes and other mortals, where they are sometimes described as the daughters of royalty, sometimes accompanied by ravens and sometimes connected to swans or horses.
Later in the poem, the hero Sinfjötli flyts with Guðmundr.
The norns have to pronounce the fatum fate, they sit on their chairs, or they roam through the country among mortals, fastening their threads.
: and your foemen fled."
:to the drink of the holy offering Baldr's funeral feast
Odin tells the heroes Sigmund and Sinfjötli to rise to greet Eric and invite him into the hall, if it is indeed he.
Nowhere is it said that they ride.
Hilda Ellis Davidson says that, regarding valkyries, "evidently an elaborate literary picture has been built up by generations of poets and storytellers, in which several conceptions can be discerned.
In the ''Prose Edda'', written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, valkyries are first mentioned in chapter 36 of the book ''Gylfaginning'', where the enthroned figure of High informs Gangleri (King Gylfi in disguise) of the activities of the valkyries and mentions a few goddesses.
File:The Ride of the Valkyrs.jpg|''The Ride of the Valkyrs'' (1909) by John Charles Dollman
:as for a king's coming,
Grimm states that a dís can be both norn and a valkyrie, "but their functions are separate and usually the persons.
Valkyries have been the subjects of various poems, works of art and musical works.
A light shines from the fell, and from that light strike bolts of lightning.
The valkyrie speaks to the unnamed man, and gives him the name ''Helgi'' (meaning "the holy one").
:Within have appeared these motifs.
The saga relates that king Haakon I of Norway died in battle, and although he is Christian, he requests that since he has died "among heathens, then give me such burial place as seems most fitting to you".
This continues until the poem ends abruptly.
Egil goes off in snow-shoes to look for Ölrún, Slagfiðr goes searching for Hlaðguðr svanhvít and Völund sits in Úlfdalir.
While flyting with Atli, Hrímgerðr says that she had seen 27 valkyries around Helgi, yet one particularly fair valkyrie led the band:
At stanza 15, a question and answer format begins where the valkyrie asks the raven a question regarding Harald, and the raven responds in turn.
The raven expresses surprise that the valkyrie seems unfamiliar with the deeds of Harald, and tells her about his deeds for several stanzas.
Valkyries are mentioned or appear in the ''Poetic Edda'' poems ''Völuspá'', ''Grímnismál'', ''Völundarkviða'', ''Helgakviða Hjörvarðssonar'', ''Helgakviða Hundingsbana I'', ''Helgakviða Hundingsbana II'' and ''Sigrdrífumál''.
An early 11th-century manuscript of Aldhelm's ''De laudis virginitatis'' (Oxford, Bodleian library, Digby 146) glosses ''ueneris'' with ''wælcyrge'' (with ''gydene'' meaning "goddess").
:for the arrival of a prince.
Odin had promised one of these—Hjalmgunnar—victory in battle, yet she had "brought down" Hjalmgunnar in battle.
Davidson says that it appears that from "early times" the Germanic peoples "believed in fierce female spirits doing the command of the war god, stirring up disorder, taking part in battle, seizing and perhaps devouring the slain."
In chapter 157 of ''Njáls saga'', a man named Dörruð witnesses 12 people riding together to a stone hut on Good Friday in Caithness.
The Old English ''wælcyrge'' and ''wælcyrie'' appear several times in Old English manuscripts, generally to translate foreign concepts into Old English.
:the valkyries to serve wine
:then said Sigrun—the wound-giving valkyries flew,
Simek says that "as the function of the matrons was also extremely varied—fertility goddess, personal guardians, but also warrior-goddesses—the belief in the ''dísir'', like the belief in the valkyries, norns and matrons, may be considered to be different manifestations of a belief in a number of female (half-?)
:The hymir's-skull-cleaver as on cliff he was perching.
Richard North says that "though it is not clear what the poet takes these women to be, their female sex, riding in flight and throwing spears suggest that they were imagined in England as a female being analogous to the later Norse ''valkyrjur''."
:is the welkin gory with warriors' blood
Scholarly theories debate whether these attestations point to an indigenous belief among the Anglo-Saxons shared with the Norse, or if they were a result of later Norse influence (see section below).
:Carrion-reek ye carry, and your claws are bloody.
Gunnr and her sisters are valkyries, and these goslings are ravens, who feed on the corpses left on the battlefield by warriors.
The Old English cognate terms ''wælcyrge'' and ''wælcyrie'' appear in several Old English manuscripts, and scholars have explored whether the terms appear in Old English by way of Norse influence, or reflect a tradition also native among the Anglo-Saxon pagans.
It describes Eric Bloodaxe and five other kings arriving in Valhalla after their death.
This theory is not universally accepted, and the reference has also been theorised as a simple metaphor for the "victorious sword" (the stinging) of the bees.
In the manuscript Cotton Cleopatra A. iii, ''wælcyrge'' is also used to gloss the Roman goddess Bellona.
Davidson points out that Arab traveller Ibn Fadlan's detailed account of a 10th-century Rus ship funeral on the Volga River features an "old Hunnish woman, massive and grim to look upon" (who Fadlan refers to as the "Angel of Death") who organises the killing of the slave girl, and has two other women with her that Fadlan refers to as her daughters.
Various theories have been proposed about the origins and development of the valkyries from Germanic paganism to later Norse mythology.
:the troll-woman's mount was feasting on the fodder of ravens:
The poem continues, and Haakon becomes a part of the einherjar in Valhalla, awaiting to do battle with the monstrous wolf Fenrir.
Davidson places emphasis on the fact that ''valkyrie'' literally means "chooser of the slain".
:Be as mindful of my welfare,
According to Mindy MacLeod and Bernard Mees, the amulets appear in Viking Age graves, and were presumably placed there because "they were thought to have protective powers".
In the second stanza, the woman explains that Odin placed a sleeping spell on her she could not break, and due to that spell she has been asleep a long time.
The narrator states that they once overheard a "high-minded", "golden-haired" and "white-armed" maiden speaking with a "glossy-beaked raven".
In addition, the place name Idisiaviso (meaning "plain of the Idisi") where forces commanded by Arminius fought those commanded by Germanicus at the Battle of the Weser River in 16 AD.
The women sing a song called ''Darraðarljóð'', which Dörruð memorizes.
Among the Bryggen inscriptions found in Bergen, Norway, is the "valkyrie stick" from the late 14th century.
Works of art depicting valkyries include "Die Walküren" (sketch, 1818) by J. G. Sandberg, "Reitende Walküre" (fresco), previously located in Munich palace but now destroyed, 1865-66 by M. Echter, "Valkyrien" and "Valkyriens død" (paintings, both from 1860), "Walkürenritt" (etching, 1871) by A. Welti, "Walkürenritt" (woodcut, 1871) by T. Pixis, "Walkürenritt" (1872) by A. Becker (reproduced in 1873 with the same title by A. v. Heyde), "Die Walkyren" (charcoal, 1880) and "Walkyren wählen und wecken die gefallenen Helden (Einherier), um sie vom Schlachtfield nach Walhall zu geleiten" (painting, 1882) and "Walkyrenschlacht" (oil painting, 1884) by K. Ehrenberg, "Walkürenritt" (oil painting, 1888, and etching, 1890) by A. Welti, "Walküre" (statue) by H. Günther, "Walkürenritt" (oil painting) by H. Hendrich, "Walkürenritt" (painting) by F. Leeke, "Einherier" (painting, from around 1900), by K. Dielitz, "The Ride of the Valkyries" (painting, from around 1900) by J. C. Dollman, "Valkyrie" (statue, 1910) and "Walhalla-freeze" (located in the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, Copenhagen, 1886–87), "Walkyrien" (print, 1915) by A. Kolb, and "Valkyrier" (drawing, 1925) by E. Hansen.
The woman recites a heathen prayer in two stanzas.
Meanwhile, comic makers Stan Lee and Jack Kirby created the Valkyrior, who serve a similar function to the Valkyries as well as having a similar name, in Marvel Comics as part of the Marvel adaptation of Norse mythology that includes Thor beginning with ''Thor #133'' in October 1966.
Helgi assembles an immense host to ride to wage battle at Frekastein against the Hniflung clan to assist Sigrún in her plight to avoid her betrothment.
In the sermon ''Sermo Lupi ad Anglos'', written by Wulfstan II, ''wælcyrie'' is used, and considered to appear as word for a human "sorceress".
The ''Idisi'' mentioned in the incantation are generally considered to be valkyries.
Lightning strikes one of the ships.
File:U 1163, Drävle (Sigrdrífa).JPG|A female figure bearing a horn on runestone U 1163.
The poem begins with comments by Odin (as Old Norse ''Óðinn''):
MacLeod and Mees believe the word means something like "supernatural sending", and that this points to a connection to the Ragnhild Tregagás charm, where a valkyrie is also "sent forth".
After Helgi has killed  King Hunding in stanza 4, a prose narrative says that Helgi escapes, consumes the raw meat of cattle he has slaughtered on a beach, and encounters Sigrún.
Sigurd uses his sword Gram to cut the corslet, starting from the neck of the corslet downwards, he continues cutting down her sleeves, and takes the corslet off of her.
Scholarly theories have been proposed about the relation between the valkyries, the norns, and the dísir, all of which are supernatural figures associated with fate.
The god Bragi asks where a thundering sound is coming from, and says that the benches of Valhalla are creaking—as if the god Baldr had returned to Valhalla—and that it sounds like the movement of a thousand.
In 2013, a small figure dated at around 800 AD was discovered in Hårby, Denmark by three amateur archaeologists.
In response, Sigrdrífa told Odin she had sworn a great oath that she would never wed a man who knew fear.
The saga relates that shortly after Haakon died on the same slab of rock that he was born upon, he was greatly mourned by friend and foe alike, and that his friends moved his body northward to Sæheim in North Hordaland.
The valkyrie tells him she knows of a hoard of swords in Sigarsholm, and that one of them is of particular importance, which she describes in detail.
It might possibly be a consequence of different forms of initiation of warriors, where one part seemed to have belonged to Óðinn and the other to Freyja.
:though worthy we were for the gods to grant it?"
These figures are commonly considered to represent valkyries or dísir.
Odin pricked her with a sleeping-thorn in consequence, told her she would never again "fight victoriously in battle", and condemned her to marriage.
In the poem ''Helgakviða Hjörvarðssonar'', a prose narrative says that an unnamed and silent young man, the son of the Norwegian King Hjörvarðr and Sigrlinn of Sváfaland, witnesses nine valkyries riding by while sitting atop a burial mound.
The prose narrative picks up again, and says that the valkyries tear their loom down and into pieces.
In the poem ''Grímnismál'', Odin (disguised as ''Grímnir''), tortured, starved and thirsty, tells the young Agnar that he wishes that the valkyries Hrist ("shaker") and Mist ("cloud") would "bear him a drinking horn", then provides a list of 11 more valkyries who he says "bear ale to the einherjar"; Skeggjöld ("axe-age"), Skögul, Hildr, Þrúðr ("power"), Hlökk ("noise", or "battle"), Herfjötur ("host-fetter"), Göll ("tumult"), Geirahöð ("spear-fight"), Randgríð ("shield-truce"), Ráðgríð ("council-truce") and Reginleif ("power-truce").
Sigrún, daughter of King Högni, is "a valkyrie and rode through air and sea", and she is the valkyrie Sváva reincarnated.
''Óskmey'' may be related to the Odinic name ''Óski'' (Old Norse, roughly meaning "wish fulfiller"), referring to the fact that Odin receives slain warriors in Valhalla.
:and from that radiance there came bolts of lightning;
The poem continues, and, among various other events, Helgi dies from a wound received in battle.
The brothers take the three women back to their hall with them—Egil takes Ölrún, Slagfiðr takes Hlaðguðr svanhvít and Völund takes Hervör alvitr.
At the end of the poem, the valkyries sing "start we swiftly with steeds unsaddled—hence to battle with brandished swords!"
:so glad is my heart.
In chapter 8 of ''Fagrskinna'', a prose narrative states that, after the death of her husband Eric Bloodaxe, Gunnhild Mother of Kings had a poem composed about him.
:certain great ones,
The 12 go into the hut and Dörruð can no longer see them.
MacLeod and Mees state that the opening lines of the charm correspond to the ''Poetic Edda'' poem ''Sigrdrífumál'', where the valkyrie Sigrdrífa provides runic advice, and that the meaning of the term ''skag'' is unclear, but a cognate exists in ''Helgakviða Hundingsbana I'' where Sinfjötli accuses Guðmundr of having once been a "''skass''-valkyrie".
:Settle down, victory-women,
In the stanza that follows, Helgi asks the valkyries (who he refers to as "southern goddesses") if they would like to come home with the warriors when night falls (all the while arrows were flying).
The Old Norse poems ''Völuspá'', ''Grímnismál'', ''Darraðarljóð'' and the ''Nafnaþulur'' section of the ''Prose Edda'' book ''Skáldskaparmál'', provide lists of valkyrie names.
A narrative at the end of the poem says that Helgi and his valkyrie wife Sváva "are said to be reincarnated".
The song consists of 11 stanzas, and within it the valkyries weave and choose who is to be slain at the Battle of Clontarf (fought outside Dublin in 1014 CE).
:so that she never shall, though she never would -
Further, "words were spoken over his grave according to the custom of heathen men, and they put him on the way to Valhalla".
Together, they mean "chooser of the slain".
:Were ye near, at night-time, where ye knew of corpses?"
Their waist-length mail armour is drenched in blood; their spears shine brightly:
High says "these women are called valkyries, and they are sent by Odin to every battle, where they choose which men are to die and they determine who has victory".
Sigurd enters the ''skjaldborg'', and sees a warrior lying there—asleep and fully armed.
:to clear up Val-hall for slain people.
Towards the end of the poem, valkyries again descend from the sky, this time to protect Helgi amid the battle at Frekastein.
Dörruð leaves the chink in the wall and heads home, and the women mount their horses and ride away; six to the south and six to the north.
The stick features a runic inscription intended as a charm.
The term "victory women" has been theorised as pointing to an association with valkyries.
: Greeted the light-lashed maiden, the lily-throated woman,
Some scholars propose that the names of the valkyries themselves contain no individuality, but are rather descriptive of the traits and nature of war-goddesses, and are possibly the descriptive creations of skalds.
