However, the Nukekubi is a being whose head and neck detach from its body to fly about seeking human prey at night.
Like Varney before her, the vampire Carmilla is portrayed in a somewhat sympathetic light as the compulsion of her condition is highlighted.
It has a distinctly suspenseful style, using vivid imagery to describe the horrifying exploits of Varney.
Cultures such as the Mesopotamians, Hebrews, Ancient Greeks, and Romans had tales of demons and spirits which are considered precursors to modern vampires.
In 1597, King James wrote a dissertation on witchcraft titled ''Daemonologie'' in which he wrote the belief that demons could possess both the living and the dead.
South Asia also developed other vampiric legends.
The term ''vampire'' did not exist in ancient times.
The vampiric traits described in Stoker's work merged with and dominated folkloric tradition, eventually evolving into the modern fictional vampire.
Porphyria was also linked with legends of vampirism in 1985 and received much media exposure, but has since been largely discredited.
Generally a black horse was required, though in Albania it should be white.
The latter part of the 20th century saw the rise of multi-volume vampire epics.
The vampire has been part of the occult society in Europe for centuries and has spread into the American sub-culture as well for more than a decade, being strongly influenced by and mixed with the neo gothic aesthetics.
One of the earliest recordings of vampire activity came from the region of Istria in modern Croatia, in 1672.
In his 1931 treatise ''On the Nightmare'', Welsh psychoanalyst Ernest Jones asserted that vampires are symbolic of several unconscious drives and defence mechanisms.
Many elaborate rituals were used to identify a vampire.
In one striking example of the latter, the corpses of five people in a graveyard near the Polish village of Dravsko, dating from the 17th and 18th centuries, were buried with sickles placed around their necks or across their abdomens.
The most famous, and most recently recorded, case of suspected vampirism is that of nineteen-year-old Mercy Brown, who died in Exeter, Rhode Island in 1892.
Lilitu was considered a demon and was often depicted as subsisting on the blood of babies.
in 1733, Johann Christoph Harenberg wrote a general treatise on vampirism and the Marquis d'Argens Boyer cites local cases.
Aztec mythology described tales of the Cihuateteo, skeletal-faced spirits of those who died in childbirth who stole children and entered into sexual liaisons with the living, driving them mad.
Its portrayal of vampirism as a disease of contagious demonic possession, with its undertones of sex, blood and death, struck a chord in Victorian Europe where tuberculosis and syphilis were common.
Corpses thought to be vampires were generally described as having a healthier appearance than expected, plump and showing little or no signs of decomposition.
And Estries, female shape changing, blood drinking demons, were said to roam the night among the population, seeking victims.
It wanders around animating dead bodies at night, attacking the living much like a ghoul.
Almost every nation has associated blood drinking with some kind of revenant or demon, or in some cases a deity.
A paragraph on vampires was included in the second edition (1749) of ''De servorum Dei beatificatione et sanctorum canonizatione'', On the beatification of the servants of God and on canonization of the blessed, written by Prospero Lambertini (Pope Benedict XIV).
Calmet conducted extensive research and amassed judicial reports of vampiric incidents and extensively researched theological and mythological accounts as well, utilizing the scientific method in his analysis to come up with methods for determining the validity for cases of this nature.
The bat transformation scene would again be used by Lon Chaney Jr. in 1943's ''Son of Dracula''.
Legend once said a man was not rabid if he could look at his own reflection (an allusion to the legend that vampires have no reflection).
Such vampiric paranormal romance novels and allied vampiric chick-lit and vampiric occult detective stories are a remarkably popular and ever-expanding contemporary publishing phenomenon.
The Leyak is a similar being from Balinese folklore of Indonesia.
They use an elongated proboscis-like tongue to suck fetuses from these pregnant women.
The village leader ordered a stake to be driven through his heart, but when the method failed to kill him, he was subsequently beheaded with better results.
The ''lugat'' cannot be seen, he can only be killed by the dhampir, who himself is usually the son of a lugat.
However, some have disputed the comparison of ''jiang shi'' with vampires, as ''jiang shi'' are usually represented as mindless creatures with no independent thought.
A problem with this theory is the question of how people presumably buried alive managed to stay alive for any extended period without food, water or fresh air.
An alternate explanation for noise is the bubbling of escaping gases from natural decomposition of bodies.
The staking of a swollen, decomposing body could cause the body to bleed and force the accumulated gases to escape the body.
Similarly, a parallel is made between sensitivity to sunlight by sufferers, yet this was associated with fictional and not folkloric vampires.
The reinvention of the vampire myth in the modern era is not without political overtones.
It would be clad in the linen shroud it was buried in, and its teeth, hair, and nails may have grown somewhat, though in general fangs were not a feature.
However, the stories of the ''Loogaroo'' are widespread through the Caribbean Islands and Louisiana in the United States.
David Malki, author of Wondermark, suggests in Wondermark No.
566 the use of the collective noun 'basement', as in "A basement of vampires."
Though folkloric vampires were believed to be more active at night, they were not generally considered vulnerable to sunlight.
As a devil borrows a dead body, it would seem so visibly and naturally to any man who converses with them and that any substance within the body would remain intolerably cold to others which they abuse.
An injured Estrie could be healed by eating bread and salt given her by her attacker.
Considered one of the preeminent figures of the classic horror film, the vampire has proven to be a rich subject for the film and gaming industries.
In Saxon regions of Germany, a lemon was placed in the mouth of suspected vampires.
The series ''Blood Ties'' premiered on Lifetime Television in 2007, featuring a character portrayed as Henry Fitzroy, illegitimate son of Henry VIII of England turned vampire, in modern-day Toronto, with a female former Toronto detective in the starring role.
Members of the Family are afflicted with a manic desire to consume human flesh, but restrict themselves to drinking blood to avoid becoming complete monsters.
After death, the skin and gums lose fluids and contract, exposing the roots of the hair, nails, and teeth, even teeth that were concealed in the jaw.
She appeared as an attractive woman with long black hair that covered a hole in the back of her neck, with which she sucked the blood of children.
That was the first case in history that a real person had been described as a vampire.
The deadly disease tuberculosis, or "consumption" as it was known at the time, was believed to be caused by nightly visitations on the part of a dead family member who had died of consumption themselves.
The character was later used in a story written by Serbian writer Milovan Glišić and in the Yugoslav 1973 horror film ''Leptirica'' inspired by the story.
Another likely cause of disordered tombs is grave robbing.
Vampires in the ''Twilight'' series (2005–2008) by Stephenie Meyer ignore the effects of garlic and crosses, and are not harmed by sunlight (although it does reveal their supernatural nature).
Despite being dismissed by experts, the link gained media attention and entered popular modern folklore.
The role-playing game ''Vampire: the Masquerade'' has been influential upon modern vampire fiction and elements of its terminology, such as ''embrace'' and ''sire'', appear in contemporary fiction.
Vampires had already been discussed in French and German literature.
The main characters, Sam and Dean Winchester, along with other hunters, believe that the true way to kill a vampire is to decapitate the being.The show's vampires are shown in a rather negative light, though some are shown mercy after being found to not harm humans.
Lee returned as Dracula in all but two of these and became well known in the role.
Vampirism and the Vampire lifestyle also represent a relevant part of modern day's occultist movements.
This could produce a groan-like sound when the gases moved past the vocal cords, or a sound reminiscent of flatulence when they passed through the anus.
Indeed, vampire hunting societies still exist, although they are largely formed for social reasons.
Over time the first two terms became general words to describe witches and demons respectively.
The literary Dracula transforms into a bat several times in the novel, and vampire bats themselves are mentioned twice in it.
The continuing popularity of the vampire theme has been ascribed to a combination of two factors: the representation of sexuality and the perennial dread of mortality.
The eastern Cape region has the ''impundulu,'' which can take the form of a large taloned bird and can summon thunder and lightning, and the Betsileo people of Madagascar tell of the ''ramanga'', an outlaw or living vampire who drinks the blood and eats the nail clippings of nobles.
They are said to be created when a person's soul (魄 ''pò'') fails to leave the deceased's body.
The mandurugo is a variety of the aswang that takes the form of an attractive girl by day, and develops wings and a long, hollow, thread-like tongue by night.
In January 2005, rumours circulated that an attacker had bitten a number of people in Birmingham, England, fuelling concerns about a vampire roaming the streets.
The sexual aspect may or may not be present.
After Austria gained control of northern Serbia and Oltenia with the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718, officials noted the local practice of exhuming bodies and "killing vampires".
Despite being called the Age of Enlightenment, during which most folkloric legends were quelled, the belief in vampires increased dramatically, resulting in a mass hysteria throughout most of Europe.
The pilot for the Dan Curtis 1972 television series ''Kolchak: The Night Stalker'' revolved around reporter Carl Kolchak hunting a vampire on the Las Vegas strip.
The causes of vampiric generation were many and varied in original folklore.
The story was published in book form in 1847 and runs to 868 double-columned pages.
In the Balkans, a vampire could also be killed by being shot or drowned, by repeating the funeral service, by sprinkling holy water on the body, or by exorcism.
Romani people drove steel or iron needles into a corpse's heart and placed bits of steel in the mouth, over the eyes, ears and between the fingers at the time of burial.
It has also been hypothesized that vampire legends were influenced by individuals being buried alive because of shortcomings in the medical knowledge of the time.
Government officials examined the bodies, wrote case reports, and published books throughout Europe.
The notion of vampirism has existed for millennia.
The innate sexuality of bloodsucking can be seen in its intrinsic connection with cannibalism and folkloric one with incubus-like behaviour.
Indeed, blood was often seen seeping from the mouth and nose when one was seen in its shroud or coffin and its left eye was often open.
Active vampirism within the vampire subculture includes both blood-related vampirism, commonly referred to as ''sanguine vampirism'', and ''psychic vampirism'', or supposed feeding from pranic energy.
The tongue is used to suck up blood from a sleeping victim.
A 2008 series from HBO, entitled ''True Blood'', gives a Southern take to the vampire theme.
The hysteria, commonly referred to as the "18th-Century Vampire Controversy", raged for a generation.
Although there are no vampire bats in Europe, bats and owls have long been associated with the supernatural and omens, although mainly because of their nocturnal habits, and in modern English heraldic tradition, a bat means "Awareness of the powers of darkness and chaos".
An early use of the Old Russian word is in the anti-pagan treatise "Word of Saint Grigoriy" (Russian ''Слово святого Григория''), dated variously to the 11th–13th centuries, where pagan worship of ''upyri'' is reported.
Another, less widespread theory, is that the Slavic languages have borrowed the word from a Turkic term for "witch" (e.g., Tatar ''ubyr'').
The ''Oxford English Dictionary'' dates the first appearance of the English word ''vampire'' (as ''vampyre'') in English from 1734, in a travelogue titled ''Travels of Three English Gentlemen'' published in ''The Harleian Miscellany'' in 1745.
Emotions such as love, guilt, and hate fuel the idea of the return of the dead to the grave.
These reports, prepared between 1725 and 1732, received widespread publicity.
Jiangshi, sometimes called "Chinese vampires" by Westerners, are reanimated corpses that hop around, killing living creatures to absorb life essence (qì) from their victims.
Blagojevich was reported to have died at the age of 62, but allegedly returned after his death asking his son for food.
Many legends report various beings draining other fluids from victims, an unconscious association with semen being obvious.
''Dhampiraj'' is also an Albanian surname.
Rabies has been linked with vampire folklore.
In Romania, garlic could be placed in the mouth, and as recently as the 19th century, the precaution of shooting a bullet through the coffin was taken.
This increase of interest in vampiric plotlines led to the vampire being depicted in films such as ''Underworld'' and ''Van Helsing'', and the Russian ''Night Watch'' and a TV miniseries remake of '''Salem's Lot'', both from 2004.
Similar Chinese narratives state that if a vampire-like being came across a sack of rice, it would have to count every grain; this is a theme encountered in myths from the Indian subcontinent, as well as in South American tales of witches and other sorts of evil or mischievous spirits or beings.
In Slavic and Chinese traditions, any corpse that was jumped over by an animal, particularly a dog or a cat, was feared to become one of the undead.
Tales of supernatural beings consuming the blood or flesh of the living have been found in nearly every culture around the world for many centuries.
This has led vampire hunters to mistakenly conclude that a dead body had not decomposed at all, or, ironically, to interpret signs of decomposition as signs of continued life.
This description would also fit the Sundel Bolongs.
Filling the hole with her hair would drive her off.
The paper made no attempt to address the credibility of the assumption that every vampire victim would turn into a vampire.
Cultural practices often arose that were intended to prevent a recently deceased loved one from turning into an undead revenant.
However, it is Bram Stoker's 1897 novel ''Dracula'' which is remembered as the quintessential vampire novel and provided the basis of the modern vampire legend.
The vampire has since become a dominant figure in the horror genre.
In other words, vampires did not exist
Methods of destroying suspected vampires varied, with staking the most commonly cited method, particularly in southern Slavic cultures.
The two incidents were well-documented.
This can produce the illusion that the hair, nails, and teeth have grown.
One unusual feature of this monster is its greenish-white furry skin, perhaps derived from fungus or mould growing on corpses.
The 12th-century English historians and chroniclers Walter Map and William of Newburgh recorded accounts of revenants, though records in English legends of vampiric beings after this date are scant.
Even government officials engaged in the hunting and staking of vampires.
Holes appearing in the earth over a grave were taken as a sign of vampirism.
He teaches counting and simple arithmetic through his compulsion to count everything, a trait he shares with certain other vampires of folklore.
''Philosophical Dictionary,'' Voltaire wrote:
The non-decay of vampires' bodies could recall the incorruption of the bodies of the saints of the Catholic Church.
''Buffy'', released in 1992, foreshadowed a vampiric presence on television, with adaptation to a long-running hit TV series of the same name and its spin-off ''Angel''.
In 2008 the BBC Three series Being Human became popular in Britain.
In some cases in which people reported sounds emanating from a specific coffin, it was later dug up and fingernail marks were discovered on the inside from the victim trying to escape.
In other cases the person would hit their heads, noses or faces and it would appear that they had been "feeding."
''Varney the Vampire'' was a landmark popular mid-Victorian era gothic horror story by James Malcolm Rymer and Thomas Peckett Prest, which first appeared from 1845 to 1847 in a series of pamphlets generally referred to as ''penny dreadfuls'' because of their inexpensive price and typically gruesome contents.
Other European countries followed suit.
''Bram Stoker's Dracula'' was a noteworthy 1992 film which became the then-highest grossing vampire film ever.
Vampire'' were released during the jiangshi cinematic boom of the 1980s and 1990s.
Corpses swell as gases from decomposition accumulate in the torso and the increased pressure forces blood to ooze from the nose and mouth.
Marx defined capital as "dead labour which, vampire-like, lives only by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it sucks".
Drawing on past works such as ''The Vampyre'' and "Carmilla", Stoker began to research his new book in the late 19th century, reading works such as ''The Land Beyond the Forest'' (1888) by Emily Gerard and other books about Transylvania and vampires.
Like the Lamia, the ''striges'' feasted on children, but also preyed on adults.
While in 1732 an anonymous writer calling itself "the doctor Weimar" discusses the non-putrefaction of these creatures, from a theological point of view.
The Serbian form has parallels in virtually all Slavic languages: Bulgarian and Macedonian  вампир (''vampir''), Bosnian: ''vampir'', Croatian ''vampir'', Czech and Slovak ''upír'', Polish ''wąpierz'', and (perhaps East Slavic-influenced) ''upiór'', Ukrainian упир (''upyr''), Russian упырь (''upyr''), Belarusian упыр (''upyr''), from Old East Slavic упирь (''upir'') (note that many of these languages have also borrowed forms such as "vampir/wampir" subsequently from the West; these are distinct from the original local words for the creature).
In a 16th-century burial near Venice, a brick forced into the mouth of a female corpse has been interpreted as a vampire-slaying ritual by the archaeologists who discovered it in 2006.
Later films showed more diversity in plotline, with some focusing on the vampire-hunter, such as Blade in the Marvel Comics' ''Blade'' films and the film ''Buffy the Vampire Slayer''.
In any case, Dolphin did not go on to publish his work more widely.
According to Sefer Hasidim, Estries were creatures created in the twilight hours before God rested.
Piercing the skin of the chest was a way of "deflating" the bloated vampire.
The 1927 stage production of ''Dracula'' followed the novel in having Dracula turn into a bat, as did the film, where Béla Lugosi would transform into a bat.
They were described as having the bodies of crows or birds in general, and were later incorporated into Roman mythology as ''strix'', a kind of nocturnal bird that fed on human flesh and blood.
The Malaysian ''Penanggalan'' may be either a beautiful old or young woman who obtained her beauty through the active use of black magic or other unnatural means, and is most commonly described in local folklore to be dark or demonic in nature.
In his entry for "Vampires" in the Dictionnaire philosophique (1764), Voltaire notices how the end of the 18th century coincided with the decline of the folkloric belief in the existence of vampires but that now "there were stock-jobbers, brokers, and men of business, who sucked the blood of the people in broad daylight; but they were not dead, though corrupted.
Empusa was the daughter of the goddess Hecate and was described as a demonic, bronze-footed creature.
Implied though not often explicitly documented in folklore, immortality is one attribute which features heavily in vampire film and literature.
Noting that the condition is treated by intravenous haem, he suggested that the consumption of large amounts of blood may result in haem being transported somehow across the stomach wall and into the bloodstream.
They also prefer to eat entrails (specifically the heart and the liver) and the phlegm of sick people.
Lord Ruthven and Varney were able to be healed by moonlight, although no account of this is known in traditional folklore.
'Coven' has been used as a collective noun for vampires, possibly based on the Wiccan usage.
Classified as vampires, all share the thirst for blood.
A number of murderers have performed seemingly vampiric rituals upon their victims.
The decade saw several more vampire films, most notably ''Dracula's Daughter'' in 1936.
Although vampires were generally described as undead, some folktales spoke of them as living beings.
Although vampiric entities have been recorded in most cultures, the term ''vampire''  was not popularized in the West until the early 18th century, after an influx of vampire superstition into Western Europe from areas where vampire legends were frequent, such as the Balkans and Eastern Europe, although local variants were also known by different names, such as ''shtriga'' in Albania, ''vrykolakas'' in Greece and ''strigoi'' in Romania.
These true suckers lived not in cemeteries, but in very agreeable palaces".
In early 1970 local press spread rumours that a vampire haunted Highgate Cemetery in London.
This tradition persisted in modern Greek folklore about the ''vrykolakas,'' in which a wax cross and piece of pottery with the inscription "Jesus Christ conquers" were placed on the corpse to prevent the body from becoming a vampire.
Within his classification of demons, he explained the concept through the notion that incubi and succubae could possess the corpse of the deceased and walk the earth.
In quite another type of depiction, Count von Count, a harmless and friendly vampire parodying Bela Lugosi's depictions, is a major character on the children's television series ''Sesame Street.''
The aristocratic Count Dracula, alone in his castle apart from a few demented retainers, appearing only at night to feed on his peasantry, is symbolic of the parasitic ''Ancien regime''.
Another popular vampire-related show is CW's ''The Vampire Diaries''.
This distinguishes the relationship between vampirism and nightmares which were believed that many cases of vampirism were simply illusions brought by the imagination.
The 21st century brought more examples of vampire fiction, such as J.R. Ward's Black Dagger Brotherhood series, and other highly popular vampire books which appeal to teenagers and young adults.
Aspen was also the wood of choice for stakes, as it was believed that Christ's cross was made from aspen (aspen branches on the graves of purported vampires were also believed to prevent their risings at night).
The susceptibility to garlic and light could be due to hypersensitivity, which is a symptom of rabies.
Such fiction began with 18th-century poetry and continued with 19th-century short stories, the first and most influential of which was John Polidori's ''The Vampyre'' (1819), featuring the vampire Lord Ruthven.
For resistant cases, the body was dismembered and the pieces burned, mixed with water, and administered to family members as a cure.
The successful 1958 ''Dracula'' starring Lee was followed by seven sequels.
Everything ranging from premature burial to the early ignorance of the body's decomposition cycle after death has been cited as the cause for the belief in vampires.
It also set the trend for seeing vampires as poetic tragic heroes rather than as the more traditional embodiment of evil.
In India, for example, tales of vetālas, ghoul-like beings that inhabit corpses, have been compiled in the ''Baitāl Pacīsī''; a prominent story in the ''Kathāsaritsāgara'' tells of King Vikramāditya and his nightly quests to capture an elusive one.
Dracula is a major character in more films than any other but Sherlock Holmes, and many early films were either based on the novel of ''Dracula'' or closely derived from it.
The charismatic and sophisticated vampire of modern fiction was born in 1819 with the publication of ''The Vampyre'' by John Polidori; the story was highly successful and arguably the most influential vampire work of the early 19th century.
During the late 18th and 19th centuries the belief in vampires was widespread in parts of New England, particularly in Rhode Island and Eastern Connecticut.
Folkloric vampires could also make their presence felt by engaging in minor poltergeist-like activity, such as hurling stones on roofs or moving household objects, and pressing on people in their sleep.
It has been argued that instead, the coin was intended to ward off any evil spirits from entering the body, and this may have influenced later vampire folklore.
There are many documented cases of families disinterring loved ones and removing their hearts in the belief that the deceased was a vampire who was responsible for sickness and death in the family, although the term "vampire" was never actually used to describe the deceased.
Popular video games about vampires include ''Castlevania'', which is an extension of the original Bram Stoker ''Dracula'' novel, and ''Legacy of Kain''.
The Old Norse ''draugr'' is another medieval example of an undead creature with similarities to vampires.
''The Vampyre'' was highly successful and the most influential vampire work of the early 19th century.
The epidemic allusion is obvious in the classical cases of Petar Blagojevich and Arnold Paole, and even more so in the case of Mercy Brown and in the vampire beliefs of New England generally, where a specific disease, tuberculosis, was associated with outbreaks of vampirism.
In some cases, especially in small localities, vampire superstition is still rampant and sightings or claims of vampire attacks occur frequently.
A former peasant, Jure died in 1656.
In different regions, animals can be revenants as lugats; also, living people during their sleep.
In 2006, a physics professor at the University of Central Florida wrote a paper arguing that it is mathematically impossible for vampires to exist, based on geometric progression.
By the 1970s, vampires in films had diversified with works such as ''Count Yorga, Vampire'' (1970), an African Count in 1972's ''Blacula'', the BBC's ''Count Dracula'' featuring French actor Louis Jourdan as Dracula and Frank Finlay as Abraham Van Helsing, and a Nosferatu-like vampire in 1979's ''Salem's Lot'', and a remake of ''Nosferatu'' itself, titled Nosferatu the Vampyre with Klaus Kinski the same year.
The vampire theme continued in penny dreadful serial publications such as ''Varney the Vampire'' (1847) and culminated in the pre-eminent vampire novel of all time: ''Dracula'' by Bram Stoker, published in 1897.
In modern fiction, the vampire tends to be depicted as a suave, charismatic villain.
The controversy in Austria only ceased when Empress Maria Theresa of Austria sent her personal physician, Gerard van Swieten, to investigate the claims of vampiric entities.
From 1679, Philippe Rohr devotes an essay to the dead who chew their shrouds in their graves, subject resumed later by Otto in 1732, and then by Michael Ranft in 1734.
Although vampires have appeared in Japanese cinema since the late 1950s, the folklore behind it is western in origin.
After his death, people began to die in the surrounding area and it was widely believed that Miloš had returned to prey on the neighbours.
Decapitation was the preferred method in German and western Slavic areas, with the head buried between the feet, behind the buttocks or away from the body.
In his opinion, while the incorruption of the bodies of saints was the effect of a divine intervention, all the phenomena attributed to vampires were purely natural or the fruit of "imagination, terror and fear".
Early folk belief in vampires has sometimes been ascribed to the ignorance of the body's process of decomposition after death and how people in pre-industrial societies tried to rationalise this, creating the figure of the vampire to explain the mysteries of death.
''Aloe vera'' hung backwards behind or near a door was thought to ward off vampiric beings in South American superstition.
