Similarly, various Indo-Canadian artists and actors have a profile in Bollywood or other aspects of India's entertainment industry.
in 1983 and recently expanded to include a three-page B.C.
The Marine Building is known for its elaborate ceramic tile facings and brass-gilt doors and elevators, which make it a favourite location for movie shoots.
Vancouver merchants outfitted prospectors bound for the Klondike Gold Rush in 1898.
Hogan's Alley, a small area adjacent to Chinatown, just off Main Street at Prior, was once home to a significant black community.
Less than a year later, the Westminster and Vancouver Tramway Company began operating Canada's first interurban line between the two cities (extended to Chilliwack in 1910).
Labour leader Frank Rogers was killed by CPR police while picketing at the docks, becoming the movement's first martyr in British Columbia.
A series of gang-related incidents in early 2009 escalated into what police have dubbed a gang war.
This mill, known as the Hastings Mill, became the nucleus around which Vancouver formed.
Many plants and trees growing throughout Vancouver and the Lower Mainland were imported from other parts of the continent and from points across the Pacific.
However, as with other Canadian cities, the overall crime rate has been falling "dramatically".
Concern was expressed that Vancouver's increasing homelessness problem would be exacerbated by the Olympics because owners of single room occupancy hotels, which house many of the city's lowest income residents, converted their properties to attract higher income residents and tourists.
Smaller companies include Touchstone Theatre, and Studio 58.
Gastown is also a popular area for nightlife with many upscale restaurants and nightclubs, as well as the Davie Village which is centre to the city's LGBT community.
Mixed visible minority
Mary Ellen Smith, a Vancouver suffragist and prohibitionist, became the first woman elected to a provincial legislature in Canada in 1918.
In the 1980s, an influx of immigrants from Hong Kong in anticipation of the transfer of sovereignty from the United Kingdom to China, combined with an increase in immigrants from mainland China and previous immigrants from Taiwan, established in Vancouver one of the highest concentrations of ethnic Chinese residents in North America.
Other visible minority
However, it has started to appear as itself in several major films and TV series.
The mild climate of the city and proximity to ocean, mountains, rivers and lakes make the area a popular destination for outdoor recreation.
Vancouver is one of Canada's warmest cities in the winter.
Each year over a million people pass through Vancouver on cruise ship vacations, often bound for Alaska.
The civic government was dominated by the centre-right Non-Partisan Association (NPA) since World War II, albeit with some significant centre-left interludes until 2008.
Larger musical performances are usually held at venues such as Rogers Arena, Queen Elizabeth Theatre, BC Place Stadium or the Pacific Coliseum, while smaller acts are held at places such as the Commodore Ballroom, the Orpheum Theatre and the Vogue Theatre.
The dominance of the economy by big business was accompanied by an often militant labour movement.
Many TV shows have also been filmed in Vancouver, such as ''Supernatural'', ''The 100'', ''Arrow'', ''The Flash'', ''Supergirl'' and ''The X-Files''.
news section, and the ''National Post'' which centres on national news.
Nicknamed Hollywood North, a distinction it shares with Toronto, the city has been used as a film making location for nearly a century, beginning with the Edison Manufacturing Company.
In total there are 22 municipalities, one electoral area and one treaty First Nation comprising Metro Vancouver, the regional government whose seat is in Burnaby.
Protection of urban parks, a focus on the development of rapid transit as opposed to a freeway system, a harm-reduction approach to illegal drug use, and a general concern about community-based development are examples of policies that have come to have broad support across the political spectrum in Vancouver.
Inter-city passenger rail service is operated from Pacific Central Station by Via Rail to points east, Amtrak Cascades to Seattle and Portland, and Rocky Mountaineer rail tour routes.
Vancouver's Hong Kong Chinese population has produced several Cantopop stars across the Hong Kong entertainment industry.
Ninety-three percent of the electricity used in Vancouver is generated using sustainable resources such as hydroelectric power.
Vancouver has hosted many international conferences and events, including the 1954 British Empire and Commonwealth Games, UN Habitat I, Expo 86, the World Police and Fire Games in 1989 and 2009; and the 2010 Winter Olympics and Paralympics which were held in Vancouver and Whistler, a resort community  north of the city.
Gregor Robertson, a former MLA for Vancouver-Fairview and head of Happy Planet, was the mayoral candidate for Vision Vancouver, the other main contender.
The forest in Stanley Park was logged between the 1860s and 1880s, and evidence of old-fashioned logging techniques such as springboard notches can still be seen there.
Until the city's naming in 1885, "Vancouver" referred to Vancouver Island, and it remains a common misconception that the city is located on the island.
Almost 30% of the city's inhabitants are of Chinese heritage.
It nevertheless remained important to the local economy until it closed in the 1920s.
The daily maximum averages  in July and August, with highs rarely reaching .
There is also a freshwater beach at Trout Lake in John Hendry Park.
However, little or none of the permanent collection is ever on view.
Vancouver's growing season averages 237 days, from 18 March until 10 November.
RCAF Station Jericho Beach, the first air base in Western Canada, was taken over by the Canadian Army in 1947 when sea planes were replaced by long-range aircraft.
Prior to the Hong Kong diaspora of the 1990s, the largest non-British ethnic groups in the city were Irish and German, followed by Scandinavian, Italian, Ukrainian and Chinese.
Vancouver's population grew from a settlement of 1,000 people in 1881 to over 20,000 by the turn of the century and 100,000 by 1911.
As of April 2010, the average two-level home in Vancouver sold for a record high of $987,500, compared with the Canadian average of $365,141.
This race and the UBC Grand Prix are part of BC Superweek, an annual series of professional cycling races in Metro Vancouver.
Musical contributions from Vancouver include performers of classical, folk and popular music.
Vancouver's streetcar system began on 28 June 1890, and ran from the (first) Granville Street Bridge to Westminster Avenue (now Main Street and Kingsway).
More recently, the city has been debating "ecodensity"—ways in which "density, design, and land use can contribute to environmental sustainability, affordability, and livability".
The city's selection to co-host the 2010 Winter Olympics was also a major influence on economic development.
Vancouver has been ranked one of the most livable cities in the world for more than a decade.
These flower for several weeks in early spring each year, an occasion celebrated by the Vancouver Cherry Blossom Festival.
Local primary reserve units include The Seaforth Highlanders of Canada and The British Columbia Regiment (Duke of Connaught's Own), based at the Seaforth Armoury and the Beatty Street Drill Hall, respectively, and the 15th Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery.
Vancouver is the only major Canadian city with these trends.
Transportation demand management policies have imposed restrictions on drivers making it more difficult and expensive to commute while introducing more benefits for non-drivers.
People of English, Scottish, and Irish origins were historically the largest ethnic groups in the city, and elements of British society and culture are still visible in some areas, particularly South Granville and Kerrisdale.
After two tense months of daily and disruptive protesting, the relief camp strikers decided to take their grievances to the federal government and embarked on the On-to-Ottawa Trek, but their protest was put down by force.
The Sun Tower's cupola was finally exceeded as the Empire's tallest commercial building by the elaborate Art Deco Marine Building in the 1920s.
Other significant Asian ethnic groups in Vancouver are South Asian (mostly Punjabi) usually referred to as Indo-Canadian (5.7%), Filipino (5.0%), Japanese (1.7%), Korean (1.5%), as well as sizeable communities of Vietnamese, Indonesians, and Cambodians.
After 6 years in Vancouver, the team relocated to Memphis, Tennessee in 2001.
International students and English as a Second Language (ESL) students have been significant in the enrolment of these public and private institutions.
Vancouver has also been ranked among Canada's most expensive cities in which to live.
The bicycle-sharing system Mobi was introduced to the city in June 2016.
On average, snow falls on eleven days per year, with three days receiving  or more.
earning it the film industry nickname, Hollywood North.
The two major English-language daily newspapers are ''The Vancouver Sun'' and ''The Province''.
, Vancouver had the seventh highest crime rate, dropping 3 spots since 2005, among Canada's 27 census metropolitan areas.
Several matches of the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup were played in Vancouver, including the final at BC Place Stadium.
Most of the base facilities were transferred to the City of Vancouver in 1969 and the area renamed "Jericho Park".
The summer months are typically dry, with an average of only one in five days during July and August receiving precipitation.
The city has several large beaches, many adjacent to one another, extending from the shoreline of Stanley Park around False Creek to the south side of English Bay, from Kitsilano to the University Endowment Lands, (which also has beaches that are not part of the city proper).
For school trustee, there were four Vision Vancouver seats, three COPE seats, and two NPA seats.
Vancouver is a film and television production centre.
While each member of Metro Vancouver has its own separate local governing body, Metro Vancouver oversees common services and planning functions within the area such as providing drinking water; operating sewage and solid waste handling; maintaining regional parks; overseeing air quality, greenhouse gases and ecological health; and providing a strategy for regional growth and land use.
In 2011 Vancouver slipped to fourth place overall at 1.19 billion, although the region still leads Canada in foreign production.
Sales in February 2016 were 56.3% higher than the 10 year average for the month.
The central branch contains 1.5 million volumes.
Changes are being made to the regional transportation network as part of Translink's 10-Year Transportation Plan.
In 2015, Vancouver was one of six venues for the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup and hosted the Final game between the United States and Japan.
as the terminus for the Canadian Pacific Railway, to the disappointment of Port Moody, New Westminster and Victoria, all of which had vied to be the railhead.
In the Kitsilano district are the Vancouver Maritime Museum, the H. R. MacMillan Space Centre, and the Vancouver Museum, the largest civic museum in Canada.
The economy of early Vancouver was dominated by large companies such as the CPR, which fuelled economic activity and led to the rapid development of the new city; in fact the CPR was the main real estate owner and housing developer in the city.
Today the Chinese are the largest visible ethnic group in the city, with a diverse Chinese-speaking community, and several languages, including Cantonese and Mandarin.
When alternative rock became popular in the 1990s, several Vancouver groups rose to prominence, including 54-40, Odds, Moist, the Matthew Good Band, Sons of Freedom and Econoline Crush.
% of Total Population
Since the 1980s, immigration has drastically increased, making the city more ethnically and linguistically diverse; 52% do not speak English as their first language.
The 1994 Stanley Cup riot overwhelmed police and injured as many as 200 people.
After the war, these Japanese-Canadian men and women were not allowed to return to cities like Vancouver causing areas, like the aforementioned Japantown, to cease to be ethnically Japanese areas as the communities never revived.
Canada's first drug law came about following an inquiry conducted by the federal Minister of Labour and future Prime Minister, William Lyon Mackenzie King.
The NPA fractured over the issue of drug policy in 2002, facilitating a landslide victory for the Coalition of Progressive Electors (COPE) on a harm reduction platform.
The mill's central role in the city waned after the arrival of the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) in the 1880s.
As part of the land and political deal whereby the area of the townsite was made the railhead of the CPR, it was renamed "Vancouver" and incorporated shortly thereafter as a city, in 1886.
The North Shore Mountains dominate the cityscape, and on a clear day, scenic vistas include the snow-capped volcano Mount Baker in the state of Washington to the southeast, Vancouver Island across the Strait of Georgia to the west and southwest, and Bowen Island to the northwest.
'''Total Aboriginal population'''
Prominent theatre companies in Vancouver include the Arts Club Theatre Company on Granville Island, and Bard on the Beach.
Libraries in Vancouver include the Vancouver Public Library with its main branch at Library Square, designed by Moshe Safdie.
for five consecutive years.
While some manufacturing did develop, including the establishment of the British Columbia Sugar Refinery by Benjamin Tingley Rogers in 1890, natural resources became the basis for Vancouver's economy.
Dances for a Small Stage is a semi-annual dance festival.
'''Total visible minority population'''
It provides a bus service, including the B-Line rapid bus service, a foot passenger and bicycle ferry service (known as SeaBus), an automated rapid transit service called SkyTrain, and West Coast Express commuter rail.
Another significant international event held in Vancouver, the 1986 World Exposition, received over 20 million visitors and added $3.7 billion to the Canadian economy.
Since the 1990s, development of high-rise condominia in the downtown peninsula has been financed, in part, by an inflow of capital from Hong Kong immigrants due to the former colony's 1997 handover to China.
Only in Elliott Bay, Seattle did the size of trees rival those of Burrard Inlet and English Bay.
The city's strong focus on lifestyle and health culture also makes it a hub for many lifestyle-brands with Lululemon, Kit and Ace, Mountain Equipment Co-op, Herschel Supply Co., Reigning Champ, and Nature's Path Organic Foods all founded and headquartered in Vancouver.
While during summer months the inland temperatures are significantly higher, Vancouver has the coolest summer average high of all major Canadian metropolitan areas.
Major film production studios in Vancouver and Burnaby have turned Greater Vancouver and nearby areas into one of the largest film production centres in North America,
The Vancouver Folk Music Festival and the Vancouver International Jazz Festival showcase music in their respective genres from around the world.
The metropolitan area referred to as Greater Vancouver, with more than 2.4 million residents, is the third most populous metropolitan area in the country and the most populous in Western Canada.
Aboriginal groupSource:
Mountain bikers have created world-renowned trails across the North Shore.
The area is thought to have had the largest trees of these species on the British Columbia Coast.
The 2011 census recorded more than 603,000 people in the city, making it the eighth largest among Canadian cities.
The city produced a number of notable punk rock bands, including D.O.A.
By 2008, this proportion had grown to 51%.
Urban planning in Vancouver is characterized by high-rise residential and mixed-use development in urban centres, as an alternative to sprawl.
Some species imported from harsher climates in Eastern Canada or Europe have grown to immense sizes.
Vancouver also produced influential metal band Strapping Young Lad and pioneering electro-industrial bands Skinny Puppy, Numb and Front Line Assembly; the latter's Bill Leeb is better known for founding ambient pop super-group Delerium.
The  of beaches include Second and Third Beaches in Stanley Park, English Bay (First Beach), Sunset, Kitsilano Beach, Jericho, Locarno, Spanish Banks, Spanish Banks Extension, Spanish Banks West, and Wreck Beach.
Stamp, who had begun logging in the Port Alberni area, first attempted to run a mill at Brockton Point, but difficult currents and reefs forced the relocation of the operation in 1867 to a point near the foot of Dunlevy Street.
The concentration of media ownership has spurred alternatives, making Vancouver a center for independent online media including ''The Tyee'', the ''Vancouver Observer'', and NowPublic., as well as hyperlocal online media, like ''Vancouver Is Awesome'', which provide coverage of community events and local arts and culture.
A sawmill established at Moodyville (now the City of North Vancouver) in 1863, began the city's long relationship with logging.
The National Basketball Association (NBA) came to town in the form of the Vancouver Grizzlies in 1995.
Vision Vancouver candidate Gregor Robertson defeated Ladner by a considerable margin, nearing 20,000 votes.
Of the remaining three, COPE received two and the NPA one.
Within a 20- to 30-minute drive from downtown Vancouver are the North Shore Mountains, with three ski areas: Cypress Mountain, Grouse Mountain, and Mount Seymour.
Three Chinese language daily newspapers, ''Ming Pao'', ''Sing Tao'' and ''World Journal'' cater to the city's large Cantonese and Mandarin speaking population.
The BC Titans of the International Basketball League played their inaugural season in 2009, with home games at the Langley Event Centre.
The balance of power was significantly shifted to Vision Vancouver, which held seven of the 10 spots for councillor.
The success of these dense but liveable neighbourhoods led to the redevelopment of urban industrial sites, such as North False Creek and Coal Harbour, beginning in the mid-1980s.
The CAG showcases temporary exhibitions by up-and-coming Vancouver artists.
Vancouver was recognized as the fourth greenest city in the world according to the 2014 Global Green Economy Index.
From the mid-1950s until the 1980s, many Portuguese immigrants came to Vancouver and the city had the third-largest Portuguese population in Canada in 2001.
Examples include the monkey puzzle tree, the Japanese Maple, and various flowering exotics, such as magnolias, azaleas, and rhododendrons.
Vancouver's climate is temperate by Canadian standards and is usually classified as oceanic or marine west coast, which under the Köppen climate classification system is classified as ''Cfb'' that borders on a warm summer Mediterranean Climate ''Csb''.
Vancouver's 1981–2010 USDA Plant Hardiness Zone ranges from 8A to 9A depending on elevation and proximity to water.
Vancouver has an adult obesity rate of 12% compared to the Canadian average of 23%.
Alcohol prohibition began in the First World War and lasted until 1921, when the provincial government established control over alcohol sales, a practice still in place today.
Other streets are lined with flowering chestnut, horse chestnut and other decorative shade trees.
The City of Vancouver was incorporated on 6 April 1886, the same year that the first transcontinental train arrived.
Unusually for a city of Vancouver's size, all municipal elections are on an at-large basis.
From that first enterprise, other stores and some hotels quickly appeared along the waterfront to the west.
As part of the larger Metro Vancouver region, it is influenced by the policy direction of livability as illustrated in Metro Vancouver's Regional Growth Strategy.
In December 2013, the city announced a proposal for a Zero Waste Innovation Centre that focuses on sustainable waste handling and energy recovery, potentially through the use of waste gassification technology.
The multilingual South Asian community is served by Spice Radio on 1200 AM established in 2014.
The highest temperature ever recorded at the airport was  set on 30 July 2009, and the highest temperature ever recorded within the city of Vancouver was  occurring first on 31 July 1965, again on 8 August 1981, and finally on 29 May 1983.
UBC consistently ranks among the 40 best universities in the world, and is among the 20 best public universities.
The city has adopted various strategies to reduce housing costs, including cooperative housing, legalized secondary suites, increased density and smart growth.
A more interactive museum is Science World at the head of False Creek.
Vancouver has been called a "city of neighbourhoods", each with a distinct character and ethnic mix.
The district administers about 74 elementary schools, 17 elementary annexes, 18 secondary schools, 7 adult education centres, 2 Vancouver Learn Network schools, which include 18 French immersion, a Mandarin bilingual, a fine arts, gifted, and Montessori schools.
In contrast, according to Forbes, Vancouver had the 6th most overpriced real estate market in the world and was second-highest in North America after Los Angeles in 2007.
HeliJet and float plane companies operate scheduled air service from Vancouver harbour and YVR south terminal.
Vancouver is the most densely populated Canadian municipality with over 250,000 residents, and the fourth most densely populated such city in North America behind New York City, San Francisco,
Several road projects will be completed within the next few years, including a replacement for the Port Mann Bridge, as part of the Provincial Government's Gateway Program.
In 1981, less than 7% of the population belonged to a visible minority group.
Despite increases in Latin American immigration to Vancouver in the 1980s and 90s, recent immigration has been comparatively low, and African immigration has been similarly stagnant (3.6% and 3.3% of total immigrant population, respectively).
The Vancouver Fire Department was established that year and the city quickly rebuilt.
The other public universities in the metropolitan area around Vancouver are Capilano University in North Vancouver, the Emily Carr University of Art and Design on Granville Island in Vancouver, and Kwantlen Polytechnic University with four campuses all outside the city proper.
Annual festivals that are held in Vancouver include the PuSh International Performing Arts Festival in January and the Vancouver Fringe Festival in September.
Vancouver Community College and Langara College are publicly funded college-level institutions in Vancouver, as is Douglas College with three campuses outside the city.
The first major sympathy strike was in 1903 when railway employees struck against the CPR for union recognition.
The largest trees in Vancouver's old-growth forest were in the Gastown area, where the first logging occurred, and on the southern slopes of False Creek and English Bay, especially around Jericho Beach.
As of 1 January 1929, the population of the enlarged Vancouver was 228,193.
Annual precipitation as measured at Vancouver International Airport in Richmond averages , compared with  in the downtown area and  in North Vancouver.
Vancouver's scenic location makes it a major tourist destination.
This was reaffirmed with the results of the 2005 provincial election and the 2006 federal election.
Media dominance is a frequently discussed issue in Vancouver as newspapers ''The Vancouver Sun'', ''The Province'', the ''Vancouver Courier'' and other local newspapers such as the ''Surrey Now'', the ''Burnaby Now'' and the ''Richmond News'', are all owned by Postmedia Network.
The Vancouver Opera is a major opera company in the city, and City Opera of Vancouver is the city's professional chamber opera company.
The Evergreen Line is planned to link the cities of Coquitlam and Port Moody with the SkyTrain system by summer 2016.
Vancouver plays host to special events such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference, the Clinton-Yeltsin Summit, or the Symphony of Fire fireworks show that require significant policing.
Vancouver is a member municipality of Metro Vancouver, a regional government.
Forbes has also ranked Vancouver as the tenth cleanest city in the world.
The Granville Entertainment District has the city's highest concentration of bars and nightclubs with closing times of 3am, in addition to various after-hours clubs open until late morning on weekends.
Germans are the next-largest European ethnic group in Vancouver and were a leading force in the city's society and economy until the rise of anti-German sentiment with the outbreak of World War I in 1914.
This is, in part, the result of a push by city planners for a solution to traffic problems and pro-environment campaigns.
The City of Vancouver encompasses a land area of about 114 square km, giving it a population density of about 5,249 people per square km (13,590 per square mi).
In 2011, Vancouver hosted the Grey Cup, the Canadian Football League (CFL) championship game which is awarded every year to a different city which has a CFL team.
Other social movements, such as the first-wave feminist, moral reform, and temperance movements were also instrumental in Vancouver's development.
Though polarized, a political consensus has emerged in Vancouver around a number of issues.
Both also maintain campuses in Downtown Vancouver and Surrey.
Cycling has become Vancouver's fastest-growing mode of transportation.
Vancouver has over  of parks, of which, Stanley Park, at , is the largest.
Winters in Greater Vancouver are the fourth mildest of Canadian cities after nearby Victoria, Nanaimo and Duncan, all on Vancouver Island.
In 2009, Metro Vancouver hosted the World Police and Fire Games.
A number of other local and international papers serve other multicultural groups in the Lower Mainland.
Vancouver is served by Vancouver International Airport (YVR), located on Sea Island in the city of Richmond, immediately south of Vancouver.
The second-tallest building in Vancouver is the Private Residences at Hotel Georgia, at .
, Port Metro Vancouver is the third largest port by tonnage in the Americas (displacing New York), 27th in the world, the busiest and largest in Canada, and the most diversified port in North America.
For park commissioner, four spots went to Vision Vancouver, one to the Green Party, one to COPE, and one to NPA.
The Vancouver School of conceptual photography (often referred to as photoconceptualism) is a term applied to a grouping of artists from Vancouver who achieved international recognition starting in the 1980s.
The larger Lower Mainland-Southwest economic region (which includes also the Squamish-Lillooet, Fraser Valley, and Sunshine Coast Regional District) has a population of over 2.93 million.
It was quickly followed by mills owned by Captain Edward Stamp on the south shore of the inlet.
In recent years, Vancouver has become a centre for software development, biotechnology, aerospace, video game development, animation studios and television production and film industry.
Vancouver is governed by the eleven-member Vancouver City Council, a nine-member School Board, and a seven-member Park Board, all of whom serve three-year terms.
They played their games at Rogers Arena.
During the summer of 2008 Vancouver hosted the World Ultimate Championships.
Fairchild Group also has two television stations: Fairchild TV and Talentvision, serving Cantonese and Mandarin speaking audiences respectively.
