The flowers can be naturally pollinated only by bees of the ''Melipona'' genus found in Mexico (''abeja de monte'' or mountain bee).
Vanillin can be easily synthesized from various raw materials, but the majority of food-grade (>99% pure) vanillin is made from guaiacol.
Tied in bundles and rolled in blankets, fruits may be placed in an oven at  for 36 to 48 hours.
In general, vanilla fruit grade is based on the length, appearance (color, sheen, presence of any splits, presence of blemishes), and moisture content of the fruit.
Additional sources include ''V.
In the United States, castoreum, the exudate from the castor sacs of mature beavers, has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration  as a food additive, often referenced simply as a "natural flavoring" in the product's list of ingredients.
+ Example of a Vanilla fruit grading system, used in Madagascar
The top portion of the cutting is tied to the tree using natural fibers such as banana or hemp.
Although it is native to Mexico, it is now widely grown throughout the tropics.
The chemical compound vanillin (4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde) is a major contributor to the characteristic flavor and aroma of real vanilla, but hundreds of compounds contribute to a complex flavor that vanillin can  only approximate.
10–15&nbsp;cm, 140–160 fruits per pound
If the fruits are between 10 and 15&nbsp;cm long, pods are under the second-quality category, and fruits less than 10&nbsp;cm in length are under the third-quality category.
tahitensis'', grown in the South Pacific; and ''V.
Subjugated by the Aztecs, the Totonacs paid tribute by sending vanilla fruit to the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan.
The insect pests of vanilla include beetles and weevils that attack the flower, caterpillars, snakes, and slugs that damage the tender parts of shoot, flower buds, and immature fruit, and grasshoppers that affect cutting shoot tips.
Prices remained high through the early 1980s despite the introduction of Indonesian vanilla.
Hand-pollination allowed global cultivation of the plant.
+ Simplified vanilla fruit grading system for cooks
Several methods have been proposed for vanilla tissue culture, but all of them begin from axillary buds of the vanilla vine.
In dishes prepared with whole natural vanilla, these seeds are recognizable as black specks.
Traditionally, it consists of keeping fruits, for seven to 10 days, densely stacked and insulated in wool or other cloth.
Therefore, conditions such as excess water, insufficient drainage, heavy mulch, overpollination, and too much shade favor disease development.
The harvested green fruit can be commercialized as such or cured to get a better market price.
planifolia'' in India.
planifolia'', is produced in much less quantity and marketed as the vanilla from the land of its origin.
One flower produces one fruit.
A healthy vine should produce about 50 to 100 beans per year, but growers are careful to pollinate only five or six flowers from the 20 on each raceme.
In general, quality vanilla only comes from good vines and through careful production methods.
They called it ''vainilla'', or "little pod".
Also called "Gourmet" or "Prime".
It is used in both food and beverages, especially as vanilla and raspberry flavoring.
dark brown to black sometimes with a few red streaks
Sweating is a hydrolytic and oxidative process.
The vanilla flower lasts about one day, sometimes less, so growers have to inspect their plantations every day for open flowers, a labor-intensive task.
Cuttings between  should be selected for planting in the field or greenhouse.
planifolia'' plants introduced from the Americas, is the term used for vanilla from Indian Ocean islands such as Madagascar, the Comoros, and Réunion, formerly the Île Bourbon.
Beans that show localized signs of disease or other physical defects are cut to remove the blemishes; the shorter fragments left are called “cuts” and are assigned lower grades, as are fruits with lower moisture contents.
Another minor component of vanilla extract is piperonal (heliotropin).
Three major species of vanilla currently are grown globally, all of which derive from a species originally found in Mesoamerica, including parts of modern-day Mexico.
Conditioning is performed by storing the pods for five to six months in closed boxes, where the fragrance develops.
Most artificial vanilla products contain vanillin, which can be produced synthetically from lignin, a natural polymer found in wood.
It is also used to flavor some cigarettes and in perfume-making.
The main species harvested for vanilla is ''V.
In this case, the pods' seeds are mixed into the preparation.
Mexico, once the leading producer of natural vanilla with an annual yield of 500&nbsp;tons, produced only 10&nbsp;tons of vanilla in 2006.
short, cut, and often split fruits, typically with substandard aroma and color
30–35% moisture content.
Its growth environment is referred to as its ''terroir'', and includes not only the adjacent plants, but also the climate, geography, and local geology.
Over-pollination  results in diseases and inferior bean quality.
According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation, Indonesia is currently responsible for the vast majority of the world's Bourbon vanilla production and 58% of the world total vanilla fruit production.
Growth is rapid under good conditions.
Flowering normally occurs every spring, and without pollination, the blossom wilts and falls, and no vanilla bean can grow.
similar to European red but more blemishes and dryer/stiffer
The remaining upper roots cling to the support, and often grow down into the soil.
The fruits require five to six weeks to develop, but around six months to mature.
Most diseases come from the uncharacteristic growing conditions of vanilla.
The majority of the world's vanilla is the ''V.
The two lower leaves are removed, and this area is buried in loose soil at the base of a support.
Where their blood touched the ground, the vine of the tropical orchid grew.
Despite the expense, vanilla is highly valued for its flavor.
* '''West Indian vanilla''' is made from ''V.
At that time, a shortage of vanilla planting stock was occurring in India.
The processed fruits are sorted, graded, bundled, and wrapped in paraffin paper and preserved for the development of desired bean qualities, especially flavor and aroma.
Vanilla was completely unknown in the Old World before Cortés.
supple with oily luster
Madagascar (especially the fertile Sava region) accounts for much of the global production of vanilla.
† ''moisture content varies among sources cited''
Inclusion of vanilla varietals from any of the former French dependencies or overseas France may be a part of the flavoring.
Optimum temperatures for cultivation are  during the day and  during the night.
planifolia'' flowers are hermaphroditic: They carry both male (anther) and female (stigma) organs; however, to avoid self-pollination, a membrane separates those organs.
The cured vanilla fruits contain an average of 2.5% vanillin.
Once fully cured, the vanilla fruits are sorted by quality and graded.
Each flower must be hand-pollinated within 12 hours of opening.
By 2010, prices were down to $20/kg.
Today, even in Mexico, hand pollination is used extensively.
In 1819, however, French entrepreneurs shipped vanilla fruits to the islands of Réunion and Mauritius in hopes of producing vanilla there.
In the wild, very few natural pollinators exist, with most pollination being carried out by bees of the genus ''Melipona''.
An estimated 95% of "vanilla" products are artificially flavored with vanillin derived from lignin instead of vanilla fruits.
like Black but dryer/stiffer
The orchid species ''Leptotes bicolor'' is used as a natural vanilla replacement in Paraguay and southern Brazil.
This retains a temperature of  and high humidity.
The vines grew, but would not fruit outside Mexico.
Left alone, it will grow as high as possible on the support, with few flowers.
Ethyl vanillin is more expensive, but has a stronger note.
Higher-grade fruits command higher prices in the market.
The liquid extracted from vanilla pods was once believed to have medical properties, helping with various stomach ailments.
Soils for vanilla cultivation should be loose, with high organic matter content and loamy texture.
All plants need to grow under 50% shade, as well as the rest of the crop.
The fruit contains tiny, black seeds.
Frozen or quick-frozen fruits must be thawed again for the subsequent sweating stage.
Generally, one flower per raceme opens per day, so the raceme may be in flower for over 20 days.
Every year, growers fold the higher parts of the plant downward so the plant stays at heights accessible by a standing human.
The appellation originates from the French style of making vanilla ice cream with a custard base, using vanilla pods, cream, and egg yolks.
Each country which produces vanilla has its own grading system, and individual vendors, in turn, sometimes use their own criteria for describing the quality of the fruits they offer for sale.
They must be well drained, and a slight slope helps in this condition.
Tonka bean extract smells and tastes like vanilla, but coumarin has been shown to cause liver damage in lab animals and is banned in food in the US by the Food and Drug Administration since 1954.
* Labor intensity (pollination and harvest activities)
As a result, vanilla is widely used in both commercial and domestic baking, perfume manufacture, and aromatherapy.
Exposing the fruits to sunlight until they turn brown, a method originating in Mexico, was practiced by the Aztecs.
The species was introduced by French Admiral François Alphonse Hamelin to French Polynesia from the Philippines, where it was introduced from Guatemala by the Manila Galleon trade.
Real seedpod extract is an extremely complicated mixture of several hundred different compounds, including vanillin, acetaldehyde, acetic acid, furfural, hexanoic acid, 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde, eugenol, methyl cinnamate, and isobutyric acid.
''Fusarium'', ''Sclerotium'', ''Phytophthora'', and ''Colletrotrichum'' species cause rots of root, stem, leaf, bean, and shoot apex.
Mosaic virus, leaf curl, and cymbidium mosaic potex virus are the common viral diseases.
Vanilla grows as a vine, climbing up an existing tree (also called a tutor), pole, or other support.
''Cook's Illustrated'' ran several taste tests pitting vanilla against vanillin in baked goods and other applications, and to the consternation of the magazine editors, tasters could not differentiate the flavor of vanillin from vanilla; however, for the case of vanilla ice cream, natural vanilla won out.
brown with reddish variegation
The method of killing varies, but may be accomplished by heating in hot water, freezing, or scratching, or killing by heating in an oven or exposing the beans to direct sunlight.
In the mid-1980s, the cartel that had controlled vanilla prices and distribution since its creation in 1930 disbanded.
Most of these practices are implemented under greenhouse cultivation, since such field conditions are very difficult to achieve.
As with most orchids, the blossoms grow along stems branching from the main vine.
Mulch is very important for proper growth of the vine, and a considerable portion of mulch should be placed in the base of the vine.
If organic agriculture is practiced, insecticides are avoided, and mechanical measures are adopted for pest management.
Any practice directed to stimulate aerial root production has a direct effect on vine productivity.
Good-quality vanilla has a strong, aromatic flavor, but food with small amounts of low-quality vanilla or artificial vanilla-like flavorings are far more common, since true vanilla is much more expensive.
Initial attempts to cultivate vanilla outside Mexico and Central America proved futile because of the symbiotic relationship between the vanilla orchid and its natural pollinator, the local species of ''Melipona'' bee.
Whole, dark, plump and oily pods that are visually attractive, with no blemishes, and that have a higher moisture content are graded most highly.
Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés is credited with introducing both vanilla and chocolate to Europe in the 1520s.
The cyclone, political instability, and poor weather in the third year drove vanilla prices to an astonishing US$500/kg in 2004, bringing new countries into the vanilla industry.
Within hours, the flowers closed and several days later, Morren noticed vanilla pods beginning to form.
The flower, self-pollinated, will then produce a fruit.
These diseases can be controlled by spraying Bordeaux mixture (1%), carbendazim (0.2%) and copper oxychloride (0.2%).
tahitiensis'' (grown in Niue and Tahiti), although the vanillin content of these species is much less than ''V.
''Vainilla'' is from the diminutive of ''vaina'', from the Latin ''vagina'' (sheath) to describe the shape of the pods.
The different methods give different profiles of enzymatic activity.
Vanilla flavoring in food may be achieved by adding vanilla extract or by cooking vanilla pods in the liquid preparation.
In 1836, botanist Charles François Antoine Morren was drinking coffee on a patio in Papantla (in Veracruz, Mexico) and noticed black bees flying around the vanilla flowers next to his table.
Three years are required for cuttings to grow enough to produce flowers and subsequent pods.
Cuttings take one to eight weeks to establish roots, and show initial signs of growth from one of the leaf axils.
Like other orchids' seeds, vanilla seeds will not germinate without the presence of certain mycorrhizal fungi.
dark brown to black
This was the part of the first project to grow ''V.
planifolia'' and ''V.
A more recent and thorough test by the same group produced a more interesting variety of results; namely, high-quality artificial vanilla flavoring is best for cookies, while high-quality real vanilla is slightly better for cakes and significantly better for unheated or lightly heated foods.
According to Totonac mythology, the tropical orchid was born when Princess Xanat, forbidden by her father from marrying a mortal, fled to the forest with her lover.
Prices dropped 70% over the next few years, to nearly US$20 per kilogram; prices rose sharply again after tropical cyclone Hudah struck Madagascar in April 2000.
Wilting of the cuttings before planting provides better conditions for root initiation and establishment.
It then releases the distinctive vanilla smell.
Indonesia and Madagascar are the world's largest producers.
After Edmond Albius discovered how to pollinate the flowers quickly by hand, the pods began to thrive.
Vanilla sold in tourist markets around Mexico is sometimes not actual vanilla extract, but is mixed with an extract of the tonka bean, which contains coumarin.
A vine remains productive between 12 and 14 years.
* '''Bourbon vanilla''' or '''Bourbon-Madagascar vanilla''', produced from ''V.
They named the fruit ''tlilxochitl'', or "black flower", after the matured fruit, which shrivels and turns black shortly after it is picked.
A few years later in 1841, a simple and efficient artificial hand-pollination method was developed by a 12-year-old slave named Edmond Albius on Réunion, a method still used today.
A five-year-old vine can produce between  pods, and this production can increase up to  after a few years.
Also called "Extract fruits".
Reduction of the beans to 25–30% moisture by weight, to prevent rotting and to lock the aroma in the pods, is always achieved by some exposure of the beans to air, and usually (and traditionally) intermittent shade and sunlight.
Daily exposure to the sun may also be used, or dipping the fruits in hot water.
Growers tried to bring this bee into other growing locales, to no avail.
Each fruit contains thousands of tiny black vanilla seeds.
Vanilla requires organic matter, so three or four applications of mulch a year are adequate for the plant.
Regarded as the world's most popular aroma and flavor, vanilla is a widely used aroma and flavor compound for foods, beverages and cosmetics, as indicated by its popularity as an ice cream flavor.
Immature, dark green pods are not harvested.
The method proved financially unworkable and was not deployed commercially.
Vanilla is a common ingredient in Western sweet baked goods, such as cookies and cakes.
The largest fruits greater than 16&nbsp;cm and up to as much as 21&nbsp;cm are usually reserved for the gourmet vanilla market, for sale to top chefs and restaurants.
He watched their actions closely as they would land and work their way under a flap inside the flower, transferring pollen in the process.
Commercial vanilla production can be performed under open field and "greenhouse" operations.
Pale yellow discoloration that commences at the distal end of the fruits is an indication of the maturity of pods.
To ensure the finest flavor from every fruit, each individual pod must be picked by hand just as it begins to split on the end.
Spanish and Portuguese sailors and explorers brought vanilla into Africa and Asia later that century.
These seed pods are roughly a third of an inch by six inches, and brownish red to black when ripe.
In 1841, Edmond Albius, a slave who lived on the French island of Réunion in the Indian Ocean, discovered at the age of 12 that the plant could be hand-pollinated.
The Totonac people, who inhabit the East Coast of Mexico in the present-day state of Veracruz, were the first to cultivate vanilla.
The first flowers that open per vine should be pollinated, so the beans are similar in age.
For stem cutting, a progeny garden needs to be established.
Drying is the most problematic of the curing stages; unevenness in the drying process can lead to the loss of vanillin content of some fruits by the time the others are cured.
A good crop, coupled with decreased demand caused by the production of imitation vanilla, pushed the market price down to the $40/kg range in the middle of 2005.
Vanilla essence occurs in two forms.
It is also used to describe the distinctive vanilla flavor derived from ''V.
Ideal humidity is around 80%, and under normal greenhouse conditions, it can be achieved by an evaporative cooler.
Soil pH has not been well documented, but some researchers have indicated an optimum soil pH around 5.3.
pompona'', found in the West Indies, and Central and South America.
If the fruit is more than  in length, it belongs to first-quality product.
Red Fox (European quality)
Fertilization varies with soil conditions, but general recommendations are: 40 to 60 g of N, 20 to 30 g of P2O5 and 60 to 100 g of K2O should be applied to each plant per year besides organic manures, such as vermicompost, oil cakes, poultry manure, and wood ash.
Tissue culture was first used as a means of creating vanilla plants during the 1980s at Tamil Nadu University.
Inside of these pods is an oily liquid full of tiny seeds.
Genetic analysis shows this species is possibly a cultivar from a hybrid of ''V.
Testing has shown mechanical disruption of fruit tissues can cause curing processes, including the degeneration of glucovanillin to vanillin, so the reasoning goes that disrupting the tissues and cells of the fruit allow enzymes and enzyme substrates to interact.
The term '''French vanilla''' is often used to designate particular preparations with a strong vanilla aroma, containing vanilla grains and sometimes also containing eggs (especially egg yolks).
It can be grown in a wood (on trees), in a plantation (on trees or poles), or in a "shader", in increasing orders of productivity.
Most successful vanilla growing and processing is done in the region within 10 to 20° of the equator.
Vanilla fruit yield depends on the care and management given to the hanging and fruiting vines.
A small splinter of wood or a grass stem is used to lift the rostellum or move the flap upward, so the overhanging anther can be pressed against the stigma and self-pollinate the vine.
However, vanillin is only one of 171 identified aromatic components of real vanilla fruits.
Cuttings below  need to be rooted and raised in a separate nursery before planting.
Hot-water killing may consist of dipping the pods in hot water () for three minutes, or at  for 10 seconds.
Several methods exist in the market for curing vanilla; nevertheless, all of them consist of four basic steps: killing, sweating, slow-drying, and conditioning of the beans.
The only way to produce fruits without the bees is artificial pollination.
* '''Tahitian vanilla''' is the name for vanilla from French Polynesia, made with ''V.
Although vanilla is a prized flavoring agent on its own, it is also used to enhance the flavor of other substances, to which its own flavor is often complementary, such as chocolate, custard, caramel, coffee, and others.
Before planting the cuttings, trees to support the vine must be planted at least three months before sowing the cuttings.
Pre-Columbian Mesoamerican people cultivated the vine of the vanilla orchid, called ''tlilxochitl'' by the Aztecs.
Soon, the tropical orchids were sent from Réunion Island to the Comoros Islands, Seychelles, and Madagascar, along with instructions for pollinating them.
Planting material should always come from unflowered portions of the vine.
This also greatly stimulates flowering.
In scratch killing, fruits are scratched along their length.
Each fruit ripens at its own time, requiring a daily harvest.
Under this scheme, vanilla extract is normally made from Grade B fruits.
