As chairman of the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC), and later director of OSRD, Bush coordinated the activities of some six thousand leading American scientists in the application of science to warfare.
In June 1943, the Army provided $500,000 to build the computer, which became ENIAC, the first general-purpose electronic computer.
The Vannevar Bush papers are located in several places, with the majority of the collection held at the Library of Congress.
In May 1938, Bush accepted a prestigious appointment as president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (CIW), which had been founded in Washington, D.C. Also known as the Carnegie Institution for Science, it had an endowment of $33 million, and annually spent $1.5 million in research, most of which was carried out at its eight major laboratories.
He married Phoebe in August 1916.
Other challenges involved obtaining adequate funds from the president and Congress and determining apportionment of research among government, academic, and industrial facilities.
Concerned about the lack of coordination in scientific research and the requirements of defense mobilization, Bush proposed the creation of a general directive agency in the federal government, which he discussed with his colleagues.
Alfred Friendly summed up the feeling of many scientists in declaring that Bush had become "the Grand Old Man of American science".
Bush was outraged when a security hearing stripped Oppenheimer of his security clearance in 1954; he issued a strident attack on Oppenheimer's accusers in ''The New York Times''.
In 1917, following the United States' entry into World War I, he went to work with the National Research Council.
Bush's authority, both among scientists and politicians, suffered a rapid decline, though he remained a revered figure.
Texas Instruments sold it to Bain Capital in 2006, and it became a separate company again as Sensata Technologies in 2010.
To control it, he created a Top Policy Group consisting of himself—although he never attended a meeting—Wallace, Bush, Conant, Stimson and the Chief of Staff of the Army, General George Marshall.
A small number of projects reported to him directly, such as the S-1 Uranium Committee.
Loomis suggested that the lab should be run by the Carnegie Institution, but Bush convinced him that it would best be run by MIT.
Compton appointed Bush to the newly created post of vice president in 1932.
Through the President's uncle, Frederic Delano, Bush managed to set up a meeting with Roosevelt on June 12, 1940, to which he brought a single sheet of paper describing the agency.
It was the first of a string of inventions.
He had the secretary of NACA prepare a draft of the proposed National Defense Research Committee (NDRC) to be presented to Congress, but after the Germans invaded France in May 1940, Bush decided speed was important and approached President Franklin D. Roosevelt directly.
The investigator is staggered by the findings and conclusions of thousands of other workers."
Their marriage produced two sons: Richard Davis Bush and John Hathaway Bush.
Bush clashed over leadership of the institute with Cameron Forbes, CIW's chairman of the board, and with his predecessor, John Merriam, who continued to offer unwanted advice.
Shortly after "As We May Think" was originally published, Douglas Engelbart read it, and with Bush's visions in mind, commenced work that would later lead to the invention of the mouse.
Bush was appointed to the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1938, and soon became its chairman.
By this time, war had broken out in Europe, and the inferiority of American aircraft engines was apparent, in particular the Allison V-1710 which performed poorly at high altitudes and had to be removed from the P-51 Mustang in favor of the British Rolls-Royce Merlin engine.
He returned to Tufts in October 1914 to teach mathematics, and spent the 1915 summer break working at the Brooklyn Navy Yard as an electrical inspector.
In December 1938, NACA asked for $11 million to establish a new aeronautical research laboratory in Sunnyvale, California, to supplement the existing Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory.
It advised that the atomic bomb should be used against an industrial target in Japan as soon as possible and without warning.
It had two bicycle wheels, and a pen that plotted the terrain over which it traveled.
"Madison Avenue believes," he said, "that if you tell the public something absurd, but do it enough times, the public will ultimately register it in its stock of accepted verities."
Bush played a critical role in persuading the United States government to undertake a crash program to create an atomic bomb.
Before the war, Bush had gone on the record as saying, "I don't understand how a serious scientist or engineer can play around with rockets", but in May 1944, he was forced to travel to London to warn General Dwight Eisenhower of the danger posed by the V-1 and V-2.
The meeting agreed with Bush, and created a Military Policy Committee chaired by him, with Somervell's chief of staff, Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer, representing the army, and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell representing the navy.
Bush found backing from Laurence K. Marshall and Richard S. Aldrich to create the Spencer Thermostat Company, which hired Bush as a consultant.
Afterwards, he took his hat off to Oppenheimer in tribute.
The civilians already knew each other well, which allowed the organization to begin functioning straight away.
The new company soon had revenues in excess of a million dollars.
Bush was concerned that information overload might inhibit the research efforts of scientists.
He then attended Tufts, like his father before him.
Bowen, the director of the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), saw the NDRC as a bureaucratic rival, and recommended abolishing it.
Starting in 1927, Bush constructed a differential analyzer, an analog computer that could solve differential equations with as many as 18 independent variables.
He was a trustee of Tufts College from 1943 to 1962, of Johns Hopkins University from 1943 to 1955, of the Carnegie Corporation of New York from 1939 to 1950, the Carnegie Institution of Washington from 1958 to 1974, and the George Putnam Fund of Boston from 1956 to 1972, and was a regent of the Smithsonian Institution from 1943 to 1955.
With Truman as president, men like John R. Steelman, who was appointed chairman of the President's Scientific Research Board in October 1946, came to prominence.
MIT was the largest to receive funds, with its obvious ties to Bush and his close associates.
In their introduction to a paper discussing information literacy as a discipline, Bill Johnston and Sheila Webber wrote in 2005 that
The NDRC allocated the new laboratory a budget of $455,000 for its first year.
Bush was a well-known policymaker and public intellectual during World War II, when he was in effect the first presidential science advisor.
He worked closely with the company's president, Max Tishler, although Bush was concerned about Tishler's reluctance to delegate responsibility.
To preserve the secret of the proximity fuze, its use was initially permitted only over water, where a dud round could not fall into enemy hands.
Bush wanted the institute to concentrate on hard science.
On August 31, 1940, Bush met with Henry Tizard, and arranged a series of meetings between the NDRC and the Tizard Mission, a British scientific delegation.
The scientists, burying their old professional competition in the demand of a common cause, have shared greatly and learned much.
In late 1943, the Army obtained permission to use the weapon over land.
He became a member of the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity, and dated Phoebe Clara Davis, who also came from Chelsea.
As a "test man", his job was to assess equipment to ensure that it was safe.
In 1945, Bush published the essay "As We May Think" in which he predicted that "wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified".
The bill passed the Senate and the House, but was pocket vetoed by Truman on August 6, on the grounds that the administrative officers were not properly responsible to either the president or Congress.
The Quebec Agreement merged the two atomic bomb projects, creating the Combined Policy Committee with Stimson, Bush and Conant as United States representatives.
In July 1945, the Kilgore bill was introduced in Congress, proposing the appointment and removal of a single science administrator by the president, with emphasis on applied research, and a patent clause favoring a government monopoly.
In 1945, Bush was awarded the Public Welfare Medal from the National Academy of Sciences.
"As We May Think" has turned out to be a visionary and influential essay.
He continued to be skeptical about rockets and missiles, writing in his 1949 book, ''Modern Arms and Free Men'', that intercontinental ballistic missiles would not be technically feasible "for a long time to come&nbsp;... if ever".
It was the first of a string of inventions.
The reform of the administration of MIT began in 1930 with the appointment of Karl T. Compton as president.
In May 1945, Bush became part of the Interim Committee formed to advise the new president, Harry S. Truman, on nuclear weapons.
In 1980, the National Science Foundation created the Vannevar Bush Award to honor his contributions to public service.
His critics saw his attitude as a failure of vision.
He was never happy with the position and resigned as chairman of the RDB after a year, but remained on the oversight committee.
In March 1942, Bush sent a report to Roosevelt outlining work by Robert Oppenheimer on the nuclear cross section of uranium-235.
He saw little value in the humanities and social sciences, and slashed funding for ''Isis'', a journal dedicated to the history of science and technology and its cultural influence.
The NDRC established itself in the administration building at the Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Bush soon became dissatisfied with the dilatory way the project was run, with its indecisiveness over the selection of sites for the pilot plants.
In 1922, he collaborated with fellow MIT professor William H. Timbie on ''Principles of Electrical Engineering'', an introductory textbook.
While the OSRD had some success developing unguided rockets, it had nothing comparable to the V-1, the V-2 or the Henschel Hs 293 air-to-ship gliding guided bomb.
Only when he returned to Washington did he discover that Roosevelt had agreed with the British.
In April 1942, Bush placed Section T directly under the OSRD, and Parsons in charge.
Bush was paid a $10,000 fee to design the Rapid Analytical Machine (RAM).
Bush received the AIEE's Edison Medal in 1943, "for his contribution to the advancement of electrical engineering, particularly through the development of new applications of mathematics to engineering problems, and for his eminent service to the nation in guiding the war research program."
This was a device for assisting surveyors that looked like a lawn mower.
This enabled radios, which had previously required two different types of batteries, to operate from mains power.
Bush's method of management at the OSRD was to direct overall policy, while delegating supervision of divisions to qualified colleagues and letting them do their jobs without interference.
Bush would often ask: "Will it help to win a war; ''this'' war?"
Bush's relationship with the navy was more turbulent.
Bush introduced the concept of the ''memex'' during the 1930s, which he imagined as a form of memory augmentation involving a microfilm-based "device in which an individual stores all his books, records, and communications, and which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility.
Senator Robert Reynolds attempted to get Laughlin reinstated, but Bush informed the trustees that an inquiry into Laughlin would "show him to be physically incapable of directing an office, and an investigation of his scientific standing would be equally conclusive."
By mid-1941, it had developed SCR-584 radar, a mobile radar fire control system for antiaircraft guns.
He is also known in engineering for his work on analog computers, for founding Raytheon, and for the memex, a hypothetical adjustable microfilm viewer with a structure analogous to that of hypertext.
Bush was present at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range on July 16, 1945, for the Trinity nuclear test, the first detonation of an atomic bomb.
General Motors told him that "even if it were a better engine, General Motors would not be interested in it."
The war had accustomed many scientists to working without the budgetary constraints imposed by pre-war universities.
Starting in 1927, Bush constructed a differential analyzer, an analog computer with some digital components that could solve differential equations with as many as 18 independent variables.
Bush therefore pressed for OSRD to be wound up as soon as possible.
In ''Science, The Endless Frontier'', his 1945 report to the President of the United States, Bush called for an expansion of government support for science, and he pressed for the creation of the National Science Foundation.
He was survived by his sons Richard, a surgeon, and John, president of Millipore Corporation, and by six grandchildren and his sister Edith.
Bush became director of the OSRD while Conant succeeded him as chairman of the NDRC, which was subsumed into the OSRD.
A popular student, he was vice president of his sophomore class, and president of his junior class.
Bush's wife had died in 1969.
At the meeting, Churchill forcefully pressed for a renewal of interchange, while Bush defended current policy.
He was now able to influence research policy in the United States at the highest level, and could informally advise the government on scientific matters.
He joined the Department of Electrical Engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1919, and founded the company now known as Raytheon in 1922.
He was able to meet with Samuel Goudsmit and other members of the Alsos Mission, who assured him that there was no danger from the German project; he conveyed this assessment to Lieutenant General Bedell Smith.
During his senior year, he managed the football team.
His adviser, Arthur Edwin Kennelly, tried to demand more work from him, but Bush refused, and Kennelly was overruled by the department chairman; Bush received his doctorate in engineering jointly from MIT and Harvard University.
This invention arose from previous work performed by Herbert R. Stewart, one of Bush's masters students, who at Bush's suggestion created the integraph, a device for solving first-order differential equations, in 1925.
AMRAD's management was not interested in the device, but had no objection to its sale.
He toured the Western Front in October 1944, and spoke to ordnance officers, but no senior commander would meet with him.
In Bush's view, the "purest realms" were the physical and medical sciences; he did not propose funding the social sciences.
Bush remained a member of the NACA until November 1948.
For developing the differential analyzer, Bush was awarded the Franklin Institute's Louis E. Levy Medal in 1928.
From 1947 to 1962, Bush was on the board of directors for American Telephone and Telegraph.
In 1924, Bush and Marshall teamed up with physicist Charles G. Smith, who had invented a device called the S-tube.
Bush appointed four leading scientists to the NDRC: Karl T. Compton (president of MIT), James B. Conant (president of Harvard University), Frank B. Jewett (president of the National Academy of Sciences and chairman of the Board of Directors of Bell Laboratories), and Richard C. Tolman (dean of the graduate school at Caltech); Rear Admiral Harold G. Bowen, Sr. and Brigadier General George V. Strong represented the military.
With the Army on board, Bush moved to streamline oversight of the project by the OSRD, replacing the S-1 Section with a new S-1 Executive Committee.
President Truman awarded Bush the Medal of Merit with bronze oak leaf cluster in 1948, President Lyndon Johnson awarded him the National Medal of Science in 1963, and President Richard Nixon presented him with the Atomic Pioneers Award from the Atomic Energy Commission in February 1970.
Spurred by the need for enough financial security to marry, he submitted his thesis, entitled ''Oscillating-Current Circuits: An Extension of the Theory of Generalized Angular Velocities, with Applications to the Coupled Circuit and the Artificial Transmission Line'', in April 1916.
A Senate bill was introduced in February 1947 to create the National Science Foundation (NSF) to replace the OSRD.
On Bush's advice, Roosevelt chose the army to run the project rather than the navy, although the navy had shown far more interest in the field, and was already conducting research into atomic energy for powering ships.
On August 23, 1938, Bush was appointed to the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), the predecessor of NASA.
Following Ames's retirement in October 1939, Bush became chairman of the NACA, with George J. Mead as his deputy.
It has been exhilarating to work in effective partnership."
He had two older sisters, Edith and Reba.
He gutted Carnegie's archeology program, setting the field back many years in the United States.
During World War I, Bush had become aware of poor cooperation between civilian scientists and the military.
Roosevelt approved a Military Policy Committee recommendation stating that information given to the British should be limited to technologies that they were actively working on and should not extend to post-war developments.
He was named after John Vannevar, an old friend of the family who had attended Tufts College with Perry.
One of CIW staff members that Tuve recruited to Section T in 1940 was James Van Allen.
At the meeting with Roosevelt on October 9, 1941, Bush advocated cooperating with the United Kingdom, and he began corresponding with his British counterpart, Sir John Anderson.
At a meeting On September 19, 1940, the Americans described Loomis and Compton's microwave research.
A version was also developed for use with howitzers against ground targets.
"If one looks at the proximity fuze program as a whole," historian James Phinney Baxter III wrote, "the magnitude and complexity of the effort rank it among the three or four most extraordinary scientific achievements of the war."
On graduation in 1913 he received both bachelor of science and master of science degrees.
In August 1942, a live firing test was conducted with the newly commissioned cruiser ; three pilotless drones were shot down in succession.
Bush distrusted the company's sales organization, but supported Tishler's research and development efforts.
Oppenheimer's calculations, which Bush had George Kistiakowsky check, estimated that the critical mass of a sphere of uranium-235 was in the range of 2.5 to 5 kilograms, with a destructive power of around 2,000 tons of TNT.
Bush immediately realized the potential of such an invention, for these were much more difficult to solve, but also quite common in physics.
A compromise Kilgore–Magnuson bill of February 1946 passed the Senate but expired in the House because Bush favored a competing bill that was a virtual duplicate of the original Magnuson bill.
Bush became chairman of the board at Merck following the death of George W. Merck, serving until 1962.
Goddard would come to be regarded as America's pioneer of rocketry, but many contemporaries regarded him as a crank.
The OSRD was involved in some 2,500 contracts, worth in excess of $536 million.
The authority that Bush had as chairman of the RDB was much different from the power and influence he enjoyed as director of OSRD and would have enjoyed in the agency he had hoped would be independent of the Executive branch and Congress.
The OSRD was abolished without a successor organization on December 31, 1947.
Nonetheless, it was an important step toward creating such a device.
Bush left Tufts in 1919, although he remained employed by AMRAD, and joined the Department of Electrical Engineering at MIT, where he worked under Dugald C. Jackson.
Bush was also made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1948, and an Officer of the French Legion of Honor in 1955.
With passage of the National Security Act on July 26, 1947, the JRDB became the Research and Development Board (RDB).
With its dissolution, Bush and others had hoped that an equivalent peacetime government research and development agency would replace the OSRD.
It was a frustrating experience for Bush, since he had never appeared before Congress before, and the senators were not swayed by his arguments.
The organization operated financially on a hand-to-mouth basis with monetary support from the president's emergency fund.
Without a National Science Foundation, the military stepped in, with the Office of Naval Research (ONR) filling the gap.
In all, the OSRD requested deferments for some 9,725 employees of OSRD contractors, of which all but 63 were granted.
Furthermore, the OSRD had a broader mandate than the NDRC, moving into additional areas such as medical research and the mass production of penicillin and sulfa drugs.
His device worked as designed, but only from a wooden ship; attempts to get it to work on a metal ship such as a destroyer failed.
Working on the analytical engine, Shannon described the application of Boolean algebra to electronic circuits in his landmark master's thesis, ''A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits''.
The station owner, Harold Power, hired him to run the company's laboratory, at a salary greater than that which Bush drew from Tufts.
A major embarrassment to them all was Harry H. Laughlin, the head of the Eugenics Record Office, whose activities Merriam had attempted to curtail without success.
He attempted to develop a means of detecting submarines by measuring the disturbance in the Earth's magnetic field.
A few months later, ''Life'' magazine published a condensed version of "As We May Think", accompanied by several illustrations showing the possible appearance of a memex machine and its companion devices.
With Bush as chairman, the NDRC was functioning even before the agency was officially established by order of the Council of National Defense on June 27, 1940.
"They are founded on new principles and new conceptions, which in turn are painstakingly developed by research in the purest realms of science!"
Bush continued to serve on the NACA through 1948 and expressed annoyance with aircraft companies for delaying development of a turbojet engine because of the huge expense of research and development as well as retooling from older piston engines.
This became especially difficult as the army's manpower crisis really began to bite in 1944.
Bush reorganized the committee, strengthening its scientific component by adding Tuve, George B. Pegram, Jesse W. Beams, Ross Gunn and Harold Urey.
Taffy Bowen and John Cockcroft of the Tizard Mission then produced a cavity magnetron, a device far in advance of anything the Americans had ever seen, with an amazing power output of around 10 KW at 10&nbsp;cm, enough to spot the periscope of a surfaced submarine at night from an aircraft.
For his master's thesis, Bush invented and patented a "profile tracer", a mapping device for assisting surveyors.
After graduation, Bush worked at General Electric (GE) in Schenectady, New York, for $14 a week.
Although the United States trailed the Germans and Japanese in several areas, this represented an entire field that had been left to the enemy.
In September 1949, he was appointed to head a scientific panel that included Oppenheimer to review the evidence that the Soviet Union had tested its first atomic bomb.
He was buried at South Dennis Cemetery in South Dennis, Massachusetts, after a private funeral service.
In July 1943, on a visit to London to learn about British progress on antisubmarine technology, Bush, Stimson and Bundy met with Anderson, Lord Cherwell and Winston Churchill at 10 Downing Street.
The Eugenics Record Office was renamed the Genetics Record Office, its funding was drastically cut, and it was closed completely in 1944.
A series of bureaucratic battles ended with the NRL placed under the Bureau of Ships, and Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox placing an unsatisfactory fitness report in Bowen's personnel file.
In his obituary, ''The New York Times'' described Bush as "a master craftsman at steering around obstacles, whether they were technical or political or bull-headed generals and admirals."
The OSRD continued to function actively until some time after the end of hostilities, but by 1946–47 it had been reduced to a minimal staff charged with finishing work remaining from the war period; Bush was calling for its closure even before the war had ended.
By 1953, the Department of Defense was spending $1.6 billion a year on research; physicists were spending 70 percent of their time on defense related research, and 98 percent of the money spent on physics came from either the Department of Defense or the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), which took over from the Manhattan Project on January 1, 1947.
His most difficult problems, and also greatest successes, were keeping the confidence of the military, which distrusted the ability of civilians to observe security regulations and devise practical solutions, and opposing conscription of young scientists into the armed forces.
Bush preferred to quit rather than study a subject that did not interest him, and he subsequently enrolled in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) electrical engineering program.
Unlike normal radar, the proximity fuze sent out a continuous signal rather than short pulses.
Bush later explained that "I have a great reservation about these studies where somebody goes out and interviews a bunch of people and reads a lot of stuff and writes a book and puts it on a shelf and nobody ever reads it."
Bush helped create the Joint Research and Development Board (JRDB) of the Army and Navy, of which he was chairman.
To exploit the invention, Bush decided to create a special laboratory.
Under Bush's supervision, Hazen was able to construct the differential analyzer, a table-like array of shafts and pens that mechanically simulated and plotted the desired equation.
Bush could only recommend that the launch sites be bombed, which was done.
He briefed Roosevelt on Tube Alloys, the British atomic bomb project and its Maud Committee, which had concluded that an atomic bomb was feasible, and on the German nuclear energy project, about which little was known.
He was chiefly responsible for the movement that led to the creation of the National Science Foundation.
Bush and Compton soon clashed over the issue of limiting the amount of outside consultancy by professors, a battle Bush quickly lost, but the two men soon built a solid professional relationship.
An offshoot of the work at MIT was the beginning of digital circuit design theory by one of Bush's graduate students, Claude Shannon.
Bush appeared on the cover of ''Time'' magazine on April 3, 1944.
Bush met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff in October 1944 to press for its use, arguing that the Germans would be unable to copy and produce it before the war was over.
Having delayed its funding, Bush's prediction proved correct as ENIAC was not completed until December 1945, after the war had ended.
He established a cordial relationship with Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, and Stimson's assistant, Harvey H. Bundy, who found Bush "impatient" and "vain", but said he was "one of the most important, able men I ever knew".
In contrast, the competing Magnuson bill was similar to Bush's proposal to vest control in a panel of top scientists and civilian administrators with the executive director appointed by them.
In 1949, he received the IRI Medal from the Industrial Research Institute in recognition of his contributions as a leader of research and development.
In September 1940, Norbert Wiener approached Bush with a proposal to build a digital computer.
It is an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory."
AMRAD's lucrative contracts from World War I had been cancelled, and Bush attempted to reverse the company's fortunes by developing a thermostatic switch invented by Al Spencer, an AMRAD technician, on his own time.
In June 1938, Bush asked Laughlin to retire, offering him an annuity, which Laughlin reluctantly accepted.
He was particularly disturbed at the allocation of an AA-3 priority, which would delay completion of the pilot plants by three months.
Bush became its president on January 1, 1939, with a salary of $25,000.
The supporters of digital computers were disappointed at the decision, which they attributed to a preference for outmoded analog technology.
Bush accepted a job with Tufts, where he became involved with the American Radio and Research Corporation (AMRAD), which began broadcasting music from the campus on March 8, 1916.
