Mass tourism emerged since the late 1950s.
bar:2001 at: 313 text: 312,9 shift:(-14,5)
bar:2005 from:0 till:312
Elegant mansions were erected on main boulevards and in the vineyards north of town.
*Bulgarians: 284,738 (93.8%)
Tourism is of foremost importance with the suburban beachfront resorts of Golden Sands, Holiday Club Riviera, Sunny Day, Constantine and Helena, and others with a total capacity of over 60,000 beds (2005), attracting millions of visitors each year (4.74 million in 2006, 3.99 million of which international tourists).
In December 2007 (and again in October 2008), Varna was voted "Best City in Bulgaria to Live In"  by a national poll by ''Darik Radio'', the ''24 Chasa'' daily and the information portal darik.news.
In retail, the city not only has the assortment of international big-box retailers  now ubiquitous in larger Bulgarian cities, but boasts made-in-Varna national chains with locations spreading over the country such as retailer Piccadilly, restaurateur Happy, and pharmacy chain Sanita.
Official statistics according to GRAO and NSI, however, have not supported their claims.
At the same time, stretches of shanty towns, more befitting Rio de Janeiro, remain in Romani neighbourhoods on the western edge of town due to complexities of local politics.
bar:2001 from:0 till:313
Control changed from Byzantine to Bulgarian hands several times during the Middle Ages.
In 1201, Kaloyan took over the Varna fortress, then in Byzantine hands, on Holy Saturday using a siege tower, and secured it for the Second Bulgarian Empire.
The city has many of the finest eateries in the nation and abounds in ethnic food places.
*Turks: 12,295 (3.8%)
*Turks: 10,028 (3.6%)
Beach resorts were designed mostly in a sleek modern style, which was somewhat lost in their recent more lavish renovations.
By ethnic group, ethnic Bulgarians were then 6,714, of whom 4478 men and 2236 women.
There is a plethora of Internet cafes and many places, including parks, are covered by free public wireless internet service.
There is a number of farmers markets offering fresh local produce; the Kolkhozen Pazar, the largest one, also has a fresh fish market but is located in a crowded area virtually inaccessible for cars.
With the departure of most Turks and Greeks and the arrival of Bulgarian refugees and settlers from inland, Northern Dobruja, Bessarabia, and Asia Minor, and later, of refugees from Macedonia, Eastern Thrace and Southern Dobruja following the Second Balkan War and the First World War, ethnic diversity gave way to Bulgarian predominance, although sizeable minorities of Gagauz, Armenians, and Sephardic Jews remained for decades.
The Turks routed an army of 20,000-30,000 crusaders led by Ladislaus III of Poland (also Ulászló I of Hungary), which had assembled at the port to set sail to Constantinople.
Varna has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification ''Cfa''), with considerable maritime and continental influences.
The summer begins in early May and lasts till early October.
Odessus was an early Christian centre, as testified by ruins of ten early basilicas, a monophysite monastery, and indications that one of the Seventy Disciples, Ampliatus, follower of Saint Andrew (who, according to the Bulgarian Orthodox Church legend, preached in the city in 56 CE), served as bishop there.
It was surrounded by a stone wall restored in the 1830s with a citadel, a moat, ornamented iron gates flanked by towers, and a vaulted stone bridge across the River Varna.
Armenians, Greeks, Jews, and other long-standing ethnic groups are also present although in much smaller numbers.
Varna is accessible by air (Varna International Airport), sea (Port of Varna Cruise Terminal), railway (Central railway station), and car.
The city was flanked by two fortresses with smaller commercial ports of their own, Kastritsi and Galata, within sight of each other, and was protected by two other strongholds overlooking the lakes, Maglizh and Petrich.
The first population data date back to the mid-17th century when the town was thought to have about 4,000 inhabitants, while the first population census in 1881 counted 24,555.
bar:1965 at: 180 text: 180,1 shift:(-14,5)
bar:1934 at: 70 text: 69,6 shift:(-14,5)
The oldest gold jewelry in the world, belonging to the Varna culture, was discovered in the Varna Necropolis and dates to 4200-4600 BC.
One of the early centres of industrial development and the Bulgarian labor movement, Varna established itself as the nation's principal port of export, a major grain producing and viticulture centre, seat of the nation's oldest institution of higher learning outside Sofia, a popular venue for international festivals and events, as well as the country's ''de facto'' summer capital with the erection of the Euxinograd royal summer palace (currently, the Bulgarian government convenes summer sessions there).
In October 2006, ''The Independent'' dubbed Varna "Europe's new funky-town, the good-time capital of Bulgaria".
*Bulgarians: 296,407 (92.5%)
Here, the "Varna-Devnya-Provadiya agglomeration" is not considered identical to the "Varna metro area".
From 20 December 1949 to 20 October 1956 the city was renamed by the communist government ''Stalin'' after Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin.
*Indefinable: 2,406 (0.8%)
**Undeclared: 1,042 (0.3%)
However, it is noted that in Varna, the so-called ''mutri'' (Mafia) presence was by no means as visible as it was in smaller coastal towns and resorts.
The economy is service-based, with 61% of net revenue generated in trade and tourism, 16% in manufacturing, 14% in transportation and communications, and 6% in construction.
Perhaps the new name applied initially to an adjacent river or lake, a Roman military camp, or an inland area, and only later to the city itself.
bar:2009 at: 321 text: 320,8 shift:(-14,5)
At the Liberation of Bulgaria, ethnic Bulgarians were 3,500 of the total population of 21,000 inhabitants.
The name may be older than that; perhaps it derives from Proto-Indo-European root ''we-r-'' (water) (see also Varuna), or from Proto-Slavic root ''varn'' (black), or from Iranian ''bar'' or ''var'' (camp, fortress: see also Etymological list of provinces of Bulgaria).
Varna became a front city in the First Balkan War and the First World War; its economy was badly affected by the temporary loss of its agrarian hinterland of Southern Dobruja to Romania (1913–16 and 1919–40).
ImageSize = width:750 height:280
According to the 2001 census data, the ethnic composition was as follows:
One of them, the veteran German Communist Otto Braun died while on a vacation in Varna in 1974.
Local Bulgarians took part in the National Revival; Vasil Levski set up a secret revolutionary committee.
There is also a number of newer Orthodox temples; two, dedicated to apostle Andrew and the local martyr St. Procopius of Varna, are currently under construction.
Temperatures in summer usually vary between 18 C and 21 degrees C in the night and 25–35 C during the day.
Food markets, among others, include supermarket chains Piccadilly and Burleks.
Heavy industry and trade with the Soviet Union boomed in the 1950s to the 1970s.
As a result local notables that participated in the Greek national movement were executed by the Ottoman authorities, while others managed to escape to Greece and continue their struggle.
In 2008, Deputy Mayor Venelin Zhechev estimated the actual population at 650,000.
Many Bulgarians regard Varna as a boom town; some, including from Sofia and Plovdiv, or returning from western countries, but mostly from Dobrich, Shumen, and the greater region, are relocating there.
bar:1956 at: 120 text: 120,3 shift:(-14,5)
From 30 September to 4 October 1973, the 10th Olympic Congress took place in the Sports Palace.
In January 2012, the city of Varna has a population of 334 781, which makes it the third largest city in Bulgaria, while the Varna Municipality along with the legally affiliated adjacent villages had 343 643 inhabitants.
textcolor:black fontsize:S
Major athletic games were held every five years, possibly attended by Gordian III in 238 CE.
id:linegrey value:gray(0.7)
Galaktika book publishing house occupied a prominent place nationally in the 1970–1990s, focusing on international sci-fi and marine fiction, contemporary non-fiction and poetry.
The region of ancient Thrace was populated by Thracians by 1000 BC.
As the number of vehicles quadrupled since 1989, Varna became known for traffic jams; parking on the old town's leafy but narrow streets normally takes the sidewalks.
These are Thracian Cliffs, Lighthouse Golf and Black Sea Rama.
**Undeclared: 31,276 (10.3%)
Yordanov was reelected for a third consecutive term in 2007.
The city is cut off from north and north-east winds by hills along the north arm of the bay, yet January and February still can be bitterly cold at times, with blizzards.
bar:1985 at: 303 text: 302,8 shift:(-14,5)
In Swedish, the meaning of 'värn' is 'shield', 'defense' - hence Varna is a defended, fortified place.
Varna Peninsula on Livingston Island in the South Shetland Islands.
In the late 19th century, Varna was considered the birthplace of Bulgarian football with a Swiss gym teacher, Georges de Regibus, coaching the first varsity team at the men's high school.
In June 2007, Eni and Gazprom disclosed the South Stream project whereby a  offshore natural gas pipeline from Russia's Dzhubga with annual capacity of  is planned to come ashore at Varna, possibly near the Galata offshore gas field, en route to Italy and Austria.
Varna is currently (March 2009) represented by five ministers in Sergey Stanishev's cabinet: Deputy Prime Minister Meglena Plugchieva  (BSP, Administration of EU Funds), Nikolay Vasilev (NDSV, State Administration), Daniel Valchev (NDSV, Education and Science), Miglena Tacheva (BSP, Justice), and Petar Dimitrov (BSP, Economy and Energy).
Asparukh fortified the Varna river lowland by a rampart against a possible Byzantine landing; the ''Asparuhov val'' (Asparukh's Wall) is still standing.
Ethnic Turks rank second with 3%, however by 2009, Russians and other Russian-speaking recent immigrants with no Bulgarian citizenship, estimated at over 20,000, perhaps have outnumbered them, additionally there is a growing number of new Asian and African immigrants and corporate expatriates.
Local business groups have formed political parties for recent local elections, setting a national trend.
Some manufacturing veterans are giving way to post-industrial developments: an ECE shopping mall is taking the place of the former VAMO diesel engine works and the Varna Brewery is being replaced by a convention centre.
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:100 start:0 gridcolor:linegrey
The synthetic culture with Hellenistic Thracian, Roman, as well as eastern—Armenian, Syrian, Persian—traits that developed around Odessus in the 6th century under Justinian I, may have influenced the Pliska-Preslav culture of the First Bulgarian Empire, ostensibly in architecture and plastic decorative arts, but possibly also in literature, including Cyrillic scholarship.
In the Second World War, the Red Army occupied the city in September 1944, helping cement communist rule in Bulgaria.
The place abounded in pre-Ottoman relics, ancient ruins were widely used as stone quarries.
In 442 CE, a peace treaty between Theodosius II and Attila was done at Odessus.
Wheat, animal skins, honey and wax, wine, timber and other local agricultural produce for the Italian and Constantinople markets were the chief exports, and Mediterranean foods and luxury items were imported.
With the nearby towns of Beloslav and Devnya, Varna forms the Varna-Devnya Industrial Complex, home to some of the largest chemical, thermal power, and manufacturing facilities in Bulgaria, including Varna Thermal Pover Plant and Sodi Devnya, the two largest cash privatization deals in the country's recent history.
*Gypsies: 3,162 (1.0%)
*Indefinable: 2,288 (0.8%)
On a different note, spiritual master Peter Deunov started preaching his Esoteric Christianity doctrine in Varna in the late 1890s, and, in 1899–1908, the yearly meetings of his Synarchic Chain, later known as the Universal White Brotherhood, were convened there.
bar:1934 from:0 till:70
id:linegrey2 value:gray(0.9)
Varna is also Bulgaria's only international cruise destination (with over 30 cruises scheduled for 2007) and a major international convention and spa centre.
Karel Škorpil suggested that Boris I may have been interred there.
The remains of another massive 9th-century basilica adjacent to the scriptorium at Boris I's Theotokos Panagia monastery are being excavated and conserved.
Although Varna receives about two thirds of the average rainfall for Bulgaria, abundant groundwater keeps its wooded hills lush throughout summer.
bar:1887 at: 25 text: 25,3 shift:(-11,5)
Men's basketball (Euroins Cherno More), women's volleyball, gymnastics, boxing, martial arts, and sailing are also vibrant.
The new venue will seat 30,000 (40,000 for concerts including standing room).
In 2008, there were three large shopping malls operating and another four projects in various stages of development, turning Varna into an attractive international shopping destination (Pfohe Mall, Central Plaza, Mall Varna, Grand Mall, Gallery Mall, Cherno More Park, and Varna Towers), plus a retail park under development outside town.
Two old mosques (one is open) have survived since Ottoman times, when there were 18 of them in town, as have two once stately but now dilapidated synagogues, a Sephardic and an Ashkenazic one, the latter in Gothic style (it is undergoing restoration).
bar:2009 from:0 till:321
The city is the easternmost destination of Pan-European transport corridor 8 and is connected to corridors 7 and 9 via Rousse.
bar:1975 from:0 till:253
The new urban general plan (under discussion in early 2008) envisages a large public amateur sports complex south of Lake Varna and a ski run with artificial snow covering.
The highest temperature ever recorded was 41.0 C and the lowest -19.0 C.
The public transit system is extensive and reasonably priced, with over 80 local and express bus, local trolleybus, and fixed-route minibus lines; there is a large fleet of taxicabs.
The unofficial metro area (including Varna municipality and adjacent parts of Aksakovo, Avren, Beloslav, and Devnya municipalities, and excluding adjacent parts of Dobrich Province) has an estimated population of 475,000.
The failure of the Crusade of Varna made the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453 all but inevitable, and Varna (with all of Bulgaria) was to remain under Ottoman domination for over four centuries.
14th-century Italian portolan charts showed Varna as arguably the most important seaport between Constantinople and the Danube delta; they usually labeled the region Zagora.
According to the 1881 census, the Turkish language was a mother tongue for 8903 people (36,25%), for 6721 was the Bulgarian (27,36%), for 5,367 was Greek (21,85%) and Tatar for 837 (3,41%).
Financial services, particularly banking, insurance, investment management, and real-estate finance are booming.
In stores and restaurants, credit cards are normally accepted.
Additionally, the  long,  high Asparuhov most bridge is a popular spot for bungee jumping.
As of December 2008, the fallout of the global financial crisis has not yet been hard.
By the late 10th century, the name ''Varna'' was established so firmly that when Byzantines wrestled back control of the area from the Bulgarians in the 970's, they kept it rather than restoring the ancient name ''Odessos''.
Excavations at nearby Thracian sites have shown uninterrupted occupation from the 7th to the 4th century BC and close commercial relations with the colony.
Miletian Greeks founded the ''apoikia'' (trading post) of '''Odessòs''' towards the end of the 7th century BC (the earliest Greek archaeological material is dated 600–575 BC), or, according to Pseudo-Scymnus'', ''in the time of Astyages (here, usually 572–570 BC is suggested), within an earlier Thracian settlement.
id:cobar value:rgb(0.2,0.7,0.8)
Tourist shopping areas include the boutique rows along Prince Boris Blvd (with retail rents rivaling Vitosha Blvd in Sofia) and adjacent pedestrian streets, as well as the large mall and big-box cluster in the Mladost district, suitable for motorists.
In January and February, migrating swans winter on the sheltered beaches.
id:cobar2 value:rgb(0.6,0.9,0.6)
The National Revival Alley is decorated with bronze monuments to prominent Bulgarians, and the Cosmonauts' Alley contains trees planted by Yuri Gagarin and other Soviet and Bulgarian cosmonauts.
The scriptorium may have played a key role in the development of Cyrillic script by Bulgarian scholars under the guidance of one of Saints Cyril and Methodius' disciples.
With the country's return to capitalism since 1989, upscale apartment buildings mushroomed both downtown and on uptown terraces overlooking the sea and the lake.
Over the past few decades, it developed as a festival centre of international standing.
Major industries traditionally include transportation (Navibulgar, Port of Varna, Varna International Airport), distribution (Logistics Park Varna),  shipbuilding (see also Oceanic-Creations), ship repair, and other marine industries.
bar:1946 from:0 till:78
Over the last couple of years, crime has subsided, which is said to have contributed to Varna being named as Bulgaria's Best City to Live In (2007); in 2007, the regional police chief was promoted to the helm of the national police service.
During the rapid urbanization of the 1960s to the early 1980s, large apartment complexes sprawled onto land formerly covered by small private vineyards or agricultural cooperatives as the city population tripled.
The municipality (община, ''obshtina'', commune) of Varna comprises the city and five suburban villages: Kamenar, Kazashko, Konstantinovo, Topoli, and Zvezditsa, served by the city public transit system.
Radio Varna opened in 1934.
In 513, it became a focal point of the Vitalian revolt.
The name ''Odessos'' could have been pre-Greek, arguably of Greek Carian origin.
The city beaches, also known as ''sea baths'' (морски бани, ''morski bani''), are dotted with hot (up to 55°С/131&nbsp;°F) sulphuric mineral water sources (used for spas, swimming pools and public showers) and punctured by small sheltered marinas.
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical
In 1866, the first railroad in Bulgaria connected Varna with the Rousse on the Danube, linking the Ottoman capital Constantinople with Central Europe; for a few years, the Orient Express ran through that route.
bar:1910 from:0 till:41
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:50 start:0 gridcolor:linegrey2
The  swimmimg marathon Cape Galata—Varna is a popular venue.
color:cobar width:19 align:left
The city occupies   on verdant terraces (Varna monocline of the Moesian platform) descending from the calcareous Franga Plateau (height ) on the north and Avren Plateau on the south, along the horseshoe-shaped Varna Bay of the Black Sea, the elongated Lake Varna, and two artificial waterways connecting the bay and the lake and bridged by the Asparuhov most.
An early mention of modern Varna in English literature is found in Charles Dickens' ''All the Year Round'' (Vol.
In January 2009, the ''Financial Times'' said that "Varna now draws about 30,000 new residents a year."
The Christian army was attacked by a superior force of 55,000 or 60,000 Ottomans led by sultan Murad II.
ATMs and 24/7 gas stations with convenience stores abound.
Black Sea water has become cleaner after 1989 due to decreased chemical fertilizer in farming; it has low salinity, lacks large predators or poisonous species, and the tidal range is virtually imperceptible.
Varna has some of the finest and oldest museums, professional arts companies, and arts festivals in the nation and is known for its century-old traditions in visual arts, music, and book publishing, as well as for its bustling current pop-culture scene.
By the late 13th century, with the Treaty of Nymphaeum of 1261, the offensive-defensive alliance between Michael VIII Palaeologus and Genoa that opened up the Black Sea to Genoese commerce, Varna had turned into a thriving commercial port city frequented by Genoese and later also by Venetian and Ragusan merchant ships.
bar:1887 from:0 till:25
The municipal chief executive is the mayor (кмет, ''kmet'': the word is cognate with count).
bar:1910 at: 41 text: 41,4 shift:(-11,5)
The number and range of fitness, wellness and recreation clubs in Varna is rapidly growing, which reflects the positive change of lifestyle of the average Varna citizen.
bar:1992 from:0 till:309
Αt the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence (1821) revolutionary activity was recorded in Varna.
Since December 2006, various sources, including the Bulgarian National Television, national newspapers, research agencies, the mayor's office, and local police, claim that Varna has a population by present address of over 500,000, making it the nation's second-largest city.
Many smaller Orthodox chapels have mushroomed in the area.
In 2007, a number of double-decker buses were purchased; the mayor vowed that by summer 2008, all city buses would be retrofitted with air conditioners and later fueled by methane.
*Others: 4,566 (1.4%)
bar:1956 from:0 till:120
A member of the Pontic Pentapolis, Odessos was a mixed community—contact zone between the Ionian Greeks and the Thracian tribes (Getae, Krobyzoi, Terizi) of the hinterland.
In Varna Municipality 290,780 declared as Bulgarians, 11,089 as Turks, 3,535 as Gypsies and 34,758 did not declare their ethnic group.
The Roman city, ''Odessus'', first included into the ''Praefectura orae maritimae'' and then in 15 AD annexed to the province of Moesia (later ''Moesia Inferior''), covered 47 hectares in present-day central Varna and had prominent public baths, Thermae, erected in the late 2nd century AD, now the largest Roman remains in Bulgaria (the building was  wide,  long, and  high) and fourth-largest known Roman baths in Europe.
Varna is one of the few cities in Bulgaria with a positive natural growth (6300 births vs. 3600 deaths in 2009) and new children's day care centers opening (6 expected in 2009).
In September 2004, ''FDi magazine'' (a ''Financial Times'' Business Ltd publication) proclaimed Varna ''South-eastern Europe City of the Future''  citing its strategic location, fast-growing economy, rich cultural heritage and higher education.
It has been suggested that the 681 AD peace treaty with the Byzantine Empire that established the new Bulgarian state was concluded at Varna and the first Bulgarian capital south of the Danube may have been provisionally located in its vicinity—possibly in an ancient city near Lake Varna's north shore named Theodorias (Θεοδωριάς) by Justinian I—before it moved to Pliska  to the west.
There is a comparable number of Gypsies (1% of the population) mostly in three distinctive and largely impoverished ghetto neighborhoods: Maksuda; Rozova Dolina in the Asparuhovo district; and Chengene Kula in the Vladislavovo district, while Varna is spearheading several programs on Gypsy integration.
According to the 1883 census, it was the second-largest in Bulgaria after Ruse.
Real estate boomed in 2003–2008 with some of the highest prices in the nation, by fall 2007 surpassing Sofia (this still holds true in April 2009).
Thereafter Varna became Bulgaria's third-largest city and kept this position steadily for the next 120 years, while different cities took turns in the first, second, and fourth places.
The first two maritime republics held consulates and had expatriate colonies there (Ragusan merchants remained active at the port through the 17th century operating from their colony in nearby Provadiya).
Another state-of the-art track-and-field stadium with a capacity of 5,000 seats and training halls for professional and public use will open in the Mladost district in 2009 to compensate for the lost track-and-field capacity of old Varna stadium.
bar:2011 at: 335 text: 334,9 shift:(-14,5)
*Gypsies: 3,748 (1.2%)
Seawater temperature during the summer months is usually around 23–27 degrees C. In winter temperatures are about 0 degrees at night and 5-10 degrees C during the day.
The largest political parties in the city are BSP, GERB and SDS, with the National Movement for Stability and Progress (NDSV) as a distant fourth; DSB, the Bulgarian Democratic Party, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO, VMRO), and Ataka are also active.
On 10 November 1444, one of the last major battles of the Crusades in European history was fought outside the city walls.
Varna became a popular resort for Eastern Europeans, until 1989 barred from travelling to the west.
Economically, Varna is among the best-performing and fastest-growing Bulgarian cities; unemployment, at 2.34% (2007), is over 3 times lower than the nation's rate; in 2007, median salary was the highest,  on a par with Sofia and Burgas.
Modern landmarks of the 1960s include the Palace of Culture and Sports, built in 1968.
In the early 19th century, many local Greeks joined the patriotic organization Filiki Eteria.
The city was unsuccessfully besieged by Amadeus VI of Savoy, who had captured all Bulgarian fortresses to the south of it, including Galata, in 1366.
As early as the 1880s, numerous daily and weekly newspapers were published in Bulgarian and several minority languages.
The waterfront promenade is lined by a string of beach clubs offering a vibrant scene of rock, hip-hop, Bulgarian and American-style pop, techno, and chalga.
Like other cities in the region, Varna has its share of stray dogs, for the most part calm and friendly, flashing orange clips on the ears showing they have been castrated and vaccinated.
Varna hosts international competitions, including world championships, and national events in several sports on a regular basis, including auto racing and motocross.
In the wider region of the Varna lakes (before the 1900s, freshwater) and the adjacent karst springs and caves, over 30 prehistoric settlements have been unearthed with the earliest artifacts dating back to the Middle Paleolithic or 100,000 years ago.
bar:1985 from:0 till:303
There is an old Armenian Apostolic church; two Roman Catholic churches (only one is now open and holds mass in Polish on Sundays), a thriving Evangelical Methodist episcopal church offering organ concerts, active Evangelical Pentecostal, Seventh-day Adventist, and two Baptist churches.
According to the latest 2011 census data, the individuals declared their ethnic identity were distributed as follows:
*Others: 3,378 (1.1%)
With the new suburban construction far outpacing infrastructure growth, ancient landslides were activated, temporarily disrupting major highways.
There are also notable facilities for radio navigation devices, household appliances, security systems, textiles, apparel, food and beverages, printing, and other industries.
Odessos was included in the assessment of the Delian league of 425 BC.
It is the centre of a growing conurbation stretching along the seaboard  north and  south (mostly residential and recreational sprawl) and along the lake  west (mostly transportation and industrial facilities).
The resorts received considerable internal and foreign investment in the late 1990s and early in the first decade of the 21st century, and are environmentally sound, being located reassuringly far from chemical and other smokestack industries.
There are consulates of the following countries: the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Poland, Russia, Slovakia, Sweden, Ukraine, and the United Kingdom.
A 4th–5th-century episcopal basilica north of the Thermae is also being restored.
The port of Varna developed as a major supplier of food—notably wheat from the adjacent breadbasket Southern Dobruja—to Constantinople and a busy hub for European imports to the capital; 12 foreign consulates opened in the city.
