She and Nijinsky shared no common language; she spoke French but he knew only a little, so many of their early conversations involved an interpreter.
As the company was due to start performing immediately, the couple had no honeymoon.
He studied mime under Pavel Gerdt; all three men were principal dancers at the Imperial Russian Ballet.
Relations between Diaghilev and Nijinsky had deteriorated under the stress of Nijinsky's becoming principal choreographer and his pivotal role in the company's financial success.
Vaslav and Bronia, just two years apart, became very close as they grew.
Shortly after, he upstaged his own performance, appearing in the ''Bluebird'' pas de deux from the ''Sleeping Beauty'', partnering Lydia Kyasht.
He was congratulated by the director of the Imperial Ballet and offered a place in the company although he was a year from graduation.
Romola was pregnant, so the couple returned to Budapest, Austro-Hungary, to his mother-in-law Emilia Markus' house.
When the ship stopped at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, the couple went straight to buy wedding rings.
Nijinsky became calmer and more serious as he grew older, but continued to make few friends, which continued through his life.
A turning point for Nijinsky was his meeting the Russian Sergei Diaghilev, a celebrated and highly innovative producer of ballet and opera, as well as art exhibitions.
Rubinstein wept when he saw Nijinsky's confusion that night.
Nijinsky is immortalized in numerous still photographs, many of which were made by E.O.
His older brother Stanislav Fomitch and younger sister Bronislava Nijinska also became dancers.
Nijinsky's work in choreographing ballets had proved controversial.
He graduated second in his class, with top marks in dancing, art and music.
Nijinsky now was "an experimental artist.
However, Nijinsky asked her again, in broken French and mime, and she accepted.
The 1905 annual student show included a pas de deux from ''The Persian Market,'' danced by Nijinsky and Sofia Fedorova.
Kchessinska partnered him in ''La Fille Mal Gardée'', where he succeeded in an atypical role for him involving humour and flirtation.
Vaslav Nijinsky was born in 1889 or 1890 in Kiev, Russian Empire (now Ukraine), as '''Wacław Niżyński''', to ethnic Polish parents, touring dancers Tomasz Niżyński (b.
On another night, when the orchestra played music during the scene change so as to calm the audience, Nijinsky, having expressly banned this, flew into a rage and was discovered half dressed and screaming in his dressing room.
Nijinsky had missed a performance in Rio when Romola was ill, and only a dancer's own illness, certified by a doctor, was allowed to miss a performance.
Eleanora moved to 20 Mokhovaya Street in St Petersburg with her children.
Buoyed by Nijinsky's salary, his new earnings from giving dance classes, and his sister Bronia's employment with the ballet company, the family moved to a larger flat on Torgovaya Ulitsa.
Nijinsky's ''Diary'' was written during the six weeks in 1919 he spent in Switzerland before being committed to the asylum to Zurich.
Plans to include Opera had to be dropped because of the lack of finances, and logistical difficulties in obtaining necessary scenery at short notice and for free.
This laxity was compounded through his school years by Nijinsky's frequently being chosen as an extra in various productions, forcing him to be away from classrooms for rehearsals and to spend nights at performances.
Although Gunsbourg had a financial interest in Ballets Russes, he was also interested in forming his own company, and a split between Diaghilev and his star dancer might have presented him with an opportunity.
In 1953 his body was moved to Montmartre Cemetery in Paris and reinterred beside the graves of Gaétan Vestris, Théophile Gautier, and Emma Livry.
Scenery was late, Fokine refused to allow the use of his ballets, there was inadequate time to rehearse, and Nijinsky became "more and more nervous and distraught".
In 1910, he performed in ''Giselle'', and Fokine's ballets ''Carnaval'' and ''Scheherazade'' (based on the orchestral suite by Rimsky-Korsakov).
Instead of reporting to Diaghilev on what was occurring, Gunsbourg agreed to act on Nijinsky's behalf in presenting a proposal of marriage to Romola.
Commissioned by the Polish National Ballet, the sculpture was made in bronze by the well-known Ukrainian sculptor Giennadij Jerszow.
After a tour of South America in 1917, and due to travel difficulties imposed by the war, the family settled in St. Moritz, Switzerland.
This was settled after another week's delay by a downpayment of $13,000 against the $90,000 claimed, plus a fee of $1000 for each performance in America.
Diaghilev departed for Paris in early 1909 to make arrangements, which were immediately complicated on the day of his return, 22 February 1909, by the death of Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovitch, who had sponsored an application by Diaghilev for an imperial subsidy of 100,000 roubles for the tour.
Eventually he sent a telegram to Nijinsky informing him that he was no longer employed by the Ballets Russes.
The new season at the Mariinsky theatre began in September 1907, with Nijinsky employed as coryphée on a salary of 780 roubles per year.
Prince Lvov had visited Nijinsky's mother in St Petersburg, telling her tearfully that he would no longer be taking a special interest in her son, but he advanced a significant sum to Diaghilev towards the tour's expenses.
He had a good ability to hear and play music on the piano, though his sight reading was relatively poor.
Diaghilev also usually dismissed dancers who married.
She was likely warned that he was homosexual by Marie Rambert, whom Romola befriended and who was also in love with Nijinsky.
They took the travel arrangements and accommodation as confirmation of a relationship.
Newspapers reported a nervous breakdown.
In 1901 one of the class deliberately caused him to fall, leading to his suffering a concussion and being in a coma for four days.
With the start of the Great War (World War I), Nijinsky was classified as an enemy Russian citizen.
Nijinsky had not been performing, but she returned the following day and saw him: "An electric shock passed through the entire audience.
During 1945 after the end of the war, after Romola had moved with him to Vienna, he encountered a group of Russian soldiers in an encampment, playing traditional folk tunes on a balalaika and other instruments.
In music he studied piano, flute, balalaika and accordion, receiving good marks.
I had put myself in the hands of someone who did not love me."
Intoxicated, entranced, gasping for breath, we followed this superhuman being... the power, the featherweight lightness, the steel-like strength, the suppleness of his movements.." Romola broke off her engagement and began following the Ballets Russes across Europe, attending every performance she could.
Bronia was still in St Petersburg following the birth of her child, and Nijinsky asked her to be part of his new company.
His sister Bronia also became a dancer and choreographer, working closely with him for much of his career.
For these things he did need the Ballets Russes, which at that time was the only forward-thinking ballet company in the world."
Diaghilev could not face Nijinsky to tell him personally that he would no longer be choreographing the ballet ''Joseph'', but instead asked his sister Bronia Nijinska to deliver the bad news.
It portrays them in their roles as the Faun and the Nymph from the ballet ''L’après-midi d’un faune.''
Mikhail Oboukhov became his teacher in 1902, and awarded him the highest grade he had ever given to a student.
She "almost cried with thankfulness" that he showed no interest in making love on their wedding night.
Eleanora continued to tour and dance while having three children, sons Stanislav Fomitch (b.
She befriended his masseur and was rewarded with a rundown on his musculature.
She had 'stalked' the company and Nijinsky since 1912.
He and his family became itinerant dancers, the children appearing in the Christmas show at Nizhny Novgorod.
Gunsbourg hurried to arrange the marriage, getting permission by telegram from Romola's mother.
The complex negotiations included a prisoner exchange with the United States, and agreement that Nijinsky would dance and choreograph for the Ballets Russes' tour.
He was readmitted to the school as a non-resident after a sound beating and restored to his previous position after a month's probation.
Nijinsky spent his summer after graduation rehearsing and then performing at Krasnoe Selo in a makeshift theatre with an audience mainly of army officers.
He did well in subjects which interested him, but not otherwise.
Diaghilev accepted the idea of an Egyptian theme, but he required a comprehensive rewrite based on new music, by which Fokine created a new ballet ''Cléopâtre''.
Nijinsky twisted his ankle, postponing the season's opening for a week and his own appearance by two weeks.
The 1908 season of colorful Russian ballets and operas, works mostly new to the West, was a great success, leading him to plan a new tour for 1909 with a new name for his company, the now famous Ballets Russes.
Diaghilev managed to raise some money in Russia, but he had to rely significantly on Gabriel Astruc, who had been arranging theatres and publicity on behalf of the company in France, to also provide finance.
In 1902 he was warned that only the excellence of his dancing had prevented his expulsion from the school for poor results.
As he got older, Stanislav became increasingly mentally unstable and would have fierce tantrums.
At age nine Nijinsky was accepted at the Imperial Ballet School (later known as the Maryinsky School) in St. Petersburg, the pre-eminent ballet school in the world.
Diaghilev and Nijinsky travelled to Paris ahead of the rest of the company.
The theme, the difficult and challenging music of Stravinsky, and Nijinsky's choreography, led to a violent uproar; Diaghilev was pleased with the notoriety.
Aside from Nijinsky's difficulties, Diaghilev came under pressure from financial backers and theatre owners who wanted productions more in the style of previous successful work.
With no alternative employer available, Nijinsky tried to form his own company, but this was not a success.
Fokine noted Nijinsky's great ability at learning a dance and precisely what a choreographer wanted.
The tour party included Romola de Pulszky, whose father Count Charles Pulszky was a Hungarian politician, and mother Emilia Márkus was a noted actress.
His sister wrote that he felt intimidated by the illustrious and aristocratic company.
He was given student parts in command performances in front of the Czar of ''Paquita'', ''The Nutcracker'' and ''The Little Horse''.
Nijinsky and Diaghilev became lovers for a time, and Diaghilev was deeply involved in directing and managing Nijinsky's career.
Fokine was asked to start rehearsals for the existing ''Le Pavillon d'Armide'' and for ''Les Sylphides'', an expanded version of his ''Chopiniana''.
Fokine insisted that Ida Rubenstein would appear as Cleopatra, and Nijinsky insisted that his sister should have a part.
He was confined to house arrest in Budapest and could not leave the country.
His partnership with Tamara Karsavina, also of the Mariinsky Theatre, was legendary, and they have been called the ''"most exemplary artists of the time"''.
Initially Nijinsky stayed at the Hôtel Daunou.
In 1909 he joined the Ballets Russes, a new ballet company started by Sergei Diaghilev.
The tour had already started in January with a number of problems: ''Faun'' was considered too sexually explicit and had to be amended; ''Scheherazade,'' including an orgy between blacks and whites, did not appeal to Americans; and ballet aficionados were calling for Nijinsky.
Nijinsky and his wife moved to St. Moritz, Switzerland, where he tried to recover from the stresses of the tour.
Pierre Monteux, the conductor, refused to take part in performances because he did not want to be associated with failure.
She was never found.
At the premiere of ''Le Sacre du Printemps'' (1913) in Paris, with music by Igor Stravinsky, fights broke out in the audience between those who loved and hated this startling new style of ballet and music.
The war made problems for the Ballets Russes too; the company had difficulty recruiting dancers and Fokine returned to Russia.
In 1897 Thomas and Eleanora separated after Thomas had fallen in love with another dancer, Rumiantseva, while touring in Finland.
He had to be calmed down enough to perform.
A few days after the marriage, Nijinsky tried to teach Romola some ballet, but she was not interested.
After a few days, he was transferred to the Bellevue Sanatorium, "a luxurious and humane establishment directed at that time by Ludwig Binswanger."
These performances frequently included members of the Imperial family and other nobility, whose support and interest were essential to a career.
He needed roles that would extend his gifts, and above all, he needed to choreograph.
Leonide Massine joined the company as the new attractive young lead for ''Joseph''.
Oboukhov amended the dance to show off Nijinsky's abilities, drawing gasps and then spontaneous applause in the middle of the performance with his first jump.
The Ballets Russes and the Imperial Russian ballet were the pre-eminent ballet companies in the world and uniquely had permanent companies of dancers staging full-scale new productions.
In 1900, Nijinsky joined the Imperial Ballet School, where he initially studied dance under Sergei Legat and his brother Nicholas.
Nijinsky originally conceived ''Jeux'' as a flirtatious interaction among three males, although Diaghilev insisted it be danced by one male and two females.
No film exists of Nijinsky dancing; Diaghilev never allowed the Ballets Russes to be filmed because he felt that the quality of film at the time could never capture the artistry of his dancers.
Adolph Bolm warned Romola against proceeding, saying "It will ruin your life".
No sooner had rehearsals started that the permission was withdrawn, disappearing as had the imperial subsidy.
She persuaded a friend from the Wielki Theatre, Victor Stanislas Gillert, who was at the time teaching at the Imperial Ballet School, to help get Vaslav into the school.
Nijinsky was caught in the crowd on Nevsky Prospect and propelled toward the Winter Palace.
The season of colorful Russian ballets and operas, works mostly new to the West, was a great success.
His mother also received an allowance of 500 francs per month (other senior dancers had received 200,000 francs for a six-month season).
He arranged for the noted teacher Enrico Cecchetti to sponsor the application.
He appeared in supporting parts in classical ballets such as ''Faust'', as a mouse in ''The Nutcracker'', a page in ''Sleeping Beauty'' and ''Swan Lake'', and won the Didelot scholarship.
On another occasion, he had told a reporter, "One thing I am determined not to do, and that is to go on the music-hall stage".
Negotiations with Otto Kahn of the New York Metropolitan Opera led to an additional tour of the US being agreed to for the autumn.
The Paris seasons of the Ballets Russes were an artistic and social sensation; setting trends in art, dance, music and fashion for the next decade.
On 11 June 2011, Poland’s first sculpture of the Polish/Russian dancers, Vaslav Nijinsky and his sister Bronislava Nijinska, was unveiled in the Teatr Wielki’s foyer.
The unexpected friendliness was noticed by Baron de Gunsbourg, an investor in the Ballets Russes, who had been tasked with keeping an eye on the company.
It combined elements of autobiography with appeals for compassion toward the less fortunate.
Their older brother Stanislav had suffered a fall from a window when young and seemed to have suffered some brain damage.
In 1906, he danced in the Mariinsky production of Mozart's ''Don Giovanni'', in a ballet sequence choreographed by Michel Fokine.
She deleted about 40% of the diary, especially references to bodily functions, sex, and homosexuality, recasting Nijinsky as an "involuntary homosexual."
It was still well received, and Nijinsky's performance in ''Faun '' was considered better than Massine's.
Diaghilev asked him to begin preparing a new ballet, ''La Légende de Joseph,'' based on the Bible.
They were time-consuming to rehearse and  badly received by critics.
It reflected the decline of his household into chaos.
To round out the program, they needed another ballet.
As the tour progressed, Nijinsky's performances received steady acclaim, although his management was haphazard and contributed to the tour's loss of $250,000.
Romola did not give up.
He was congratulated by ''prima ballerina'' Mathilde Kchessinska of the Imperial Ballet, who invited him to partner her.
He jumped on a stagehand who had flirted with Romola ("I had never seen Vaslav like that").
Both boys received training from their father and appeared in an amateur production of ''Hopak'' in Odessa in 1894.
Anna Pavlova, Karsavina and Nijinsky were chosen as principal dancers.
The partnership of Fokine, Benois and Nijinsky was repeated throughout his career.
His ballets were ''L'après-midi d'un faune'' (''The Afternoon of a Faun'', based on Claude Debussy's ''Prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune'') (1912); ''Jeux'' (1913); and ''Till Eulenspiegel'' (1916).
Nijinsky's unique talent showed in Fokine's pieces such as ''Le Pavillon d'Armide'' (music by Nikolai Tcherepnin); ''Cleopatra'' (music by Anton Arensky and other Russian composers) and a divertissement ''La Fête''.
He moved to the Hôtel de Hollande together with Diaghilev and his secretary, Alexis Mavrine, before the arrival of the others.
Accounts vary as to the cause of death.
The company was to embark on a tour of South America in August 1913.
As the title character in ''L'après-midi d'un faune'', in the final tableau, he mimed masturbation with the scarf of a nymph, causing a scandal; he was defended by such artists as Auguste Rodin, Odilon Redon and Marcel Proust.
From 1947 Nijinsky lived in Surrey, England with his wife.
Nijinsky created a sensation in the role of the Wind God Vayou.
Without sufficient time to compose a new work, they decided on a suite of popular dances, to be called ''Le Festin''.
Anna Pavlova sent him a caustic telegram, reminding him that he had disapproved some years before when she had appeared there in vaudeville.
He worked closely with choreographer Michel Fokine and artist Léon Bakst, and later with other contemporary artists and composers.
The work was never performed due to the outbreak of the Russo-Japanese War.
Nijinska, who had always worked closely with her brother and supported him, could not accompany the tour because she had married in July 1912 and become pregnant.
Designer Alexandre Benois proposed a ballet based upon ''Le Pavillon d'Armide'', choreographed by Fokine to music by Nikolai Tcherepnin.
In 1920, Nijinsky's second daughter Tamara was born.
Also in 1917, Bronia and Vaslav lost their older brother Stanislav, who died in a hospital in Leningrad.
Nijinsky objected to her taking class with the professionals.
7 March 1862) and Eleonora Bereda (b.
He could find only two offers, one a position with the Paris Opera, which would not start for more than a year; the other to take a ballet company to London for eight weeks to perform as part of a mixed bill at the Palace Theatre.
A ''New York Times'' review said, "How ironic that in erasing the real ugliness of his insanity, the old version silenced not only Nijinsky's true voice but the magnificently gifted body from which it came.
She moved sections around, obscuring the "march of events" obvious in the original version and toning down some of the odder portions, including trying to distinguish between sections in which he writes as God and others as himself (in the original all such sections are written the same.)
She referred to him as ''Le Petit'', and wanted to have his child.
Nijinsky arrived in New York on 4 April 1916.
Tomasz was ''premier danseur'', and Eleanora a soloist.
At the end of the one year probationary period, his teachers agreed upon Nijinsky's exceptional dancing ability and he was confirmed as a boarder at the school.
Diaghilev did not accompany the South American tour, claiming he had been told that he would die on the ocean.
Bronia entered the school two years after Vaslav.
And how fortunate we are to have them both restored."
His expressive execution of a pas de deux from ''The Sleeping Beauty'' (Tchaikovsky) was a tremendous success.
Nijinsky chose to continue his studies.
The two met, married in May 1884 and settled into a career with the traveling Setov opera company.
Rehearsals for ''Eulenspiegel'' had not been completed, and it had to be improvised during its first performance.
''Faune'' caused controversy because of its sexually suggestive final scene.
On Sunday, 9 January 1905, Nijinsky was caught in the Bloody Sunday massacre in St Petersburg, where a group of petitioners led by Father Grapon attempted to present their petition to the Czar.
During his first year, his academic studies had covered work he had already done, so his relatively poor results had not been so much noted.
The theme of the ballet, based on pagan myths, was a young maiden who sacrificed herself by dancing until she died.
Nijinsky was also to prepare two new ballets.
He died from kidney failure at a clinic in London on 8 April 1950 and was buried in London.
He was finally permitted to leave after intervention by Diaghilev and international leaders; he was allowed to go to New York for an American tour.
Finally Romola arranged a consultation in Zurich with the psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler in 1919, asking her mother and stepfather for help in getting Nijinsky there.
Mavrine was known to have been Diaghilev's lover, but left the tour together with Olga Pedorova shortly after it had begun.
He appears not to have appreciated that his marriage would result in a break with Diaghilev's company, although many others immediately expected this would be the result.
Kahn did not get on with Diaghilev and insisted Nijinsky should manage the tour.
He missed three days, and the management had had enough.
He had been institutionalized for many years.
The Mariinsky audience was deeply familiar with the piece, but exploded with enthusiasm for his performance and his appearing to fly, an effect he continued to have on audiences with the piece during his career.
She started to earn a living as an extra in Warsaw's Grand Theatre Ballet (Polish: ''Teatr Wielki''), becoming a full member of the company at age thirteen.
Nijinsky took the creative reins and choreographed ballets which pushed boundaries and stirred controversy.
During the winter of 1908/9, Diaghilev started planning for the 1909 Paris tour of opera and ballet.
Others have suggested the reason had more to do with wanting to spend time away from Nijinsky and enjoy a holiday in Venice, "where perhaps adventures with pretty dark-eyed boys awaited him".
Diaghilev started negotiations in October 1914 for Nijinsky to work again for the company, but could not obtain release of the dancer until 1916.
She was glad to do so, being concerned at how well he could cope without his customary supporters.
He tried his hand at choreography, with a children's opera, ''Cinderella'', with music by another student, Boris Asafyev.
Drinking and laughing with them helped him start to speak again.
He had maintained long periods of almost absolute silence during his years of illness.
He was celebrated for his virtuosity and for the depth and intensity of his characterizations.
The final company had only three experienced dancers: Nijinsky and Bronia plus her husband.
Nijinsky's diary, which he wrote from January to early March 1919, expressed his great fear of hospitalization and confinement.
In October 1912 their father had died while on tour with his dance company, causing another stress for the siblings.
His fears were realized; he was diagnosed with schizophrenia and committed to Burghölzli.
In ''The Rite of Spring'' (''Le Sacre du Printemps''), with music by Igor Stravinsky) (1913), Nijinsky created choreography that exceeded the limits of traditional ballet and propriety.
He concentrated on promoting Russian visual and musical art abroad, particularly in Paris.
His physical vulnerability had been aggravated by the great stress.
