On their return to Rome they chose to live at the Vatican.
* World Medical Association
Acting with three other cardinals chosen by lot every three days, one from each order of cardinals (cardinal bishop, cardinal priest, and cardinal deacon), he in a sense performs during that period the functions of head of state of Vatican City.
* European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat IGO)
Dating its origins to the early nineteenth century, the Corps in its present form was established in 1941.
The name  was first used in the Lateran Treaty, signed on 11 February 1929, which established the modern city-state.
Ancient tradition holds that it was in this circus that Saint Peter was crucified upside-down.
It is in this territory that St. Peter's Basilica, the Apostolic Palace, the Sistine Chapel, and museums were built, along with various other buildings.
Although the Holy See (which is distinct from the Vatican City) and the Catholic Church use Ecclesiastical Latin in official documents, the Vatican City officially uses Italian.
Swiss mercenaries were historically recruited by Popes as part of an army for the Papal States, and the Pontifical Swiss Guard was founded by Pope Julius II on 22 January 1506 as the pope's personal bodyguard and continues to fulfill that function.
These organizations are much less numerous than those in which the Holy See participates either as a member or with observer status.
However, there is no formal defence treaty with Italy, as the Vatican City is a neutral state.
A state that is  long and  wide, it has a small transportation system with no airports or highways.
The territory includes St. Peter's Square, distinguished from the territory of Italy only by a white line along the limit of the square, where it touches Piazza Pio&nbsp;XII.
The tourist foot-traffic in St. Peter's Square is one of the main locations for pickpockets in Vatican City.
Broadband service is widely provided within Vatican City.
This area became the site of martyrdom of many Christians after the Great Fire of Rome in AD 64.
The area was part of the Roman ''rione'' of Borgo until 1929.
The name is taken from Vatican Hill, the geographic location of the state.
His official title with regard to Vatican City is ''Sovereign of the State of the Vatican City''.
Pope John XXIII was the first Pope to make use of the railway; Pope John Paul II rarely used it.
Vatican Radio, the Vatican Television Center, and L'Osservatore Romano are organs not of the Vatican State but of the Holy See, and are listed as such in the Annuario Pontificio, which places them in the section "Institutions linked with the Holy See", ahead of the sections on the Holy See's diplomatic service abroad and the Diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, after which is placed the section on the State of Vatican City.
Within Vatican City are religious and cultural sites such as St. Peter's Basilica, the Sistine Chapel and the Vatican Museums.
Being separated from the city, on the west bank of the Tiber river, the area was an outcrop of the city that was protected by being included within the walls of Leo IV (847–55), and later expanded by the current fortification walls, built under Paul III (1534–49), Pius IV (1559–65) and Urban VIII (1623–44).
Under the Roman Empire, many villas were constructed there, after Agrippina the Elder (14 BC&nbsp;– 18 October AD 33) drained the area and laid out her gardens in the early 1st century AD.
Its main transmission antennae are located in Italian territory, and exceed Italian environmental protection levels of emission.
The Gendarmerie Corps (''Corpo della Gendarmeria'') is the gendarmerie, or police and security force, of Vatican City and the extraterritorial properties of the Holy See.
The City is served by an independent, modern telephone system named the Vatican Telephone Service, and a postal system that started operating on 13 February 1929.
Vatican City has a reasonably well-developed transport network considering its size (consisting mostly of a piazza and walkways).
Because of their rarity, Vatican euro coins are highly sought by collectors.
On 1 August, the state started to release its own postal stamps, under the authority of the Philatelic and Numismatic Office of the Vatican City State.
The Pope is the sovereign of the state.
The incomes and living standards of lay workers are comparable to those of counterparts who work in the city of Rome.
The Vatican Obelisk was originally taken by Caligula from Heliopolis in Egypt to decorate the ''spina'' of his circus and is thus its last visible remnant.
For these audiences and for major ceremonies in Saint Peter's Basilica and Square, tickets free of charge must be obtained beforehand.
The Constantinian basilica was built in 326 over what was believed to be the tomb of Saint Peter, buried in that cemetery.
Vatican City State, which employs nearly 2,000 people, had a surplus of 6.7&nbsp;million euros in 2007 but ran a deficit in 2008 of over 15&nbsp;million euros.
For most of this time the popes did not live at the Vatican.
He planted an orchard ''(pomerium)'', a lawn ''(pratellum)'' and a garden ''(viridarium)''.
Pius XII created 32 cardinals in early 1946, having announced his intentions to do so in his preceding Christmas message.
It is listed in the Annuario Pontificio under "Holy See", not under "State of Vatican City".
The Holy See has the oldest active continuous diplomatic service in the world, dating back to at least AD 325 with its legation to the Council of Nicea.
(This site should not be confused with that of the Holy See, which uses all these languages, along with Portuguese, with Latin since 9 May 2008 and Chinese since 18 March 2009.)
Civil defence is the responsibility of the Corps of Firefighters of the Vatican City State, the national fire brigade.
The official Italian name of the city is '''' or, more formally, '''', meaning "Vatican City State".
These properties, scattered all over Rome and Italy, house essential offices and institutions necessary to the character and mission of the Holy See.
Soldiers of the Swiss Guard are entitled to hold Vatican City State passports and nationality.
Even before the arrival of Christianity, it is supposed that this originally uninhabited part of Rome (the ''ager vaticanus'') had long been considered sacred, or at least not available for habitation.
The Pope is ''ex officio'' head of state of Vatican City, functions dependent on his primordial function as bishop of the diocese of Rome.
Its seven members are cardinals appointed by the pope for terms of five years.
They claimed the new building would block views of the Basilica from nearby Italian apartments.
Persons accused of crimes recognized as such both in Italy and in Vatican City that are committed in Italian territory will be handed over to the Italian authorities if they take refuge in Vatican City or in buildings that enjoy immunity under the treaty.
* World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
As the Vatican City is an enclave within Italy, its military defence is provided by the Italian armed forces.
They include the following eight, in each of which Vatican City State holds membership:
The Holy See, which is distinct from Vatican City State, has permanent observer status with all the rights of a full member except for a vote in the UN General Assembly.
St. Peter's Square is reached through the Via della Conciliazione which runs from close to the Tiber River to St. Peter's.
The highest point is  above mean sea level.
But with the motu proprio ''Pontificalis Domus'' of 28 March 1968, Pope Paul VI abolished the honorary positions that had continued to exist until then, such as Quartermaster general and Master of the Horse.
Important actions of the Governorate must be confirmed by the Pontifical Commission and by the Pope through the Secretariat of State.
There was a total of 572 Vatican citizens, of whom 352 were not residents, mainly apostolic nuncios and diplomatic staff.
These organs concentrate on material questions concerning the state's territory, including local security, records, transportation, and finances.
Italy made no attempt to interfere with the Holy See within the Vatican walls.
* International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO)
The Lateran Palace, on the opposite side of Rome was their habitual residence for about a thousand years.
The Governorate oversees the central governmental functions through several departments and offices.
It has an ATM with instructions in Latin, possibly the only such ATM in the world.
The Palatine Guard and the Noble Guard, the last armed forces of the Vatican City State, were disbanded by Pope Paul VI in 1970.
Pius XII had refrained from creating cardinals during the war.
Issuance of euro-denominated coins is strictly limited by treaty, though somewhat more than usual is allowed in a year in which there is a change in the papacy.
Castel Gandolfo and the named basilicas are patrolled internally by police agents of Vatican City State and not by Italian police.
His principal subordinate government official for Vatican City is the President of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, who since 1952 exercises the functions previously belonging to the Governor of Vatican City.
The state can thus be deemed a significant but not essential instrument of the Holy See.
The Cardinal Camerlengo presides over the Apostolic Camera to which is entrusted the administration of the property and the protection of the temporal rights of the Holy See during a papal vacancy.
* Universal Postal Union (UPU)
Almost all of Vatican City's 558 (2005) citizens either live inside the Vatican's walls or serve in the Holy See's diplomatic service in embassies (called "nunciature"; a papal ambassador is a "nuncio") around the world.
Vatican City is currently the only widely recognized independent state that has not become a member of the United Nations.
Other industries include printing, the production of mosaics, and the manufacture of staff uniforms.
Legislative functions are delegated to the unicameral Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, led by the President of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State.
Artists who decorated the interiors of the Vatican include Raphael and Fra Angelico.
The name "Vatican" was already in use in the time of the Roman Republic for a marshy area on the west bank of the Tiber across from the city of Rome.
Thereafter the popes resided undisturbed within the Vatican walls, and certain papal prerogatives were recognized by the Law of Guarantees, including the right to send and receive ambassadors.
* 62 other clergy, working but not necessarily living in the Vatican.
The Vatican Museums, incorporating the Sistine Chapel, usually charge an entrance fee.
Under the terms of article 22 of the Lateran Treaty, Italy will, at the request of the Holy See, punish individuals for crimes committed within Vatican City and will itself proceed against the person who committed the offence, if that person takes refuge in Italian territory.
There is a Vatican football championship, with teams including the Swiss Guard's FC Guardia and police and museum guard teams.
The term Holy See refers not to the Vatican state but to the Pope's spiritual and pastoral governance, largely exercised through the Roman Curia.
All the decisions these four cardinals take must be approved by the College of Cardinals as a whole.
The gardens date back to medieval times when orchards and vineyards extended to the north of the Papal Apostolic Palace.
The government of Vatican City has a unique structure.
Some 1,500 people were killed; Pius XII himself, who had been described in the previous month as "worried sick" about the possible bombing, went to the scene of the tragedy.
There is no general public access to the gardens, but guided tours for small groups can be arranged to the gardens and excavations under the basilica.
Furthermore, it is the only site to date registered with the UNESCO as a ''centre containing monuments'' in the "International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection" according to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.
The British uncompromisingly said "they would bomb Rome whenever the needs of the war demanded".
On 1 March 2011, only 220 of the over 800 people living in Vatican City were citizens.
The Holy See, which ruled Vatican City, pursued a policy of neutrality during World War II, under the leadership of Pope Pius XII.
From then on, the area became more populated in connection with activity at the basilica.
Judicial functions are delegated to a supreme court, an appellate court, a tribunal (Tribunal of Vatican City State), and a trial judge.
Vatican City's official website languages are Italian, English, French, German, and Spanish.
Those of the Vatican State remain under the control of the Pontifical Commission for the State of Vatican City.
There are no passport controls for visitors entering Vatican City from the surrounding Italian territory.
Legislative authority is vested in the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State, a body of cardinals appointed by the Pope for five-year periods.
The Gendarmerie Corps was transformed into a civilian police and security force.
People convicted of committing crimes in the Vatican serve terms in Italian prisons (Polizia Penitenziaria), with costs covered by the Vatican.
* 293 clergy, members of the Holy See's diplomatic missions, resident in other countries, and forming well over half the total of the citizens;
It replaced the 1929 "Law concerning citizenship and residence".
The Governorate consists of the President of the Pontifical Commission—using the title "President of the Governorate of Vatican City"—a general secretary, and a Vice general secretary, each appointed by the pope for five-year terms.
Vatican City has no prison system, apart from a few detention cells for pre-trial detention.
Vatican City is one of the few independent countries without an airport, and is served by the airports that serve the city of Rome, Leonardo da Vinci-Fiumicino Airport, and to a lesser extent Ciampino Airport.
It is distinct from the Holy See.
One of the main diplomatic priorities of the bishop of Rome was to prevent the bombing of the city; so sensitive was the pontiff that he protested even the British air dropping of pamphlets over Rome, claiming that the few landing within the city-state violated the Vatican's neutrality.
According to the Lateran Treaty (Art.
As Vatican City has listed every building in its territory on the International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection, the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict theoretically renders it immune to armed attack.
Euro coins and notes were introduced on 1 January 2002—the Vatican does not issue euro banknotes.
The Vatican also controls its own Internet TLD, which is registered as (.va).
Television services are provided through another entity, the Vatican Television Center.
Anyone who loses Vatican citizenship and does not possess other citizenship automatically becomes an Italian citizen as provided in the Lateran Treaty.
The corps has 130 personnel and is a part of the Directorate for Security Services and Civil Defence (which also includes the Vatican Fire Brigade), an organ of the Governorate of Vatican City.
The Vatican citizenry consists almost entirely of two groups: clergy, most of whom work in the service of the Holy See, and a very few as officials of the state; and the Swiss Guard.
At the Vatican's request, sentences imposed can be served in Italy (see the section on crime, below).
It also created a new category, that of official Vatican "residents", i.e., people living in Vatican City; these are not necessarily Vatican citizens.
They also formed the ceremonial Noble Guard.
The 101 members of the Pontifical Swiss Guard constituted 18% of the total, and there were only 55 other lay persons with Vatican citizenship.
In the Swiss Guard, German is the language used for giving commands, but the individual guards take their oath of loyalty in their own languages: German, French, Romansh or Italian.
Nevertheless, the pope has absolute power in the executive, legislative and judicial branches over Vatican City.
They feature some of the world's most famous paintings and sculptures.
Vatican City State, created in 1929 by the Lateran Pacts, provides the Holy See with a temporal jurisdiction and independence within a small territory.
''L'Osservatore Romano'' is the multilingual semi-official newspaper of the Holy See.
The corps is responsible for security, public order, border control, traffic control, criminal investigation, and other general police duties in Vatican City including providing security for the pope outside of Vatican City.
Members are equipped with small arms and the traditional halberd (also called the Swiss voulge), and trained in bodyguarding tactics.
Vatican City issues its own coins.
They moved to the Quirinal Palace in 1583, after work on it was completed under Pope Paul V (1605–1621), but on the capture of Rome in 1870 retired to the Vatican, and what had been their residence became that of the King of Italy.
"Vatican" is derived from the name of an Etruscan settlement,  ''Vatica'' or ''Vaticum'' meaning garden, located in the general area the Romans called ''vaticanus ager'', "Vatican territory".
Stone walls bound the area in the North, South and West.
He still carries out his business and meets foreign representatives in the Palace.
Other places are open to only those individuals who have business to transact there.
According to the Lateran Treaty, certain properties of the Holy See that are located in Italian territory, most notably the Papal Palace of Castel Gandolfo and the major basilicas, enjoy extraterritorial status similar to that of foreign embassies.
Until the adoption of the Euro, Vatican coinage and stamps were denominated in their own Vatican lira currency, which was on par with the Italian lira.
When the Lateran Treaty of 1929 that gave the state its form was being prepared, the boundaries of the proposed territory were influenced by the fact that much of it was all but enclosed by this loop.
In AD 40, her son, Emperor Caligula (31 August AD 12–24 January AD 41; r. 37–41) built in her gardens a circus for charioteers (AD 40) that was later completed by Nero, the ''Circus Gaii et Neronis'', usually called, simply, the Circus of Nero.
* International Institute of Administrative Sciences (IIAS)
However, the official texts of documents are in the ''Acta Apostolicae Sedis'', the official gazette of the Holy See, which has an appendix for documents of the Vatican City State.
Unlike citizenship of other states, which is based either on ''jus sanguinis'' (birth from a citizen, even outside the state's territory) or on ''jus soli'' (birth within the territory of the state), citizenship of Vatican City is granted ''jus officii'', namely on the grounds of appointment to work in a certain capacity in the service of the Holy See.
The gardens cover approximately  which is most of the Vatican Hill.
The highest state functionaries are all Catholic clergy of various national origins.
3) St. Peter's Square, up to but not including the steps leading to the basilica, is normally patrolled by the Italian police.
Most of the content of this appendix consists of routine executive decrees, such as approval for a new set of postage stamps.
Vatican City has no armed forces of its own, although the Swiss Guard is a military corps of the Holy See responsible for the personal security of the Pope, and resident in the state.
It is published by a private corporation under the direction of Roman Catholic laymen, but reports on official information.
The nobility that was closely associated with the Holy See at the time of the Papal States continued to be associated with the Papal Court after the loss of these territories, generally with merely nominal duties (see Papal Master of the Horse, Prefecture of the Pontifical Household, Hereditary officers of the Roman Curia, Black Nobility).
The directors and officials of these offices are appointed by the pope for five-year terms.
, there were about 30 female citizens.
For a short while the plans strained the relations between the Vatican and the Italian government.
There are 16 articles in the new law, whereas the old law had 33 articles.
According to the terms of the treaty, the Holy See has "full ownership, exclusive dominion, and sovereign authority and jurisdiction" over the city-state.
This followed the charging  of two senior clerics including a monsignor with money laundering offences.
The name "Vatican" predates Christianity and comes from the Latin '''', meaning Vatican Mount.
This grand approach was constructed by Benito Mussolini after the conclusion of the Lateran Treaty.
Executive power is in the hands of the President of that commission, assisted by the General Secretary and Deputy General Secretary.
There is free public access to Saint Peter's Square and Basilica and, on the occasion of papal general audiences, to the hall in which they are held.
Italian is also the everyday language used by most of those who work in the state.
The treaty, which became effective on 7 June 1929, established the independent state of Vatican City and reaffirmed the special status of Catholicism in Italy.
The international postal country code prefix is ''SCV'', and the only postal code is ''00120'' – altogether ''SCV-00120''.
In the first decades of the existence of the Vatican City State, executive functions were entrusted to some of them, including that of Delegate for the State of Vatican City (now denominated President of the Commission for Vatican City).
After the American entry into the war, the US opposed such a bombing, fearful of offending Catholic members of its military forces, but said that "they could not stop the British from bombing Rome if the British so decided".
* 58 cardinals, resident in Rome, mostly outside the Vatican;
The independent city-state, on the other hand, came into existence in 1929 by the Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and Italy, which spoke of it as a new creation, not as a vestige of the much larger Papal States (756–1870), which had previously encompassed much of central Italy.
All recruits must be Catholic, unmarried males with Swiss citizenship who have completed their basic training with the Swiss Armed Forces with certificates of good conduct, be between the ages of 19 and 30, and be at least  in height.
The City's postal service is sometimes said to be "the best in the world", and faster than the postal service in Rome.
In December 1942, the British envoy suggested to the Holy See that Rome be declared an "open city", a suggestion that the Holy See took more seriously than was probably meant by the British, who did not want Rome to be an open city, but Mussolini rejected the suggestion when the Holy See put it to him.
He is currently the only absolute monarch in Europe.
Remains of this ancient necropolis were brought to light sporadically during renovations by various popes throughout the centuries, increasing in frequency during the Renaissance until it was systematically excavated by orders of Pope Pius XII from 1939 to 1941.
It also participates in:
The pontiff also ordered that the Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See would be the Vatican's central bank, with responsibilities similar to other central banks around the world.
In 1984, a new concordat between the Holy See and Italy modified certain provisions of the earlier treaty, including the position of Catholicism as the Italian state religion, a position given to it by a statute of the Kingdom of Sardinia of 1848.
Vatican City has no formally enacted official language, but, unlike the Holy See which most often uses Latin for the authoritative version of its official documents, Vatican City uses only Italian in its legislation and official communications.
Pope Francis also appointed an auditor-general authorized to carry out random audits of any agency at any time, and engaged a US financial services company to review the Vatican's 19,000 accounts to ensure compliance with international money laundering practices.
Recruitment is arranged by a special agreement between the Holy See and Switzerland.
On 24 February 2014 the Vatican announced it was establishing a secretariat for the economy, to be responsible for all economic, financial and administrative activities of the Holy See and the Vatican City State, headed by Cardinal George Pell.
The Vatican Apostolic Library and the collections of the Vatican Museums are of the highest historical, scientific and cultural importance.
On the following day, the new government declared Rome an open city, after consulting the Holy See on the wording of the declaration, but the British had decided that they would never recognize Rome as an open city.
Most of the 2,400 lay workers who comprise the majority of the Vatican workforce reside outside the Vatican and are citizens of Italy, while a few are citizens of other nations.
Forced to give up secular power, the popes focused on spiritual issues.
For some tracts of the frontier, there was no wall, but the line of certain buildings supplied part of the boundary, and for a small part of the frontier a modern wall was constructed.
In 1871 the Quirinal Palace was confiscated by the king of Italy and became the royal palace.
It is responsible for fire fighting, as well as a range of civil defence scenarios including flood, natural disaster, and mass casualty management.
Vatican Radio, which was organised by Guglielmo Marconi, broadcasts on short-wave, medium-wave and FM frequencies and on the Internet.
The Holy See, not being a country, issues only diplomatic and service passports, whereas Vatican City issues normal passports for its citizens.
Crime in Vatican City consists largely of purse snatching, pickpocketing and shoplifting by outsiders.
The Corps is governmentally supervised through the Directorate for Security Services and Civil Defence, which is also responsible for the Gendarmerie (see below).
In 1984, the Vatican was added by UNESCO to the List of World Heritage Sites; it is the only one to consist of an entire state.
Vatican City is home to some of the most famous art in the world.
The current President is Italian Cardinal Giuseppe Bertello, who was appointed on 1 October 2011.
On 26 November 2008, the Vatican itself put into effect a plan announced in May 2007 to cover the roof of the Paul VI Audience Hall with photovoltaic panels.
This situation was resolved on 11 February 1929, when the Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy was signed by Prime Minister and Head of Government Benito Mussolini on behalf of King Victor Emmanuel III and by Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Gasparri for Pope Pius XI.
The Latin name is ''''; this is used in official documents by not just the Holy See, but in most official Church and Papal documents.
Pope Francis, born Jorge Mario Bergoglio in Buenos Aires, Argentina, was elected on 13 March 2013.
Executive authority is delegated to the Governorate of Vatican City.
The head of the Vatican's Department of Technical Services robustly rejected challenges to the Vatican State's right to build within its borders.
Another raid took place on 13 August 1943, after Mussolini had been ousted from power.
