During the 20th century the patriarchs were usually appointed cardinal, and three cardinal patriarchs, Giuseppe Sarto, Angelo Roncalli, and Albino Luciani were elected pope: Pius X, John XXIII, and John Paul I, respectively.
the law establishing and regulating the regional institution, which was first promulgated on 22 May 1971), uses the term "people" for Venetians, but, like in the case of Sardinians, this is not a legal recognition of any differences from other Italian citizens.
One-fifth of Italy's foreign tourism gravitates towards Veneto, which is the first region in Italy in terms of tourist presence, attracting over 60 million visitors every year, and the second after Emilia-Romagna in terms of hotel industry structures.
After the Regional Council approved a resolution on self-determination (with an explicit reference to a referendum) in November 2012, a referendum bill was proposed in April 2013.
Paolo Veronese (1528–1588) was about as prolific as Tintoretto, with works that celebrated the Venetian state, as well as decorating houses of Venetian nobles.
Together with Padua, the city is included in the Padua-Venice Metropolitan Area (population 1,600,000).
Belluno is the least densely populated province, with 57 inhabitants per km2.
The invasion provoked another wave of migration from the mainland to the Byzantine controlled coast and islands.
Its population is about five million, ranking fifth in Italy.
The Armistice of Villa Giusti which ended warfare between Italy and Austria-Hungary in World War I, was signed at Villa Giusti near Padua.
After the Congress of Vienna, 1814–1815, Venetia was the eastern half of the Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia, a separate kingdom of the Austrian Empire.
Venetia remained under Austrian control until the Austro-Prussian War in 1866, when the Kingdom of Italy joined on the Prussian side and was promised Venetia in exchange for its assistance.
From the 13th to 17th centuries, it held the island of Crete and from the mid-15th to mid-16th century, the island of Cyprus.
*Villa Cornaro (Piombino Dese PD)
It was the beginning of many barbarian invasions.
Tintoretto (1518–1594) recast Roman Mannerism in a Venetian style, less linear, and with more use of colour to distinguish forms, highlighting the bright prospects for its operations, giving unusual deformations of perspective, to increase the sense of tension in the work.
The inland portion contains cultivable land recently reclaimed by a system of canals and dykes.
The San Giorgio Maggiore houses a huge canvas by him depicting the ''Last Supper''.
At the end of his long life, he had acquired fame and commissions across the continent.
Subsequently, the literary production in Venetian undergoes a period of decline following the collapse of the Republic of Venice, succeeding anyway during the 20th century to reach peaks with wonderful lyrical poets such as Biagio Marin of Grado.
Albarella island is a private island on the Lido.
It is the world's oldest academic botanical garden that is still in its original location.
Then in 1805–1806, it was conquered by Napoleon's armies and included in the Kingdom of Italy.
*Villa Emo (Vedelago TV)
During the mid-6th century, Justinian reconquered Venetia for the Eastern Roman Empire.
Thus, in 169 BC 1,500 more colonising families were sent by Rome to Aquileia.
* mountains (''montagna''): , (117 ''comuni'' being classified as mountainous);
The Statute of Veneto describes Venetians as a "people".
* Saint Mark's feast day (April 25);
Following protests, the Austrians left and the French ceded it to Italy on 20 October.
Palladian Villa architecture, in masterpieces such as Villa Emo, Villa Barbaro, Villa Capra, and Villa Foscari, evoked the imagined grandeur of antique classical Roman villas.
Luigi Barzini, writing in ''The New York Times'', described it as "undoubtedly the most beautiful city built by man".
As well, the city is the site of the Teatro delle Maddalene, the Teatro delle Grazie, the Giuseppe Verdi Theater, and the Cesare Pollini music conservatory.
Fish ponds have been created there as well.
His most important works include ''Psyche Revived by Love's Kiss'' and the ''The Three Graces''.
Cortina d'Ampezzo, it is situated in the province of Belluno and is one of the most exclusive mountain locations in Europe together with Kitzbühel in Austria and St. Moritz in Switzerland.
Veronese Vialone Nano Rice from Verona (PGI) is a type of rice with short, plump grains, which have a creamy consistency when cooked.
*Villa Zeno (Cessalto TV)
Greek-Byzantine rule would not last long.
Moreover, the region is not granted a form of autonomy comparable to that of neighbouring Friuli-Venezia Giulia and Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol.
The town of Rovigo is also the site of the Francesco Vanezza music conservatory.
After the Second World War, many Venetians emigrated to Western European countries.
Furthermore, in the area around Portogruaro people speak Furlan.
The 24 Palladian villas which are part of UNESCO:
In 1797, Napoleon invaded the territory of the Venetian Republic.
In 1915, Italy entered the First World War on the side of the France and the United Kingdom, after extricating itself from its alliance with Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
The delta and the lagoon are a stopping-point for migratory birds.
Several news sources, however, contested these results, saying that participants were at most 135,000 (3.6% of eligible voters) based on public independent web traffic statistics.
The climate changes significantly between one area to another.
The province of Belluno hosts the so-called eyeglasses district, being the largest world manufacturer Luxottica a firm domiciliated at Agordo.
The Second Treaty of Constance in 1183 confirmed the Peace of Venice of 1177 in which the cities agreed to remain part of the Empire as long as their jurisdiction over their own territories was not infringed upon.
Este, Padua, Oderzo, Adria, Vicenza, Verona, and Altino became centres of Venetic culture.
Palaces and churches of Venice abound with his paintings.
Other dolomitic peaks are the Tre Cime di Lavaredo and the Pale di San Martino.
Various types of buildings were represented including the Teatro Olimpico, ''palazzi'' and a few villas.
However, over time, the Veneti began to adopt the dress and certain other customs of their Celtic neighbours.
A reminder of Lombard rule can be seen in the place names beginning with the word ''Farra''.
In the 2010 regional election Liga Veneta–Lega Nord won 35.2% of the vote, followed by the two main Italian parties of the time, The People of Freedom (24.7%) and the Democratic Party (20.3%).
Tiramisù (a dessert made from mascarpone, coffee, Marsala wine, savoiardi and chocolate) originates from Veneto.
Antonio Canova (1757–1822), born in Possagno, was the greatest of the neoclassical artists.
The region is home to a notable nationalist movement.
This caused another southern front for Austria, the Third Italian War of Independence.
In the case of Villa Badoer, the open barn, formed by a large circular colonnade, enclosing the front yard in front of the villa allows you to create a space that recalls the ancient idea of the Forum Romanum, and bringing all campaign activities to gravitate in front of the villa itself.
Precipitations are scarce ( per year) next to the River Po, more abundant ( per year) at higher altitudes; the highest values (up to  per year) are recorded in the Bellunese Prealps, near Pasubio and on the Asiago plateau.
The garden, affiliated with the University of Padua, currently covers roughly  and has special collections.
These ancient Veneti spoke Venetic, an Indo-European language akin to, but distinct from Latin and the other Italic languages.
The 36 Lombard duchies included the Venetian cities of Ceneda, Treviso, Verona, and Vicenza.
Notable Venetian-language authors include the playwrights Ruzante (1502–1542), Carlo Goldoni (1707–1793) and Carlo Gozzi (1720–1806).
Millions of Venetians left their homes and their native land to seek opportunities in other parts of the world.
In his villas, the owner shall permit the control over production activities of the surrounding countryside by structuring the functional parts, such as porch, close to the central body.
After making wine, the alcohol of the pressed grapes is distilled to produce grappa or ''graspa'', as it is called in the local language.
Veneto is an important wine-growing area producing: Soave, Bardolino, Recioto, Amarone, Torcolato, Prosecco, Tocai Rosso, Garganega, Valpolicella, Verduzzo, Raboso, Moscato, Cabernet Franc, Pinot Nero, Pinot Grigio, and Merlot.
In the 2013 general election the Five Star Movement came first with 26.3%, the Democrats 21.3%, The People of Freedom 18.7% and Lega Nord a mere 10.5%.
*Villa Foscari, called La Malcontenta (Mira VE)
During the 3rd century BC, the Veneti, together with the Cenomani Celts on their western border, sided with the Romans, as Rome expanded and struggled against the Insubres and Boii (Celts).
Though being a heavily industrialised region, tourism is one of the main economic resources of Veneto.
The cattle stock, although declining, still represented 15% of the national stock.
The ''Via Claudia'' was completed in 46 BC and connected Altinum, Tarvisium (modern Treviso), Feltria (modern Feltre), and Tridentum (modern Trent).
In many of these places, their descendants have maintained the use of their ancestral Venetian dialects.
In the 20th century it was the venue for the career beginnings of Tullio Serafin, Beniamino Gigli and Renata Tebaldi.
Veneto was part of the Roman Empire until the 5th century AD.
But the Dolomites spread also over the Piave river (''Dolomiti d'Oltrepiave'') to the east; and far away over the Adige river to the west is the ''Brenta'' Group (Western Dolomites); there is also another smaller group called ''Piccole Dolomiti'' (Small Dolomites) located between the Provinces of Trento and Vicenza (see the map).
By the 16th century, the Venetian Republic dominated over Veneto, Friuli, parts of Lombardy and Romagna, Istria, Dalmatia, the Ionian Islands of Corfu, Cefalonia, Ithaca and Zante.
His studio was prolific.
Many other festivals are closely linked to the religious calendar.
Most of Palladio's surviving villas lay outside the site.
*Villa Pisani (Montagnana PD)
The current President of Veneto is Luca Zaia (Liga Veneta–Lega Nord), elected in 2010 with 60.2% of the vote and the support of Lega Nord, The People of Freedom and the Alliance of the Centre.
Verona was inscribed in the year 2000.
In 1167 an alliance (called the Lombard League) was formed among the Venetian cities such as Venice, Padua, Treviso, Vicenza, and Verona with other cities of Northern Italy to assert their rights against the Holy Roman Emperor.
The Venetian state—i.e.
After the Battle of Philippi (42 BC), which ended the Roman Civil War, the lands of the Veneti, together with the rest of Cisalpine Gaul, ceased to be a province and the territory of the Veneti, which included Istria, modern Friuli and Trentino-Alto Adige became Region X (''Venetia et Histria'') of a new entity named ''Italia'' (Italy).
By the Treaty of Campoformio signed on 17 October 1797, part of the Venetian mainland was handed over to Francis II of the Holy Roman Empire and a western part was annexed to the French backed Cisalpine Republic.
Several rivers flow through the region: the Po, Adige, Brenta, Bacchiglione, Livenza, Piave, and Tagliamento.
The territory soon reverted to Napoleon in 1801.
The Po Valley, covering 57% of Veneto, extends from the mountains to the Adriatic sea, broken only by some low hills: Euganean Hills, Berici Hills Colli Asolani and Montello, which constitute the remaining 14% of the territory.
Gradually, the communes of the mainland grew in power and wealth.
The lower plain is both a mainstay of agricultural production and the most populated part of the region.
The Patriarchate of Venice is an archdiocese and metropolitan see of an ecclesiastical region which includes suffragan episcopal sees of Adria-Rovigo, Belluno-Feltre, Chioggia, Concordia-Pordenone, Padua, Treviso, Verona, Vicenza, and Vittorio Veneto.
* Pasqua (Easter Sunday);
Giorgione and Titian developed an original and innovative style, which characterised the painters of the Venetian school rather than other traditions.
There are several million people of Venetian descent around the world, particularly in Brazil, in the states of São Paulo, Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, Paraná and Espirito Santo.
Montegrotto Terme and Recoaro Terme are other resorts.
At its northernmost corner it borders also on Austria.
*Villa Thiene (Quinto Vicentino VI)
Inserted by UNESCO in 1997.
* San Nicolò de Bari (St. Nicholas, December 6);
*Villa Almerico Capra, also called "La Rotonda" (Vicenza)
*Villa Angarano, also known as Villa Bianchi Michiel (Bassano del Grappa VI)
It was mainly a peasant revolt, less organised than the nearby Andreas Hofer's revolt, while hurban national guard troops fought on the French-Italian side.
These are two historical groups of villages of Cimbric origin, which for a long time formed two distinct "commonwealths" under the rule of the Republic of Venice, among others.
The Patriarchate of Venice claims St. Mark the Evangelist as its patron.
Meanwhile, under the Pax Romana, Patavium developed into one of the most important cities of northern Italy.
Aquileia had its own liturgical rites which were used throughout the dioceses of Veneto until the later Middle Ages when the Roman Rite replaced the Aquileian Rite.
The thermal baths of Abano Terme are an important tourist attraction.
After the Italians suffered an enormous defeat at Caporetto in November 1917, the combined Austro-Hungarian and German forces advanced almost unhindered through Veneto towards Venice until reaching the Piave River.
After the fall of the Republic of Venice in 1796, every city in Veneto created its own form of art.
According to ancient historians, who perhaps wanted to link Venetic origins to legend of Roman origins in Troy, the Veneti (often called the ''Paleoveneti'') came from Paphlagonia in Anatolia at the time of the Fall of Troy (12th century BC), led by prince Antenor, a comrade of Aeneas.
This period also witnessed the founding of the second oldest university in Italy, the University of Padua founded in 1222.
Veneto hosts one of the oldest universities in the world, the University of Padua, founded in 1222.
*Villa Piovene (Lugo di Vicenza VI)
Meanwhile, the Veneti prospered through their trade in amber and breeding of horses.
This aesthetic, through his publications, proved very popular and underwent a revival in the neoclassical period.
Overwhelmed by more powerful forces, Doge Ludovico Manin resigned and retired to his villa at Passariano in Friuli and the thousand year old Republic disappeared as an independent state.
In 131 BC, the ''Via Annia'' joined Adria to Patavium (modern Padua) to Altinum to Concordia to Aquileia.
The Archdiocese of Venice was elevated to an honorary Patriarchate by the pope on October 8, 1457 when the Patriarchate of Grado, a successor to the Patriarchate of Aquileia, was suppressed.
This is why the Alps and the province of Rovigo are suffering more than other areas, from a trend of declining and ageing population.
During the last 20 years, a large number of Venetian companies relocated their plants (especially the most dangerous and polluting productions) in Eastern Europe, especially Romania.
A referendum – where only 30% of the adult population voted as was custom in the period, and did so under government pressure there was a 99.99% majority for Italy – was held on 21–22 October and ratified the handover.
*Villa Serego (Santa Sofia di Pedemonte VI)
Austria offered to sell Venetia to Italy, but the Italians refused, seeing it as a dishonourable act.
Other carateristical places are:
While in Veneto Byzantine was also important, an element of innovation was brought to Padua by Giotto, bearer of a new pictorial tradition: that of Tuscany.
The Romanian city of Timişoara is also called "The Newest Venetian Province".
Perspective played a central role in Tiepolo's representations, and was forced beyond the usual limits in his ceiling decorations depicting levitating figures viewed from below.
Fishing is also still important in coastal areas.
The region's capital and largest city is Venice.
''The storm'' (1506–1508), now in the Accademia in Venice, is an example of this use of colour, where the mixture colour and texture continue indefinitely without preparatory drawing for the painting work gives a special atmosphere.
Sappada is in the extreme north of the region.
Geography and historical events have determined the present social and economic structure of the region, centred on a broad belt running from east to west.
Of the seven provinces of the region, the Province of Padua is the most populous and has the greatest density, with 424.81 persons per km2, reaching 2268.58 in the city of Padua.
The invasion of the non-Catholic Lombards in 568 only served to prolong the schism until 606 and then finally 699 when the Synod of Pavia definitively ended the schism.
Fossil deposits are also abundant there.
Once the wars ended, the Treaty of Vienna ceded the region to neutral France, but left the fortresses under Austrian control for a time.
Between 24 October and 3 November 1918, Italy launched the decisive Battle of Vittorio Veneto.
Veneto's morphology is characterised by its:
The Venetian language enjoyed substantial prestige in the days of the Venetian Republic, when it attained the status of a lingua franca in the Mediterranean.
The league was dissolved at the death of Emperor Frederick II in 1250.
To the north there are the Tre Cime di Lavaredo, said to be a symbol of the Italian Dolomites.
Prosciutto Veneto Berico-Euganeo (PDO) is obtained from the fresh meat of a top breed of adult hogs.
* Vendemmia (grape harvest in September);
In the so-called "Second Republic", Veneto has been a stronghold of the centre-right coalition, which has governed the region since 1995, first under President Giancarlo Galan (Forza Italia/The People of Freedom) and, since 2010, Luca Zaia (Liga Veneta–Lega Nord).
*Villa Trissino (Meledo di Sarego VI)
Venetian is attested as a written language in the 13th century.
Homemade wine making is widespread.
During the fascist era, due to the nationalist policy the Venetian language, as other local languages, was banned in public spaces.
The region has about 4.8 million inhabitants, ranking Veneto as the fifth most populated region in Italy.
Rejection of the Second Council of Constantinople (553) led to a schism wherein the bishops of Aquileia, Liguria, Aemilia, Milan and of the Istrian peninsula all refused to condemn the Three Chapters leading to the churches of Veneto to break communion with the Church of Rome.
The term villa was used to describe a country house.
As the region does not enjoy a special status of autonomy, minority languages are not granted any form of recognition.
*Villa Chiericati (Vancimuglio di Grumolo delle Abbadesse VI)
They are commonly used in risotto dishes and have a high starch content.
*Villa Godi (Lonedo di Lugo di Vicenza)
* Altopiano di Asiago and Calà del Sasso, with 4444 steps, the world's longest staircase open to the public.
Artists of the successive phase included Giorgione, Titian, Sebastiano del Piombo and Lorenzo Lotto.
The same saint, symbolised by a winged lion, had become the typical symbol of the Venetian Republic and is still represented on many civic symbols.
Bibione, Eraclea and Sottomarina are resorts too.
The eastern shore of the largest lake in Italy, Lake Garda, belongs to Veneto.
The first patriarch of Venice was St. Laurence, a nobleman of the Giustiniani family.
The plain and the Alpine foothills are the most developed areas in contrast to the Po delta and the mountainous areas, with the exception of the surroundings of Belluno.
During 1945–1946, Yugoslav Partisan brigades occupied part of Gorizia and for a month Trieste.
'''Veneto''' ( or , ) or '''Venetia''' ( – ; ; more specifically '''') is one of the twenty regions of Italy.
Vicenza is a thriving and cosmopolitan city, with a rich history and culture, and many museums, art galleries, piazzas, villas, churches and elegant, Renaissance ''palazzi''.
The business volume of tourism in Veneto is estimated in 12 billion Euros.
The most hit were Treviso and Vicenza, as well as the industrial area around Marghera.
The Ladin language is spoken in parts of the province of Belluno, especially in the municipalities of Cortina d'Ampezzo, Livinallongo del Col di Lana and Colle Santa Lucia, while Cimbrian is spoken in two villages (Roana and Giazza respectively) of the Seven Communities and the Thirteen Communities.
However, as the Ottoman Empire grew more powerful and aggressive, Venice was often put on the defensive.
Veneto converted to Christianity during Roman rule.
Those who remained in Veneto would experience the turmoil of two World Wars.
It asked to be annexed to the Kingdom of Sardinia to form an Italian confederation against Austria, then using the Italian tricolour in its flag, but, after the other Italian states left the war (May 1848) and Sardinia surrendered (August 1848, then March 1849), Venetia stood alone.
In 2008 the Italian national institute of statistics ISTAT estimated that 403,985 foreign-born immigrants live in Veneto, equal to 8.3% of the total regional population.
The Amarone della Valpolicella, a wine from the hills around Verona, is made with high-selected grapes and is among the more expensive red wines in the world.
The coasts of the Adriatic Sea are characterised by the Venetian Lagoon, a flat terrain with ponds, marshes and islands.
Around this time, Padua also served as home to St. Anthony, the beloved Saint called simply "il Santo" ("the Saint") by the inhabitants of the town.
Traditionally a very Catholic region, Veneto was once the heartland of Christian Democracy, which won a record 60.5% of the vote in the 1948 general election, polled above 50% in each and every general and regional election until 1983 and governed the region since its establishment in 1970 to 1994.
* hills (''collina''): , (120 hilly ''comuni'');
* San Giovanni Battista (June 24);
Spritz, in the Venetian language also called "spriss" or "spriseto" depending on the area, usually consists of ⅓ sparkling wine and ⅔ Aperol.
In Padova, musical ensembles such as the ''Amici della Musica di Padova'', the ''Solisti Veneti'' and the Padova-Veneto Symphony are found.
It is located in the north-eastern part of Italy and is bordered to the east by Friuli Venezia Giulia, to the south by Emilia-Romagna, to the west by Lombardy and to the north by Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol.
Many emigrated to Latin America, especially Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.
The influences of the contribution of Giotto were felt immediately, as in the frescoes of Giusto de' Menabuoi in the Baptistry near the Cathedral of Padua and those of Altichiero in the Basilica of Saint Anthony.
The date of construction of these villas ranges from the 15th to the 19th century.
Radicchio rosso di Treviso (PGI) is a peculiar vegetable with a faintly bitter taste and a crunchy texture.
The area of Lake Garda is a major tourist destination.
In the south and in the extreme east of the region, grain crops are more common and land holdings are larger than in the rest of the region; mechanisation is more advanced here.
*Carnival of Venice celebrated the Tuesday before Ash Wednesday;
The region's largest party is the Venetist/Padanist Liga Veneta, a founding member of Lega Nord.
Venice has also been described by the Times Online as being one of Europe's most romantic cities.
Due to uneven economic development reducing many to poverty, the 19th century and the first half of the 20th became a period of emigration.
