Venezuela devalued its currency in February 2013 due to the rising shortages in the country, which included those of milk, flour, and other necessities.
Violent crimes have been so prevalent in Venezuela that the government no longer produces the crime data.
Economic shocks in the 1980s and 1990s led to several political crises, including the deadly Caracazo riots of 1989, two attempted coups in 1992, and the impeachment of President Carlos Andrés Pérez for embezzlement of public funds in 1993.
Since the discovery of oil in the early 20th century, Venezuela has the world's largest oil reserves and has been one of the world's leading exporters of oil.
To deal with lack of power supply, in April 2016 the Maduro government announced rolling blackouts and reduced the government workweek to only Monday and Tuesday.
The Buddhist community is made up mainly of Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans.
Indigenous musical styles of Venezuela are exemplified by the groups ''Un Sólo Pueblo'' and ''Serenata Guayanesa''.
The sustainability of the Bolivarian Missions has been questioned due to the Bolivarian state's overspending on public works and because the Chávez government did not save funds for future economic hardships like other OPEC nations; with economic issues and poverty rising as a result of their policies in the 2010s.
Spanish influences are evident in bullfights and certain features of gastronomy.
Italian instruction is guaranteed by the presence of a constant number of schools and private institutions because the Italian government considered mandatory language teaching at school level.
File:Laguna_El_Suero,_Sierra_Nevada,_Merida,_Venezuela.jpg|''Mountains in Sierra Nevada de Merida'' in Merida
Voting is not compulsory.
Venezuela has always been a melting pot of cultures and this can be seen in the richness and variety of its musical styles and dances: calipso, bambuco, fulía, cantos de pilado de maíz, cantos de lavanderas, sebucán, and maremare.
The shortages included, and may still include, necessities such as toilet paper, milk, and flour, Fears rose so high due to the toilet paper shortage that the government occupied a toilet paper factory, and continued further plans to nationalize other industrial aspects like food distribution.
Service quality for those with access is mixed, with water often being supplied only on an intermittent basis and most wastewater not being treated.
Democratic Action and COPEI would dominate the political landscape for four decades.
Coup leader Hugo Chávez was pardoned in March 1994 by president Rafael Caldera, with a clean slate and his political rights reinstated.
Colombian border crossings have been temporarily opened to allow Venezuelans to purchase food and basic household and health items in Colombia in mid-2016.
According to the ''World Refugee Survey 2008'', published by the US Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, Venezuela hosted a population of refugee and asylum seekers from Colombia numbering 252,200 in 2007, and 10,600 new asylum seekers entered Venezuela in 2007.
The Democratic Unity Roundtable contested his appointment as a violation of the constitution.
The national dance is the ''joropo''.
There are approximately 33 prisons holding about 50,000 inmates.
little reliance on external financing.
It is believed nearly 12% of Venezuelans live abroad with Ireland becoming a popular destination for students.
However, he was never sworn in for his third period, due to medical complications.
Venezuela has the least expensive petrol in the world because the consumer price of petrol is heavily subsidized.
The strike produced severe economic dislocation, with the country's GDP falling 27% during the first four months of 2003, and costing the oil industry $13.3 billion.
Specific songs are related to the different stages of the festival and of the procession, when the saints start their yearly ''paseo'' – stroll – through the community to dance with their people.
File:Basilica of the chinita on the night of the Nazarene procession.jpg|Basilica of the Chinita in Maracaibo
Though almost half of Venezuela's land area lies south of the Orinoco, only 5% of Venezuelans live there.
The United Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office has advised against all travel to Venezuela.
Besides the largest conventional oil reserves and the second-largest natural gas reserves in the Western Hemisphere, Venezuela has non-conventional oil deposits (extra-heavy crude oil, bitumen and tar sands) approximately equal to the world's reserves of conventional oil.
For the 2011–2016 period the number of seats is 165.
Despite of that, Maduro said "I will stop by hook or by crook the opposition coming to power, whatever the costs, in any way".
The profits of the oil industry have been lost to "social engineering" and corruption, instead of investments needed to maintain oil production.
In the 16th century, Venezuela was contracted as a concession by the King of Spain to the German Welser banking family (Klein-Venedig, 1528–1546).
As the government started to devalue the currency in February 1983 to face its financial obligations, Venezuelans' real standards of living fell dramatically.
On 14 May 2016, the Organization of American States manifest to be studying to Apply the Inter-American Democratic Charter with sanctions for non-compliance to its own Constitution to Venezuela.
On 24 July 1823, José Prudencio Padilla and Rafael Urdaneta helped seal Venezuelan independence with their victory in the Battle of Lake Maracaibo.
In the early 20th century, North American immigrants who came to Venezuela to work in the nation's oil industry helped to popularize the sport in Venezuela.
This led to an increase in malnutrition, especially among children.
In a study titled ''Venezolana Community Abroad.
The term of office is six years, and (as of 15 February 2009) a president may be re-elected an unlimited number of times.
To a large extent over the years, the people of Trinidad and Tobago have benefited from the generosity of the Venezuelans, whether it was due to their innate ability to give and share or whether it was provided by the articles of the Treaty as a means to share and for that they are grateful.
They include; El Rodeo outside of Caracas, Yare Prison in the northern state of Miranda, and several others.
The German community speaks their native language, while the people of Colonia Tovar people speaks mostly an Alemannic dialect of German called ''coloniero''.
Spain's colonization of mainland Venezuela started in 1522, establishing its first permanent South American settlement in the  city of Cumaná.
Other notable manufacturing includes electronics and automobiles, as well as beverages, and foodstuffs.
Data from the 2011 Census.
Venezuela is divided into 23 states (''estados''), a capital district (''distrito capital'') corresponding to the city of Caracas, and the Federal Dependencies (''Dependencias Federales'', a special territory).
Currently, large numbers of Venezuelan graduates seek for a future elsewhere due to the country's troubled economy and heavy crime rate.
Teresa Carreño was a world-famous 19th century piano virtuoso.
However, the Supreme Court of Venezuela ruled that under Venezuela's Constitution, Nicolás Maduro is the legitimate president and was invested as such by the Venezuelan National Assembly (Asamblea Nacional).
Millions of Colombians, as well as Middle Eastern and Haitian populations would continue immigrating to Venezuela into the early 21st century.
The country can be further divided into ten geographical areas, some corresponding to climatic and biogeographical regions.
Venezuela's national tree is the araguaney, whose characteristic lushness after the rainy season led novelist Rómulo Gallegos to name it "''la primavera de oro de los araguaneyes''" (the golden spring of the araguaneyes).
The current government has created a program to expand access to health care known as Misión Barrio Adentro, although its efficiency and work conditions have been criticized.
municipalities and community-based organizations.
Venezuela under Hugo Chávez suffered "one of the worst cases of Dutch Disease in the world" due to the Bolivarian government's large dependence on oil sales.
Venezuela and the United States belong to a number of the same international organizations, including the related agencies of the UN such as the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Organization.
Located on Victoria Avenue in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, the modest building has served as a home office to the visitors to the country of Trinidad and Tobago, where information on the country of Venezuela was sought by many a student and school teacher who needed to boost their knowledge of the culture and the language of Spain and Venezuela.
Since the early 2000s
The sport is also noted for having an increased focus during the World Cup.
Each year, roughly 287,600 hectares of forest are permanently destroyed and other areas are degraded by mining, oil extraction, and logging.
The great poet and humanist Andrés Bello was also an educator and intellectual (He was also a childhood tutor and mentor of Simón Bolívar).
"In the democratic era, Venezuela has attempted to fulfill the principles of Simon Bolivar's ideals through a variety of means.
The Jewish community numbers approximately 13,000 and is mainly concentrated in Caracas.
Venezuela has been ranked one of the most corrupt countries on the Corruption Perceptions Index since the survey started in 1995.
There are small but influential Muslim, Buddhist, and Jewish communities.
However, in the late 19th century, artists began emphasizing historical and heroic representations of the country's struggle for independence.
Non-revenue water is estimated to be high at 62%, compared to the regional average of 40%.
In the north are the Venezuelan Andes and the Coro region, a mountainous tract in the northwest, holds several sierras and valleys.
It has a total area of  and a land area of , making it the 33rd largest country in the world.
With social programs such as the Bolivarian Missions, Venezuela initially made progress in social development in the 2000s, particularly in areas such as health, education, and poverty.
The Orinoco Delta, which forms a triangle covering Delta Amacuro, projects northeast into the Atlantic Ocean.
Venezuela is among the top 20 countries in terms of endemism.
Chávez survived several further political tests, including an August 2004 recall referendum.
In the south and east the Amazon rainforest region has limited cross-border transport; in the west, there is a mountainous border of over  shared with Colombia.
These include the ''flor de mayo'' orchid (''Cattleya mossiae''), the national flower.
President Maduro acknowledged PSUV defeat, but attributed the opposition's victory to an intensification of the "economic war".
It also has a Guinness World Record, after Dayana Mendoza, Miss Universe 2008 from Venezuela crowned Stefania Fernandez, also from Venezuela as Miss Universe 2009, marking the first time over 50 years in the competition that a country wins the title in two consecutive years.
Since 1958, the country has had a series of democratic governments.
"The Summits of the Americas are institutionalized gatherings of the heads of state and government of the Western Hemisphere where leaders discuss common policy issues, affirm shared values and commit to concerted actions at the national and regional level to address continuing and new challenges faced in the Americas.
In 2015, Venezuela had the world's highest inflation rate with the rate surpassing 100%, becoming the highest in the country's history.
In the latest stage in the major cities and regions oil of U.S. origin and manifestations of the new immigration of Spanish, Italian and Portuguese, increasing the already complex cultural mosaic.
Castro defaulted on Venezuela's considerable foreign debts, and declined to pay compensation to foreigners caught up in Venezuela's civil wars.
English is the most widely used foreign language in demand and is spoken by many professionals, academics, and members of the upper and middle classes as a result of oil exploration by foreign companies, in addition to its acceptance as a lingua franca.
After World War II, immigration from Southern Europe (mainly from Spain, Italy, Portugal, and France) and poorer Latin American countries markedly diversified Venezuelan society.
For example, Palestinian foreign minister Riyad al-Maliki declared in 2015 that Venezuela was his country's "most important ally".
about 80% of the population.
The Zulian ''gaita'' is also a very popular style, generally performed during Christmas.
They left behind works of art, particularly anthropomorphic ceramics, but no major monuments.
In response, federal protections for critical habitat were implemented; for example, 20% to 33% of forested land is protected.
Venezuela is one of the six nations in the world—along with Russia, Nicaragua, Nauru, Vanuatu, and Tuvalu—to have recognized the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Venezuela had a total of 150 plants for sewage treatment.
Catatumbolightning.jpg|Tropical monsoon climate (Am) in Sur del Lago
According to the OAS website.
Net primary school enrollment rate was at 91% in 2005.
The remainder is being served by five state
Venezuela has a national universal health care system.
During the 20th century, Venezuela, along with the rest of Latin America, received millions of immigrants from Europe.
Other notable architectural works include the Capitolio, the Baralt Theatre, the Teresa Carreño Cultural Complex, and the General Rafael Urdaneta Bridge.
Among its animals, 23% of reptilian and 50% of amphibian species are endemic.
Economic crises in the 1980s and 1990s led to a political crisis in which hundreds died in the Caracazo riots of 1989, two attempted coups d'état in 1992,  and the impeachment of President Carlos Andrés Pérez (re-elected in 1988) for corruption in 1993.
When the junta unexpectedly lost the election it held in 1952, it ignored the results and Pérez Jiménez was installed as President, where he remained until 1958.
East of it are lowlands abutting Lake Maracaibo and the Gulf of Venezuela.
The government of Hugo Chávez tried to invest in expanding it, but Venezuela's rail project is on hold due to Venezuela not being able to pay the $7.5 billion and owing China Railway nearly $500 million.
At the 2012 Spanish Grand Prix, he claimed his first pole and victory and became the first and only Venezuelan to have done so in the history of Formula 1.
In September 2016, news agency Breitbart reported that a study published in the Spanish-language Diario de las Américas indicated that 15% of Venezuelans are eating “food waste discarded by commercial establishments”.
According to Chávez and other supporters, the "Bolivarian Revolution" seeks to build a mass movement to implement Bolivarianism—popular democracy, economic independence, equitable distribution of revenues, and an end to political corruption—in Venezuela.
Native ''caciques'' (leaders) such as Guaicaipuro (''circa'' 1530–1568) and Tamanaco (died 1573) attempted to resist Spanish incursions, but the newcomers ultimately subdued them; Tamanaco was put to death by order of Caracas' founder, Diego de Losada.
The country's biosphere reserve is part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves; five wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention.
The decree could force citizens to work in agricultural fields and farms for 60-day (or longer) periods to supply food to the country.
The country falls into four horizontal temperature zones based primarily on elevation, having tropical, dry, temperate with dry winters, and polar (alpine tundra) climates, amongst others.
"At the Third Summit," which was held in Quebec, Canada in 2001 "leaders instructed their foreign ministers to prepare an Inter-American Democratic Charter which was adopted on September 11, 2001 in Lima".
Later, during and after the war, new waves of immigrants from other parts of Europe, the Middle East, and China began; many were encouraged by government-established immigration programs and lenient immigration policies.
Notable Venezuelan artists include Arturo Michelena, Cristóbal Rojas, Armando Reverón, Manuel Cabré; the kinetic artists Jesús Soto, Gego and Carlos Cruz-Díez; and contemporary artists as Marisol and Yucef Merhi.
In the first half of the 20th century, US oil companies were heavily involved in Venezuela, initially interested only in purchasing concessions.
Spain's eastern Venezuelan settlements were incorporated into New Andalusia Province.
The Bolivarian National Armed Forces of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Fuerza Armada Nacional Bolivariana, FANB) are the overall unified military forces of Venezuela.
Infant mortality in Venezuela was 19 deaths per 1,000 births for 2014, lower than the South American average (by comparison, the U.S. figure was 6 deaths per 1,000 births in 2013).
However, football, as well as basketball, are among the more popular sports played in Venezuela.
Acculturation and assimilation, typical of a cultural syncretism, caused an arrival at the current Venezuelan culture, similar in many respects to the rest of Latin America, although the natural environment means that there are important differences.
The recovery of oil prices in the early 2000s gave Venezuela oil funds not seen since the 1980s.
According to the most popular and accepted version, in 1499, an expedition led by Alonso de Ojeda visited the Venezuelan coast.
The Timoto-Cuica culture was the most complex society in Pre-Columbian Venezuela; with pre-planned permanent villages, surrounded by irrigated, terraced fields.
Globally, it seeks a "multi-polar" world based on strengthened ties among undeveloped countries.
As a result of the shortages, Venezuelans must search for food, wait in lines for hours and sometimes settle without having certain products.
Much of Venezuela's 19th-century history was characterized by political turmoil and dictatorial rule, including the Independence leader José Antonio Páez, who gained the presidency three times and served a total of 11 years between 1830 and 1863.
About 93% of the population lives in urban areas in northern Venezuela; 73% live less than  from the coastline.
However, many major government and military officials have been known for their involvement with drug trafficking; especially with the October 2013 incident of men from the Venezuelan National Guard placing 1.3 tons of cocaine on a Paris flight knowing they will not face charges.
The election of Carlos Andrés Pérez in 1973 coincided with the 1973 oil crisis, in which Venezuela's income exploded as oil prices soared; oil industries were nationalized in 1976.
Familia de Warao en canoe.jpg|Tropical rainforest climate (Af) in Orinoco Delta
Between 1990 and 2005, Venezuela officially lost 8.3% of its forest cover, which is about 4.3 million ha.
Although not as popular in Venezuela as the rest of South America, football, spearheaded by the Venezuela national football team is gaining popularity as well.
This culminated in the Federal War (1859–1863), a civil war in which hundreds of thousands died, in a country with a population of not much more than a million people.
The state oil company PDVSA played a key role in the December 2002 – February 2003 national strike which sought President Chávez' resignation.
The Central Range runs parallel to the coast and includes the hills surrounding Caracas; the Eastern Range, separated from the Central Range by the Gulf of Cariaco, covers all of Sucre and northern Monagas.
This corruption is shown with Venezuela's significant involvement in drug trafficking, with Colombian cocaine and other drugs transiting Venezuela towards the United States and Europe.
Los Llanos Venezolanos.jpg|Tropical savanna climate (Aw) in Los Llanos
According to Claudio Bifano, president of the Venezuelan Academy of Physical, Mathematical and Natural Sciences, more than half of medical graduates in 2013 had left Venezuela.
New Granada's congress gave Bolívar control of the Granadian army; leading it, he liberated several countries and founded Gran Colombia.
A collapse in confidence in the existing parties saw the 1998 election of former coup-involved career officer Hugo Chávez and the launch of the Bolivarian Revolution, beginning with a 1999 Constituent Assembly to write a new Constitution of Venezuela.
Peru will host the Eighth Summit of the Americas in 2018.
Glacial Pico Humboldt 4.JPG| Alpine glacier climate (EFH) in Pico Humboldt
Among plants of Venezuela, over 25,000 species of orchids are found in the country's cloud forest and lowland rainforest ecosystems.
File:Quebrada Jaspe - La Gran Sabana - Estado Bolívar.JPG|''Jasper Creek''
After a series of unsuccessful uprisings, Venezuela, under the leadership of Francisco de Miranda, a Venezuelan marshal who had fought in the American Revolution and the French Revolution, declared independence on 5 July 1811.
Venezuela's territory covers around  with an estimated population around 31 028 337.
They interpret Bolívar's ideas from a socialist perspective.
The Fifth Summit of the Americas was held in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago in 2009 was attended by Hugo Chávez on behalf of Venezuela.
The electricity sector in Venezuela is one of the few to rely primarily on hydropower, and includes the Guri Dam, one of the largest in the world.
During the colonial period and until after the Second World War, many of the European immigrants to Venezuela came from the Canary Islands, which had a significant cultural impact on the cuisine and customs of Venezuela.
The recovery of oil prices after 2001 boosted the Venezuelan economy and facilitated social spending.
The discovery of oil had worsened political corruption, and by the late 1970s, Juan Pablo Pérez Alfonso's description of oil as "the Devil's excrement" had become a common expression in Venezuela.
The Muslim community of more than 100,000 is concentrated among persons of Lebanese and Syrian descent living in Nueva Esparta State, Punto Fijo and the Caracas area.
Capital flight before and during the strike led to the reimposition of currency controls (which had been abolished in 1989), managed by the CADIVI agency.
Venezuela is entirely located in the tropics over the Equator to around 12° N. Its climate varies from humid low-elevation plains, where average annual temperatures range as high as , to glaciers and highlands (the ''páramos'') with an average yearly temperature of .
In 2003 the government of Hugo Chávez implemented currency controls after capital flight led to a devaluation of the currency.
Dunas en los medanos de coro.jpg|Hot desert climate (BWh) in Medanos de Coro National Park
All deputies serve five-year terms.
Thus, constitutional rights in Venezuela are considered suspended in fact by a large number of publications and public figures.
Maduro said that "the Amnesty law (approved by the Parliament) will not be executed" and asked the Supreme Court to declare it unconstitutional before the law was known.
In the tropical zone—below —temperatures are hot, with yearly averages ranging between .
The national musical instrument is the cuatro.
In 1895, after years of diplomatic attempts to solve the border dispute, from Venezuela, the dispute over the Essequibo River border flared up, it was submitted to a "neutral" commission (composed of British, American, and Russian representatives and without a direct Venezuelan representative), which in 1899 decided mostly against Venezuela's claim.
Venezuela's most significant natural resources are petroleum and natural gas, iron ore, gold, and other minerals.
Throughout most of the 20th century, Venezuela maintained friendly relations with most Latin American and Western nations.
The fallout of the 2008 global financial crisis saw a renewed economic downturn.
The Central Bank of Venezuela is responsible for developing monetary policy for the Venezuelan bolívar which is used as currency.
despite a decentralization process initiated in the 1990s that has now
This led to the Venezuela Crisis of 1902–1903, in which Britain, Germany, and Italy imposed a naval blockade of several months, before international arbitration at the new Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague was agreed.
Venezuela is considered a state with extremely high biodiversity (currently ranks 7th in the world's list of nations with the most number of species), with habitats ranging from the Andes Mountains in the west to the Amazon Basin rain-forest in the south, via extensive ''llanos'' plains and Caribbean coast in the center and the Orinoco River Delta in the east.
Attempts at fighting crime such as Operation Liberation of the People have been done to crack down on gang-controlled areas.
According to a study by sociologists of the Central University of Venezuela, over 1.5 million Venezuelans, or about 4% to 6% of the country's population, left Venezuela following the Bolivarian Revolution.
As a result of the strike, around 40% of the company's workforce (around 18,000 workers) were dismissed for "dereliction of duty" during the strike.
In the 2012 Summer Olympics, Venezuelan Rubén Limardo won a gold medal in fencing.
The Bolivarian Revolution refers to a leftist social movement and political process in Venezuela led by late Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez, the founder of the Fifth Republic Movement and later the United Socialist Party of Venezuela.
Managers and skilled highly paid technicians of PDVSA shut down the plants and left their posts, and by some reports sabotaged equipment, and petroleum production and refining by PDVSA almost ceased.
During the 1930s, baseball's popularity continued to rise in the country, leading to the foundation of the Venezuelan Professional Baseball League in 1945, and the sport would soon become the nation's most popular.
Colder conditions with temperatures from  are found in the cool zone between , especially in the Venezuelan Andes, where pastureland and permanent snowfield with yearly averages below  cover land above  in the ''páramos''.
The Spanish influence was predominant (due to the colonization process and the socioeconomic structure it created) and in particular came from the regions of Andalusia and Extremadura, the places of origin of most settlers in the Caribbean during the colonial era.
The components of the Bolivarian National Armed Forces are: the Venezuelan Army, the Venezuelan Navy, the Venezuelan Air Force, the Venezuelan National Guard, and the Venezuelan National Militia.
The sector remains centralized
That database includes nearly 3,900 species of fungi recorded from Venezuela, but is far from complete, and the true total number of fungal species already known from Venezuela is likely higher, given the generally accepted estimate that only about 7% of all fungi worldwide have so far been discovered.
Tap water is relatively inexpensive, because of a national tariff
File:Aponwao - Gran Sabana - Venezuela - Salto Aponwao.jpg|''Salto Aponwao'' in Bolívar
This was especially true post-World War II, as a consequence of war-ridden Europe.
An example of this includes buildings, music, the Catholic religion, and language.
With the start of oil exploitation in the early 20th century, companies from the United States began establishing operations in Venezuela, bringing with them US citizens.
One of his decisions was to force stores and their warehouses to sell all of their products, which led to even more shortages in the future.
In 1945, a civilian-military coup overthrew Medina Angarita and ushered in a three-year period of democratic rule under the mass membership Democratic Action, initially under Rómulo Betancourt, until Rómulo Gallegos won the Venezuelan presidential election, 1947 (generally believed to be the first free and fair elections in Venezuela).
Venezuela ranks fourth in the world for cocaine seizures, behind Colombia, the United States, and Panama.
Venezuela is also home to Formula 1 driver, Pastor Maldonado.
They spun vegetable fibers to weave into textiles and mats for housing.
Following the rise of political literature during the Venezuelan War of Independence, Venezuelan Romanticism, notably expounded by Juan Vicente González, emerged as the first important genre in the region.
Venezuela was a proponent of OAS's decision to adopt its Anti-Corruption Convention, and is actively working in the Mercosur trade bloc to push increased trade and energy integration.
Portuguese is spoken not only by the Portuguese community in Santa Elena de Uairén but also by much of the population due to its proximity to Brazil.
The highest judicial body is the Supreme Tribunal of Justice or ''Tribunal Supremo de Justicia'', whose magistrates are elected by parliament for a single two-year term.
The 1980s oil glut led to an external debt crisis and a long-running economic crisis, which saw inflation peak at 100% in 1996 and poverty rates rise to 66% in 1995 as (by 1998) per capita GDP fell to the same level as 1963, down a third from its 1978 peak.
