In 775/6 the episcopal seat of Olivolo (San Pietro di Castello; Helipolis) was created.
* Chirignago-Zelarino; population: 38;179;
Treviso is 35 minutes away.
From this beginning Venice developed as an important typographic center and even as late as the 18th century was responsible for printing half of Italy's published books.
However, Venice's popularity as a major worldwide tourist destination has caused several problems, including the fact that the city can be very overcrowded at some points of the year.
It is signified by a warm colour scale and a picturesque use of colour.
Water taxis are also active.
Some of the most important brands of glass in the world today are still produced in the historical glass factories on Murano.
In the early 16th century, there was rivalry in Venetian painting between the ''disegno'' and ''colorito'' techniques.
* The Mestre station is on the mainland, on the border between the boroughs of Mestre and Marghera.
The lagoon and a part of the city are listed as a World Heritage Site.
There are Louis Vuitton and Ermenegildo Zegna flagship stores in the city.
Venice inspired the poetry of Ezra Pound, who wrote his first literary work in the city.
Venice began to lose its position as a center of international trade during the later part of the Renaissance as Portugal became Europe's principal intermediary in the trade with the East, striking at the very foundation of Venice's great wealth; while France and Spain fought for hegemony over Italy in the Italian Wars, marginalising its political influence.
When tides are predicted to rise above 110 centimetres, the pontoons will be filled with air, causing them to float and block the incoming water from the Adriatic Sea.
Lacquerwork and Chinoiserie were particularly common in bureau cabinets.
, 91% of the population was Italian.
The Venetian state – i.e., the medieval Maritime Republic of Venice – was often popularly called the "Republic of Music", and an anonymous Frenchman of the 17th century is said to have remarked that "In every home, someone is playing a musical instrument or singing.
Others small stations in the municipality are: Venezia Porto Marghera, Venezia Carpenedo, Venezia Mestre Ospedale, Venezia Mestre Porta Ovest.
The first complete and uncensored printed edition of the Talmud was printed in Venice by Daniel Bomberg in 1523.
The City of Venice and the Central Association of Cities and Communities of Greece (KEDKE) established, in January 2000, in pursuance of the EC Regulations n. 2137/85, the European Economic Interest Grouping (E.E.I.G.)
In the 1980s, the Carnival of Venice was revived and the city has become a major centre of international conferences and festivals, such as the prestigious Venice Biennale and the Venice Film Festival, which attract visitors from all over the world for their theatrical, cultural, cinematic, artistic, and musical productions
This compared with the Italian average of 18.06% (minors) and 19.94% (pensioners).
These early canvases were generally rough.
This engineering work is due to be completed by 2016.
Venice remained closely associated with Constantinople, being twice granted trading privileges in the Eastern Roman Empire, through the so-called Golden Bulls or "chrysobulls" in return for aiding the Eastern Empire to resist Norman and Turkish incursions.
By the 16th century, Venetian artisans had gained even greater control over the color and transparency of their glass, and had mastered a variety of decorative techniques.
(Winged lions, visible throughout Venice, symbolise St Mark.)
Azienda del Consorzio Trasporti Veneziano (ACTV) is a public company responsible for public transportation in Venice.
Next, Christopher Columbus discovered the New World in 1492.
During the 20th century, when many artesian wells were sunk into the periphery of the lagoon to draw water for local industry, Venice began to subside.
In the old centre, the canals serve the function of roads, and almost every form of transport is on water or on foot.
File:IRISBUS ACTV.JPG|Bus in Mestre
Examples of these include: Casanova's autobiographical ''History of My Life'', Ben Jonson's ''Volpone'' (1605-6), Anne Rice's ''Cry to Heaven'' (1982), Shakespeare's ''Merchant of Venice'' (ca.
The largest immigrant group came from other European nations: (Romanians, the largest group: 3%, South Asia: 1.3%, and East Asia: 0.9%).
In 1866, after the Third Italian War of Independence, Venice, along with the rest of the Veneto, became part of the newly created Kingdom of Italy.
There are public buses from the airport to Venice from this airport.
As the community continued to develop and as Byzantine power waned, its autonomy grew, leading to eventual independence.
Two of the most famous Venetian writers were Marco Polo in the Middle Ages and later Giacomo Casanova.
The French writer Philippe Sollers spent most of his life in Venice and published '' A Dictionary For Lovers Of Venice'' in 2004.
The ''Cavalieri di San Marco'' was the only order of chivalry ever instituted in Venice, and no citizen could accept or join a foreign order without the government's consent.
The urban organization is governed by the Italian Constitution (art.
There are two main stations:
It is one of the world's most prestigious film festivals and is part of the Venice Biennale.
Some simply advertise flights to "Venice", while naming the actual airport only in small print.
Parts of Venice are renowned for the beauty of their settings, their architecture, and artwork.
New ports were built, including those at Malamocco and Torcello in the Venetian lagoon.
The mainland of Venice is composed of 5 boroughs: Mestre-Carpenedo, Marghera, Chirignago-Zelarino and Favaro Veneto.
Other Venetian institutions of higher education are: the "Accademia di Belle Arti" (Academy of Fine Arts), established in 1750, whose first Chairman was Giovanni Battista Piazzetta; and the "Benedetto Marcello" Conservatory of Music, which, established in 1876 as High School and Musical Society, later (1915) became "Liceo Musicale" and finally (1940), when its Director was Gian Francesco Malipiero, State Conservatory of Music.
The ''tribuni maiores'', the earliest central standing governing committee of the islands in the Lagoon, dated from c. 568.
Giacomo Casanova (1725–1798) was a prolific writer and famous adventurer best remembered for his autobiography, ''Histoire De Ma Vie'' (Story of My Life), which links his colourful lifestyle to the city of Venice.
Less well-known is the smaller sandolo.
Despite efforts to keep Venetian glassmaking techniques within Venice, they became known elsewhere, and Venetian-style glassware was produced in other Italian cities and other countries of Europe.
In 2009, 270,098 people resided in Venice's ''comune'' (the population estimate of 272,000 inhabitants includes the population of the whole Comune of Venezia; of whom around 60,000 live in the historic city of Venice (''Centro storico''); 176,000 in ''Terraferma'' (the mainland), mostly in the large ''frazioni'' (roughly equivalent to "parishes" or "wards" in other countries) of Mestre and Marghera; and 31,000 on other islands in the lagoon).
Chandeliers were usually very colourful, using Murano glass to make them look more vibrant and stand out from others, and precious stones and materials from abroad were used, since Venice still held a vast trade empire.
In 726 the soldiers and citizens of the Exarchate rose in a rebellion over the iconoclastic controversy at the urging of Pope Gregory II.
In January, a regional court scrapped the ban, but global cruise lines indicated that they would continue to respect it until a long-term solution for the protection of Venice is found.
The meaning of the word is uncertain, although there are other Indo-European tribes with similar-sounding names, such as the Celtic Veneti, Baltic Veneti, and the Slavic Wends.
Subsidence, the gradual lowering of the surface of Venice, has led to the seasonal ''Acqua alta'' when much of the city's surface is occasionally covered at high tide.
The average age of Venice residents was 46 compared to the Italian average of 42.
Nowadays each ''sestiere'' is a statistical and historical area without any degree of autonomy.
The piles penetrate a softer layer of sand and mud until they reach a much harder layer of compressed clay.
It can be argued that Venice produced the best and most refined rococo designs.
Venetian rococo was well known as rich and luxurious, with usually very extravagant designs.
The Roman/Byzantine territory was organized as the Exarchate of Ravenna, administered from that ancient port and overseen by a viceroy (the Exarch) appointed by the Emperor in Constantinople, but Ravenna and Venice were connected only by sea routes; and with the Venetians' isolated position came increasing autonomy.
It has a 994-metre grass runway.
By the late 13th century, Venice was the most prosperous city in all of Europe.
In 1895 an ''Esposizione biennale artistica nazionale'' (biennial exhibition of Italian art) was inaugurated.
Chief examples of the style are the Doge's Palace and the Ca' d'Oro in the city.
Many of the important characteristics of these objects had been developed by the 13th century.
File:Vaporetto 01.jpg|Vaporetto in Venice
Roberta di Camerino is the only major Italian fashion brand to be based in Venice.
In 1630, the Italian plague of 1629–31 killed a third of Venice's 150,000 citizens.
One of these (the historic city) is divided into six areas called ''sestieri'': Cannaregio, San Polo, Dorsoduro (including the Giudecca and Isola Sacca Fisola), Santa Croce, San Marco (including San Giorgio Maggiore) and Castello (including San Pietro di Castello and Sant'Elena).
Marco Polo System to promote and realise European projects within transnational cultural and tourist field, particularly referred to the artistic and architectural heritage preservation and safeguard.
However the industrial areas in Mestre and Marghera and the railway lines to Padua, Trieste and Trento were repeatedly bombed.
Ugo Foscolo (1778–1827), born in Zante, an island that at the time belonged to the Republic of Venice, was also a famous poet and revolutionary who wanted to see a free republic established in Venice following its fall to Napoleon.
This plunder included the gilt bronze horses from the Hippodrome of Constantinople, which were originally placed above the entrance to the cathedral of Venice, St Mark's Basilica, although the originals have been replaced with replicas and are now stored within the basilica.
The name ''Venetia'', however, derives from the Roman name for the people known as the Veneti, and called by the Greeks ''Eneti'' (Ἐνετοί).
Toward the end of that century, the center of the Venetian glass industry moved to Murano, an offshore island in Venice.
The Republic of Venice seized a number of places on the eastern shores of the Adriatic before 1200, mostly for commercial reasons, because pirates based there were a menace to trade.
A few months later, Pepin himself died, apparently as a result of a disease contracted there.
The city is a particularly popular setting for essays, novels, and other works of fictional or non-fictional literature.
Beyond the road and rail land entrances at the northern edge of the city, transportation within the city remains (as it was in centuries past) entirely on water or on foot.
PATREVE is only a statistical metropolitan area without any degree of autonomy.
In the 18th century, Venetian painting had a revival with Tiepolo's decorative painting and Canaletto's and Guardi's panoramic views.
From the 11th century until the 15th century, pilgrimages to the Holy Land were offered in Venice.
The Republic of Venice was a major maritime power during the Middle Ages and Renaissance, and a staging area for the Crusades and the Battle of Lepanto, as well as a very important center of commerce (especially silk, grain, and spice) and art in the 13th century up to the end of the 17th century.
Venice has a rich and diverse architectural style, the most famous of which is the Gothic style.
Charlemagne sought to subdue the city to his own rule.
Founded by Count Giuseppe Volpi di Misurata in 1932 as the ''Esposizione Internazionale d'Arte Cinematografica'', the festival has since taken place every year in late August or early September on the island of the Lido.
Venice has cooperation agreements with the Greek city of Thessaloniki, the German city of Nuremberg, signed on 25 September 1999, and the Turkish city of Istanbul, signed on 4 March 1993, within the framework of the 1991 Istanbul Declaration.
The seizure of Constantinople proved as decisive a factor in ending the Byzantine Empire as the loss of the Anatolian themes after Manzikert.
The city was governed by the Great Council, which was made up of members of the noble families of Venice.
This all changed by the 17th century, when Venice's trade empire was taken over by other countries such as Portugal, and its naval importance was reduced.
In the 14th century, many young Venetian men began wearing tight-fitting multicoloured hose, the designs on which indicated the Compagnie della Calza ("Trouser Club") to which they belonged.
In recognition of this, Venice was "granted numerous privileges and concessions" and Ursus, who had personally taken the field, was confirmed by Leo as ''dux'' and given the added title of ''hypatus'' (Greek for "Consul".)
The alder came from the westernmost part of today's Slovenia (resulting in the barren land of the Kras region), in two regions of Croatia, Lika and Gorski kotar (resulting in the barren slopes of Velebit) and south of Montenegro.
In 2011, the city opened Ponte della Costituzione, the fourth bridge across the Grand Canal, connecting the Piazzale Roma bus terminal area with the Stazione Ferroviaria (train station), the others being the original Ponte di Rialto, the Ponte dell'Accademia, and the Ponte degli Scalzi.
Some airlines market Treviso Airport in Treviso,  from Venice, as a Venice gateway.
But Venice remained Italy's fashion capital, and was a serious contender to Paris in terms of wealth, architecture, luxury, taste, sophistication, trade, decoration, style, and design.
It is also known for its several important artistic movements, especially the Renaissance period.
The name "Venezuela" is a Spanish diminutive of Venice.
Venice's location at the head of the Adriatic, and directly south of the terminus of the Brenner Pass over the Alps, would have given it a distinct advantage as a middleman in this important trade.
Some words with a Venetian etymology include arsenal, ciao, ghetto, gondola, imbroglio, lagoon, lazaret, lido, Montenegro, quarantine, and regatta.
In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Venice declined by 0.2%, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.85%.
Venice's oared galleys were at a disadvantage when it came to traversing the great oceans, and therefore Venice was left behind in the race for colonies.
Shortly after the introduction of the tax, Spain produced similar paper for general taxation purposes, and the practice spread to other countries.
Today, Venice is a major fashion and shopping centre, not as important as Milan, Florence, and Rome, but on a par with Verona, Turin, Vicenza, Naples, and Genoa.
Venice was especially famous for its beautiful girandole mirrors, which remained among, if not the, finest in Europe.
The city also has several Renaissance and Baroque buildings, including the Ca' Pesaro and the Ca' Rezzonico.
Venice remained a republic throughout its independent period, and politics and the military were kept separate, except when on occasion the Doge personally headed the military.
Venice's economy has changed throughout history.
"), the supposed cry of the first refugees to the Venetian lagoon from the mainland, or even with ''venia'' ("forgiveness") are fanciful.
Settlement on the islands in the lagoon probably increased with the Lombard conquest of other Byzantine territories, as refugees sought asylum there.
During the reign of duke Agnello Particiaco (811–827) the ducal seat moved from Malamocco to the highly protected Rialto, the current location of Venice.
The name of the city, deriving from Latin forms ''Venetia'' and ''Venetiae'', is most likely taken from "Venetia et Histria", the Roman name of ''Regio X'' of Roman Italy, but applied to the coastal part of the region that remained under Roman Empire outside of Gothic, Lombard, and Frankish control.
Early masters were the Bellini and Vivarini families, followed by Giorgione and Titian, then Tintoretto and Veronese.
The Venice People Mover (managed by ASM) is a cable-operated public transit system connecting Tronchetto island with Piazzale Roma.
By the standards of the time, Venice's stewardship of its mainland territories was relatively enlightened and the citizens of such towns as Bergamo, Brescia and Verona rallied to the defence of Venetian sovereignty when it was threatened by invaders.
Venice at the time was a rich and prosperous Maritime Republic, which controlled a vast sea and trade empire.
The traditional first doge of Venice, Paolo Lucio Anafesto, was actually Exarch Paul, and his successor, Marcello Tegalliano, was Paul's ''magister militum'' (General: literally, "Master of Soldiers").
In more modern times, Venice has an eruv, used by the Jewish community.
Its shape has evolved through the centuries, as documented in many well-known paintings.
The local basketball team, Reyer Venezia Mestre, plays in the first national league, the Lega Basket Serie A.
In the 18th century, then, it became a major agricultural and industrial exporter.
There are bus services on islands and waterbus services linking islands with other islands (Venice, Murano, Burano) and with the peninsula of Cavallino-Treporti.
The need to balance cruise tourism revenues with the protection of the city's fragile canals has seen the Italian Transport Ministry attempt to introduce a ban on large cruise ships visiting the city.
''Mainland (terraferma)'', annexed with a Royal Decree, in 1926, to the municipality of Venezia:
It is also a Science and Technology Partnership City with Qingdao, China.
Church and various private properties were tied to military service, although there was no knight tenure within the city itself.
Ursus was the first of 117 "doges" (''doge'' is the Venetian dialect development of the Latin ''dux'' ("leader"); the corresponding word in English is ''duke'', in standard Italian ''duce''.)
Other ports such as Genoa, Pisa, Marseille, Ancona and Dubrovnik were hardly able to make any competition to the well organized transportation of pilgrims from Venice.
The war lasted thirty years and cost Venice much of its eastern Mediterranean possessions.
Napoleon was seen as something of a liberator by the city's Jewish population, although it can be argued they had lived with fewer restrictions in Venice.
Venice became an imperial power following the Fourth Crusade, which, having veered off course, culminated in 1204 by capturing and sacking Constantinople and establishing the Latin Empire.
After the 2015 elections, five of the six boroughs are governed by the Democratic Party and its allies, and one by the center-right mayoral majority.
Florence and Padua are two of the stops between Rome and Venice.
Polo (1254–1324) was a merchant who voyaged to the Orient.
Several bus routes and one of the above tramway lines link the mainland with ''Piazzale Roma'', the main bus station in Venice, via Ponte della Libertà, a road bridge connecting the mainland with the group of islands that comprise the historic center of Venice.
The airport is on the mainland and was rebuilt away from the coast.
On 29 April 1945, New Zealand troops under Freyberg of the Eighth Army reached Venice and relieved the city and the mainland, which were already in partisan hands.
A connection with the Latin word ''venetus'', meaning the color 'sea-blue', is also possible.
This, however, proved a costly failure.
At the time, Venice was in trouble.
In 2006, it was the world's 28th most internationally visited city, with 2.927&nbsp;million international arrivals that year.
In 828 the new city's prestige increased with the acquisition of the claimed relics of St Mark the Evangelist from Alexandria, which were placed in the new basilica.
Venice is served by the Marco Polo International Airport (''Aeroporto di Venezia Marco Polo''), named in honor of its famous citizen.
The word ''ghetto'', originally Venetian, is now used in many languages.
After the fall of Constantinople, the former Roman Empire was partitioned among the Latin crusaders and the Venetians.
His ''Aldine Editions'' included translations of nearly all the known Greek manuscripts of the era.
* Lido–Pellestrina (also known as ''Venezia litorale''); population: 21,664.
The ''sestieri'' are divided into parishes – initially 70 in 1033, but reduced under Napoleon and now numbering just 38.
Venice is predominantly Roman Catholic (92.7% of resident population in the area of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Venice in 2012), but because of the long-standing relationship with Constantinople, there is also a noticeable Orthodox presence, and as a result of immigration, there are now some Muslim, Hindu and Buddhist inhabitants.
The most important printing office was the Aldine Press of Aldus Manutius, which in 1499 printed the ''Hypnerotomachia Poliphili'', considered the most beautiful book of the Renaissance, and established modern punctuation, the page format and italic type, and the first printed work of Aristotle.
He removed the gates of the Ghetto and ended the restrictions on when and where Jews could live and travel in the city.
Tourism has been a major sector of Venetian industry since the 18th century, when it was a major center for the Grand Tour, with its beautiful cityscape, uniqueness, and rich musical and artistic cultural heritage.
'''Venice''' ( ;  ) is a city in northeastern Italy and the capital of the Veneto region.
Since this group was too large for efficient administration, a Council of Ten (also called the Ducal Council or the Signoria), controlled much of the administration of the city.
Some late Roman sources reveal the existence of fishermen on the islands in the original marshy lagoons.
Although no surviving historical records deal directly with the founding of Venice, tradition and the available evidence have led several historians to agree that the original population of Venice consisted of refugees from Roman cities near Venice such as Padua, Aquileia, Treviso, Altino and Concordia (modern Portogruaro) and from the undefended countryside, who were fleeing successive waves of Germanic and Hun invasions.
The Roman defences were again overthrown in the early 5th century by the Visigoths and, some 50 years later, by the Huns led by Attila.
Then Vasco da Gama of Portugal found a sea route to India by rounding the Cape of Good Hope during his first voyage of 1497-99, destroying Venice's land route monopoly.
The municipality of Venice is subdivided into six administrative Boroughs (''Municipalità'').
Mestre is the center and the most populated urban area of the mainland of Venice.
Venice has been known as the "La Dominante," "Serenissima," "Queen of the Adriatic," "City of Water," "City of Masks," "City of Bridges," "The Floating City," and "City of Canals."
In building its maritime commercial empire, the Republic dominated the trade in salt, acquired control of most of the islands in the Aegean, including Cyprus and Crete, and became a major power-broker in the Near East.
Thomas Mann wrote the novel ''Death in Venice'', published in 1912.
The Venice Film Festival  is the oldest film festival in the world.
His series of books, co-written by Rustichello da Pisa, titled ''Il Milione'' provided important knowledge of the lands east of Europe, from the Middle East to China, Japan and Russia.
In the 19th century, a causeway to the mainland brought the Venezia Santa Lucia railway station to Venice, and the Ponte della Libertà road causeway and parking facilities (in Tronchetto island and in piazzale Roma) were built during the 20th century.
Many gondolas are lushly appointed with crushed velvet seats and Persian rugs.
Most of these piles are still intact after centuries of submersion.
Six hundred years ago, Venetians protected themselves from land-based attacks by diverting all the major rivers flowing into the lagoon and thus preventing sediment from filling the area around the city.
This made Venice a wealthy city throughout most of its history.
Venice was the early center of music printing; Ottaviano Petrucci began publishing music almost as soon as this technology was available, and his publishing enterprise helped to attract composers from all over Europe, especially from France and Flanders.
It consists of six bars pointing forward representing the Sestieri of the city, and one that points backward representing the Giudecca.
Many additional places around the world are named after Venice, e.g., Venice, Los Angeles, home of Venice Beach, California.
Later mainland possessions, which extended across Lake Garda as far west as the Adda River, were known as the "Terraferma", and were acquired partly as a buffer against belligerent neighbours, partly to guarantee Alpine trade routes, and partly to ensure the supply of mainland wheat, on which the city depended.
The style originated in 14th-century Venice, where the confluence of Byzantine style from Constantinople met Arab influence from Moorish Spain.
: traghetto) to cross the Canale Grande in the absence of a nearby bridge.
The six fingers or flanges of the ''ferro'' on the bow of a gondola represent the six ''sestieri''.
* Venice, Lido and Murano by Alilaguna (private company) motor boats;
Venice is a city of small islands, enhanced during the Middle Ages by the dredging of soils to raise the marshy ground above the tides.
In 1604, to defray the cost of flood relief, Venice introduced what could be considered the first example of a 'stamp tax'.
Studies indicate that the city continues sinking at a relatively slow rate of 1-2mm per annum; therefore, the state of alert has not been revoked.
The Venice Biennale is one of the most important events in the arts calendar.
Its strategic position at the head of the Adriatic made Venetian naval and commercial power almost invulnerable.
It was realised that extraction of water from the aquifer was the cause.
The city is often threatened by flood tides pushing in from the Adriatic between autumn and early spring.
The city is also the setting for such video games as ''Assassin's Creed II'' and ''Tomb Raider II''.
* Favaro Veneto; population: 23,615;
Venice became Austrian territory when Napoleon signed the Treaty of Campo Formio on 12 October 1797.
Together with Padua and Treviso, the city is included in the Padua-Treviso-Venice Metropolitan Area (PATREVE), with a total population of 2,600,000.
It is regarded by some as a tourist trap, and by others as a "living museum".
Today, there are numerous attractions in Venice, such as St Mark's Basilica, the Grand Canal, and the Piazza San Marco.
The targets were destroyed with virtually no architectural damage inflicted on the city itself.
Bedrooms of rich Venetians were usually sumptuous and grand, with rich damask, velvet, and silk drapery and curtains, and beautifully carved rococo beds with statues of putti, flowers and angels.
At the peak of its power and wealth, it had 36,000 sailors operating 3,300 ships, dominating Mediterranean commerce.
The second, most famous, occasion was in 1606, by order of Pope Paul V.
