Venture capital is invested in exchange for an equity stake in the business.
In addition to traditional venture capital and angel networks, groups have emerged, which allow groups of small investors or entrepreneurs themselves to compete in a privatized business plan competition where the group itself serves as the investor through a democratic process.
Media for equity investors are able to supply start-ups with often significant advertising campaigns in return for equity.
When the latter results were published, some ''San Jose Mercury News'' readers dismissed the possibility that sexism was a cause.
In turn, this explains why venture capital is most prevalent in the fast-growing technology and life sciences or biotechnology fields.
To achieve this, or even just to avoid the dilutive effects of receiving funding before such claims are proven, many start-ups seek to self-finance sweat equity until they reach a point where they can credibly approach outside capital providers such as venture capitalists or angel investors.
The risk anticipated is very high.
For instance, in the UK, 4% of British investment goes to venture capital, compared to about 33% in the U.S.
Over the next two years, many venture firms had been forced to write-off large proportions of their investments, and many funds were significantly "under water" (the values of the fund's investments were below the amount of capital invested).
Law firms are also increasingly acting as an intermediary between clients seeking venture capital and the firms providing it.
As a percentage of GDP, venture investment was 0.058% in 1994, peaked at 1.087% (nearly 19 times the 1994 level) in 2000 and ranged from 0.164% to 0.182% in 2003 and 2004.
Women make up a small (usually less than 10%) fraction of the private equity workforce.
A core skill within VC is the ability to identify novel or disruptive technologies that have the potential to generate high commercial returns at an early stage.
They run the Venture Capital firm and make the investment decisions on behalf of the fund.
Venture firms have added $4.2 billion into their funds this year, down from $6.3 billion in the first quarter of 2013, but up from $2.6 billion in the fourth quarter of 2012.
Vietnam is experiencing its first foreign venture capitals, including IDG Venture Vietnam ($100&nbsp;million) and DFJ Vinacapital ($35&nbsp;million)
Venture capital firms suffered a temporary downturn in 1974, when the stock market crashed and investors were naturally wary of this new kind of investment fund.
While such an approach has long precedents in the sphere of charity, it is receiving renewed attention from entrepreneurs, now that social media and online communities make it possible to reach out to a group of potentially interested supporters at very low cost.
In 1978, the US Labor Department relaxed certain of the ERISA restrictions, under the "prudent man rule," thus allowing corporate pension funds to invest in the asset class and providing a major source of capital available to venture capitalists.
Read more about Venture capital in Israel.
It is also seen as financing companies that have demonstrated extraordinary business potential.
In Europe and India, Media for equity is a partial alternative to venture capital funding.
Venture partners are expected to source potential investment opportunities ("bring in deals") and typically are compensated only for those deals with which they are involved.
Within the venture capital industry, the general partners and other investment professionals of the venture capital firm are often referred to as "venture capitalists" or "VCs".
Despite the above structure, the government needs to adjust its regulation around intellectual property, exchange control and other legislation to ensure that Venture capital succeeds.
The compensation structure, still in use today, also emerged with limited partners paying an annual management fee of 1.0–2.5% and a carried interest typically representing up to 20% of the profits of the partnership.
EIRs are hired by venture capital firms temporarily (six to 18 months) and are expected to develop and pitch startup ideas to their host firm, although neither party is bound to work with each other.
Entrepreneurs must remain vigilant about sharing information with venture capitalists that are investors in their competitors.
The Wallenbergs, Vanderbilts, Whitneys, Rockefellers, and Warburgs were notable investors in private companies in the first half of the century.
Because there are no public exchanges listing their securities, private companies meet venture capital firms and other private equity investors in several ways, including warm referrals from the investors' trusted sources and other business contacts; investor conferences and symposia; and summits where companies pitch directly to investor groups in face-to-face meetings, including a variant known as "Speed Venturing", which is akin to speed-dating for capital, where the investor decides within 10 minutes whether he wants a follow-up meeting.
In addition to findings that women make up the majority of early technology adopters, Harvard Business School Professor Paul Gompers has stated that female venture capitalists consistently perform as well as males at large firms that have more than one woman.
Venture capitalists with finance backgrounds tend to have investment banking or other corporate finance experience.
In 2013, Wix.com joined 62 other Israeli firms on the Nasdaq.
In 1973, with the number of new venture capital firms increasing, leading venture capitalists formed the National Venture Capital Association (NVCA).
ARDC is credited with the first trick when its 1957 investment of $70,000 in Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) would be valued at over $355 million after the company's initial public offering in 1968 (representing a return of over 1200 times on its investment and an annualized rate of return of 101%).
Once integrated into the business network, these firms are more likely to succeed, as they become "nodes" in the search networks for designing and building products in their domain.
Section 12 J of the ''Income Tax Act'' was updated to include venture capital.
However, due to bigger sized deals in early stage investments, the number of deals was down 20% to 213.
There are substantial penalties for a limited partner (or investor) that fails to participate in a capital call.
These funds are typically managed by a venture capital firm, which often employs individuals with technology backgrounds (scientists, researchers), business training and/or deep industry experience.
More often than not, these companies were exploiting breakthroughs in electronic, medical, or data-processing technology.
Venture capital firms or funds invest in these early-stage companies in exchange for equity–an ownership stake–in the companies they invest in.
The first round of institutional venture capital to fund growth is called the Series A round.
Only after 1945 did "true" private equity investments begin to emerge, notably with the founding of the first two venture capital firms in 1946: American Research and Development Corporation (ARDC) and J.H.
Smaller firms tend to thrive or fail with their initial industry contacts; by the time the fund cashes out, an entirely new generation of technologies and people is ascending, whom the general partners may not know well, and so it is prudent to reassess and shift industries or personnel rather than attempt to simply invest more in the industry or people the partners already know.
In 1972 Doriot merged ARDC with Textron after having invested in over 150 companies.
Companies are allowed to use a tax efficient structure similar to VCTs in the UK.
The Nasdaq crash and technology slump that started in March 2000 shook virtually the entire venture capital industry as valuations for startup technology companies collapsed.
The number of firms multiplied, and the capital managed by these firms increased from $3 billion to $31 billion over the course of the decade.
Typical career backgrounds vary, but, broadly speaking, venture capitalists come from either an operational or a finance background.
It is also defined as "providing seed", "start-up and first-stage financing".
India is fast catching up with the West in the field of venture capital and a number of venture capital funds have a presence in the country (IVCA).
Trade association Invest Europe has a list of active member firms and industry statistics.
The report also found that 97% of VC-funded businesses had male chief executives, and that businesses with all-male teams were more than four times as likely to receive VC funding compared to teams with at least one woman.
Located in Menlo Park, CA, Kleiner Perkins, Sequoia and later venture capital firms would have access to the many semiconductor companies based in the Santa Clara Valley as well as early computer firms using their devices and programming and service companies.
The South African Government and Revenue Service is following the international trend of using tax efficient vehicles to propel economic growth and job creation through venture capital.
In 1965, Sutter Hill Ventures acquired the portfolio of Draper and Johnson as a founding action.
Because a fund may run out of capital prior to the end of its life, larger venture capital firms usually have several overlapping funds at the same time; doing so lets the larger firm keep specialists in all stages of the development of firms almost constantly engaged.
Results would begin to turn very attractive, successful and would ultimately generate the venture capital boom of the 1990s.
The Venture Capital industry in Mexico is a fast-growing sector in the country that, with the support of institutions and private funds, is estimated to reach US$100 billion invested by 2018.
Geographical differences can be significant.
A venture capitalist is a person who makes venture investments, and these venture capitalists are expected to bring managerial and technical expertise as well as capital to their investments.
In contrast to the US, European media companies and also funds have been pursuing a media for equity business model as a form of venture capital investment.
Funds are difficult to come by and very few firms have managed to get funding despite demonstrating tremendous growth potential.
ARDC became the first institutional private-equity investment firm to raise capital from sources other than wealthy families, although it had several notable investment successes as well.
In industries where assets can be securitized effectively because they reliably generate future revenue streams or have a good potential for resale in case of foreclosure, businesses may more cheaply be able to raise debt to finance their growth.
A widely used source for tracking the number of women in venture capital, is the Midas List which has been published by Forbes since 2001.
Capital raised in the region in 2005, including buy-out funds, exceeded €60 billion, of which €12.6 billion was specifically allocated to venture investment.
By mid-2003, the venture capital industry had shriveled to about half its 2001 capacity.
In addition to angel investing, equity crowdfunding and other seed funding options, venture capital is attractive for new companies with limited operating history that are too small to raise capital in the public markets and have not reached the point where they are able to secure a bank loan or complete a debt offering.
As a consequence, most venture capital investments are done in a pool format, where several investors combine their investments into one large fund that invests in many different startup companies.
Before World War II (1939–1945), money orders (originally known as "development capital") remained primarily the domain of wealthy individuals and families.
These funds, also known as Retail Venture Capital or Labour Sponsored Investment Funds (LSIF), are generally sponsored by labor unions and offer tax breaks from government to encourage retail investors to purchase the funds.
In 2012, in France, according to a study  by AFIC (the French Association of VC firms), €6.1B have been invested through 1,548 deals (39% in new companies, 61% in new rounds) by firms such as Partech Ventures or Innovacom.
China is also starting to develop a venture capital industry (CVCA).
The basic incentive available to any Canadian corporation performing R&D is a refundable tax credit that is equal to 20% of "qualifying" R&D expenditures (labour, material, R&D contracts, and R&D equipment).
After a few successful years, an associate may move up to the "senior associate" position and potentially principal and beyond.
This practice is called "bootstrapping".
The Wallenberg family started Investor AB in 1916 in Sweden and were early investors in several Swedish companies such as ABB, Atlas Copco, Ericsson, etc.
Diaspora organization TechWadi aims to give MENA companies access to VC investors based in the US.
Although the titles are not entirely uniform from firm to firm, other positions at venture capital firms include:
John Hay Whitney (1904–1982) and his partner Benno Schmidt (1913–1999) founded J.H.
An enhanced 35% refundable tax credit of available to certain (i.e.
Venture capitalists also are expected to nurture the companies in which they invest, in order to increase the likelihood of reaching an IPO stage when valuations are favourable.
It was also in the 1960s that the common form of private equity fund, still in use today, emerged.
Equity crowdfunding is emerging as an alternative to traditional venture capital.
This shows the difference between a venture capital fund management company and the venture capital funds managed by them.
It is commonly noted that the first venture-backed startup is Fairchild Semiconductor (which produced the first commercially practical integrated circuit), funded in 1959 by what would later become Venrock Associates.
Although the post-boom years represent just a small fraction of the peak levels of venture investment reached in 2000, they still represent an increase over the levels of investment from 1980 through 1995.
Some equity crowdfunding models are also being applied specifically for startup funding, such as those listed at Comparison of crowd funding services.
This is typically the most junior apprentice position within a venture capital firm.
Along with Ralph Flanders and Karl Compton (former president of MIT), Doriot founded ARDC in 1946 to encourage private-sector investment in businesses run by soldiers returning from World War II.
Venture capital funds, which were responsible for much of the fundraising volume in 2000 (the height of the dot-com bubble), raised only $25.1 billion in 2006, a 2% decline from 2005 and a significant decline from its peak.
The  MENA Private Equity Association  Guide to Venture Capital for entrepreneurs lists VC firms in the region, and other resources available in the MENA VC ecosystem.
This need for high returns makes venture funding an expensive capital source for companies, and most suitable for businesses having large up-front capital requirements, which cannot be financed by cheaper alternatives such as debt.
With few exceptions, private equity in the first half of the 20th century was the domain of wealthy individuals and families.
The SR&ED program does not restrict the export of any technology or intellectual property that may have been developed with the benefit of SR&ED tax incentives.
Offshore funding is provided via specialist venture capital trusts, which seek to utilise securitization in structuring hybrid multi-market transactions via an SPV (special purpose vehicle): a corporate entity that is designed solely for the purpose of the financing.
Eric M. Warburg founded E.M. Warburg & Co. in 1938, which would ultimately become Warburg Pincus, with investments in both leveraged buyouts and venture capital.
Venture capital is also a way in which the private and public sectors can construct an institution that systematically creates business networks for the new firms and industries, so that they can progress and develop.
The traditional VCs are shifting their focus to later-stage investments, and return on investment of many VC funds have been low or negative.
However, venture capitalists' decisions are often biased, exhibiting for instance overconfidence and illusion of control, much like entrepreneurial decisions in general.
In 2006, the total amount of private equity and venture capital in India reached $7.5&nbsp;billion across 299 deals.
One of the reasons to look for alternatives to venture capital is the problem of the traditional VC model.
Whitney & Company in 1946.
Venture capitalists typically assist at four stages in the company's development:
Because the CCPC rules require a minimum of 50% Canadian ownership in the company performing R&D, foreign investors who would like to benefit from the larger 35% tax credit must accept minority position in the company, which might not be desirable.
European venture capital investment in the second quarter of 2007 rose 5% to €1.14 billion from the first quarter.
The return of the venture capitalist as a shareholder depends on the growth and profitability of the business.
Entrepreneurs are typically well advised to protect truly proprietary intellectual property.
A venture may be defined as a project prospective converted into a process with an adequate assumed risk and investment.
The market for initial public offerings cooled in the mid-1980s before collapsing after the stock market crash in 1987, and foreign corporations, particularly from Japan and Korea, flooded early-stage companies with capital.
Associates will often have worked for 1–2 years in another field, such as investment banking or management consulting.
Venture capitalists with an operational background (operating partner) tend to be former founders or executives of companies similar to those which the partnership finances or will have served as management consultants.
However, innovative structures have been developed to permit LSVCCs to direct in Canadian subsidiaries of corporations incorporated in jurisdictions outside of Canada.
This return is generally earned when the venture capitalist "exits" by selling its shareholdings when the business is sold to another owner.
Additionally, venture capital units within Chemical Bank and Continental Illinois National Bank, among others, began shifting their focus from funding early stage companies toward investments in more mature companies.
In the year of 2008, while VC funding were still majorly dominated by U.S. money ($28.8 billion invested in over 2550 deals in 2008), compared to international fund investments ($13.4 billion invested elsewhere), there has been an average 5% growth in the venture capital deals outside the USA, mainly in China and Europe.
The growth of the industry was hampered by sharply declining returns, and certain venture firms began posting losses for the first time.
In a follow-up ''Newsweek'' article, Nina Burleigh asked "Where were all these offended people when women like Heidi Roizen published accounts of having a venture capitalist stick her hand in his pants under a table while a deal was being discussed?"
At the time when all of the money has been raised, the fund is said to be closed, and the 10-year lifetime begins.
A study published in early 2013 showed that contrary to popular belief, European startups backed by venture capital do not perform worse than US counterparts.
Entrepreneurs-in-residence (EIRs) are experts in a particular industry sector (e.g., biotechnology or social media) and perform due diligence on potential deals.
Currently, there are not many venture capital funds in operation and it is a small community; however a small number of funds are available.
GPs typically put in personal capital up to 1-2% of the VC Fund size to show their commitment to the LPs.
Other forms include venture resources that seek to provide non-monetary support to launch a new venture.
The vintage year generally refers to the year in which the fund was closed and may serve as a means to stratify VC funds for comparison.
If a company does have the qualities venture capitalists seek including a solid business plan, a good management team, investment and passion from the founders, a good potential to exit the investment before the end of their funding cycle, and target minimum returns in excess of 40% per year, it will find it easier to raise venture capital.
Private equity firms organized limited partnerships to hold investments in which the investment professionals served as general partner and the investors, who were passive limited partners, put up the capital.
small) Canadian-controlled private corporations (CCPCs).
Whitney & Company and Warburg Pincus began to transition toward leveraged buyouts and growth capital investments.
Namely, they are not allowed to advertise or solicit business in any form as per the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission guidelines.
Venture capitalists are typically very selective in deciding what to invest in; as a result, firms are looking for the extremely rare yet sought-after qualities such as innovative technology, potential for rapid growth, a well-developed business model, and an impressive management team.
Good examples would include asset-intensive extractive industries such as mining, or manufacturing industries.
Europe has a large and growing number of active venture firms.
The investing cycle for most funds is generally three to five years, after which the focus is managing and making follow-on investments in an existing portfolio.
One of them is a lawsuit by Ellen Pao against her former employer Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers.
Venture capital firms are typically structured as partnerships, the general partners of which serve as the managers of the firm and will serve as investment advisors to the venture capital funds raised.
Most venture capitalists treat information confidentially, but as a matter of business practice, they do not typically enter into Non Disclosure Agreements because of the potential liability issues those agreements entail.
Throughout the 1970s, a group of private equity firms, focused primarily on venture capital investments, would be founded that would become the model for later leveraged buyout and venture capital investment firms.
In Israel, high-tech entrepreneurship and venture capital have flourished well beyond the country's relative size.
During the 1960s and 1970s, venture capital firms focused their investment activity primarily on starting and expanding companies.
Traditional crowdfunding is an approach to raising the capital required for a new project or enterprise by appealing to large numbers of ordinary people for small donations.
Questions about how to increase the number of VC opportunities for women have been brought to the forefront by several events.
In response to the changing conditions, corporations that had sponsored in-house venture investment arms, including General Electric and Paine Webber either sold off or closed these venture capital units.
Babson College's Diana Report found that the number of women partners in VC firms decreased from 10% in 1999 to 6% in 2014.
Venrock was founded in 1969 by Laurance S. Rockefeller, the fourth of John D. Rockefeller's six children as a way to allow other Rockefeller children to develop exposure to venture capital investments.
Venture capital is also associated with job creation (accounting for 2% of US GDP), the knowledge economy, and used as a proxy measure of innovation within an economic sector or geography.
The second quarter venture capital investment results were significant in terms of early-round investment, where as much as €600 million (about 42.8% of the total capital) were invested in 126 early round deals (which comprised more than half of the total number of deals).
This is a mid-level investment professional position, and often considered a "partner-track" position.
By definition, VCs also take a role in managing entrepreneurial companies at an early stage, thus adding skills as well as capital, thereby differentiating VC from buy-out private equity, which typically invest in companies with proven revenue, and thereby potentially realizing much higher rates of returns.
There are several strict guidelines regulating those that deal in venture capital.
As part of the due diligence process, most venture capitalists will require significant detail with respect to a company's business plan.
Yale School of Management Professor Andrew Metrick refers to these first 15 years of the modern venture capital industry beginning in 1980 as the "pre-boom period" in anticipation of the boom that would begin in 1995 and last through the bursting of the Internet bubble in 2000.
Specifically she claimed that a number of firms in the 1980s ignored her senior management experience in Hambrecht & Quist.
That is most commonly the case for intangible assets such as software, and other intellectual property, whose value is unproven.
Obtaining venture capital is substantially different from raising debt or a loan.
The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) venture capital industry is an early stage of development but growing.
About two thirds of the funds invested were from foreign sources, and the rest domestic.
Of these qualities, funds are most interested in ventures with exceptionally high growth potential, as only such opportunities are likely capable of providing financial returns and a successful exit within the required time frame (typically 3–7 years) that venture capitalists expect.
Georges Doriot, the "father of venture capitalism" (and former assistant dean of Harvard Business School), founded INSEAD in 1957.
The start-ups are usually based on an innovative technology or business model and they are usually from the high technology industries, such as information technology (IT), social media or biotechnology.
Canadian technology companies have attracted interest from the global venture capital community partially as a result of generous tax incentive through the Scientific Research and Experimental Development (SR&ED) investment tax credit program.
More than 75% of VC firms in the US did not have any female venture capitalists at the time they were surveyed.
In addition, as of 2010, Israel led the world in venture capital invested per capita.
In exchange for the high risk that venture capitalists assume by investing in smaller and early-stage companies, venture capitalists usually get significant control over company decisions, in addition to a significant portion of the companies' ownership (and consequently value).
Typically the asymmetry is seen in cases where there's an investor that has other interests such as tax income in case of public investors.
Israel attracted $170 per person compared to $75 in the USA.
In addition, some new private online networks are emerging to provide additional opportunities for meeting investors.
The Southern African venture capital industry is developing.
It was not until 1978 that venture capital experienced its first major fundraising year, as the industry raised approximately $750 million.
Furthermore, many venture capital firms will only seriously evaluate an investment in a start-up company otherwise unknown to them if the company can prove at least some of its claims about the technology and/or market potential for its product or services.
The majority of the venture capital in Southern Africa is centered on South Africa and Kenya.
Limited partners of venture capital firms typically have access only to limited amounts of information with respect to the individual portfolio companies in which they are invested and are typically bound by confidentiality provisions in the fund's limited partnership agreement.
Lenders have a legal right to interest on a loan and repayment of the capital irrespective of the success or failure of a business.
In Europe, an investment advisory firm offers young ventures the option to exchange equity for services investment; their aim is to guide ventures through the development stage to arrive at a significant funding, mergers and acquisition, or other exit strategy.
As it has very little natural resources and, historically has been forced to build its economy on knowledge-based industries, its VC industry has rapidly developed, and nowadays has about 70 active venture capital funds, of which 14 international VCs with Israeli offices, and additional 220 international funds which actively invest in Israel.
In 2006, the top three countries receiving the most venture capital investments were the United Kingdom (515 minority stakes sold for €1.78 billion), France (195 deals worth €875 million), and Germany (207 deals worth €428 million) according to data gathered by Library House.
Nevertheless, PricewaterhouseCoopers' MoneyTree Survey shows that total venture capital investments held steady at 2003 levels through the second quarter of 2005.
In addition to the increased competition among firms, several other factors affected returns.
Switzerland's most active early-stage investors are The Zurich Cantonal Bank,  investiere.ch, Swiss Founders Fund, as well as a number of angel investor clubs.
General Partners or GPs
This constituency comprises both high-net-worth individuals and institutions with large amounts of available capital, such as state and private pension funds, university financial endowments, foundations, insurance companies, and pooled investment vehicles, called funds of funds.
Venture capital refers to capital investment; equity and debt ;both of which carry indubitable risk.
The revival of an Internet-driven environment in 2004 through 2007 helped to revive the venture capital environment.
Most venture capital funds have a fixed life of 10 years, with the possibility of a few years of extensions to allow for private companies still seeking liquidity.
As a result, venture capital came to be almost synonymous with technology finance.
This model was pioneered by successful funds in Silicon Valley through the 1980s to invest in technological trends broadly but only during their period of ascendance, and to cut exposure to management and marketing risks of any individual firm or its product.
Venture capital firms in the United States may also be structured as limited liability companies, in which case the firm's managers are known as managing members.
Entrepreneur-in-residence
In such a fund, the investors have a fixed commitment to the fund that is initially unfunded and subsequently "called down" by the venture capital fund over time as the fund makes its investments.
The late 1990s were a boom time for venture capital, as firms on Sand Hill Road in Menlo Park and Silicon Valley benefited from a huge surge of interest in the nascent Internet and other computer technologies.
The public successes of the venture capital industry in the 1970s and early 1980s (e.g., Digital Equipment Corporation, Apple Inc., Genentech) gave rise to a major proliferation of venture capital investment firms.
Whitney & Company continued to make investments in leveraged buyout transactions and raised $750 million for its sixth institutional private equity fund in 2005.
ARDC continued investing until 1971, when Doriot retired.
Another is ''Elephant in the Valley'', a survey aiming to expose discrimination started by several women in business including Tracy Vassallo, a former partner of the same firm.
'''Venture capital''' ('''VC''') is a type of private equity, a form of financing that is provided by firms or funds to small, early-stage, emerging firms that are deemed to have high growth potential, or which have demonstrated high growth (in terms of number of employees, annual revenue, or both).
A venture capital fund refers to a pooled investment vehicle (in the United States, often an LP or LLC) that primarily invests the financial capital of third-party investors in enterprises that are too risky for the standard capital markets or bank loans.
From just a few dozen firms at the start of the decade, there were over 650 firms by the end of the 1980s, each searching for the next major "home run."
In 1938, Laurance S. Rockefeller helped finance the creation of both Eastern Air Lines and Douglas Aircraft, and the Rockefeller family had vast holdings in a variety of companies.
