Equipped with seven scientific instruments, ''Venus Express'' provided unprecedented long-term observation of Venus's atmosphere.
The preceding pair of transits occurred in December 1874 and December 1882; the following pair will occur in December 2117 and December 2125.
The clouds also contain sulfur aerosol, about 1% ferric chloride and some water.
These features are volcanic in origin.
Later, American astronomer Chester Smith Lyman observed a complete ring around the dark side of the planet when it was at inferior conjunction, providing further evidence for an atmosphere.
It is radically different from Earth in other respects.
On 18 October 1967, the Soviet ''Venera 4'' successfully entered the atmosphere and deployed science experiments.
The southern continent is called Aphrodite Terra, after the Greek goddess of love, and is the larger of the two highland regions at roughly the size of South America.
If later impacts created moons, these were removed in the same way.
The ground shows evidence of extensive volcanism, and the sulfur in the atmosphere may indicate that there have been some recent eruptions.
Instead, the heat from the core is being used to reheat the crust.
Conditions on the Venusian surface differ radically from those on Earth because of its dense carbon dioxide atmosphere.
The lightning rate is at least half of that on Earth.
The atmosphere of Venus was discovered in 1761 by Russian polymath Mikhail Lomonosov.
Little more was discovered about Venus until the 20th&nbsp;century.
Although Mercury, the other inferior planet, reaches a maximum elongation of only 28° and is often difficult to discern in twilight, Venus is hard to miss when it is at its brightest.
The atmosphere complicated efforts to determine a rotation period for the planet, and observers such as Italian-born astronomer Giovanni Cassini and Schröter incorrectly estimated periods of about  from the motions of markings on the planet's apparent surface.
The core is thought to be electrically conductive and, although its rotation is often thought to be too slow, simulations show it is adequate to produce a dynamo.
This could be possible only if Venus orbited the Sun, and this was among the first observations to clearly contradict the Ptolemaic geocentric model that the Solar System was concentric and centred on Earth.
The clouds of Venus are capable of producing lightning much like the clouds on Earth.
To an observer on the surface of Venus, the Sun would rise in the west and set in the east, although Venus's opaque clouds prevent observing the Sun from the planet's surface.
However, a few scientists have speculated that thermoacidophilic  extremophile microorganisms might exist in the lower-temperature, acidic upper layers of the Venusian atmosphere.
One possibility is that Venus has no solid inner core, or that its core is not cooling, so that the entire liquid part of the core is at approximately the same temperature.
The erosion has increased the ratio of higher-mass deuterium to lower-mass hydrogen in the atmosphere 100 times compared to the rest of the solar system.
The planet is bright enough to be seen in a clear midday sky and is easily visible when the Sun is low on the horizon.
It was the first planet beyond Earth visited by a spacecraft (''Mariner 2'') in 1962, and the first to be successfully landed on (by ''Venera 7'') in 1970.
It has several trojan asteroids: the quasi-satellite  and two other temporary trojans,  and .
Venus fades to about magnitude −3 when it is backlit by the Sun.
The existence of lightning had been controversial since the first suspected bursts were detected by the Soviet Venera probes.
When the Italian physicist Galileo Galilei first observed the planet in the early 17th&nbsp;century, he found it showed phases like the Moon, varying from crescent to gibbous to full and vice versa.
Clouds at different levels have different compositions and particle size distributions.
It has the densest atmosphere of the four terrestrial planets, consisting of more than 96% carbon dioxide.
In 2008 and 2009, the first direct evidence for ongoing volcanism was observed by ''Venus Express'', in the form of four transient localized infrared hot spots within the rift zone Ganis Chasma, near the shield volcano Maat Mons.
It may have had water oceans in the past, but these would have vaporized as the temperature rose due to a runaway greenhouse effect.
When Venus is furthest from the Sun in the sky, it shows a half-lit phase, and when it is closest to the Sun in the sky, it shows as a crescent or full phase.
Transits of Venus occur in cycles of  with the current pattern of transits being pairs of transits separated by eight years, at intervals of about  or —a pattern first discovered in 1639 by the English astronomer Jeremiah Horrocks.
Like that of Earth, the Venusian core is at least partially liquid because the two planets have been cooling at about the same rate.
The density at the surface is 65&nbsp;kg/m3, 6.5% that of water or 50 times as dense as Earth's atmosphere at 20&nbsp;°C at sea level.
Because Venus is an inferior planet from Earth, it never appears to venture far from the Sun; its elongation reaches a maximum of 47.8°.
Its peak is 11&nbsp;km above the Venusian average surface elevation.
Schröter found when the planet was a thin crescent, the cusps extended through more than 180°.
This magnetic field is induced by an interaction between the ionosphere and the solar wind, rather than by an internal dynamo in the core like the one inside Earth.
Several lines of evidence point to ongoing volcanic activity on Venus.
One possibility is that ash from a volcanic eruption was generating the lightning.
Later work in the 1950s showed the rotation was retrograde.
It has the longest rotation period (243 days) of any planet in the Solar System and rotates in the opposite direction to most other planets.
Alex Alemi's and David Stevenson's 2006 study of models of the early Solar System at the California Institute of Technology shows Venus likely had at least one moon created by a huge impact event billions of years ago.
The first claimed observation of ashen light was made in 1643, but the existence of the illumination has never been reliably confirmed.
The atmospheric pressure at the planet's surface is 92 times that of Earth.
Then, ''Venus Express'' by the European Space Agency (ESA) entered orbit around Venus in April 2006.
Venus was the first planet to have its motions plotted across the sky, as early as the second millennium BC, and was a prime target for early interplanetary exploration as the closest planet to Earth.
The actual temperatures are not known, because the size of the hot spots could not be measured, but are likely to have been in the 800–1100 K range, relative to a normal temperature of 740 K.
Its almost featureless disc gave no hint what its surface might be like, and it was only with the development of spectroscopic, radar and ultraviolet observations that more of its secrets were revealed.
The only appreciable variation in temperature occurs with altitude.
On Venus, about 85% of the craters are in pristine condition.
In 2006–07, ''Venus Express'' clearly detected whistler mode waves, the signatures of lightning.
Three of the spots were observed in more than one successive orbit.
About 10&nbsp;million&nbsp;years later, according to the study, another impact reversed the planet's spin direction and caused the Venusian moon gradually to spiral inward until it collided with Venus.
Several other Venus flybys took place in the 1980s and 1990s that increased the understanding of Venus, including ''Vega 1'' (1985), ''Vega 2'' (1985), ''Galileo'' (1990), ''Magellan'' (1994), ''Cassini–Huygens'' (1998), and ''MESSENGER'' (2006).
Venus is by far the hottest planet in the Solar System, with a mean surface temperature of , even though Mercury is closer to the Sun.
This radiation may result in cloud-to-cloud lightning discharges.
It is named after the Roman goddess of love and beauty.
Objects with less than a certain kinetic energy are slowed down so much by the atmosphere that they do not create an impact crater.
It has been made sacred to gods of many cultures, and has been a prime inspiration for writers and poets as the "morning star" and "evening star".
As a result, no internal geodynamo is available to drive a magnetic field.
Venus has no natural satellites.
The original prime meridian passed through the radar-bright spot at the centre of the oval feature Eve, located south of Alpha Regio.
It is the second-brightest natural object in the night sky after the Moon, reaching an apparent magnitude of −4.6, bright enough to cast shadows.
Pliny the Elder credited the realization that they were a single object to Pythagoras in the sixth century BCE, while Diogenes Laertius argued that Parmenides was probably responsible.
On 29 January 2013, ESA scientists reported that the ionosphere of Venus streams outwards in a manner similar to "the ion tail seen streaming from a comet under similar conditions."
Exceptions are Maxwell Montes, named after James Clerk Maxwell, and highland regions Alpha Regio, Beta Regio, and Ovda Regio.
After the Venera missions were completed, the prime meridian was redefined to pass through the central peak in the crater Ariadne.
Closer to the Sun than Earth, the planet was frequently depicted as warmer, but still habitable by humans.
Venus is a primary feature of the night sky, and so has been of remarkable importance in mythology, astrology and fiction throughout history and in different cultures.
This is not because Venus is more volcanically active than Earth, but because its crust is older.
The -rich atmosphere generates the strongest greenhouse effect in the Solar System, creating surface temperatures of at least .
Romantic poets such as William Blake, Robert Frost, Alfred Lord Tennyson and William Wordsworth  wrote odes to it.
The transit could be watched live from many online outlets or observed locally with the right equipment and conditions.
The number of craters, together with their well-preserved condition, indicates the planet underwent a global resurfacing event about 300–600 million years ago, followed by a decay in volcanism.
The Ancient Greeks thought of the two as separate stars, Phosphorus and Hesperus.
Much of the Venusian surface appears to have been shaped by volcanic activity.
This may mean that levels had been boosted several times by large volcanic eruptions.
No craters are smaller than 3&nbsp;km, because of the effects of the dense atmosphere on incoming objects.
Because its rotation is so slow, Venus is very close to spherical.
Observers have speculated it may result from electrical activity in the Venusian atmosphere, but it could be illusory, resulting from the physiological effect of observing a bright, crescent-shaped object.
Too volatile to condense on the surface, it rose in gaseous form to higher elevations, where it is cooler and could precipitate.
On Venus, a global resurfacing event may have shut down plate tectonics and led to a reduced heat flux through the crust.
The Venusian orbit is slightly inclined relative to Earth's orbit; thus, when the planet passes between Earth and the Sun, it usually does not cross the face of the Sun.
The successful Soviet Venera program came to a close in October 1983, when ''Venera 15'' and ''16'' were placed in orbit to conduct detailed mapping of 25% of Venus's terrain (from the north pole to 30°N latitude)
As the brightest point-like object in the sky, Venus is a commonly misreported "unidentified flying object".
As it does so, it changes from the "Evening Star", visible after sunset, to the "Morning Star", visible before sunrise.
Earth's oceanic crust is continually recycled by subduction at the boundaries of tectonic plates, and has an average age of about 100 million years, whereas the Venusian surface is estimated to be 300–600 million years old.
The planet presents a small "full" image when it is on the opposite side of the Sun.
The northern continent is called Ishtar Terra, after Ishtar the Babylonian goddess of love, and is about the size of Australia.
In 1995, the ''Magellan'' spacecraft imaged a highly reflective substance at the tops of the highest mountain peaks that bore a strong resemblance to terrestrial snow.
Due to its extremely hostile conditions, a surface colony on Venus is not possible with current technology.
In the 17th&nbsp;century, Giovanni Cassini reported a moon orbiting Venus, which was named Neith and numerous sightings were reported over the following , but most were determined to be stars in the vicinity.
The resonance 13:8 ratio is approximate.
Because of the decreasing eccentricity of Earth's orbit, the minimum distances will become greater over tens of thousands of years.
Aerostats (lighter-than-air balloons) could be used for initial exploration and ultimately for permanent settlements.
The mass of the atmosphere of Venus is 96.5% carbon dioxide, with most of the remaining 3.5% being nitrogen.
Incoming projectiles less than 50 metres in diameter will fragment and burn up in the atmosphere before reaching the ground.
Without plate tectonics to dissipate heat from its mantle, Venus instead undergoes a cyclical process in which mantle temperatures rise until they reach a critical level that weakens the crust.
Here, ions of hydrogen and oxygen are being created by the dissociation of neutral molecules from ultraviolet radiation.
This alone would make it difficult for a human to walk through, even if the heat, pressure, and lack of oxygen were not a problem.
It shows a larger "quarter phase" when it is at its maximum elongations from the Sun, and is at its brightest in the night sky, and presents a much larger "thin crescent" in telescopic views as it comes around to the near side between Earth and the Sun.
Instead, Venus may lose its internal heat in periodic major resurfacing events.
An alternative explanation for the lack of satellites is the effect of strong solar tides, which can destabilize large satellites orbiting the inner terrestrial planets.
When Venus lies between Earth and the Sun in inferior conjunction, it makes the closest approach to Earth of any planet at an average distance of 41&nbsp;million&nbsp;km.
Radar observations of Venus were first carried out in the 1960s, and provided the first measurements of the rotation period, which were close to the modern value.
The Venus symbol also represents femininity, and in Western alchemy stood for the metal copper.
This implies that the dynamo is missing because of a lack of convection in Venus's core.
He suggested this was due to a dense, yellow lower atmosphere with high cirrus clouds above it.
In 2007, ''Venus Express'' discovered that a huge double atmospheric vortex exists at the south pole.
This makes Venus's surface hotter than Mercury's, which has a minimum surface temperature of  and maximum surface temperature of , even though Venus is nearly twice Mercury's distance from the Sun and thus receives only 25% of Mercury's solar irradiance.
As of 2016, Japan's ''Akatsuki'' is in a highly elliptical orbit around Venus since 7 December 2015, and there are several probing proposals under study by Roscosmos, NASA, and India's ISRO.
Radar observations in the 1970s revealed details of the Venusian surface for the first time.
The surface of Venus is effectively isothermal; it retains a constant temperature not only between day and night but between the equator and the poles.
The principal difference between the two planets is the lack of evidence for plate tectonics on Venus, possibly because its crust is too strong to subduct without water to make it less viscous.
This results in reduced heat loss from the planet, preventing it from cooling and providing a likely explanation for its lack of an internally generated magnetic field.
Venus's rotation has slowed down by  per Venusian sidereal day in the  between the ''Magellan'' spacecraft and ''Venus Express'' visits.
In the second century, in his astronomical treatise ''Almagest'', Ptolemy theorized that both Mercury and Venus are located between the Sun and the Earth.
The surface of Venus is often said to resemble traditional accounts of Hell.
This temperature is higher than that used for sterilization.
Venus may have formed from the solar nebula with a different rotation period and obliquity, reaching its current state because of chaotic spin changes caused by planetary perturbations and tidal effects on its dense atmosphere, a change that would have occurred over the course of billions of years.
Polished copper has been used for mirrors from antiquity, and the symbol for Venus has sometimes been understood to stand for the mirror of the goddess.
The water has probably photodissociated, and the free hydrogen has been swept into interplanetary space by the solar wind because of the lack of a planetary magnetic field.
The weak magnetosphere around Venus means that the solar wind is interacting directly with its outer atmosphere.
Venus's equator rotates at , whereas Earth's is approximately .
The 11th century Persian astronomer Avicenna claimed to have observed the transit of Venus, which later astronomers took as confirmation of Ptolemy's theory.
NASA obtained additional data in 1978 with the Pioneer Venus project that consisted of two separate missions: Pioneer Venus Orbiter and Pioneer Venus Multiprobe.
The planet has few impact craters, demonstrating that the surface is relatively young, approximately 300–600 million years old.
Venus has some unique surface features in addition to the impact craters, mountains, and valleys commonly found on rocky planets.
U.S. President Jimmy Carter reported having seen a UFO in 1969, which later analysis suggested was probably Venus.
One Venusian year is about 1.92&nbsp;Venusian solar days.
Among the many engineering challenges are the dangerous amounts of sulfuric acid at these heights.
He correctly surmised this was due to scattering of sunlight in a dense atmosphere.
In 1967, ''Venera 4'' found Venus's magnetic field to be much weaker than that of Earth.
Although all planetary orbits are elliptical, Venus's orbit is the closest to circular, with an eccentricity of less than 0.01.
Two highland "continents" make up the rest of its surface area, one lying in the planet's northern hemisphere and the other just south of the equator.
Venus's minute axial tilt—less than 3°, compared to 23° on Earth—also minimises seasonal temperature variation.
Although rainfall drives thunderstorms on Earth, there is no rainfall on the surface of Venus (though sulfuric acid rain falls in the upper atmosphere, then evaporates around 25&nbsp;km above the surface).
Successive inferior conjunctions of Venus repeat very near a 13:8 orbital resonance (Earth orbits 8 times for every 13 orbits of Venus), shifting 144° upon sequential inferior conjunctions.
Winds at the surface are slow, moving at a few kilometres per hour, but because of the high density of the atmosphere at the surface, they exert a significant amount of force against obstructions, and transport dust and small stones across the surface.
The surface was mapped in detail by ''Magellan'' in 1990–91.
''Venus Express'' also discovered, in 2011, that an ozone layer exists high in the atmosphere of Venus.
Venus has several times as many volcanoes as Earth, and it has 167 large volcanoes that are over 100&nbsp;km across.
In 1982 the first colour images of the surface were obtained with the Soviet ''Venera 13'' and ''14'' landers.
The solar wind then supplies energy that gives some of these ions sufficient velocity to escape Venus's gravity field.
During the Soviet Venera program, the ''Venera 9'' orbiter obtained spectroscopic evidence of lightning on Venus, and the ''Venera 12'' descent probe obtained additional evidence of lightning and thunder.
Venus is one of the four terrestrial planets in the Solar System, meaning that it is a rocky body like Earth.
As it moves around its orbit, Venus displays phases like those of the Moon in a telescopic view.
This has led to proposals for "floating cities" in the Venusian atmosphere.
The diameter of Venus is 12,092&nbsp;km (only 650&nbsp;km less than Earth's) and its mass is 81.5% of Earth's.
The observations also revealed a bright region attributed to mountains, which was called Maxwell Montes.
A network of fractures and faults covers much of this area.
On the Moon, degradation is caused by subsequent impacts, whereas on Earth it is caused by wind and rain erosion.
The latest pair was June 8, 2004 and June 5–6, 2012.
The 584-day average interval between successive close approaches to Earth is almost exactly equal to 5&nbsp;Venusian solar days, but the hypothesis of a spin–orbit resonance with Earth has been discounted.
The European Space Agency's ''Venus Express'' in 2007 detected whistler waves further confirming the occurrence of lightning on Venus.
'''Venus''' is the second planet from the Sun, orbiting it every 224.7 Earth days.
As an inferior planet, it always lies within about 47° of the Sun.
Venus is shrouded by an opaque layer of highly reflective clouds of sulfuric acid, preventing its surface from being seen from space in visible light.
Another piece of evidence comes from measurements of sulfur dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, which dropped by a factor of 10 between 1978 and 1986, jumped in 2006, and again declined 10-fold.
Maxwell Montes, the highest mountain on Venus, lies on Ishtar Terra.
The astronomical symbol for Venus is the same as that used in biology for the female sex: a circle with a small cross beneath.
These spots are thought to represent lava freshly released by volcanic eruptions.
The atmospheric pressure and temperature approximately fifty kilometres above the surface are similar to those at Earth's surface.
Other possible constituents of the cloud particles are ferric sulfate, aluminium chloride and phosphoric anhydride.
In Venus's mostly carbon dioxide atmosphere, Earth's air (nitrogen and oxygen) would act as a lifting gas.
The Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa, believed to have been compiled around the mid-seventeenth century BCE, shows the Babylonians understood the two were a single object, referred to in the tablet as the "bright queen of the sky", and could support this view with detailed observations.
Another possibility is that its core has already completely solidified.
Among these are flat-topped volcanic features called "farra", which look somewhat like pancakes and range in size from 20 to 50&nbsp;km across, and from 100 to 1,000&nbsp;m high; radial, star-like fracture systems called "novae"; features with both radial and concentric fractures resembling spider webs, known as "arachnoids"; and "coronae", circular rings of fractures sometimes surrounded by a depression.
From the year 1 to 5383, there are 526&nbsp;approaches less than 40&nbsp;million&nbsp;km; then there are none for about 60,158 years.
Venus was known to ancient civilizations both as the "morning star" and as the "evening star", names that reflect the early assumption that these were two separate objects.
The rotation period of Venus may represent an equilibrium state between tidal locking to the Sun's gravitation, which tends to slow rotation, and an atmospheric tide created by solar heating of the thick Venusian atmosphere.
Then, over a period of about 100 million years, subduction occurs on an enormous scale, completely recycling the crust.
Almost a thousand impact craters on Venus are evenly distributed across its surface.
The Romans designated the morning aspect of Venus as Lucifer, literally "Light-Bringer", and the evening aspect as Vesper, both literal translations of the respective Greek names.
A dynamo requires three things: a conducting liquid, rotation, and convection.
8/13 is approximately 0.615385 while Venus orbits the Sun in 0.615187 years.
Most Venusian surface features are named after historical and mythological women.
A Venusian sidereal day thus lasts longer than a Venusian year (243 versus 224.7 Earth days).
Venus has an extremely dense atmosphere composed of 96.5% carbon dioxide, 3.5% nitrogen, and traces of other gases, most notably sulfur dioxide.
Winds on Venus move at up to 60 times the speed of its rotation, whereas Earth's fastest winds are only 10–20% rotation speed.
The state of the core is highly dependent on the concentration of sulfur, which is unknown at present.
A long-standing mystery of Venus observations is the so-called ashen light—an apparent weak illumination of its dark side, seen when the planet is in the crescent phase.
ESA concluded that mission in December 2014.
On other cratered bodies, such as Earth and the Moon, craters show a range of states of degradation.
Plans have been proposed for rovers or more complex missions, but they are hindered by Venus's hostile surface conditions.
Whereas Earth's crust is in continuous motion, Venus is thought to be unable to sustain such a process.
It is similar to Earth in size and mass, and is often described as Earth's "sister" or "twin".
In the 12th century, the Andalusian astronomer Ibn Bajjah observed "two planets as black spots on the face of the Sun", which were later identified as the transits of Venus and Mercury by the Maragha astronomer Qotb al-Din Shirazi in the 13th century.
Historically, transits of Venus were important, because they allowed astronomers to determine the size of the astronomical unit, and hence the size of the Solar System as shown by Horrocks in 1639.
Venus's surface is a dry desertscape interspersed with slab-like rocks and is periodically resurfaced by volcanism.
''Venera 4'' showed the surface temperature was hotter than ''Mariner 2'' had calculated, at almost 500&nbsp;°C, determined that the atmosphere is 95% carbon dioxide (), and discovered that Venus's atmosphere was considerably denser than ''Venera 4'' designers had anticipated.
Atmospheric erosion by the solar wind probably led to the loss of most of Venus's water during the first billion years after it formed.
This erosion process results in a steady loss of low-mass hydrogen, helium, and oxygen ions, whereas higher-mass molecules, such as carbon dioxide, are more likely to be retained.
The longitudes of physical features on Venus are expressed relative to its prime meridian.
The absence of evidence of lava flow accompanying any of the visible caldera remains an enigma.
