In 1960, the Museum of Anthropology in Xalapa was inaugurated as well as the Coatzacoalco-Salina Cruz highway.
It is divided into five zones, the Plaza del Arroyo Group, the Central Zone, the Gran Xicalcoliuhqui, Tajín Chico and the Column Complex.
Most of this is conceded by the federal government to private companies, with strategic stretches maintained directly by the government.
The chief exports of this state are coffee, fresh fruits, fertilizer, sugar, fish and crustaceans.
The Huastecs are in the far north of the Veracruz and extend into parts of Tamaulipas, Hidalgo, San Luis Potosí, Querétaro and Puebla.
Much is this crop is protected by import bans from Asia.
These included new schools for special education, distance learning and technological institutes, giving the state one of the highest number of school campuses in the country.
Other works include Poesías A Tirsa, Nox (also known as Claudia) and his last works such as Al buen cura and La mujer de nieve.
This forced royalist troops to withdraw to Xalapa.
Some of his works include Rosalba y los llaveros, Felicidad and Las visitaciones del Diablo.
It is also unknown if the Totonac built it, but since they have dominated the region for centuries, they lay claim to it.The city developed from the end of the Classic period and the beginning of the Post Classic period, between 800 and 1150 C.E.
The Veracruz city international airport was opened in the 1970s.
Later works include the three murals in the main stairwell of the School of Law at the University of Xalapa and El hombre y el conocimiento at the Universidad Veracruzana.
José María Jara is noted for his paintings of Veracruz customs, whose works include El Velorio, which was presented at the World’s Fair in Paris.
Most of the pieces come from the center of the state and from the Huasteca region.On the edge of the Tuxpan River.The city also has the Mexican-Cuban Museum.
Alberto Fuster was most active at the end of the century and is noted for bringing symbolism painting to Mexico from his stay in Europe.
Nine are urban parks, three are national parks (Pico de Orizaba, Cofre de Perote and San José de los Molinos .
Most coffee is grown in the mountain areas of Córdoba-Huatusco, Coatepec-Teocelo-Cosautlán and Misantla-Tlapacoyan-Atzalan.
The area is also the native habitat of the vanilla bean.
She was replaced by the Virgin of Candlemas, the protector of fishermen, making this celebration particularly important on the coast, especially in Tlacotalpan, where it is celebrated with much pomp.
It was abandoned in the 19th century.
The Spanish and the British withdrew after making deals with Juárez, but the French pushed on to establish the reign of Maximilian I of Mexico.
The major focal point for international business is the World Trade Center EXPOVER in Boca del Río.
Despite some efforts at conservation and reclamation, exploitation continues to put pressure on remaining wild areas.
Major peaks include Pico de Orizaba (), Cofre de Perote (), Cerro de Tecomates (), Cerro del Vigía Alta () and Cerro de 3 Tortas ().
The Centro Sur area is mostly indigenous and encompasses the area of, Huatusco, Coscomatepec, Cotaxtla, Orizaba, Amatlán, Huilango y las españolas Córdoba y Fortín de las Flores, la negra Yanga and San Lorenzo de los Negros.
Imported were livestock (sheep, cows, goats, horses), wheat and other cultivars.
Dishes here are similar to Centro Norte, but chayotes appear more often as this region is a major producer of the vegetable.
It is a small museum with one hall, with photographs and documents.
The state contains three major airports.
In 1609, a leader named Gaspar Yanga led an insurrection against the Spanish but was defeated in battle.
In 1996, he won the Premio Nacional de Literatura and in 2002 he received the Ariel de Oro for his work in cinema.
During the Mexican War of Independence, there was support for the insurgents in many parts of the state, with skirmishes erupting in various parts as early as 1811.
The Museum of Science and Technology is in Xalapa.
Two of Mexico's most polluted rivers, the Coatzacoalcos and the Río Blanco are located in the state.
Inaugurated in 1989, the center has facilities to accommodate 5,000 people in 7,000 m2, an exhibition hall of 12,000m2, a business center and parking for over 800 vehicles.
The first major civilization in territory of the current state was that of the Olmecs.
Geophysical studies, in particular gravimetry, starting in 1920 led to the discovery of the Poza Rica Field in 1932 and Moralillo Field in 1948, on the west flank of the Golden Lane in the Tamabra forereef facies.
While the last of the Spanish held on in San Juan de Ulúa, Agustín de Iturbide had been declared the emperor of Mexico in 1822.
During the Mexican–American War, the port was blockaded again, this time by the Americans.
During the Conquest, the rest of the Totonac peoples allied themselves with the Spanish, but the Huastecs, despite also being under Aztec rule, fought against them.
Covering 1.5 hectares, the main building has a square base, which is surrounded by gardens and trees.
The Centro Ceremonial Cuajilote is located on the Bobos River.
There are over 1,000 hotels in the state, over half of which are small, family-owned enterprises.
The rest is divided among nearly 11,000 smaller establishments.
At one point, they outnumbered Europeans and a significant number ran away from haciendas and plantations to form their own communities, sometimes allied with indigenous groups.
Meats in adobo sauce are common as well.
Caribbean imports such as sugar cane and pineapple were adapted as well as the peanut, brought from Africa by the Portuguese via Brazil.
Telmex controls over 75% of the telephone service in the state.
Its total area is , accounting for about 3.7% of Mexico’s total territory.
Species in danger of extinction include the jaguar, spider monkey and anteater .
Veracruz is the largest mango producer in the country, grown on 31,640 hectares producing 287,000 tons.
Some, such as Costus dirzoi, Daphnopsis megacarpa, Eugenia sotoesparzae, Inga sinacae, Miconia ibarrae, Mormodes tuxtlensis and Thelypteris rachyflexuosa, are native only to this area.
The music is generally performed by harps, violins and guitars, with an occasional wind instrument.
After the Revolution, agrarian reform, including the redistribution of land and the creation of ejidos took place here.
It stretches about  north to south, but its width varies from between  to , with an average of about  in width.
However, most of Veracruz’s best-known artists are from the 19th and 20th centuries.
The current system is the result of a number of reforms which took place in the 1980s and 1990s.
Most of the country’s mojarra, oysters and shrimp come from here.
In December, Spanish troops commanded by general Manuel Gasset occupied the port of Veracruz, without any local resistance, followed a month later by French and British forces.
The largest in terms of water discharge are the Pánuco, Tuxpan, Papaloapan, Coazocoalcos and Uxpanapa.
No major battles of the Mexican Revolution were fought in the state, though there were skirmishes and attacks on the port.
The port was bombarded, but eventually a settlement was reached.
The Los Tuxtlas area is centered on the communities of Santiago, San Andrés and Catemaco, which were the center of the Olmec civilization.
A number of these are early murals such as El comercio in the Jáuregi de Xalapa market as well as an untitled work in a private home in Córdoba which deals with the fusion of the Spanish, indigenous and African races in Mexico.
In Papantla, boards or tables are placed on rooftops, which have been adorned with flowers, plant matter and more.
The major event leading up to this war in Veracruz was the cigar-makers strike of 1905, when more than 5,000 workers of the "El Valle Nacional" company walked off the job.
The ports of Veracruz are Tuxpan, Veracruz, Coatzacoalcos, Pajaritos, Minatitlán-Nanchital, Tecolutla, Nautla, Alvarado and Tlacotalpan.
The Museum of Anthropology contains the second most important collection of Mesoamerican artifacts in the country.
Goods imported through the state reach 16 out of Mexico’s 31 states plus Mexico City.
The first three are the ports for heavy cargo ships, with Veracruz the most important of the three.
The Tres Zapotes site is located community of the same name.
The number of ethnic communities in the state has been calculated at 2,062.
African slaves were imported to Mexico through the Veracruz port.
From the 20th century on, a number of names stand out.
Transportation and commerce are important factors in the state, mostly linked to importing and exporting through its four deepwater ports.
Nicknamed “Flaco de oro” (golden skinny one), he always insisted that he was born in Tlacotalpan, Veracruz and not Mexico City as records show.
There is a small semi arid region around the city of Perote and the west of the Huasteca area.
It is believed to have originated with the Nahua, Huastec and Otomi peoples in central Mexico, and then spread throughout most of Mesoamerica.
Members of the unicameral legislature, the State Congress, are elected to three-year terms.
Veracruz is the largest producer of rice with 24,000 hectares producing 120,000 tons.
These companies included Huasteca Company Petroleum and El Aguila along with American and English firms.
Some of these include the Aquarium, the Museum of the City (Museo de la Ciudad), The Agustín Laura Museum, the Santiago Fortress (Baluarte de Santiago) the "Las Atarazanas" Museum and the San Juan de Ulúa Fort.
“El Tajín” in Tihuatlán serving Poza Rica and “Canticas” in Minatitlán provide national service.
The patron saint of Veracruz is Rafael Guízar y Valencia.
El Pital is a site in the municipality of Martínez de la Torre.
Wildlife includes 102 mammal species, 49 amphibian, 109 reptilian, 561 bird species and more.
Almost all of the four and five-star establishments are in metropolitan area of Veracruz.
The overwhelming majority of people in the state are Catholic, however, there is a significant Protestant minority and a number who profess the Jewish faith.
Most of the proponents of this were born in Veracruz itself and include José Justo Montiel (1824–1899), Gonzalo Argüelles Bringas (1877–1942), Eugenio Landecio (teacher of José María Velasco), Natal Pesado and Ignacio Rosas.
The state has about one-fourth of Mexico’s petroleum reserves and ranks third in petroleum production.
This would make the port more important than it had been.
Another important native contribution is seafood, which is featured in many dishes such as, arroz a la tumbada and caldo de mariscos (seafood soup).
Programs in the past that might move economic activity from the informal to the formal sector have not succeeded suggesting public finance issues such as tax evasion will continue to plague the state with
Leather items include shoes, jackets, bags, wallets, belts and boots and are usually made in the La Huasteca region, Teocolo, Citlaltépetl and Naolinco.
These generally include native dances and foods based on corn.
Miguel Mata Reyes is best known for his contributions to the design of the Palacio de Bellas Artes as well a portrait of Antonio López de Santa Anna.
Eventually, this city along with the port were cut off from Mexico City.
According to myth, the ritual was created to ask the gods to end a severe drought.
Vanilla beans are native to the state, which is the primary producer for Mexico.
The largest of these is Bruno Pagliai, which covers 300.8 hectares.
The Panuco, Tuxpan, Papaloapan and Coatzacoalcos are navigable.
Veracruz shares common borders with the states of Tamaulipas (to the north), Oaxaca and Chiapas (to the south), Tabasco (to the southeast), and Puebla, Hidalgo, and San Luis Potosí (on the west).
Los Idolos is a site in the municipal city of Misantla, and was an important ceremonial site for the Totonacapan region.
In 1908, the infamous Dos Bocas oil fire occurred after the San Diego de la Mar No.
The state contains  of railway.
In 1998, about 10% of the population spoke an indigenous language; however, this does not take into account all indigenous peoples.
According to many Journalists' Organisations, Veracruz is one of the most dangerous places for journalists especially after governor Javier Duarte came to power in December 2010.
It was built beginning in 1959 over six hectares.
Using relatively recent night light data and electricity consumption in comparison with Gross County Product, the informal sector of the local economy in Veracruz state is shown to have grown during the period of the Fox Administration though the regional government remained PRI.
One example is Juan Hernández Ramírez’s writing of poetry in the Nahuatl spoken in the La Huasteca area of Veracruz.
These ceremonial sites were the most complex of that early time period.
A major conspiracy against the colonial government was discovered in the port in 1812, with rebels taking Ayahualulco and Ixhuacán during the same year.
The state capital of Xalapa is also home to a number of important museums.
The complex is divided into to various halls and galleries by theme, focusing on the Olmec and Totonac cultures.
One important name from this generation is Emilio Carballido who wrote about 100 plays as well as scripts for radio and television.
This state is located in Eastern Mexico.
The state of Veracruz, especially its port, has been a crossroads for various cultures since the very early colonial period.
In Tuxpan is the Regional Museum of Anthropology with more than 400 pieces from pre-Hispanic groups in the region, displayed in four halls.
Palm fronds are woven into fans, shoes and baskets in jalcomulco, Ozulama and Tlalixcoyan.
The site has a large number of Mesoamerican ball game courts, one with details reliefs showing the beheading of a ballplayer and his role in the afterlife.
Day of the Dead is celebrated in almost all of Mexico from 31 Oct to 2 November but there are local twists in the state.
The state is divided into 212 local governmental units called municipios (municipalities), each of which is headquartered in a prominent city, town, or village.
Like other groups, many of African descent would intermarry with other groups, with the category of “mulatto” existing in the old colonial caste system for those with African blood.
Five companies provide cable and satellite television.
The Christian celebration of Candlemas is fused with traditions associated with Chalchiuhtlicua, the goddess of water, rivers, lakes and ocean.
It consists of a mound with a pyramid base and stairs on the east side.The site’s culture is considered to be a link between the coastal and highland cultures of the region.
There are 202 radio stations (57 AM, 35 FM).
The Archeological Museum of Córdoba is in the city of the same name with three exhibition halls containing artifacts from the Maya, Olmec, Toltec and Huastec cultures.
The oil companies in the north of the state were nationalized and consolidated into PEMEX in the 1930s by Lázaro Cárdenas.
Minatitlán's celebration draws people from the nearby states of Oaxaca and Tabasco.
Hot and humid and hot and semi-humid climates dominate from sea level to about  above sea level.
The port of Veracruz has brought cargo, sailors, seamen, and slaves from various parts of the world, especially from the Caribbean and Europe.
Veracruz was named after the city of Veracruz (From Latin ''Vera Crux'', "True Cross"), which was originally called the '''Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz'''.
Another is Los Guaguas in which the participants pay homage to the sun, and Los Santiagos, which is related to the veneration of Saint James, patron saint of Hernán Cortés.
Today, the vast majority of Afro Mexicans in Veracruz and other parts of the country are spread out and intermixed with the rest of the population.
In Totonacalpan, men are still often seen in white shirts and pants with a bag to hold personal items.
To ensure the port’s monopoly, it came to have control over almost all of New Spain's Gulf coastline.
It has the most favored position on Mexico’s Gulf coast and is extensively used for exports to the United States, Latin America and Europe.
Port traffic in Veracruz account for 10% of all commercial traffic in the country, 23.4% of the port traffic of Mexico and 21% of all port traffic in the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean.
52.5% of agricultural land is used for the growing of crops or used as pasture and 43.1% is forest or rainforest.
There is about 1 million hectares of cultivable land, half of which is in private hands and 43% is ejido or communal land.
Other prominent names responsible for many projects in the state include Luis González Aparicio, Bernal Lascuraín Rangel and Luis Manuel Tello Deschamps.
In the first half of the seventeenth century, cities such as Córdoba, Orizaba, and Xalapa were formed or expanded to protect the trade route between Mexico City and the port of Veracruz.
His works include El progreso, Safo en el templo de Delfos and Nativa con loro.
Doheny's Cerro Azul No.
The assumption that the informal economy of Mexico is a constant 30% of total economic activity is not supported at the local level.
“Heriberto Jara Corona” in the city of Veracruz provides national and international service.
Clay sculptures with smiling faces are indicative of this culture.
Despite being the first Spanish settlement, the city of Veracruz lost most its older structures to the various invasions it has suffered.
His works have been done in plaster, bronze, terracotta and green onyx and include monumental works which can be found in the cities of Xalapa, Puebla, Pachuca and Mexico City.
Son huasteco (also called son huapango) is a variety of son played in the north of the state mostly among the Totonacs.
The state has indigenous cultural influences mixed with those from Europe, Africa and the Afro-Caribbean.
It consists of a large plaza 400 meters long lined with structures.
The state is well known in the country for its music and dance.
There are 166 institutes at this level, with about 68,000 students studying 221 different majors.
The others are small ports for small ships, fishing boats and tourism.
In the center of the site, there is a large plaza surrounded by temples and the palace of the Totonac chief.
The port of Veracruz alone handles over 12 million tons of freight per year.
To the north of the port city is the Sierra or Totonacalpan area of the state, home to the Totonac people.
This dress dates back to the early colonial period and had not changed much since then.
Major valleys include the Acultzingo, Córdoba, Maltrata, Orizaba and San Andrés.
In the center of the plaza there are three shrines, one of which contains phallic figures.
However, this was short-lived and the French were expelled through Veracruz in 1866/67.
This tropical forest is situated in the northeastern coastal plain and extends into southern Tamaulipas state, on the east side of the Sierra Madre Oriental.
The strike went on for months until the strikers won.
Most (90%) of the state’s communities, outside of municipal seats have fewer than 500 people and contain only 21% of the total population.
Overwork and European diseases decimated the native population of the province, prompting the importation of African slaves during the colonial period, starting in the 16th century.
His creative works include some of the first Romantic pieces produced in Mexico such as Oda a Víctor Hugo, Ojos verdes, Gloria and Voces interiores.
The newest of these are the municipalities of San Rafael and Santiago Sochiapan which were created in 2003.
Teodoro Cano García is one of Mexico’s most famous muralists of the late 20th century, famous for the promotion of the Totonac culture of his hometown of Papantla.
are part of the federal highway system.
The fandango is a dance brought over from Spanish.
Outside of the port, in other areas of the province, the economy was based on agriculture, livestock, and commerce.
Wood furniture and other items are made by the Huasteca people, mostly using cedar and palm trees.
Crown efforts against these groups began in earnest in the late sixteenth century, but a major rebellion broke out in 1606 in the areas of Villa Rica, Nueva Veracruz, Antón Lizardo, and the Rio Blanco area.
According to tradition, the origin of this dance lies in a story about a boy who was bitten by a snake and the rituals his family held to heal him.
In 1746, the state was divided into the civil jurisdictions of Pánuco, Tampico, Huayacocotla, Huauchinango, Papantla, Misantla, Xalapa, Jalacingo, Veracruz, Córdoba, Orizaba, Cosamaloapan, Tuxtla, and Cotaxtla.
One area known for its work is Papantla which also includes life sized representations of folk dancers from the area along with more mundane items of glazed and unglazed pottery.
Another is urbanization, with about one third of the state’s population living in urban centers, especially Veracruz, Xalapa, Coatzacoalcos, Minatitlán and Papantla.
Corn husks are used to make decorative figures, often religious,  in Nautla and Naranjos de Amatlán.
Much of the reason for this is that the north of Veracruz is rugged with thick vegetation and relatively little of the resources the Spanish were looking for.
Mexico later responded by severing diplomatic relations.
The Centro Norte is centered on Xalapa.
Common dishes here include Chilehuates, similar to a tamale, stuffed chile peppers, and enchiladas.
This city’s version of the event begins with the “burning of bad humor,” which is represented in effigy.
Much of the pollution comes from industrial sources, but the discharge of sewerage and uncontrolled garbage disposal are also major contributors.
The state has very few sewage treatment plants, with only 10% of sewage being treated before discharge.
The census of 2005 counted 605,135 as speaking an indigenous language.
These institutions serve about 135,000 students accounting for about 19% of the college-aged population (19- to 24-year-olds), slightly below the national average of 24%.
Coffee is grown on 152,993 hectares producing 400,575 tons.
The largest and most important site is El Tajín, located near the city of Papantla.
The state is noted for its quantity and variety of festivals.
Much of it now is on display at the Museo de Arte de Veracruz in Orizaba.
The Spanish imported between 500,000–1,000,000 West African slaves into Mexico between 1535 and 1767 (miscegenation between indigenous and African population began almost immediately).
It is cut into the mountain as a series of terraces.
These municipalities are grouped into regions called Huasteca Alta (with ten municipalities), Huasteca Baja (with 23 municipalities), Totonac (with 15 municipalities), Nautla (with 11 municipalities), Capital (with 33 municipalities), Sotavento (with 12 municipalities), De las Montañas (with 57 municipalities), Papaloapan (with 22 municipalities), De los Tuxtlas (with four municipalities) and Olmeca (with 25 municipalities) .
Efforts to defend the country were coordinated from Xalapa.
Temperatures here vary from 12 to 18C with precipitation varying more, between  and .
The port city of Veracruz, and the fort of San Juan de Ulúa, where Cortés landed three hundred years earlier, was where the Spanish made their last stand in 1824.
