It is well known for its tight racing and has become well known in short track stock car racing.
The use tax applies to items taxable under the sales tax.
There are also significant tax advantages to be gained from the formation and operation of captive insurance companies.
While the Whig Party shriveled, and the Republican Party emerged, Vermont supported Republican candidates.
As of 2015, Vermont continued to be the leading producer of maple syrup in the U.S.
In 2007 Vermont was the 14th highest out of 50 states and the District of Columbia for state and local taxation, with a per capita load of $3,681.
As of 2014, 51.3% of Vermont's population was born in the state (compared with 58.7% for the United States).
This is similar to average car ownership nationwide.
In 2009 the state received one-third (400 MW) of its power from Hydro-Québec and one-third from Vermont Yankee.
Rules which eliminate smaller parties from the ballot in most states do not exist in Vermont.
(Kerry, from neighboring Massachusetts, also became the first Northern Democrat ever to carry Vermont; Johnson was from Texas, Clinton from Arkansas and Al Gore, triumphant in the Green Mountain State in 2000, from Tennessee.)
While foreclosure rose significantly in 2007, the state stood 50th—the most favorable—in ratio of foreclosure filings to households.
*Real Estate, rental, and leasing –  (11.6%)
In 2007 Vermont was ranked the third safest state for highway fatalities.
Vermont continued to govern itself as a sovereign entity based in the eastern town of Windsor for 14 years.
In 1964 the U.S. Supreme Court decision in ''Reynolds v. Sims'' required "one-man, one-vote" redistricting in all states; this resulted in major changes in Vermont.
Vermonters of English descent (sometimes known as the "Yankee" Vermonters) overwhelmingly vote Republican.
Because of the successful attempts to dilute what is perceived as the original intent of Act 250, and other development pressures, Vermont has been designated one of America's most "endangered historic places" by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Tourism supported over 26,000 jobs, 7.2% of total employment.
The governor described it as one of the worst natural disasters of the 20th and 21st centuries, second only to the flood of 1927.
Twelve of the state's 14 counties stood in the top 20 percent.
The USDA Plant hardiness zones for the state range between zone 3b (no colder than ) in the Northeast Kingdom and northern part of the state and zone 5b (no colder than ) in the southern part of the state.
The time to tap these trees has shrunk to one week in some years.
Other racing circuits include the USAC sanctioned Bear Ridge Speedway, and the NASCAR sanctioned Devil's Bowl Speedway.
A modern high unemployment rate of nine percent was reached in June 1976.
The combined figures for overweight and obese adults rose from 40.7% in 1990 to 58.4% in 2010.
The first three scores were not considered statistically different from average.
The average dairy farm produced  pounds of milk annually in 2008.
The origin of the name "Vermont" is uncertain, but likely comes from the French ''les Verts Monts'', meaning "the Green Mountains".
Ultimately, those settlers prevailed in creating an independent state, the Vermont Republic.
Represented are the following networks and number of high-power transmitters, ABC (1), CBS (1), Fox (1), NBC (2), PBS (4), and RTV (1).
The state stood first in New England.
They generate 143 MW, about 12 percent of the state's total requirement.
Other companies had five or fewer stations.
It is the only state that does not have any buildings taller than .
The state is an alcoholic beverage control state.
In 2008 the state had an estimated 7.6% with no medical insurance, down from 9.8% in 2005.
The highways cost $28,669 per  to maintain, the 17th highest in the states.
In 2013 Vermont became the 17th state to decriminalize marijuana.
Aside from the Thirteen Colonies, Vermont is one of only four U.S. states that were previously sovereign states (along with California, Hawaii, and Texas).
It is one of four states in the US to have done this, along with Hawaii, Maine, and Alaska.
Vermont experts estimate that the state has the capacity to ultimately generate from 134 to 175 megawatts of electricity from hydro power.
The state had  worth of commerce with Québec.
Climate change appears to be affecting the maple sugar industry.
As of 2012, Vermont was one of only two states in the U.S. with fewer people than the District of Columbia—the other was Wyoming.
Vermonters were the second most active citizens of state with 55.9% meeting the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's physical activity requirements.
Rates vary from .97 percent on homesteaded property in Ferdinand, Essex County, to 2.72 percent on nonresidents' property in Barre City.
Much of this immigration included the arrival of more liberal political influences of the urban areas of New York and the rest of New England in Vermont.
It was to protect the nearby settlements of Dummerston and Brattleboro.
This was the second highest percentage nationwide, after Maine.
There was a $250 deductible.
The territory of Vermont was divided nearly in half in a jagged line running from Fort William Henry in Lake George diagonally north-eastward to Lake Memphremagog.
In 2011 Vermont was fifth among the states with the greatest backlog of foreclosures needing court processing, taking an estimated 18 years.
This was the fifth highest percentage in the nation.
This contributed $1.7 billion to the state's economy.
In 1775, after the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War, the Green Mountain Boys assisted a force from Connecticut, led by Benedict Arnold, in capturing the British fort at Ticonderoga.
''cows'' sounds like "cayows," ''fight'' like "foight," ''calf'' like "caaf," ''there'' like "thair," ''hand'' like "hay-nd," and ''back'' like "bah-k").
In 2000 the state implemented the Vermont Child Health Improvement Program to improve preventive services and management of chronic conditions.
Since 1992, Vermont has voted for the Democrat in every Presidential election.
Sometime between 1500 and 1600 CE, the Iroquois, based in present-day New York, drove many of the smaller native tribes out of Vermont, later using the area as a hunting ground and warring with the remaining Abenaki.
Subsequently, about  years ago, the second mountain building period created Green Mountain peaks that were  tall, three to four times their current height and comparable to the Himalayas.
In 2010 the state had 900 such companies.
Barre is the location of the Rock of Ages quarry, the largest dimension stone granite quarry in the United States.
However, about 60 percent of Vermont homes were heated with oil in 2008.
The capital is Montpelier, the least populous state capital in the U.S.
This tension is expressed in the terms, "Woodchuck", being applied to those established in the state, and "Flatlander", applied to the newcomers.
The state scored well in cessation of smoking, obesity, fewer occupational fatalities, prevalence of health insurance, and low infant mortality.
The independent state of Vermont issued its own coinage from 1785 to 1788 and operated a statewide postal service.
The New England cottontail disappeared from the state in the early 1970s, out-competed by the eastern cottontail rabbit, imported in the 1800s for hunting, and which is better able to detect predators.
The western border with New York and the area around Lake Champlain lies within the Eastern Great Lakes lowland forests.
Property taxes are based on appraisal of the fair market value of real property.
Some of the largest ski areas in New England are located in Vermont.
The state is represented by an at-large member of the House, Democrat Peter Welch, who succeeded Sanders in 2007.
Because the state of New York continued to assert a disputed claim that Vermont was a part of New York, Vermont could not be admitted to the Union under Article IV, Section 3 of the Constitution until the legislature of New York consented.
The tree may be replaced by the more aggressive Norway maples, in effect forcing the sugar maples to "migrate" north to Canada.
In 2009, adult day care services cost more in Vermont than any other state – $150 daily.
The state's geographic center is approximately three miles (5&nbsp;km) east of Roxbury, in Washington County.
Abolitionist Thaddeus Stevens was born in Vermont and later represented a district in Pennsylvania in Congress.
The state is part of the Northeast Power Coordinating Council for the distribution of electricity.
Vermont approved women's suffrage decades before it became part of the national constitution.
In winter, until typical El Niño conditions, Vermont's winters are "too cold to snow"; the air is too cold to contain sufficient moisture to prompt precipitation.
The governorship and the General Assembly serve two-year terms including the governor and 30 senators.
In 2009 Vermont was ranked second in the nation for safety.
In 2014 Vermont became the first state to call for a constitutional convention to overturn the Supreme Court's decision in ''Citizens United v. FEC''.
Slavery was fully banned by state law on November 25, 1858, less than three years before the American Civil War.
With the outbreak of the French and Indian War in 1754, the North American front of the Seven Years' War between the French and British, the French began construction of Fort Carillon at present-day Ticonderoga, New York in 1755.
More than 180 towns experienced a decrease, which hadn't happened since the mid-19th century.
It was one of the first tropical reefs.
Invasive wild honeysuckle has been deemed a threat to the state's forests, native species of plants, and wildlife.
This dropped in 2008 to $17.
Skiers and snowboarders visit Burke Mountain Ski Area, Bolton Valley, Smugglers' Notch, Killington Ski Resort, Mad River Glen, Stowe Mountain Resort, Sugarbush, Stratton, Jay Peak, Okemo, Suicide Six, Mount Snow, Bromley, and Magic Mountain Ski Area.
Real wages were $33,385 in 2006 constant dollars and remained there in 2010; the nation, $36,871.
The Vermont Ice Storm, a semi-professional football team, is based in South Hero.
The goal is to keep the numbers between 4,500 and 6,000.
The ''Ethan Allen Express'' serves Castleton and Rutland, while the ''Vermonter'' serves St. Albans, Essex Junction, Waterbury, Montpelier, Randolph, White River Junction, Windsor, Bellows Falls, and Brattleboro.
This was 59% of the average senior's income.
There were 4,125,082 visits in 2009–2010, a rise from recent years.
Over 85 percent of that area is non-industrial, private forestland owned by individuals or families.
The dairy barn remains an iconic image of Vermont, but the 87 percent decrease in active dairy farms between 1947 and 2003 means that preservation of the dairy barns has increasingly become dependent upon a commitment to maintaining a legacy rather than basic need in the agricultural economy.
While ranking sixth from best for adults in obesity in 2009, the state still had 22% obese with a rate of 27% for children 10–17.
The town of Bennington also has the weekday-operating Albany-Bennington Shuttle, an intercity bus operated by Yankee Trails World Travel.
The granite industry attracted numerous skilled stonecutters in the late 19th century from Italy, Scotland, and Ireland.
Ultimately, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and New York all claimed this frontier area.
Vermont Translines, an intercity bus company started by Premier Coach in 2013 partnering with Greyhound and starting service on June 9, 2014, serves Milton, Colchester, Burlington, Middlebury, Brandon, Rutland, Wallingford, Manchester and Bennington on its Burlington to Albany line, and Rutland, Killington, Bridgewater, Woodstock, Queechee and White River Junction along the US Route 4 corridor.
The national average was eight years.
In 2008 about 100,000 Vermonters got their health care through the federal government, Medicare, Tri-Care and the Veteran's Administration.
*Transportation and warehousing –  (2.1%)
In 2000–01 there were 4,579,719 skier and snowboarder visits to the state.
This was the first written constitution in North America to ban adult slavery, saying male slaves become free at the age of 21 and females at 18.
Most states have a higher bias.
This species began reviving in 1998.
On July 4, they completed the drafting of the Constitution of Vermont at the Windsor Tavern, and adopted it on July 8.
Colonial settlement was limited by the Crown to lands east of the Appalachians, in order to try to end encroachment on Native American lands.
All towns in Chittenden increased with the exception of Burlington.
*Management of companies – $35 million (.2%)
Vermont is one of two states with no coal-fired power plants.
In ''Baker v. Vermont'' (1999), the Vermont Supreme Court ruled that, under the Constitution of Vermont, the state must either allow same-sex marriage or provide a separate but equal status for them.
Vermonters have been known for their political independence.
Historically, Vermont was considered one of the most reliably Republican states in the country in terms of national elections.
After narrowly supporting George H. W. Bush in 1988, it gave Democrat Bill Clinton a 16-point margin in 1992—the first time the state had gone Democratic since 1964.
Those characteristics in eastern Vermont appear to have been inherited from West Country and Scots-Irish ancestors.
According to the Insurance Information Institute, Vermont in 2009 was the world's third-largest domicile for captive insurance companies, following Bermuda and the Cayman Islands.
The national average was 26.4%.
He developed as a national leader and later promoted Radical Republican goals after the American Civil War.
In 2012 there were 605,000 motor vehicles registered, nearly one car for every person in the state.
Founded in 1777 during the Revolutionary War, the republic lasted for fourteen years.
Thomas Young introduced it in 1777.
In 2013 73.054 million cubic feet of wood was harvested in Vermont A large amount of Vermont forest products are exports with 21.504 million feet being shipped overseas plus an additional 16.384 million cubic feet to Canada.
The Green Mountain range forms a north–south spine running most of the length of the state, slightly west of its center.
According to the 2000 Census, almost 15 percent of all housing units in Vermont were vacant and classified "for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use".
Total monthly premiums ranged from $60 to $393 for an individual.
Vermont does not assess tax on personal property.
It has a Köppen climate classification of Dfb, similar to Minsk, Stockholm, and Fargo.
They were named the Vermont Expos before 2006.
Areas in Vermont administered by the National Park Service include the Marsh-Billings-Rockefeller National Historical Park (in Woodstock) and the Appalachian National Scenic Trail.
In 1759 a combined force of 12,000 British regular and provincial troops under Sir Jeffery Amherst captured Carillon, after which the French abandoned Fort St. Frédéric.
The central and southern Green Mountain range include the oldest rocks in Vermont, formed about one billion years ago during the first mountain building period (or orogeny).
It provided for universal adult male suffrage, and required support of public schools.
As a result of tectonic formation, Vermont east of the Green Mountains tends to be formed from rocks produced in the Silurian and Devonian periods.
*Non-durable goods manufacturing –  (3.1%)
This rose to  in 2009.
In winter, Nordic and backcountry skiers visit to travel the length of the state on the Catamount Trail.
In 1995 the state banned the spreading of manure from December 15 to April 1, to prevent runoff and protect the water.
Many migrated to Barre, where the men worked as stonecutters of granite, for which there was a national market.
The state and non-profit organizations are actively encouraging regrowth and careful forest management.
The state has fifteen online radio stations.
There are three types of incorporated municipalities in Vermont: towns, cities, and villages.
Vermont was named the nation's smartest state in 2005 and 2006.
Vermont has voted Democratic in every presidential election since.
Although the Continental forces were technically defeated, the British forces were damaged to the point that they did not pursue the Americans (retreating from Fort Ticonderoga) any further.
Some NASCAR Cup drivers have come to Vermont circuits to compete against local weekly drivers such as Tony Stewart, Clint Bowyer, Kevin Harvick, Kenny Wallace, and Joe Nemechek.
In addition, it has 17 low-power television broadcast stations, which in several cases are satellites of the high-power stations.
For honey bees, colony collapse disorder has affected bee population in the state, as elsewhere.
This was the first seismic event noted in Vermont.
The state has suffered some natural disasters in the 20th and 21st centuries related to hurricanes, extensive rain and flooding.
The geological pressures that created those peaks remain evident as the Champlain Thrust, running north–south to the west of the mountains (now the eastern shore of Lake Champlain).
The decline of farms has resulted in a regrowth of Vermont's forests due to ecological succession.
It was projected that all but 29 addresses would have fixed broadband available by the end of 2013.
While still an independent republic, Vermont was the first of the future United States to abolish adult slavery.
In 2008 an economist said that the state had "a really stagnant economy, which is what we are forecasting for Vermont for the next 30 years."
Tests for eastern equine encephalitis virus antibodies were positive in moose or deer in each of Vermont's counties.
According to the United States Census Bureau, as of April 15, 2015, Vermont has an estimated population of 626,042, which was an increase of 297, since April 15, 2010.
The Vermont Barn Census, organized by a collaboration of educational and nonprofit state and local historic preservation programs, has developed educational and administrative systems for recording the number, condition, and features of barns throughout Vermont.
Greyhound Lines services a number of small towns.
Before 1992, Vermont voted for the Republican in every single Presidential election with the exception of 1964.
The Vermont-based House of LeMay performs several shows a year, hosts the annual "Winter is a Drag Ball," and performs for fundraisers.
Vermont's history of independent political thought has led to movements for the establishment of the Second Vermont Republic and other plans advocating secession.
As of September 2010 the unemployment rate was 5.8 percent.
All county services are directly funded by the state of Vermont.
A controversy dating from 1999 has been over the adoption of civil unions, an institution which grants same-sex couples nearly all the rights and privileges of marriage at the state, but not federal, level.
Winters are colder at higher elevations.
Vermont became the first to enter the Union after the original 13 states.
Vermont was ranked as the twelfth happiest state in the country.
In the southwest portion of the state are the Taconic Mountains; the Granitic Mountains are in the northeast.
In 1791 Vermont joined the U.S. as the 14th state—the first to be admitted to the union after the original 13 colonies.
Minor parties and Independents flourish.
In 2011 the state government earned $274 million in taxes and fees from tourism.
It was in effect from 1777 to 1786.
About 20% of Vermonters receive health care outside of Vermont; 20% of the care provided within the state is to non-Vermonters.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Republican presidential candidates frequently won the state with over 70 percent of the vote.
Property taxes are levied by municipalities for the support of education and municipal services.
2,800 people were counted as homeless in January 2010, 22 percent more than in 2008.
The state suffered severe flooding in late August 2011 caused by Tropical Storm Irene.
Linguists have identified speech patterns found among Vermonters as belonging to Western New England English, a dialect of New England English, which features of full pronunciation of all ''r'' sounds, pronouncing ''horse'' and ''hoarse'' the same, and pronouncing vowels in ''father'' and ''bother'' the same, none of which are features traditionally shared in neighboring Eastern New England English.
Employment grew 7.5 percent from 2000 to 2006.
In 2010 all of Vermont's hospitals billed patients $3.76 billion, and collected $2 billion.
The average effective spending per pupil in Vermont was $11,548 in 2008.
France ceded the territory to Great Britain after being defeated in 1763 in the Seven Years' War.
Statistics for black students were not reliable because of their small representation in the testing.
Vermont hosts 93 radio broadcast stations.
In the Northeast Kingdom, the Bread and Puppet Theatre holds weekly shows in Glover in a natural outdoor amphitheater.
In 2011 Vermont led the nation in the rate of young people who had consumed alcohol in the past month; one-third of people aged 11 through 20.
There are fifteen US federal border crossings between Vermont and Canada.
Much of the state, in particular the Green Mountains, is covered by the conifers and northern hardwoods of the New England-Acadian forests.
The state had  in 2007.
From 1856 to 1988, Vermont voted Democratic only once, in Lyndon B. Johnson's landslide victory of 1964 against Barry M. Goldwater.
Resorts, hotels, restaurants, and shops, designed to attract tourists, employ people year-round.
According to the 2010 U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis report, Vermont's gross state product (GSP) was .
Vermont's share is about 4.5 percent.
Agriculture contributed 2.2% of the state's domestic product in 2000.
