This becomes more difficult as the DUT gets larger and as the test frequency increases.
If the damping is increased past critical damping, the system is ''overdamped''.
The damper, instead of storing energy, dissipates energy.
A simple example using the 2 DOF model can help illustrate the concepts.
Vibrational motion could be understood in terms of conservation of energy.
MIL-STD-810G, released in late 2008, Test Method 527, calls for multiple exciter testing.
Generally, only the first few modes are important for practical applications.
where   and  are symmetric matrices referred respectively as the mass, damping, and stiffness matrices.
Since the system is a 2 DOF system, there are two modes with their respective natural frequencies and shapes.
In a previous section only a simple harmonic force was applied to the model, but this can be extended considerably using two powerful mathematical tools.
The mass&ndash;spring&ndash;damper model is an example of a simple harmonic oscillator.
This example highlights that the resulting vibration is dependent on both the forcing function and the system that the force is applied to.
* whatever the damping is, the vibration is 90 degrees out of phase with the forcing frequency when the frequency ratio r =1, which is very helpful when it comes to determining the natural frequency of the system.
This damping ratio is just a ratio of the actual damping over the amount of damping required to reach critical damping.
The exponential term defines how quickly the system “damps” down – the larger the damping ratio, the quicker it damps to zero.
For linear systems, the frequency of the steady-state vibration response resulting from the application of a periodic, harmonic input is equal to the frequency of the applied force or motion, with the response magnitude being dependent on the actual mechanical system.
These properties can be used to greatly simplify the solution of multi-degree of freedom models.
The two mode shapes for the respective natural frequencies are given as:
The next component is a 1&nbsp;Hz sine wave with an amplitude of 0.64.
The mode shapes of a cantilevered I-beam
''' Free vibration''' occurs when a mechanical system is set in motion with an initial input and allowed to vibrate freely.
The solution of an eigenvalue problem can be quite cumbersome (especially for problems with many degrees of freedom), but fortunately most math analysis programs have eigenvalue routines.
Every vibrating system has one or more natural frequencies that it vibrates at once disturbed.
If no damping exists, there is nothing to dissipate the energy and, theoretically, the motion will continue to grow into infinity.
In the above example the spring has been extended by a value of x and therefore some potential energy () is stored in the spring.
In more complex systems, the system must be discretized into more masses that move in more than one direction, adding degrees of freedom.
Most commonly VA is used to detect faults in rotating equipment (Fans, Motors, Pumps, and Gearboxes etc.)
impulses) and random functions.
Since  cannot equal zero the equation reduces to the following.
Written in this form it can be seen that the vibration at each of the degrees of freedom is just a linear sum of the mode shapes.
As the amplitude plot shows, adding damping can significantly reduce the magnitude of the vibration.
An example of animated mode shapes is shown in the figure below for a cantilevered -beam.
The vibrations gradually cease and the system rests in its equilibrium position.
When there are many degrees of freedom, one method of visualizing the mode shapes is by animating them.
In many cases, however, vibration is undesirable, wasting energy and creating unwanted sound.
If resonance occurs in a mechanical system it can be very harmful – leading to eventual failure of the system.
*With little or no damping, the vibration is in phase with the forcing frequency when the frequency ratio ''r''&nbsp;&nbsp;1
It can be shown that the eigenvectors have the following properties:
Also, the magnitude can be reduced if the natural frequency can be shifted away from the forcing frequency by changing the stiffness or mass of the system.
Note that when performing a numerical approximation of any mathematical model, convergence of the parameters of interest must be ascertained.
Thus oscillation of the spring amounts to the transferring back and forth of the kinetic energy into potential energy.
In rotor bearing systems any rotational speed that excites a resonant frequency is referred to as a critical speed.
The word comes from Latin ''vibrationem'' ("shaking, brandishing").
The mass&ndash;spring&ndash;damper model described above is called a single degree of freedom (SDOF) model since the mass is assumed to only move up and down.
The proportionality constant, k, is the stiffness of the spring and has units of force/distance (e.g.
This is done by performing an inverse Fourier Transform that converts frequency domain data to time domain.
The frequency response of the mass&ndash;spring&ndash;damper therefore outputs a high 7&nbsp;Hz vibration even though the input force had a relatively low 7&nbsp;Hz harmonic.
* whatever the damping is, when r  ≫1, the vibration is 180 degrees out of phase with the forcing frequency
In a lightly damped system when the forcing frequency nears the natural frequency () the amplitude of the vibration can get extremely high.
The formulas for these values can be found in the references.
A random (all frequencies at once) test is generally considered to more closely replicate a real world environment, such as road inputs to a moving automobile.
For example, metal structures (e.g., airplane fuselages, engine crankshafts) have damping factors less than 0.05, while automotive suspensions are in the range of 0.2&ndash;0.3.
The formula for the damping ratio () of the mass spring damper model is:
In our case the first mode shape vector is saying that the masses are moving together in phase since they have the same value and sign.
This phenomenon is called '''resonance''' (subsequently the natural frequency of a system is often referred to as the resonant frequency).
The frequency response function (FRF) does not necessarily have to be calculated from the knowledge of the mass, damping, and stiffness of the system—but can be measured experimentally.
The mode shape vectors are not the absolute motion, but just describe relative motion of the degrees of freedom.
The force generated by the mass is proportional to the acceleration of the mass as given by Newton’s second law of motion :
There also exist other kinds of vibrational modes in which the beam gets compressed/stretched out in the height, width and length directions respectively.
Consequently, one of the major reasons for vibration analysis is to predict when this type of resonance may occur and then to determine what steps to take to prevent it from occurring.
The sum of the forces on the mass then generates this ordinary differential equation:
To characterize the amount of damping in a system a ratio called the damping ratio (also known as damping factor and % critical damping) is used.
It is often desirable to achieve anti-resonance to keep a system from becoming too noisy, or to reduce strain on certain parts due to vibration modes caused by specific vibration frequencies .
and  are diagonal matrices that contain the modal mass and stiffness values for each one of the modes.
'''Damped vibration:''' When the energy of a vibrating system is gradually dissipated by friction and other resistances, the vibrations are said to be damped.
VA is a key component of a Condition Monitoring (CM) program, and is often referred to as Predictive Maintenance (PdM).
Taking advantage of the orthogonality properties by premultiplying this equation by
Therefore, this relatively simple model that has over 100 degrees of freedom and hence as many natural frequencies and mode shapes, provides a good approximation for the first natural frequencies and modes.
'''Forced  vibration''' is when a time-varying disturbance (load, displacement or velocity) is applied to a mechanical system.
The mass and stiffness matrix for this problem are then:
The Fourier transform of the square wave generates a frequency spectrum that presents the magnitude of the harmonics that make up the square wave (the phase is also generated, but is typically of less concern and therefore is often not plotted).
In practice, this is rarely done because the frequency spectrum provides all the necessary information.
Examples of this type of vibration are pulling a child back on a swing and letting go, or hitting a tuning fork and letting it ring.
As in the case of the swing, the force applied need not be high to get large motions, but must just add energy to the system.
For example, the vibrational motions of engines, electric motors, or any mechanical device in operation are typically unwanted.
if you double the force, the vibration doubles)
A similar type of result can be derived for damped systems.
When these eigenvalues are substituted back into the original set of equations, the values of  that correspond to each eigenvalue are called the '''eigenvectors'''.
Applying a force to the mass and spring is similar to pushing a child on swing, a push is needed at the correct moment to make the swing get higher and higher.
Such vibrations could be caused by imbalances in the rotating parts, uneven friction, or the meshing of gear teeth.
This can be rewritten in matrix format:
It may be clearer to understand if   is written as:
In this case, the finite element method was used to generate an approximation to the mass and stiffness matrices and solve a discrete eigenvalue problem.
Vibration Analysis (VA), applied in an industrial or maintenance environment aims to reduce maintenance costs and equipment downtime by detecting equipment faults.
The measured response may be fatigue life, resonant frequencies or squeak and rattle sound output (NVH).
The solution to the underdamped system for the mass spring damper model is the following:
If the system cannot be changed, perhaps the forcing frequency can be shifted (for example, changing the speed of the machine generating the force).
The force applied to the mass by the spring is proportional to the amount the spring is stretched "x" (assuming the spring is already compressed due to the weight of the mass).
The natural frequencies in the units of hertz are then (remembering  )  and .
The value that the damping coefficient must reach for critical damping in the mass spring damper model is:
The damped natural frequency is less than the undamped natural frequency, but for many practical cases the damping ratio is relatively small and hence the difference is negligible.
Once released, the spring tends to return to its un-stretched state (which is the minimum potential energy state) and in the process accelerates the mass.
The figure also shows the time domain representation of the resulting vibration.
Careful designs usually minimize unwanted vibrations.
), where N corresponds to the number of degrees of freedom.
Indeed, even a complex structure such as an automobile body can be modeled as a "summation" of simple mass&ndash;spring&ndash;damper models.
VA can use the units of Displacement, Velocity and Acceleration displayed as a Time Waveform (TWF), but most commonly the spectrum is used, derived from a Fast Fourier Transform of the TWF.
In the previous section, the vibration solution was given for a single harmonic force, but the Fourier transform in general gives multiple harmonic forces.
Hence, attempts to reduce noise are often related to issues of vibration.
The eigenvalues for this problem given by an eigenvalue routine is:
Furthermore, how much each mode "participates" in the final vibration is defined by q, its modal participation factor.
The fundamentals of vibration analysis can be understood by studying the simple mass&ndash;spring&ndash;damper model.
The frequency in this case is called the "damped natural frequency",  and is related to the undamped natural frequency by the following formula:
Examples of these types of vibration include a washing machine shaking due to an imbalance, transportation vibration caused by an engine or uneven road, or the vibration of a building during an earthquake.
The exponential solution is only used because it is easier to manipulate mathematically.
Vibration testing is accomplished by introducing a forcing function into a structure, usually with some type of shaker.
The plot of these functions, called "the frequency response of the system", presents one of the most important features in forced vibration.
In the case of our square wave force, the first component is actually a constant force of 0.5 newton and is represented by a value at "0" Hz in the frequency spectrum.
The cosine function is the oscillating portion of the solution, but the frequency of the oscillations is different from the undamped case.
The mass then begins to decelerate because it is now compressing the spring and in the process transferring the kinetic energy back to its potential.
The mechanical system vibrates at one or more of its natural frequencies and damps down to motionlessness.
The plots to the side present how 0.1 and 0.3 damping ratios effect how the system “rings” down over time.
If the mass and stiffness of the system is known, the formula above can determine the frequency at which the system vibrates once set in motion by an initial disturbance.
Squeak and rattle testing is performed with a special type of ''quiet shaker'' that produces very low sound levels while under operation.
Generally for smaller fixtures and lower frequency ranges, the designer targets a fixture design that is free of resonances in the test frequency range.
The proportionality constant ''c'' is called the damping coefficient and has units of Force over velocity (lbf s/ in or N s/m).
In this simple model the mass continues to oscillate forever at the same magnitude—but in a real system, ''damping'' always dissipates the energy, eventually bringing the spring to rest.
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are often written in the following matrix format and describe the modal model of the system:
Therefore, the mass&ndash;spring&ndash;damper system is isolating the harmonic force from the mounting base – referred to as vibration isolation.
These properties can be used to greatly simplify the solution of multi-degree of freedom models by making the following coordinate transformation.
The key is that the modal mass and stiffness matrices are diagonal matrices and therefore the equations have been "decoupled".
Using this coordinate transformation in the original free vibration differential equation results in the following equation.
Alternately, a DUT (device under test) is attached to the "table" of a shaker.
The value of ''X'', the initial magnitude, and  the phase shift, are determined by the amount the spring is stretched.
These eigenvectors represent the mode shapes of the system.
Devices specifically designed to trace or record vibrations are called vibroscopes.
Vibration testing is performed to examine the response of a device under test (DUT) to a defined vibration environment.
If the damping is small enough, the system still vibrates—but eventually, over time, stops vibrating.
The Fourier transform is almost always computed using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) computer algorithm in combination with a window function.
Other "response" points experience maximum vibration level (resonance) or minimum vibration level (anti-resonance).
vocal cords); these pressure waves can also induce the vibration of structures (e.g.
Most vibration testing is conducted in a 'single DUT axis' at a time, even though most real-world vibration occurs in various axes simultaneously.
Sound, or pressure waves, are generated by vibrating structures (e.g.
(Note: Since the eigenvectors (mode shapes) can be arbitrarily scaled, the orthogonality properties are often used to scale the eigenvectors so the modal mass value for each mode is equal to 1.
Vibration can be desirable: for example, the motion of a tuning fork, the reed in a woodwind instrument or harmonica, a mobile phone, or the cone of a loudspeaker.
The modal mass matrix is therefore an identity matrix)
In these cases multi-point control strategies can mitigate some of the resonances that may be present in the future.
This is shown by the line at 1&nbsp;Hz.
Hence, the Fourier transform allows you to interpret the force as a sum of sinusoidal forces being applied instead of a more "complex" force (e.g.
The eigenvalues provide the natural frequencies of the system.
The number ''fn'' is called the '''undamped natural frequency'''.
The major points to note from the solution are the exponential term and the cosine function.
In the case of the second mode shape vector, each mass is moving in opposite direction at the same rate.
The most common types of vibration testing services conducted by vibration test labs are Sinusoidal and Random.
The simple mass&ndash;spring damper model is the foundation of vibration analysis, but what about more complex systems?
The matrices are NxN square matrices where N is the number of degrees of freedom of the system.
In other words, the problem has been transformed from a large unwieldy multiple degree of freedom problem into many single degree of freedom problems that can be solved using the same methods outlined above.
The solution of a viscously damped system is somewhat more complicated.
Assuming that the initiation of vibration begins by stretching the spring by the distance of ''A'' and releasing, the solution to the above equation that describes the motion of mass is:
Using Euler's formula and taking only the real part of the solution it is the same cosine solution for the 1 DOF system.
Note: This article does not include the step-by-step mathematical derivations, but focuses on major vibration analysis equations and concepts.
The figure illustrates the resulting vibration.
If  damping is increased just to the point where the system no longer oscillates, the system has reached the point of ''critical damping''.
*When ''r''&nbsp;≫&nbsp;1 the amplitude of the vibration is actually less than the static deflection   In this region the force generated by the mass (''F''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''ma'') is dominating because the acceleration seen by the mass increases with the frequency.
For example, if a known force over a range of frequencies is applied, and if the associated vibrations are measured, the frequency response function can be calculated, thereby characterizing the system.
The remaining components are at odd frequencies and it takes an infinite amount of sine waves to generate the perfect square wave.
Solving for ''x'' is replaced by solving for ''q'', referred to as the modal coordinates or modal participation factors.
Since the deflection seen in the spring, ''X'', is reduced in this region, the force transmitted by the spring (''F''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''kx'') to the base is reduced.
For example, the above formula explains why, when a car or truck is fully loaded, the suspension feels ″softer″ than unloaded—the mass has increased, reducing the natural frequency of the system.
Hence, the solution to the problem with a square wave is summing the predicted vibration from each one of the harmonic forces found in the frequency spectrum of the square wave.
This technique is used in the field of experimental modal analysis to determine the vibration characteristics of a structure.
The following are some other points in regards to the forced vibration shown in the frequency response plots.
The solution to the problem results in N '''eigenvalues''' (i.e.
This case is called underdamping, which is important in vibration analysis.
The oscillations may be periodic, such as the motion of a pendulum—or random, such as the movement of a tire on a gravel road.
The Fourier transform can also be used to analyze non-periodic functions such as transients (e.g.
The mathematics used to describe its behavior is identical to other simple harmonic oscillators such as the RLC circuit.
The equations of motion of the 2DOF system are found to be:
A more compact form of this matrix equation can be written as:
Therefore, the damped and undamped description are often dropped when stating the natural frequency (e.g.
When a "viscous" damper is added to the model this outputs a force that is proportional to the velocity of the mass.
Please refer to the references at the end of the article for detailed derivations.
What is often done in practice is to experimentally measure the free vibration after an impact (for example by a hammer) and then determine the natural frequency of the system by measuring the rate of oscillation, as well as the damping ratio by measuring the rate of decay.
Applying the 1&nbsp;Hz square wave from earlier allows the calculation of the predicted vibration of the mass.
Generally, one or more "input" or "control" points located on the DUT-side of a fixture is kept at a specified acceleration.
For example, by applying a force to the mass&ndash;spring&ndash;damper model that repeats the following cycle – a force equal to 1&nbsp;newton for 0.5&nbsp;second and then no force for 0.5&nbsp;second.
This differential equation can be solved by assuming the following type of solution:
In the case of the spring–mass–damper model, the system is linear if the spring force is proportional to the displacement and the damping is proportional to the velocity over the range of motion of interest.
The values of the spring and mass give a natural frequency of 7&nbsp;Hz for this specific system.
Summing the forces on the mass results in the following ordinary differential equation:
It happens in this example that the fourth harmonic of the square wave falls at 7&nbsp;Hz.
The disturbance can be a periodic and steady-state input, a transient input, or a random input.
The second mathematical tool, "the principle of superposition", allows the summation of the solutions from multiple forces if the system is linear.
Sine (one-frequency-at-a-time) tests are performed to survey the structural response of the device under test (DUT).
At this point, the system has reached its maximum amplitude and will continue to vibrate at this level as long as the force applied stays the same.
The orthogonality properties then simplify this equation to:
The solution to this equation depends on the amount of damping.
The negative sign indicates that the force is always opposing the motion of the mass attached to it:
*When ''r''&nbsp;≪&nbsp;1 the amplitude is just the deflection of the spring under the static force   This deflection is called the static deflection  Hence, when ''r''&nbsp;≪&nbsp;1 the effects of the damper and the mass are minimal.
such as Unbalance, Misalignment, rolling element bearing faults and resonance conditions.
Interestingly, more damping actually reduces the effects of vibration isolation when ''r''&nbsp;≫&nbsp;1 because the damping force (''F''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''cv'') is also transmitted to the base.
with 0.1 damping ratio, the damped natural frequency is only 1% less than the undamped).
For the simple mass–spring system, ''fn'' is defined as:
Since the damping force is proportional to the velocity, the more the motion, the more the damper dissipates the energy.
This solution says that it will oscillate with simple harmonic motion that has an amplitude of ''A'' and a frequency of ''fn''.
The studies of sound and vibration are closely related.
This equation is the foundation of vibration analysis for multiple degree of freedom systems.
This type of force has the shape of a 1&nbsp;Hz square wave.
Note: angular frequency ω (ω=2 π ''f'') with the units of radians per second is often used in equations because it simplifies the equations, but is normally converted to ordinary frequency (units of Hz or equivalently cycles per second) when stating the frequency of a system.
In other words, to efficiently pump energy into both mass and spring requires that the energy source feed the energy in at a rate equal to the natural frequency.
