Although Napoleon III proclaimed a general amnesty in 1859, under which Hugo could have safely returned to France, the author stayed in exile, only returning when Napoleon III was forced from power as a result of the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870.
Letters addressed to the author were from then on labelled "To Mister Victor Hugo, In his avenue, Paris".
Weary of the constant moving required by military life, and at odds with her husband's lack of Catholic beliefs, Sophie separated temporarily from  in 1803 and settled in Paris with her children.
Today, Hugo's work continues to stimulate musicians to create new compositions.
I refuse funeral orations of all churches.
to indicate its success.
Her young husband also died trying to save her.
On 30 January 1876, Hugo was elected to the newly created Senate.
Je refuse l'oraison de toutes les Églises.
Hugo's advocacy to abolish the death penalty was renowned internationally.
The novel was not as successful as his previous efforts, and Hugo himself began to comment on the growing distance between himself and literary contemporaries such as  and , whose realist and naturalist novels were now exceeding the popularity of his own work.
Rorschach blots), "" or rubbing, often using the charcoal from match sticks or his fingers instead of pen or brush.
The house where he stayed in Vianden, Luxembourg, in 1871 has also become a commemorative museum.
There are a number of streets and avenues throughout France named after Victor Hugo.
When Hugo returned to Paris in 1870, the country hailed him as a national hero.
Superficially an adventure, one of Hugo's biographers calls it a "metaphor for the 19th century–technical progress, creative genius and hard work overcoming the immanent evil of the material world."
In the town of Béziers, there is a main street, a school, hospital and several cafés named after Victor Hugo.
Hugo's novels as well as his plays have been a great source of inspiration for musicians, stirring them to create not only opera and ballet but musical theatre such as '''' and the ever-popular '''', London West End's longest running musical.
An apocryphal tale about the shortest correspondence in history is said to have been between Hugo and his publisher Hurst and Blackett in 1862.
The latter played Beethoven in Hugo's home, and Hugo joked in a letter to a friend that, thanks to Liszt's piano lessons, he learned how to play a favourite song on the piano – with only one finger.
Because of his close relationship with his mother, Hugo waited until after her death (in 1821) to marry  in 1822.
Instalments of the book sold out within hours, and had enormous impact on French society.
The pamphlets were banned in France, but nonetheless had a strong impact there.
His last novel, '''' (''Ninety-Three''), published in 1874, dealt with a subject that Hugo had previously avoided: the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution.
Hugo produced more than 4,000 drawings.
Hugo himself particularly enjoyed the music of Gluck and Weber.
''Les Misérables'' proved popular enough with the masses that the issues it highlighted were soon on the agenda of the National Assembly of France.
Despite his popularity Hugo lost his bid for re-election to the National Assembly in 1872.
Je donne cinquante mille francs aux pauvres.
The book was well received, perhaps due to the previous success of ''''.
The surviving drawings are surprisingly accomplished and "modern" in their style and execution, foreshadowing the experimental techniques of Surrealism and Abstract expressionism.
In all heavens, beauty reigns,
He queried the reaction to the work by sending a single-character telegram to his publisher, asking ?.
The publisher replied with a single !
In the city of , Italy, Victor Hugo lived briefly stayed in what is now known as , when reuniting with his father, , in 1808.
At the beginning of her marriage, Hugo's mother Sophie followed her husband to posts in Italy (where  served as a governor of a province near Naples) and Spain (where he took charge of three Spanish provinces).
Adèle and Victor Hugo had their first child, , in 1823, but the boy died in infancy.
Vincent van Gogh ascribed the saying "Religions pass away, but God remains", actually by Jules Michelet, to Hugo.
"I leave 50,000 francs to the poor.
His faithful mistress, , died in 1883, only two years before his own death.
His legacy has been honoured in many ways, including his portrait being placed on French franc banknotes.
He also earned widespread respect as a campaigner for social causes such as the abolition of capital punishment.
that instant—too much for tears!
In '''' he calls the huntsman's chorus in Weber's ''Euryanthe'', "perhaps the most beautiful piece of music ever composed".
Hugo left five sentences as his last will, to be officially published:
British Railways perpetuated the memorial, naming Class 92 Electric Unit 92001 after Victor Hugo.
, located in Shawinigan, Quebec, was named to honour him.
Though the poems were admired for their spontaneous fervour and fluency, the collection that followed four years later in 1826 ('''') revealed Hugo to be a great poet, a natural master of lyric and creative song.
There is a statue of Victor Hugo across from the Museo Carlo Bilotti in Rome, Italy.
In his youth, Hugo resolved to be " or nothing", and his life would come to parallel that of his predecessor in many ways.
This last phase of his political career was considered a failure.
Léopold Hugo was a freethinking republican who considered Napoleon a hero; by contrast Sophie Hugo  was a Catholic Royalist who was intimately involved with her possible lover General , who was executed in 1812 for plotting against Napoleon.
Within a brief period, he suffered a mild stroke, his daughter Adèle was interned in an insane asylum, and his two sons died.
In his youth and under the influence of his mother, he identified as a Catholic and professed respect for Church hierarchy and authority.
Je verrai cet instant jusqu'à ce que je meure,
For instance, in 2009 Italian composer Matteo Sommacal was commissioned by Festival "Bagliori d'autore" and wrote a piece for speaker and chamber ensemble entitled ''Actes et paroles'', with a text elaborated by Chiara Piola Caselli after Victor Hugo's last political speech addressed to the Assemblée législative, "Sur la Revision  de la Constitution" (18 July 1851), and premiered in Rome on 19 November 2009 in the auditorium of the Institut français, Centre Saint-Louis, French Embassy to the Holy See, by Piccola Accademia degli Specchi featuring the composer Matthias Kadar.
The following year, on 28 August 1824, the couple's second child,  was born, followed by Charles on 4 November 1826,  on 28 October 1828, and  on 24 August 1830.
He is considered one of the greatest and best-known French writers.
Hugo was a maverick and got little done in the Senate.
Hugo also worked with composer Louise Bertin, writing the libretto for her 1836 opera ''La Esmeralda'', which was based on the character in ''The Hunchback of Notre Dame''.
Because of his concern for the rights of artists and copyright, he was a founding member of the '''', which led to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.
He produced more than 4,000 drawings, which have since been admired for their beauty.
Young Victor fell in love and, against his mother's wishes, became secretly engaged to his childhood friend  (1803–1868).
Je regarde toujours ce moment de ma vie
Two famous musicians of the 19th century were friends of Hugo: Hector Berlioz and Franz Liszt.
His first collection of poetry ('''') was published in 1822, when Hugo was only 20 years old, and earned him a royal pension from Louis XVIII.
However, in 's published archives, he states strongly that "any work of art has two authors : the people who confusingly feel something, a creator who translates these feelings, and the people again who consecrate his vision of that feeling.
Some of his work was shown to, and appreciated by, contemporary artists such as van Gogh and ; the latter expressed the opinion that if Hugo had decided to become a painter instead of a writer, he would have outshone the artists of their century.
Remarkably, not only Hugo's literary production has been the source of inspiration for musical works, but also his political writings have received attention from musicians and have been adapted to music.
Originally pursued as a casual hobby, drawing became more important to Hugo shortly before his exile, when he made the decision to stop writing to devote himself to politics.
The london and North Western Railway named a 'Prince of Wales' Class 4-6-0 No 1134 after Victor Hugo.
The death left her father devastated; Hugo was travelling with his mistress at the time in the south of France, and first learned about 's death from a newspaper he read in a café.
Every inch and detail of the event was for Hugo; the official guides even wore cornflowers as an allusion to Fantine's song in ''Les Misérables''.
On 27 June, one of the largest parades in French history was held.
I will see that instant until I die,
After the Siege of Paris from 1870 to 71, Hugo lived again in Guernsey from 1872 to 1873, before finally returning to France for the remainder of his life.
I want to be buried in their hearse.
The book also inspired a renewed appreciation for pre-Renaissance buildings, which thereafter began to be actively preserved.
Hugo was the third son of Joseph Léopold Sigisbert Hugo (1774–1828) and  (1772–1821); his brothers were  (1798–1855) and  (1800–1837).
The school  was founded in his town of birth,  in France.
Peace and harmony rule these realms,
Marchers stretched from the , where the author was living, down the , and all the way to the centre of Paris.
He was elevated to the peerage by King  in 1845 and entered the Higher Chamber as a '''', where he spoke against the death penalty and social injustice, and in favour of freedom of the press and self-government for Poland.
Despite his personal loss, Hugo remained committed to the cause of political change.
Thereafter he became increasingly involved in French politics.
Although Napoleon III granted an amnesty to all political exiles in 1859, Hugo declined, as it meant he would have to curtail his criticisms of the government.
In Havana, Cuba there is a park named after him and bust of Hugo stands near the entrance of the Old Summer Palace in Beijing.
His influence was credited in the removal of the death penalty from the constitutions of Geneva, Portugal and Colombia.
Hugo's novel '''' (''The Hunchback of Notre-Dame'') was published in 1831 and quickly translated into other languages across Europe.
Outside France, his best-known works are the novels '''', 1862, and '''', 1831 (known in English as ''The Hunchback of Notre-Dame'').
These parliamentary speeches are published in ''''.
Although for various reasons the opera closed soon after its fifth performance and is little known today, it has enjoyed a modern revival, both in a piano/song concert version by Liszt at the  2007 and in a full orchestral version presented in July 2008 at .
Napoleon was proclaimed Emperor of the French two years after Hugo's birth, and the Bourbon Monarchy was restored before his 13th birthday.
Hugo suffered a mild stroke on 27 June 1878.
The paraders marched for six hours past Hugo as he sat at the window at his house.
Hugo was on vacation when '''' was published.
The celebrations began on 25 June 1881 when Hugo was presented with a  vase, the traditional gift for sovereigns.
Victor Hugo's death from pneumonia on 22 May 1885, at the age of 83, generated intense national mourning.
Scroll down to the '''' heading and subsequent pages.
More than two million people joined his funeral procession in Paris from the  to the , where he was buried.
He had also pleaded for  to spare the recently captured emperor Maximilian I of Mexico but to no avail.
Hugo turned away from social/political issues in his next novel, '''' (''Toilers of the Sea''), published in 1866.
He also greatly admired Beethoven, and rather unusually for his time, he also appreciated works by composers from earlier centuries such as Palestrina and Monteverdi.
For example, Hugo's novel against capital punishment, ''The Last Day of a Condemned Man'', was adapted into an opera by , with a libretto by  and premièred by their brother, tenor , in 2007.
He also composed or published some of his best work during his period in Guernsey, including '''', and three widely praised collections of poetry ('''', 1853; '''', 1856; and '''', 1859).
While in exile, Hugo published his famous political pamphlets against Napoleon III, '''' and ''''.
Victor Hugo's first mature work of fiction appeared in 1829, and reflected the acute social conscience that would infuse his later work. ''''
Sometimes he would even toss in coffee or soot to get the effects he wanted.
He wrote many poems afterwards about his daughter's life and death, and at least one biographer claims he never completely recovered from it.
Their beings know not the word 'war'.
A mosaic commemorating Victor Hugo is located on the ceiling of the Thomas Jefferson Building of the Library of Congress.
inconsolable by anything on earth,
Thereafter she dominated Hugo's education and upbringing.
Hugo is venerated as a saint in the Vietnamese religion of , in the front hall of the Holy See in Tây Ninh.
when I cried out: "The child that I had just now—
He was not only revered as a towering figure in literature, he was a statesman who shaped the Third Republic and democracy in France.
He would not hesitate to use his children's stencils, ink blots, puddles and stains, lace impressions, "" or folding (i.e.
Hugo's childhood was a period of national political turmoil.
When one of the authors dies, the rights should totally be granted back to the other, the people".
Hugo returned to political and social issues in his next novel, '''' (''The Man Who Laughs''), which was published in 1869 and painted a critical picture of the aristocracy.
Additionally, Hugo's beautiful poems have attracted an exceptional amount of interest from musicians, and numerous melodies have been based on his poetry by composers such as , , , , , , , , Rachmaninoff and .
In his will, he made the same stipulation about his own death and funeral.
Today, the novel remains his most enduringly popular work.
Like , Hugo furthered the cause of Romanticism, became involved in politics (though mostly as a champion of Republicanism), and was forced into exile due to his political stances.
On a childhood family trip to Naples, Hugo saw the vast Alpine passes and the snowy peaks, the magnificently blue Mediterranean, and Rome during its festivities.
Hugo began planning a major novel about social misery and injustice as early as the 1830s, but a full 17 years were needed for '''' to be realised and finally published in 1862.
As a result, Hugo's early work in poetry and fiction reflect her passionate devotion to both King and Faith.
One of the effects of the novel was to shame the City of Paris into restoring the much-neglected Cathedral of Notre Dame, which was attracting thousands of tourists who had read the popular novel.
I don't have her any more!"
Perhaps he also was upset by the frequency with which his work appeared on the Church's list of banned books.
A group of French academicians, particularly Étienne de Jouy, were fighting against the "romantic evolution" and had managed to delay Victor Hugo's election.
Où je l'ai vue ouvrir son aile et s'envoler!
Hugo became the figurehead of the romantic literary movement with the plays ''Cromwell'' (1827) and ''Hernani'' (1830).
He frequented spiritism during his exile (where he participated also in many séances conducted by Madame ), and in later years settled into a rationalist deism similar to that espoused by .
On 4 September 1843, she drowned in the Seine at , pulled down by her heavy skirts, when a boat overturned.
His complete archives (published by Pauvert) show also that he wrote a letter asking the USA, for the sake of their own reputation in the future, to spare John Brown's life, but the letter arrived after Brown was executed.
'''', a documentary short story about a real-life murderer who had been executed in France, appeared in 1834, and was later considered by Hugo himself to be a precursor to his great work on social injustice, ''''.
turning an envious eye towards the past,
According to religious records, he was assigned by God to lead the foreign mission as part of God's Divine hierarchy.
The City of Paris has preserved his residences Hauteville House, Guernsey and , Paris as museums.
He was in Paris during the siege by the Prussian army in 1870, famously eating animals given to him by the Paris zoo.
Though a committed royalist when he was young, Hugo's views changed as the decades passed, and he became a passionate supporter of republicanism; his work touches upon most of the political and social issues and the artistic trends of his time.
Thanks to his contribution to mankind, his virtues, and belief in God, he is venerated as a saint in , a new religion established in Vietnam in 1926.
Où je criai : L'enfant que j'avais tout à l'heure,
The  in the 16th arrondissement of Paris bears Hugo's name, and links the  to the vicinity of the  by way of the .
Though Hugo's popularity was on the decline at the time of its publication, many now consider ''Ninety-Three'' to be a work on par with Hugo's better-known novels.
vers le passé tournant un œil d'envie,
Hugo counted 740 attacks on '''' in the Catholic press.
Well over one thousand musical compositions have been inspired by Hugo's works from the 19th century until the present day.
(''The Last Day of a Condemned Man'') would have a profound influence on later writers such as Albert Camus, Charles Dickens, and Fyodor Dostoyevsky.
It was only after Napoleon III fell from power and the Third Republic was proclaimed that Hugo finally returned to his homeland in 1870, where he was promptly elected to the National Assembly and the Senate.
It also initially published only the first part of the novel ("Fantine"), which was launched simultaneously in major cities.
Here is an excerpt of his teaching about heaven:
Victor Hugo is the namesake of the city of Hugoton, Kansas.
A census-taker asked Hugo in 1872 if he was a Catholic, and he replied, "No.
Hugo's oldest and favourite daughter, , died at age 19 in 1843, shortly after her marriage to .
L'instant, pleurs superflus !
He is buried in the .
It is reported that Hugo often drew with his left hand or without looking at the page, or during Spiritist séances, to access his unconscious mind, a concept only later popularised by Sigmund Freud.
Hugo was acutely aware of the quality of the novel and publication of the work went to the highest bidder.
Drawing became his exclusive creative outlet during the period 1848–1851.
Hugo kept his artwork out of the public eye, fearing it would overshadow his literary work.
He shares a crypt within the  with  and .
After leaving France, Hugo lived in Brussels briefly in 1851, before moving to the Channel Islands, first to Jersey (1852–1855) and then to the smaller island of Guernsey in 1855, where he stayed until Napoleon III's fall from power in 1870.
After three unsuccessful attempts, Hugo was finally elected to the  in 1841, solidifying his position in the world of French arts and letters.
Hugo decided to live in exile after Napoleon III's  at the end of 1851.
Hugo worked only on paper, and on a small scale; usually in dark brown or black pen-and-ink wash, sometimes with touches of white, and rarely with colour.
From there he became a non-practicing Catholic, and increasingly expressed anti-Catholic and anti-clerical views.
The people of Guernsey erected a statue by sculptor  in Candie Gardens (Saint Peter Port) to commemorate his stay in the islands.
They stayed in Naples for a few months and then headed back to Paris.
More than one hundred operas are based on Hugo's works and among them are Donizetti's ''Lucrezia Borgia'' (1833), Verdi's '''' (1851) and ''Ernani'' (1844), and 's '''' (1876).
He describes his shock and grief in his famous poem '''':
Most large French towns and cities have a street named after him.
The Belgian publishing house  and  undertook a marketing campaign unusual for the time, issuing press releases about the work a full six months before the launch.
It is popular worldwide, and has been adapted for cinema, television, and stage shows.
I keep looking at that moment of my life
I beg a prayer to all souls.
When Louis Napoleon (Napoleon III) seized complete power in 1851, establishing an anti-parliamentary constitution, Hugo openly declared him a traitor to France.
He felt the Church was indifferent to the plight of the working class under the oppression of the monarchy.
He relocated to Brussels, then Jersey, from which he was expelled for supporting a Jersey newspaper that had criticised Queen Victoria and finally settled with his family at Hauteville House in Saint Peter Port, Guernsey, where he would live in exile from October 1855 until 1870.
Hugo would later write about his brief stay here quoting  ("It was a palace of marble").
'''''' (; ; 26 February 1802 – 22 May 1885) was a French poet, novelist, and dramatist of the Romantic movement.
Like many young writers of his generation, Hugo was profoundly influenced by , the famous figure in the literary movement of Romanticism and France's pre-eminent literary figure during the early 19th century.
He was born in 1802 in  in the eastern region of .
The critical establishment was generally hostile to the novel;  found it insincere, Barbey d'Aurevilly complained of its vulgarity,  found within it "neither truth nor greatness", the  brothers lambasted its artificiality, and  – despite giving favourable reviews in newspapers – castigated it in private as "tasteless and inept".
To honour the fact that he was entering his 80th year, one of the greatest tributes to a living writer was held.
The opposing political and religious views of Hugo's parents reflected the forces that would battle for supremacy in France throughout his life: Hugo's father was a high-ranking officer in Napoleon's army until he failed in Spain (one of the reasons why his name is not present on the '''').
In Guernsey, every two years the Victor Hugo International Music Festival attracts a wide range of musicians and the premiere of songs specially commissioned from such composers as , ,  and  and based on Hugo's poetry.
In particular, Hugo's plays, in which he rejected the rules of classical theatre in favour of romantic drama, attracted the interest of many composers who adapted them into operas.
Image:Victor hugo gavroche a 11 ans.jpg|'''', (" is eleven years old").
After 1872, Hugo never lost his antipathy towards the Catholic Church.
However, he enjoyed sharing his drawings with his family and friends, often in the form of ornately handmade calling cards, many of which were given as gifts to visitors when he was in political exile.
Among many volumes of poetry, '''' and '''' stand particularly high in critical esteem.
It was only later, during the events leading up to France's 1848 Revolution, that he would begin to rebel against his Catholic Royalist education and instead champion Republicanism and Freethought.
On 28 June, the city of Paris changed the name of the Avenue d'Eylau to Avenue Victor-Hugo.
In France, Hugo's literary fame comes first from his poetry and then from his novels and his dramatic achievements.
Sans que rien ici-bas puisse m'en consoler,
Since Hugo's father was an officer, the family moved frequently and Hugo learned much from these travels.
In 1848, Hugo was elected to the Parliament as a conservative.
This square is served by a Paris Métro stop also named in his honour.
