Various special diplomatic meetings have been held in Vienna in the latter half of the 20th century, resulting in various documents bearing the name Vienna Convention or Vienna Document.
Another popular drink is the so-called "Spezi", a mix between Coca-Cola and the original formula of Orange Fanta or the more locally renowned Frucade.
, an official report from Statistics Austria showed that more than 660,000 (38.8%) of the Viennese population have full or partial migrant background, mostly from Ex-Yugoslavia, Turkey, Germany, Poland, Ukraine, Romania and Hungary.
From the late 19th century to 1938, the city remained a centre of high culture and modernism.
In 2012, Vienna’s contribution in Austria’s outgoing and incoming foreign direct investments was of about 60%, which demonstrates Vienna’s role as an international hub for domestic and foreign companies.
File:Secession Vienna June 2006 006.jpg|Vienna Secession building
In 1913, Adolf Hitler, Leon Trotsky, Joseph Tito, Sigmund Freud and Joseph Stalin all lived within a few miles of each other in central Vienna, some of them being regulars at the same coffeehouses.
In 1938, after a triumphant entry into Austria, Austrian-born Adolf Hitler spoke to the Austrian Germans from the balcony of the Neue Burg, a part of the Hofburg at the Heldenplatz.
The Rathaus accommodates the offices of the mayor (''Magistrat der Stadt Wien'') and the state government (''Landesregierung'').
The four-power control of Vienna lasted until the Austrian State Treaty was signed in May 1955.
10 had been constituted in 1874); hence the Linienwall was torn down beginning in 1894.
It is well known for having played an essential role as a leading European music centre, from the great age of Viennese Classicism through the early part of the 20th century.
For most of the time since after the First World War, the city has been governed by the Social Democratic Party (SPÖ) with absolute majorities in the city parliament.
The Imperial-Royal Government set up the Vienna City Renovation Fund (Wiener Stadterneuerungsfonds) and sold many building lots to private investors, thereby partly financing public construction works.
Stephen's Cathedral
Vienna was also where the European Handball Federation (EHF) was founded.
Vienna is also home to a number of opera houses, including the Theater an der Wien, the Staatsoper and the Volksoper, the latter being devoted to the typical Viennese operetta.
The city was a stage to the Austrian Civil War of 1934, when Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss sent the Austrian Army to shell civilian housing occupied by the socialist militia.
From 1850 to 1890, city limits in the West and the South mainly followed another wall called ''Linienwall'' at which a road toll called the ''Liniengeld'' was charged.
Thus they ensured that Austria would not be a member of NATO and that NATO forces would therefore not have direct communications between Italy and West Germany.
During the latter half of the 19th century, the city developed what had previously been the bastions and glacis into the Ringstraße, a new boulevard surrounding the historical town and a major prestige project.
In 1910, Vienna had more than two million inhabitants, and was the fourth largest city in Europe after London, Paris and Berlin.
Strong rules apply to the planning, authorisation and construction of high-rise buildings.
Here, the Soviet forces controlled districts 2, 4, 10, 20, 21 and 22 and all areas incorporated into Vienna in 1938.
The Irish monk Saint Colman (or Koloman, Irish ''Colmán'', derived from ''colm'' "dove") is buried in Melk Abbey and Saint Fergil (Virgil the Geometer) was Bishop of Salzburg for forty years, and twelfth-century monastic settlements were founded by Irish Benedictines.
Construction began in June 2007 and was due to last until December 2015.
Since then Vienna has 23 districts.
Vienna has a single large brewery, Ottakringer, and more than ten microbreweries.
Concurrent to the Art Nouveau movement was the Wiener Moderne, during which some architects shunned the use of extraneous adornment.
Vienna is the last great capital of the 19th-century ball.
Additionally, Vienna is the seat of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law's secretariat (UNCITRAL).
Evidence of these ties is still evident in Vienna's great Schottenstift monastery, once home to many Irish monks.
In 1804, during the Napoleonic Wars, Vienna became the capital of the Austrian Empire and continued to play a major role in European and world politics, including hosting the Congress of Vienna in 1814/15.
Across the Danube, where the Vienna International Centre is located (districts 21–22), and in the southern areas (district 23) are the newest parts of the city.
File:Hofburg Imperial Palace Garden.JPG|Prince Eugene Monument
The Hofburg is the location of the Imperial Treasury (''Schatzkammer''), holding the imperial jewels of the Habsburg dynasty.
Vienna's Ernst Happel Stadium was the venue of four Champions League and European Champion Clubs' Cup finals (1964, 1987, 1990 and 1995) and on 29 June it hosted the final of Euro 2008 which saw a Spanish 1–0 victory over Germany.
The city is administered by a multitude of departments (''Magistratsabteilungen''), politically supervised by ''amtsführende Stadträte'' (members of the city government leading offices; according to the Vienna constitution opposition parties have the right to designate members of the city government not leading offices).
File:Austria Parlament Athena.jpg|Austrian Parliament Building
Since the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989, Vienna has expanded its position as gateway to Eastern Europe: 300 international companies have their Eastern European headquarters in Vienna and its environs.
Among the more important documents negotiated in Vienna are the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, as well as the 1990 Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe.
This law of neutrality, passed in late October 1955 (and not the State Treaty itself), ensured that modern Austria would align with neither NATO nor the Soviet bloc, and is considered one of the reasons for Austria's late entry into the European Union.
Vienna's principal park is the Prater which is home to the Riesenrad, a Ferris wheel.
The airport is currently undergoing a major expansion, including a new terminal building opened in 2012 to prepare for an expected increase in passengers.
In 2005 the Ice Hockey World Championships took place in Austria and the final was played in Vienna.
In the 1996 City Council election, the SPÖ lost its overall majority in the 100-seat chamber, winning 43 seats and 39.15% of the vote.
The city was ranked 1st globally for its culture of innovation in 2007 and 2008, and sixth globally (out of 256 cities) in the 2014 Innovation Cities Index, which analyzed 162 indicators in covering three areas: culture, infrastructure, and markets.
As rural Austria is dominated by conservative citizens, if the Social Democrats would not maintain their nearly unbreakable hold on Vienna, the rival Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) would dominate Austrian politics.
By 2001, 16% of people living in Austria had nationalities other than Austrian, nearly half of whom were from former Yugoslavia; the next most numerous nationalities in Vienna were Turks (39,000; 2.5%), Poles (13,600; 0.9%) and Germans (12,700; 0.8%).
Snow in the winter is not uncommon, but rare compared to Western and Southern regions in Austria.
Vienna is known for its high quality of life.
A variant of this Celtic name could be preserved in the Czech and Slovak names of the city (''Vídeň'' and ''Viedeň'' respectively) and in that of the city's district Wieden.
Among the biggest IT firms in Vienna are Kapsch, Beko Engineering & Informatics, air trafﬁc control experts Frequentis, Cisco Systems Austria, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft Austria, IBM Austria and Samsung Electronics Austria.
The historic centre of Vienna is rich in architectural ensembles, including Baroque castles and gardens, and the late-19th-century Ringstraße lined with grand buildings, monuments and parks.
There are many popular sites associated with composers who lived in Vienna including Beethoven's various residences and grave at Zentralfriedhof (Central Cemetery) which is the largest cemetery in Vienna and the burial site of many famous people.
With a share of 85.5% in gross value added, the service sector is Vienna’s most important economic sector.
The mainly Gothic Stephansdom is located at the centre of the city, on Stephansplatz.
The Donauinsel, part of Vienna's flood defences, is a  long artificial island between the Danube and Neue Donau dedicated to leisure activities.
The number of high-rise buildings is kept low by building legislation aimed at preserving green areas and districts designated as world cultural heritage.
Within Austria, Vienna was seen as a centre of socialist politics, for which it was sometimes referred to as "Red Vienna".
Trains are operated by the ÖBB.
6.2 million tourists visited Vienna in 2014 amounting to 13,524,266 overnight stays.
File:Albertina 2.JPG|Albertina
In 1850, Vienna with the consent of the emperor annexed 34 surrounding villages, called Vorstädte, into the city limits (districts no.
Viennese cafés claim to have invented the process of filtering coffee from booty captured after the second Turkish siege in 1683.
Because of the industrialization and migration from other parts of the Empire, the population of Vienna increased sharply during its time as the capital of Austria-Hungary (1867–1918).
In recent years, Vienna has seen numerous architecture projects completed which combine modern architectural elements with old buildings, such as the remodelling and revitalisation of the old Gasometer in 2001.
At that time, Vienna's municipal policy was admired by Socialists throughout Europe, who therefore referred to the city as "Red Vienna" (''Rotes Wien'').
Many concert venues offer concerts aimed at tourists, featuring popular highlights of Viennese music, particularly the works of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Johann Strauss the father, and Johann Strauss the son.
While the Opera Ball is the best known internationally of all the Austrian balls, other balls such as the Kaffeesiederball (Cafe Owners Ball), the Jägerball (Hunter's Ball) and the Life Ball (AIDS charity event) are almost as well known within Austria and even better appreciated for their cordial atmosphere.
In 2012 8,962 IT businesses with a workforce of 64,223 were located in the Vienna Region.
On 2 April 1945, the Soviets launched the Vienna Offensive against the Germans holding the city and besieged it.
Most radical is the church's crypt, with its slender concrete columns and angular, cubist capitals and bases.
In 2014, 202 international conferences were held in Vienna, making it the second most popular congress location worldwide according to the statistics of the International Congress and Convention Association.
The Grüner Veltliner, a dry white wine, is the most widely cultivated wine in Austria.
A key architect of this period was Adolf Loos, whose works include the Looshaus (1909), the Kärntner Bar or American Bar (1908) and the Steiner House (1910).
The city of Vienna attaches major importance to science and research and focuses on creating a positive environment for research and development.
Castle Belvedere, built under Prinz Eugen, has a gallery containing paintings by Gustav Klimt (The Kiss), Egon Schiele, and other painters of the early 20th century, also sculptures by Franz Xaver Messerschmidt, and changing exhibitions too.
Directly opposite the Hofburg are the Kunsthistorisches Museum, which houses many paintings by old masters, ancient and classical artifacts, and the Naturhistorisches Museum.
Its largest conference centre, the  Austria Center Vienna (ACV) has a total capacity for around 20,000 people and is situated next to the United Nations Headquarters in Vienna.
A stated goal is that, by 2050, all vehicles within the municipal boundaries will run without conventional propulsion technologies.
Companies in Vienna have extensive contacts and competences in business with Eastern Europe due to the city’s historical role as centre of the Habsburg Empire.
20, Brigittenau, was created by separating the area from the 2nd district.
For many, the ball season lasts three months and can include up to ten or fifteen separate appearances.
Since 2012, the city hosts the annual  Pioneers Festival, the largest start-up event in Central Europe with 2.500 international participants taking place at Hofburg Palace.
These regions work together in a European Centrope border region.
Tech Cocktail, an online portal for the start-up scene, has ranked Vienna sixth among the top ten start-up cities worldwide.
File:The Hundertwasser House 03.jpg|Hundertwasserhaus
The main products are instruments and appliances for measuring, testing and navigation as well as electronic components.
British and American air raids and artillery duels between the SS and Wehrmacht and the Red Army crippled infrastructure, such as tram services and water and power distribution, and destroyed or damaged thousands of public and private buildings.
The Wienerlied is a unique song genre from Vienna.
It is the 7th-largest city by population within city limits in the European Union.
Around the start of the 20th century, Vienna was the city with the second-largest Czech population in the world (after Prague).
File:Rathaus Vienna June 2006 165.jpg|Rathaus
Vienna has regained much of its former international stature by hosting international organizations, such as the United Nations (United Nations Industrial Development Organization, United Nations Office at Vienna and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime), the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Occupied Vienna is also depicted in the Philip Kerr novel, ''A German Requiem''.
Between 2005 and 2013, Vienna was the world's number one destination for international congresses and conventions.
It amounts to 159% of the EU average.
Apart from being regarded as the ''City of Music'' because of its musical legacy, Vienna is also said to be "The City of Dreams" because it was home to the world's first psycho-analyst – Sigmund Freud.
Tennis tournament Vienna Open also takes place in the city since 1974.
In 1981 the popular British new romantic group Ultravox paid a tribute to Vienna on an album and an artful music video recording called "Vienna".
Vienna is located in northeastern Austria, at the easternmost extension of the Alps in the Vienna Basin.
These include ''Apfelstrudel'' (hot apple strudel), ''Milchrahmstrudel'' (milk-cream strudel), ''Palatschinken'' (sweet pancakes), and ''Knödel'' (dumplings) often filled with fruit such as apricots (''Marillenknödel'').
While accepting that Germany and Berlin would be divided, the Soviets had decided against allowing the same state of affairs to arise in Austria and Vienna.
The city has enacted many social democratic policies.
Mozart has a memorial grave at the Habsburg gardens and at St. Marx cemetery (where his grave was lost).
Other examples of Viennese cuisine include ''Tafelspitz'' (very lean boiled beef), which is traditionally served with ''Geröstete Erdäpfel'' (boiled potatoes mashed with a fork and subsequently fried) and horseradish sauce, ''Apfelkren'' (a mixture of horseradish, cream and apple) and ''Schnittlauchsauce'' (a chives sauce made with mayonnaise and stale bread).
His works include the Langer House (1900) and the Zacherlhaus (1903–1905).
2 to 8, after 1861 with the separation of Margareten from Wieden no.
Many of Vienna's famous parks include monuments, such as the Stadtpark with its statue of Johann Strauss II, and the gardens of the baroque palace, where the State Treaty was signed.
In May 2015, Vienna hosted the 60th Annual Eurovision Song Contest following Austria's victory in the 2014 contest.
Another extremely popular international event is the annual Life Ball, which supports people with HIV or AIDS.
In February 1934 troops of the Austrian federal government under Engelbert Dollfuss, who had closed down the first chamber of the federal parliament, the ''Nationalrat'', in 1933, and paramilitary socialist organisations were engaged in the Austrian civil war, which led to the ban of the Social Democratic party.
The British company UBM has rated Vienna one of the ''Top 10 Internet Cities'' worldwide, by analysing criteria like connection speed, WIFI availability, innovation spirit and open government data.
Austria was separated from Germany, and Vienna was restored as the republic's capital city, but the Soviet hold on the city remained until 1955.
The Secession, Karlsplatz Stadtbahn Station, and the Kirche am Steinhof by Otto Wagner rank among the best known examples of Art Nouveau in the world.
The Innere Stadt is situated away from the main flow of the Danube, but is bounded by the ''Donaukanal'' ("Danube canal").
Austria's capital is home to numerous football teams.
Sachertorte, a delicately moist chocolate cake with apricot jam created by the Sacher Hotel, is world-famous.
District residents in Vienna (Austrians as well as EU citizens with permanent residence here) elect a District Assembly (Bezirksvertretung).
File:Spanische Hofreitschule3, Vienna.jpg|Spanish Riding School
Vienna’s new Central Railway Station was opened in October 2014.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, the Ottoman armies were stopped twice outside Vienna (see Siege of Vienna, 1529 and Battle of Vienna, 1683).
Vienna lies within a transition of oceanic climate and humid subtropical climate (hovering just below 22&nbsp;°C in July and August), and features, according to the Köppen classification, a Cfb (oceanic) -climate.
Kebab, pizza and noodles are, increasingly, the snack foods most widely available from small stands.
From 1996–2001, the SPÖ governed Vienna in a coalition with the ÖVP.
The control was policed by the four powers on a ''de facto'' day-to-day basis, the famous "four soldiers in a jeep" method.
The proportion of Viennese who identify as Roman Catholic has dropped over the last fifty years, from 90% in 1961 to 39.8% in 2010.
The matches are played in the Wiener Stadthalle.
The city has a total area of 414.65 square kilometres (160.1 sq mi), making it the largest city in Austria by area.
After the war, Vienna was part of Soviet-occupied Eastern Austria until September 1945.
In addition, the highest wooden skyscraper of the world called “HoHo Wien” will be built within 3 years, starting in 2015.
The Vienna's English Theatre (VET) is an English theater in Vienna.
The English name ''Vienna'' is borrowed from the homonymous Italian version of the city's name or the French ''Vienne''.
Public transport is provided by buses, trams and 5 underground metro lines (U-Bahn).
The sausage known as ''Wiener'' (German for Viennese) in the U.S. and in Germany, is called a ''Frankfurter'' in Vienna.
The traditional 'Wiener Schnitzel' though is a cutlet of veal.
A "Beisl" is a typical small Austrian pub, of which Vienna has many.
In a 2005 study of 127 world cities, the Economist Intelligence Unit ranked the city first (in a tie with Vancouver, Canada and San Francisco, US) for the world's most livable cities.
Altogether, approximately 8,300 new companies are being founded in Vienna every year since 2004.
Many Roman Catholic churches in central Vienna feature performances of religious or other music, including masses sung to classical music and organ.
11 to 19 (district no.
Viennese cafés have an extremely long and distinguished history that dates back centuries, and the caffeine addictions of some famous historical patrons of the oldest are something of a local legend.
The majority of these companies are operating in fields of industry-oriented services, wholesale trade as well as information and communications technologies and new media.
Vienna fell eleven days later.
The UN-Habitat has classified Vienna as being the most prosperous city in the world in 2012/2013.
Wagner's prominent student Jože Plečnik from Slovenia also left important traces in Vienna.
Art Nouveau left many architectural traces in Vienna.
Alongside international and intergovernmental organisations, there are dozens of charitable organisations based in Vienna.. One such organisation is the network of SOS Children's Villages, founded by Hermann Gmeiner in 1949.
Elevation ranges from .
Viennese of at least middle class may visit a number of balls in their lifetime.
The city took particular pride in building them to a high standard.
Beer is next in importance to wine.
Winters are relatively dry and cold with average temperatures at about freezing point.
The atmosphere of four-power Vienna is the background for Graham Greene's screenplay for the film ''The Third Man'' (1949).
The Berlin Blockade of 1948 raised Western concerns that the Soviets might repeat the blockade in Vienna.
Other centres are the  Messe Wien Exhibition & Congress Center (up to 3,300 people) and the Hofburg Palace (up to 4,900 people).
Art and culture had a long tradition in Vienna, including theatre, opera, classical music and fine arts.
It houses the Museum of Modern Art, commonly known as the MUMOK (Ludwig Foundation), the Leopold Museum (featuring the largest collection of paintings in the world by Egon Schiele, as well as works by the Vienna Secession, Viennese Modernism and Austrian Expressionism), the AzW (museum of architecture), additional halls with feature exhibitions, and the Tanzquartier.
Styles range from classicist buildings to modern architecture.
File:Burgtheater - Vienna.jpg|Burgtheater
The Viennese sector for information and communication technologies is comparable in size with the sector in Helsinki or Munich and thus among Europe’s largest IT locations.
Before 2005 the most successful musical was "Elisabeth", which was later translated into several languages and performed all over the world.
The etymology of the city's name is still subject to scholarly dispute.
The 220-meter high DC Tower 1 located on the Northern bank of the Danube, completed in 2013, is the talltest skyscraper in Vienna.
The Haus der Musik ("house of music") opened in the year 2000.
Vienna is the seat of the Metropolitan Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vienna, in which is also vested the exempt Ordinariate for Byzantine-rite Catholics in Austria; its current Archbishop is Cardinal Christoph Schönborn.
Dancers and opera singers from the Vienna State Opera often perform at the openings of the larger balls.
A Vienna ball is an all-night cultural attraction.
The ''Gemeindebauten'' are social housing assets that are well integrated into the city architecture outside the first or "inner" district.
Vienna possesses many parks, including the ''Stadtpark'', the ''Burggarten'', the ''Volksgarten'' (part of the ''Hofburg''), the ''Schlosspark'' at Schloss Belvedere (home to the Vienna Botanic Gardens), the ''Donaupark'', the ''Schönbrunner Schlosspark'', the ''Prater'', the ''Augarten'', the ''Rathauspark'', the ''Lainzer Tiergarten'', the ''Dehnepark'', the ''Resselpark'', the ''Votivpark'', the ''Kurpark Oberlaa'', the ''Auer-Welsbach-Park'' and the ''Türkenschanzpark''.
US climate strategist Boyd Cohen placed Vienna first in his first ''global smart cities'' ranking of 2012.
The heart and historical city of Vienna, a large part of today's Innere Stadt, was a fortress surrounded by fields in order to defend itself from potential attackers.
Former suburbs were incorporated, and the city of Vienna grew dramatically.
Today, it has the second largest number of German speakers after Berlin.
The earliest settlement, at the location of today's inner city, was south of the meandering Danube while the city now spans both sides of the river.
Famous musicians who came here to work from other parts of Austria and Germany were Johann Joseph Fux, Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, Antonio Salieri, Carl Czerny, Johann Nepomuk Hummel, Franz Liszt, Franz von Suppé, Anton Bruckner, Johannes Brahms, Gustav Mahler and Rainhard Fendrich.
File:Naturhistorisches Museum Vienna June 2006 241.jpg|Naturhistorisches Museum
Some claim that the name comes from ''Vedunia'', meaning "forest stream", which subsequently produced the Old High German ''Uuenia'' (''Wenia'' in modern writing), the New High German ''Wien'' and its dialectal variant ''Wean''.
During the 10 years of the four-power occupation, Vienna became a hot-bed for international espionage between the Western and Eastern blocs.
The city has warm summers with average high temperatures of , with maximum exceeding  and lows of around .
The low rents enable comfortable accommodation and good access to the city amenities.
The Burgtheater is considered one of the best theatres in the German-speaking world alongside its branch, the Akademietheater.
It eventually grew to become the ''de facto'' capital of the Holy Roman Empire (1483–1806) and a cultural centre for arts and science, music and fine cuisine.
However, the cultivation and production of wines within the city borders have a high socio-cultural value.
Some people consider cafés as their extended living room where nobody will be bothered if they spend hours reading a newspaper while enjoying their coffee.
In the 1970s, Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky inaugurated the Vienna International Centre, a new area of the city created to host international institutions.
Vienna makes effort to establish itself as a start-up hub.
They put up barbed wire fences around the perimeter of West Berlin in 1953, but not in Vienna.
The Sisi Museum (a museum devoted to Empress Elisabeth of Austria) allows visitors to view the imperial apartments as well as the silver cabinet.
In conjunction, the University of Vienna annually hosts the prestigious Willem C. Vis Moot, an international commercial arbitration competition for students of law from around the world.
Vienna is today considered the centre of the Social Democratic Party.
Guests such as Bill Clinton and Whoopi Goldberg were recent attendees.
Vienna, along with Paris, Santiago, Cape Town, Prague, Canberra, Bratislava, Warsaw and London, is one of the few remaining world capital cities with its own vineyards.
File:Wien - Stephansdom.JPG|St.
A number of museums are located in the Museumsquartier (museum quarter), the former Imperial Stalls which were converted into a museum complex in the 1990s.
By 1955, the Soviets, by signing the Austrian State Treaty, agreed to relinquish their occupation zones in Eastern Austria as well as their sector in Vienna.
The city improved its position from 2012 on the ranking of the most economically powerful cities reaching number nine on the listing in 2015.
With a research quota of 3.4% Vienna exceeds the Austrian average of 2.77% and has already met the EU target of 3.0% by 2020.
A plague epidemic ravaged Vienna in 1679, killing nearly a third of its population.
