The Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Curtis LeMay, however, had long advocated saturation bombing in Vietnam and wrote of the communists that "we're going to bomb them back into the Stone Age".
Gerald Ford took over as U.S. president on 9 August 1974 after President Nixon resigned due to the Watergate scandal.
The NVA and Viet Cong quickly overran the northern provinces and in coordination with other forces attacked from Cambodia, threatening to cut the country in half.
According to the ''Pentagon Papers'', the Viet Cong "placed heavy emphasis on the withdrawal of American advisors and influence, on land reform and liberalization of the GVN, on coalition government and the neutralization of Vietnam."
While the Viet Cong had both amphibious tanks (such as the PT-76) and light tanks (such as the Type 62), they also used bicycles to transport munitions.
After news reports of American military abuses such as the 1968 My Lai Massacre, brought new attention and support to the anti-war movement, some veterans joined Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
Later films would include ''We Were Soldiers'' (2002) and ''Rescue Dawn'' (2007).
In Saigon, 1,000 NLF (Viet Cong) fighters fought off 11,000 U.S. and ARVN troops for three weeks.
''Vietnam War'' is the most commonly used name in English.
Ami Pedahzur has written that "the overall volume and lethality of Viet Cong terrorism rivals or exceeds all but a handful of terrorist campaigns waged over the last third of the twentieth century".
Across South Vietnam, 1,100 Americans and other allied troops, 2,100 ARVN, 14,000 civilians, and 32,000 NVA and Viet Cong lay dead.
In 1967, Thieu became president with Ky as his deputy, after rigged elections.
These forces operated under the designation PHLCAG-V or Philippine Civic Action Group-Vietnam.
The pledge came at a time when the situation in South Vietnam was deteriorating, especially in places like the Mekong Delta, because of the recent coup against Diệm.
Approximately 3,500 New Zealanders served in Vietnam, with 37 killed and 187 wounded.
James Olson and Randy Roberts assert that North Vietnam authorized a low-level insurgency in December 1956.
The two countries fought a brief border war, known as the Sino-Vietnamese War.
On 21 August 1963, the ARVN Special Forces of Colonel Lê Quang Tung, loyal to Diệm's younger brother Ngô Đình Nhu, raided pagodas across Vietnam, causing widespread damage and destruction and leaving a death toll estimated to range into the hundreds.
FULRO fought against both the anti-Communist South Vietnamese and the Communist Viet Cong, and then FURLO proceeded to fight against the united Communist Socialist Republic of Vietnam after the fall of South Vietnam.
On a per capita basis, the 2 million tons dropped on Laos make it the most heavily bombed country in history; ''The New York Times'' noted this was "nearly a ton for every person in Laos."
A large number of war crimes took place during the Vietnam War.
On the anti-communist side, South Korea (a.k.a.
Between 1961 and 1964 the Army's strength rose from about 850,000 to nearly a million men."
That book's introduction includes observations about the impact of the war on the black community in general and on black servicemen specifically.
U.S. B-29s, B-36s, and B-47s could have executed a nuclear strike, as could carrier aircraft from the Seventh Fleet.
However, at Binh Gia, they had defeated a strong ARVN force in a conventional battle.
However, the rising oil prices meant that much of this could not be used.
In 1971 the later U.S. presidential candidate, John Kerry, testified before the U.S. Senate and stated that over 150 U.S. veterans testified during the Winter Soldier Investigation and described war crimes committed in Southeast Asia.
Of all the countries of Indochina, Laos experienced the largest refugee flight in proportional terms, as 300,000 people out of a total population of 3 million crossed the border into Thailand.
A prime area of Ranch Hand operations was in the Mekong Delta, where the U.S. Navy patrol boats were vulnerable to attack from the undergrowth at the water's edge.
This time, Trà could travel on a drivable highway with regular fueling stops, a vast change from the days when the Ho Chi Minh trail was a dangerous mountain trek.
Vietnamese victims affected by Agent Orange attempted a class action lawsuit against Dow Chemical and other US chemical manufacturers, but District Court Judge Jack B. Weinstein dismissed their case.In his 234-page judgment, Weinstein observed: "Despite the fact that Congress and the President were fully advised of a substantial belief that the herbicide spraying in Vietnam was a violation of international law, they acted on their view that it was not a violation at the time."
Early in the American military effort, it was decided that since the enemy were hiding their activities under triple-canopy jungle, a useful first step might be to defoliate certain areas.
In 1971 Australia and New Zealand withdrew their soldiers.
The costs of the war loom large in American popular consciousness; a 1990 poll showed that the public incorrectly believed that more Americans lost their lives in Vietnam than in World War II.
Commitment of U.S. (and other free world) forces necessary to halt the losing trend by the end of 1965.
The AC-130H "Spectre" was armed with two 20&nbsp;mm M61 Vulcan cannons, one Bofors 40mm autocannon, and one 105&nbsp;mm M102 howitzer.
As the North Vietnamese launched their attack, panic set in, and ARVN resistance withered.
In the course of the war, the U.S. conducted a large-scale strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnam.
Most Australians and New Zealanders served in the 1st Australian Task Force in Phước Tuy Province.
Vice-President Richard Nixon, the plan involved the Joint Chiefs of Staff drawing up plans to use three small tactical nuclear weapons in support of the French.
However, on 31 January 1968, the NVA and the Viet Cong broke the truce that traditionally accompanied the Tết (Lunar New Year) holiday by launching the largest battle of the war, the Tet Offensive, in the hope of sparking a national uprising.
They were primarily engaged in medical and other civilian pacification projects.
They fled along roads littered with their own dead.
The war also influenced a generation of musicians and songwriters in Vietnam and the United States, both anti-war and pro/anti-communist.
Because the campaign was concentrated mainly in the Red River Delta area, a lower estimate of 50,000 executions became widely accepted by scholars at the time.
We thought that we were going into another Korean War, but this was a different country.
Tellingly, South Vietnamese forces were again defeated in June 1965 at the Battle of Đồng Xoài.
These include the murder of civilians and POWs by slowly sawing off their heads a little more each day, the destruction of Buddhist wats and the killing of monks, attacks on refugee camps involving the deliberate murder of babies and bomb threats against foreign aid workers, the abduction and assassination of journalists, and the shelling of Phnom Penh for more than a year.
In the following Battle of Huế American forces employed massive firepower that left 80 percent of the city in ruins.
Giap's Viet Minh forces handed the French a stunning military defeat, and on 7 May 1954, the French Union garrison surrendered.
Following the cessation of fighting and the beginning of the Imperial Japanese occupation, the French colonial authorities collaborated with the Japanese.
Paramilitary officers from the CIA's Special Activities Division trained and led Hmong tribesmen in Laos and into Vietnam.
Hanoi demanded new changes.
Fidel Castro has mentioned in his discourses the Batallón Girón (Giron Battalion) as comprising the Cuban contingent that served as military advisors during the war.
Officially, Canada did not have partisan involvement in the Vietnam War and diplomatically it was "non-belligerent".
As historian James Gibson summed up the situation:
Later that year the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Kissinger and Thọ, but the Vietnamese negotiator declined it saying that a true peace did not yet exist.
Some 10,450 Filipino troops were dispatched to South Vietnam.
His American advisors had recommended a more modest winning margin of "60 to 70 percent."
Beginning in the summer of 1955, Diệm launched the "Denounce the Communists" campaign, during which communists and other anti-government elements were arrested, imprisoned, tortured, or executed.
Soon thereafter, the Viet Minh began a guerrilla war against the French Union forces, beginning the First Indochina War.
Schlesinger announced early in the morning of 29 April 1975 the evacuation from Saigon by helicopter of the last U.S. diplomatic, military, and civilian personnel.
Some advocates within the peace movement advocated a unilateral withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam.
As the media's coverage of the war and that of the Pentagon diverged, a so-called credibility gap developed.
Ambassador Lodge informed Kennedy that "the prospects now are for a shorter war".
Diem brought the landlords back to the villages.
Martin pleaded with Washington to dispatch $700 million in emergency aid to bolster the regime and help it mobilize fresh military reserves.
The Creator has given us certain inviolable Rights: the right to Life, the right to be Free, and the right to achieve Happiness."
Westmoreland outlined a three-point plan to win the war:
The band Country Joe and the Fish recorded "I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-To-Die Rag" / The "Fish" Cheer in 1965, and it became one of the most influential anti-Vietnam protest anthems.
After repeated border clashes in 1978, Vietnam invaded Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) and ousted the Khmer Rouge, who were being supported by China, in the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
On the urging of the Soviet Union, Ho Chi Minh initially attempted to negotiate with the French, who were slowly re-establishing their control across the area.
U.S. officials began discussing the possibility of a regime change during the middle of 1963.
There had been over 25,000 South Vietnamese casualties during the ceasefire period.
This ended a series of coups that had happened more than once a year.
However, Guenter Lewy argues that such figures were exaggerated and that there were never more than 35,000 prisoners of all kinds in the whole country.
Soviet ships in the South China Sea gave vital early warnings to Viet Cong forces in South Vietnam.
One documented event was the Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất massacre where the 2nd Marine Brigade of the South Korean Army purportedly killed 69-79 civilians on 12 February 1968 in Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất village, Điện Bàn District of Quảng Nam Province in South Vietnam.
The communists responded with a new strategy hammered out in a series of meetings in Hanoi in March 1973, according to the memoirs of Trần Văn Trà.
Some wanted to show solidarity with the people of Vietnam, such as Norman Morrison emulating the actions of Thích Quảng Đức.
As Army Chief of Staff Harold Keith Johnson noted, "if anything came out of Vietnam, it was that air power couldn't do the job."
Swift Jr. arrived in Hanoi on a mercy mission to liberate allied POWs and were accompanied by Jean Sainteny, a French government official.
Regular U.S. combat units were deployed beginning in 1965.
Their airspeed and direction would be noted and then relayed to COSVN, North Vietnam's southern headquarters.
On 23 July 1962, fourteen nations, including China, South Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Vietnam and the United States, signed an agreement promising to respect the neutrality of Laos.
Throughout the conflict, U.S. intelligence estimates remained skeptical of French chances of success.
The ubiquitous Soviet AK-47 assault rifle was often regarded as the best rifle of the war, due to its ability to continue to function even in adverse, muddy conditions.
After their defeat in the war, the Imperial Japanese Army (IJA) gave weapons to the Vietnamese, and kept Vichy French officials and military officers imprisoned for a month after the surrender.
The Viet Minh had recruited more than 600 Imperial Japanese soldiers and given them roles to train or command Vietnamese soldiers.
The French colonial authorities, in French Indochina, sided with the Vichy regime.
It was implemented in early 1962 and involved some forced relocation, village internment, and segregation of rural South Vietnamese into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from Communist insurgents.
It began on 29 April, in an atmosphere of desperation, as hysterical crowds of Vietnamese vied for limited space.
As one observer noted "we were not in Vietnam for 10 years, but for one year 10 times."
In Vietnam, women held a variety of jobs which included operating complex data processing equipment and serving as stenographers.
Having transferred power to Trần Văn Hương, he left for Taiwan on 25 April.
The worst is an airplane."
As there have been several conflicts in Indochina, this particular conflict is known by the names of its primary protagonists to distinguish it from others.
During the war, the Soviets sent North Vietnam annual arms shipments worth $450 million.
South Korea claimed to have killed 41,000 Viet Cong fighters.
The Strategic Hamlet Program was initiated in late 1961.
The official US Department of Defense figure was 950,765 communist forces killed in Vietnam from 1965 to 1974.
Gradual withdrawal of U.S. ground forces began as part of "Vietnamization", which aimed to end American involvement in the war while transferring the task of fighting the Communists to the South Vietnamese themselves.
Vietnam retained its pro-Soviet orientation after the war and remained an important ally of the USSR in the region.
As one officer noted, "This is a political war and it calls for discriminate killing.
The South Koreans soon developed a reputation for effectiveness, reportedly conducting counterinsurgency operations so well that American commanders felt that the South Korean area of responsibility was the safest.
In the U.S. and the Western world, a large anti-Vietnam War movement developed as part of a larger counterculture.
At the Geneva Conference, the French negotiated a ceasefire agreement with the Viet Minh, and independence was granted to Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.
Fearing that they could no longer trust the French authorities, the Imperial Japanese military interned the French authorities and troops on 9 March 1945 and created the puppet Empire of Vietnam state, under Bảo Đại instead.
Operations crossed international borders: bordering areas of Laos and Cambodia were heavily bombed by U.S. forces as American involvement in the war peaked in 1968, the same year that the communist side launched the Tet Offensive.
Logistics would be upgraded until the North was in a position to launch a massive invasion of the South, projected for the 1975–76 dry season.
South Korean forces were also accused of war crimes as well.
Although acknowledging serious problems, he questions the alleged "near mutinous" conduct of junior officers and enlisted men in combat.
One example cited by Turse is Operation Speedy Express, an operation by the 9th Infantry Division, which was described by John Paul Vann as, in effect, "many My Lais".
The American media, which had until then been largely supportive of U.S. efforts, turned on the Johnson administration for what had become an increasing credibility gap.
Diệm, however, viewed the election as a test of authority.
According to Rummel, North Vietnamese and Viet Cong troops murdered between 106,000 and 227,000 civilians in South Vietnam.
More noteworthy was the fact that the naval base in Subic Bay was used for the U.S.
Thieu's contradictory orders confused and demoralized his officer corps.
Marine Corps General Victor H. Krulak heavily criticised Westmoreland's attrition strategy, calling it "wasteful of American lives… with small likelihood of a successful outcome."
End-user satisfaction with the M16 was high except during this episode, but the M16 still has a reputation as a gun that jams easily.
500,000 tons were dropped on Cambodia, 1 million tons were dropped on North Vietnam, and 4 million tons were dropped on South Vietnam.
The Army of the Republic of Vietnam forces were led in that battle by Diệm's most trusted general, Huỳnh Văn Cao, commander of the IV Corps.
The quality of the South Vietnamese military, however, remained poor.
The Cambodians under both the pro-China King Sihanouk and the pro-American Lon Nol supported their fellow co-ethnic Khmer Krom in south Vietnam, following an anti- ethnic Vietnamese policy.
These advance warning gave them time to move out of the way of the bombers, and, while the bombing runs caused extensive damage, because of the early warnings from 1968 to 1970 they did not kill a single military or civilian leader in the headquarters complexes.
Vietnam was temporarily partitioned at the 17th parallel, and under the terms of the Geneva Accords, civilians were to be given the opportunity to move freely between the two provisional states for a 300-day period.
Chief among the proposed changes was the removal of Diệm's younger brother Nhu, who controlled the secret police and special forces and was seen as the man behind the Buddhist repression and more generally the architect of the Ngô family's rule.
The outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 convinced many Washington policymakers that the war in Indochina was an example of communist expansionism directed by the Soviet Union.
The Johnson administration employed a "policy of minimum candor" in its dealings with the media.
When the British landed in the south, they rearmed the interned French forces as well as parts of the surrendered Imperial Japanese forces to aid them in retaking southern Vietnam, as they did not have enough troops to do this themselves.
Agent Orange and similar chemical substances used by the U.S. have also caused a considerable number of deaths and injuries over the years, including the US Air Force crew that handled them.
By ignoring ARVN units, the U.S. commitment became open-ended.
It can be seen that the refusal was a tacit admission that the war could not be won by escalation, at least not at a cost acceptable to the American people.
North Vietnam sent 10,000 troops of the North Vietnamese Army to attack the south in 1964, and this figure increased to 100,000 in 1965.
Corporations like Dow Chemical Company and Monsanto were given the task of developing herbicides for this purpose.
George C. Herring argues, however, that McNamara and the Pentagon "did not knowingly lie about the alleged attacks, but they were obviously in a mood to retaliate and they seem to have selected from the evidence available to them those parts that confirmed what they wanted to believe."
Approximately 7,000 UH-1 aircraft saw service in Vietnam.
Johnson assured Diệm of more aid in molding a fighting force that could resist the communists.
There was a tendency to assign American motives to Vietnamese actions, though Diệm warned that it was an illusion to believe that blindly copying Western methods would solve Vietnamese problems.
On 15 March 1973, President Nixon implied that the United States would intervene militarily if the communist side violated the ceasefire.
U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger wrote in a secret memo to President Gerald Ford that "in terms of military tactics, we cannot help draw the conclusion that our armed forces are not suited to this kind of war.
On 15 January 1973, Nixon announced the suspension of offensive action against North Vietnam.
Admiral Arthur W. Radford, Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, gave this nuclear option his backing.
The 1884 Treaty of Huế formed the basis for French colonial rule in Vietnam for the next seven decades.
In addition, 200,000 to 400,000 Vietnamese boat people died at sea, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Defense Department officials believed that these body count figures need to be deflated by 30 percent.
He said, "I am convinced that U.S. troops with their energy, mobility, and firepower can successfully take the fight to the NLF National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam a.k.a.
They viewed the conflict as a colonial war and a continuation of the First Indochina War against forces from France and later on the U.S.
In this battalion, alongside the Cubans, fought Nguyễn Thị Định, founding member of the Viet Cong, who later became the first female Major General in the North Vietnamese Army.
Drug use, racial tensions, and the growing incidence of fragging—attempting to kill unpopular officers and non-commissioned officers with grenades or other weapons—created severe problems for the U.S. military and impacted its capability of undertaking combat operations.
The women who served in the military were solely volunteers.
The Vietnam War was the first conflict where U.S. forces had secure voice communication equipment available at the tactical level.
Diệm refused to make concessions to the Buddhist majority or take responsibility for the deaths.
In May 1957, Diệm undertook a ten-day state visit to the United States.
By November 1963, there were 16,000 American military personnel in South Vietnam, up from Eisenhower's 900 advisors.
The Pathet Lao overthrew the monarchy of Laos in December 1975, establishing the Lao People's Democratic Republic under the leadership of a member of the royal family, Souphanouvong.
A cease-fire was declared across North and South Vietnam.
On 6 March 1946, Ho signed an agreement allowing French forces to replace Nationalist Chinese forces, in exchange for French recognition of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam as a "free" republic within the French Union, with the specifics of such recognition to be determined by future negotiation.
Between 1965 and 1975, the United States spent $111 billion on the war ($686 billion in FY2008 dollars).
On 22 March, the NVA opened the siege of Huế.
The vast majority of the population lived in villages in the countryside where the key issue was land reform.
Previously, communist forces had utilized hit-and-run guerrilla tactics.
As many as two million more would have left had they not been stopped by the Viet Minh.
There had also been reports of Buddhist pagodas being demolished by Catholic paramilitaries throughout Diệm's rule.
Many of them had been employed by the Americans and were left to their fate.
During his confirmation hearings in June 1973, Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger stated that he would recommend resumption of U.S. bombing in North Vietnam if North Vietnam launched a major offensive against South Vietnam.
The French continued to run affairs in Indochina, but ultimate power resided in the hands of the Imperial Japanese.
When North Vietnam went public with the agreement's details, the Nixon administration claimed that the North was attempting to embarrass the president.
They also had 1,400 aircraft and a two-to-one numerical superiority in combat troops over their Communist enemies.
– General William C. Westmoreland, U.S. Army, Saigon, 1967.
Approximately 320,000 South Korean soldiers were sent to Vietnam, each serving a one-year tour of duty.
The National Security Agency ran a crash program to provide U.S. forces with a family of security equipment code named NESTOR, fielding 17,000 units initially.
In the early morning hours of 30 April, the last U.S. Marines evacuated the embassy by helicopter, as civilians swamped the perimeter and poured into the grounds.
The plan was approved by Johnson and marked a profound departure from the previous administration's insistence that the government of South Vietnam was responsible for defeating the guerrillas.
Once again, Hanoi was surprised by the speed of their success.
Maximum troop levels peaked at 50,000 in 1968, however all were withdrawn by 1973.
Because the need for medical aid was great, many nurses underwent a concentrated four-month training program before being deployed to Vietnam in the ANC.
In addition, Soviet military schools and academies began training Vietnamese soldiers – in all more than 10,000 military personnel.
His plan, called the Nixon Doctrine, was to build up the ARVN, so that they could take over the defense of South Vietnam.
Kim Il-sung is reported to have told his pilots to "fight in the war as if the Vietnamese sky were their own".
Even Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara concluded that "the achievement of a military victory by U.S. forces in Vietnam was indeed a dangerous illusion."
Vietnam was a major political issue during the United States presidential election in 1968.
In September 1940, Japan invaded Indochina.
President Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diệm's honor in New York City.
The top-secret history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, commissioned by the Department of Defense, detailed a long series of public deceptions on the part of the U.S. government.
It was hoped these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and the central government.
The U.S. dropped over 7 million tons of bombs on Indochina during the war—more than triple the 2.1 million tons of bombs the U.S. dropped on Europe and Asia during all of World War II, and more than ten times the amount dropped by the U.S. during the Korean War.
However, the major allied victors of World War II, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Soviet Union, all agreed the area belonged to the French.
The average age of the U.S. troops killed in Vietnam was 23.11 years.
The North Vietnamese met fierce resistance at Xuân Lộc from the ARVN 18th Division, who were outnumbered six to one.
The United States countered with what became known as the "American Plan", with the support of South Vietnam and the United Kingdom.
But Saigon, bolstered by a surge of U.S. aid received just before the ceasefire went into effect, began to roll back the Viet Cong.
Increasingly, each new regime was viewed by the communists as a puppet of the Americans; whatever the failings of Diệm, his credentials as a nationalist (as Robert McNamara later reflected) had been impeccable.
Westmoreland was succeeded by his deputy Creighton Abrams, a commander less inclined to public media pronouncements.
The campaign also focused on the Bình Xuyên organized crime group which was allied with members of the communist party secret police and had some military elements.
The United States Department of State was generally in favor of encouraging a coup, while the Defense Department favored Diệm.
As Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara noted, "the dangerous illusion of victory by the United States was therefore dead."
Diệm later went on to staff his administration's key posts mostly with northern and central Catholics.
The Vietnamese government claims that ordnance has killed some 42,000 people since the war officially ended.
