It is ranked 16th worldwide in biological diversity, being home to approximately 16% of the world's species.
Vietnam is bordered by China to the north, Laos to the northwest, Cambodia to the southwest, and Malaysia across the South China Sea to the southeast.
Since the reunification of Vietnam in 1976, it has competed as the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, attending every Summer Olympics from 1988 onwards.
From 2015 to 2020, construction will begin on the routes between Vinh and Nha Trang and between Hanoi and the northern provinces of Lào Cai and Lạng Sơn.
Several other minority faiths exist in Vietnam.
The planned Long Thanh International Airport will have an annual service capacity of 100 million passengers once it becomes fully operational in 2020.
By 2000, it had established diplomatic relations with all nations.
The ''áo dài'', a formal dress, is worn for special occasions such as weddings and religious festivals.
Vietnam's economy has been plagued with inefficiency and corruption in state programs, poor quality and underproduction, and restrictions on economic activity.
After the Mạc dynasty was defeated, the Lê dynasty was nominally reinstalled, but actual power was divided between the northern Trịnh lords and the southern Nguyễn lords, who engaged in a civil war for more than four decades before a truce was called in the 1670s.
The collaborative project OpenNet Initiative classifies Vietnam's level of online political censorship to be "pervasive", while Reporters Without Borders considers Vietnam to be one of 15 global "internet enemies".
Vietnam was part of Imperial China for over a millennium, from 111 BC to AD 939.
Vietnam's Customs office reported in July 2013 that the total value of international merchandise trade for the first half of 2013 was US$124 billion, which was 15.7% higher than the same period in 2012.
Vietnam has also made significant advances in the development of robots, such as the TOPIO humanoid model.
Vietnam Airlines, the state-owned national airline, maintains a fleet of 69 passenger aircraft, and aims to operate 150 by 2020.
Teeth attributed to ''Homo sapiens'' from the Late Pleistocene have also been found at Dong Can, and from the Early Holocene at Mai Da Dieu, Lang Gao and Lang Cuom.
Following a Japanese occupation in the 1940s, the Vietnamese fought French rule in the First Indochina War, eventually expelling the French in 1954.
The provinces are subdivided into provincial municipalities (''thành phố trực thuộc tỉnh''), townships (''thị xã'') and counties (''huyện''), which are in turn subdivided into towns (''thị trấn'') or communes (''xã'').
This provides preferential access to European markets for developing countries through reduced tariffs.
In the modern era, the cultural life of Vietnam has been deeply influenced by government-controlled media and cultural programs.
In 1862, the southern third of the country became the French colony of Cochinchina.
''Nhã nhạc'' is the most popular form of imperial court music.
The form "Vietnam" () is first recorded in the 16th-century oracular poem ''Sấm Trạng Trình''.
Vietnamese scholars furthermore produced numerous encyclopedias, such as Lê Quý Đôn's ''Vân đài loại ngữ''.
In 1963, Buddhist discontent with Diệm's regime erupted into mass demonstrations, leading to a violent government crackdown.
Vietnam's minority groups speak a variety of languages, including Tày, Mường, Cham, Khmer, Chinese, Nùng, and H'Mông.
A nationalist political movement soon emerged, with leaders such as Phan Bội Châu, Phan Chu Trinh, Phan Đình Phùng, Emperor Hàm Nghi and Ho Chi Minh fighting or calling for independence.
However, agriculture's share of Vietnam's GDP has fallen in recent decades, declining from 42% in 1989 to 20% in 2006, as production in other sectors of the economy has risen.
In 2012, the country's population was estimated at approximately 90.3 million.
Vietnamese literature has a centuries-deep history.
Inadequate funding has also contributed to a shortage of nurses, midwives, and hospital beds; in 2000, Vietnam had only 250,000 hospital beds, or 14.8 beds per 10,000 people, according to the World Bank.
In its early history, Vietnamese writing used Chinese characters.
Thanks largely to these reforms, Vietnam achieved around 8% annual GDP growth between 1990 and 1997, and the economy continued to grow at an annual rate of around 7% from 2000 to 2005, making Vietnam one of the world's fastest growing economies.
In recent times, Vietnamese scientists have made many significant contributions in various fields of study, most notably in mathematics.
Vietnamese monks led by the abdicated Emperor Trần Nhân Tông developed the Trúc Lâm Zen branch of philosophy in the 13th century.
Bicycles, motor scooters and motorcycles remain the most popular forms of road transport in Vietnam's urban areas, although the number of privately owned automobiles is also on the rise, especially in the larger cities.
Hoàng Tụy pioneered the applied mathematics field of global optimization in the 20th century, while Ngô Bảo Châu won the 2010 Fields Medal for his proof of fundamental lemma in the theory of automorphic forms.
The average annual temperature is generally higher in the plains than in the mountains, and higher in the south than in the north.
Vietnam furthermore declares itself to be "a friend and reliable partner of all countries in the international community, actively taking part in international and regional cooperation processes."
At this time, the early Vietnamese kingdoms of Văn Lang and Âu Lạc appeared, and the culture's influence spread to other parts of Southeast Asia, including Maritime Southeast Asia, throughout the first millennium BC.
The Supreme People's Court of Vietnam, headed by a Chief Justice, is the country's highest court of appeal, though it is also answerable to the National Assembly.
In addition, the Mekong Delta and Red River Delta are vital to Vietnam's social and economic welfare – most of the country's population lives along or near these river deltas, and the major cities of Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi are situated near the Mekong and Red River deltas, respectively.
The US$2 billion project, which has been designed to accommodate 14 million tourists annually, is located in southern Long An Province, near Ho Chi Minh City.
Japan exploited Vietnam's natural resources to support its military campaigns, culminating in a full-scale takeover of the country in March 1945 and the Vietnamese Famine of 1945, which caused up to two million deaths.
''Xẩm'' or ''Hát xẩm'' (Xẩm singing) is a type of Vietnamese folk music.
This led to the collapse of Diệm's relationship with the United States, and ultimately to the 1963 coup in which Diệm and Nhu were assassinated.
''Hát chầu văn'' or ''hát văn'' is a spiritual form of music used to invoke spirits during ceremonies.
The Prime Minister of Vietnam is the head of government, presiding over a council of ministers composed of three deputy prime ministers and the heads of 26 ministries and commissions.
Communist forces supplying the Viet Cong carried supplies along the Ho Chi Minh trail, which passed through Laos.
Manufacturing, information technology and high-tech industries now form a large and fast-growing part of the national economy.
Only political organizations affiliated with or endorsed by the Communist Party are permitted to contest elections in Vietnam.
Arithmetics and geometry have been widely taught in Vietnam since the 15th century, using the textbook ''Đại thành toán pháp'' by Lương Thế Vinh as a basis.
By the early 10th century, Vietnam had gained autonomy, but not sovereignty, under the Khúc family.
However, the 1930 Yên Bái mutiny of the Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng was suppressed easily.
By 1884, the entire country had come under French rule, with the Central and Northern parts of Vietnam separated in the two protectorates of Annam and Tonkin.
Since the early 2000s, Vietnam has applied sequenced trade liberalisation, a two-track approach opening some sectors of the economy to international markets while protecting others.
The partition of Vietnam was not intended to be permanent by the Geneva Accords, which stipulated that Vietnam would be reunited after elections in 1956.
Southern Vietnam is divided into coastal lowlands, the mountains of the Annamite Range, and extensive forests.
As Sino-Vietnamese relations soured in 1978 and 1979, some 450,000 Hoa left Vietnam.
The name has also been found on 12 steles carved in the 16th and 17th centuries, including one at Bao Lam Pagoda in Haiphong that dates to 1558.
The Vietnamese government rejects allegations that it does not allow religious freedom.
Private ownership was encouraged in industries, commerce and agriculture.
The state's official position on religion is that all citizens are free to their belief, and that all religions are equal before the law.
Vietnam's chief trading partners include China, Japan, Australia, the ASEAN countries, the United States and Western Europe.
The three Vietnameses entities were formally integrated into the union of French Indochina in 1887.
First, the Chinese-supported Mạc dynasty challenged the Lê dynasty's power.
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam, along with China, Cuba, and Laos, is one of the world's four remaining one-party socialist states officially espousing communism.
The Vietnamese government is widely seen as suspicious of Roman Catholicism.
However, since the 1990s, Vietnam has seen a greater exposure to Southeast Asian, European and American culture and media.
In total, there are approximately 70,000 Muslims in Vietnam, while around 50,000 Hindus and a small number of Baha'is are also in evidence.
In the aftermath of the war, under Lê Duẩn's administration, there were no mass executions of South Vietnamese who had collaborated with the U.S. or the Saigon government, confounding Western fears.
Northern classical music is Vietnam's oldest musical form, and is traditionally more formal.
There are a range of traditional instruments, including the Đàn bầu (a monochord zither), the Đàn gáo (a two-stringed fiddle with coconut body), and the Đàn nguyệt (a two-stringed fretted moon lute).
In 257 BC, the last Hùng king was defeated by Thục Phán, who consolidated the Lạc Việt and Âu Việt tribes to form the Âu Lạc, proclaiming himself An Dương Vương.
The traditional focuses of Vietnamese culture are humanity (''nhân nghĩa'') and harmony (''hòa''); family and community values are highly regarded.
The Vietnam People's Armed Forces consists of the Vietnam People's Army, the Vietnam People's Public Security and the Vietnam Civil Defense Force.
On average, 40–50 new infections are reported every day in Vietnam.
For many decades, foreign cultural influences – especially those of Western origin – were shunned.
This mistrust originated during the 19th century, when some Catholics collaborated with the French colonists in conquering and ruling the country and in helping French attempts to install Catholic emperors, such as in the Lê Văn Khôi revolt of 1833.
Mountains account for 40% of the country's land area, and tropical forests cover around 42%.
The defeat of French and Vietnamese loyalists in the 1954 Battle of Dien Bien Phu allowed Ho Chi Minh to negotiate a ceasefire from a favorable position at the subsequent Geneva Conference.
This caused economic chaos and resulted in triple-digit inflation, while national reconstruction efforts progressed slowly.
Vietnam is currently working to develop an indigenous space program, and plans to construct the US$600 million Vietnam Space Center by 2018.
Guerrillas of the Cần Vương movement murdered around a third of Vietnam's Christian population during this period.
In 207 BC, a Chinese general named Zhao Tuo defeated An Dương Vương and consolidated Âu Lạc into Nanyue.
US forces became involved in ground combat operations in 1965, and at their peak they numbered more than 500,000.
The origins of Vietnamese classical music can be traced to the Mongol invasions of the 13th century, when the Vietnamese captured a Chinese opera troupe.
Temperatures vary less in the southern plains around Ho Chi Minh City and the Mekong Delta, ranging between  over the course of the year.
Education is not free; therefore, some poor families may have trouble paying tuition for their children without some form of public or private assistance.
Vietnam remains one of the world's four remaining one-party socialist states officially espousing communism.
Successive Vietnamese royal dynasties flourished as the nation expanded geographically and politically into Southeast Asia, until the Indochina Peninsula was colonized by the French in the mid-19th century.
The soil in much of southern Vietnam is relatively poor in nutrients.
However, up to 300,000 South Vietnamese were sent to reeducation camps, where many endured torture, starvation, and disease while being forced to perform hard labor.
In 2010, Vietnam was ranked as the 8th largest crude petroleum producers in the Asia and Pacific region.
In July 2006, Vietnam updated its intellectual property legislation to comply with TRIPS, and it became a member of the WTO on 11 January 2007.
Since the early 2000s, Vietnam has made significant progress in combating malaria, with the malaria mortality rate falling to about 5% of its 1990s equivalent by 2005, after the country introduced improved antimalarial drugs and treatment.
Road safety is a serious issue in Vietnam – on average, 30 people are killed in traffic accidents every day.
Because of differences in latitude and the marked variety in topographical relief, the climate tends to vary considerably from place to place.
Archaeological excavations have revealed the existence of humans in what is now Vietnam as early as the Paleolithic age.
Under this political instability, the communists began to gain ground.
Japanese and Korean have also grown in popularity as Vietnam's links with other East Asian nations have strengthened.
In 2014 Vietnam negotiated a free trade agreement with the European Union, giving the country access to the EU's Generalized System of Preferences.
Traditional Vietnamese weddings remain widely popular, and are often celebrated by expatriate Vietnamese in Western countries.
In the late 1980s, the quality of healthcare declined to some degree as a result of budgetary constraints, a shift of responsibility to the provinces, and the introduction of charges.
At its narrowest point in the central Quảng Bình Province, the country is as little as  across, though it widens to around  in the north.
In 2009, Vietnam's national life expectancy stood at 76 years for women and 72 for men, and the infant mortality rate was 12 per 1,000 live births.
Traditional Vietnamese music varies between the country's northern and southern regions.
A large number of public schools have been constructed across the country to raise the national literacy rate, which stood at 90.3% in 2008.
The President of Vietnam is the titular head of state and the nominal commander-in-chief of the military, serving as the Chairman of the Council of Supreme Defense and Security.
, 0.5% of the population is estimated to be infected with HIV, and this figure has remained stable since 2005.
Written literature has been found dating back to the 10th-century Ngô dynasty, with notable ancient authors including Nguyễn Trãi, Trần Hưng Đạo, Nguyễn Du and Nguyễn Đình Chiểu.
According to a state-approved plan, Vietnam will have 10 international airports by 2015 – besides the aforementioned three, these include Lien Khuong International Airport, Phu Bai International Airport, Cam Ranh International Airport, Phu Quoc International Airport, Cat Bi International Airport, Cần Thơ International Airport and Long Thanh International Airport.
In December 1974, North Vietnam captured the province of Phước Long and started a full-scale offensive, culminating in the Fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975.
It also maintains relations with over 650 non-government organizations.
The French maintained full control of their colonies until World War II, when the war in the Pacific led to the Japanese invasion of French Indochina in 1940.
The Vietnamese dynasties reached their zenith in the Lê dynasty of the 15th century, especially during the reign of Emperor Lê Thánh Tông (1460–1497).
These include the Vietnamese Fatherland Front and worker and trade unionist parties.
Currently, the total fertility rate of Vietnam is 1.8 (births per woman), which is largely due to the government's family planning policy, the two-child policy.
An independent Vietnamese state was formed in 939, following a Vietnamese victory in the Battle of Bạch Đằng River.
Traffic congestion is a growing problem in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, as the cities' roads struggle to cope with the boom in automobile use.
According to the IMF, the unemployment rate in Vietnam stood at 4.46% in 2012.
It was revived in the early 20th century by Phan Bội Châu's ''History of the Loss of Vietnam'', and later by the Vietnamese Nationalist Party.
The influences of immigrant peoples – such as the Cantonese, Hakka, Hokkien and Hainan cultures – can also be seen, while the national religion of Buddhism is strongly entwined with popular culture.
Traditional Vietnamese cooking is known for its fresh ingredients, minimal use of oil, and reliance on herbs and vegetables, and is considered one of the healthiest cuisines worldwide.
In recent years, as Vietnam's contacts with Western nations have increased, English has become more popular as a second language.
Vietnam operates 21 major civil airports, including three international gateways: Noi Bai in Hanoi, Da Nang International Airport in Da Nang, and Tan Son Nhat in Ho Chi Minh City.
Renamed as Đại Việt (''Great Viet''), the nation enjoyed a golden era under the Lý and Trần dynasties.
Phan Xi Păng, located in Lào Cai Province, is the highest mountain in Vietnam, standing  high.
The northern part of the country consists mostly of highlands and the Red River Delta.
Other primary exports include tea, rubber, and fishery products.
However, these reforms have also caused a rise in income inequality and gender disparities.
Vietnam's media sector is regulated by the government in accordance with the 2004 Law on Publication.
Thereafter, Vietnam was divided politically into two rival states, North and South Vietnam.
However, Vietnam is also home to 54 ethnic minority groups, including the Hmong, Dao, Tay, Thai, and Nùng.
Between 1804 and 1813, the name was used officially by Emperor Gia Long.
Vietnam's land is mostly hilly and densely forested, with level land covering no more than 20%.
Ca trù (also ''hát ả đào'') is a popular folk music.
In 1986, the Sixth National Congress of the Communist Party introduced socialist-oriented market economic reforms as part of the ''Đổi Mới'' reform program.
The folk epic  ("", originally known as '''') by Nguyễn Du was written in ''Chữ nôm''.
About 8% of the population are Christians, totalling around six million Roman Catholics and fewer than one million Protestants.
''Áo dài'' was once worn by both genders, but today it is mostly the preserve of women, although men do wear it to some occasions, such as traditional weddings.
Throughout its history, Vietnam's key foreign relationship has been with its largest neighbour and one-time imperial master, China.
The high-speed lines linking Hanoi to Vinh, Nha Trang and Ho Chi Minh City will be laid by 2015.
Since 2000, Vietnam's economic growth rate has been among the highest in the world, and, in 2011, it had the highest Global Growth Generators Index among 11 major economies.
Meanwhile, Buddhism flourished and became the state religion.
Nevertheless, only government-approved religious organisations are allowed; for example, the South Vietnam-founded Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam is banned in favour of a communist-approved body.
Many ethnic minorities – such as the Muong, who are closely related to the Kinh – dwell in the highlands, which cover two-thirds of Vietnam's territory.
engaged in activities outside their mandate.
The oldest ''Homo sapiens'' fossils from mainland Southeast Asia are of Middle Pleistocene provenance, and include isolated tooth fragments from Tham Om and Hang Hum.
Fish sauce, soy sauce, prawn sauce, and limes are among the main flavoring ingredients.
During the land reform, testimony from North Vietnamese witnesses suggested a ratio of one execution for every 160 village residents, which extrapolated nationwide would indicate nearly 100,000 executions.
The present Vietnam Olympic Committee was formed in 1976 and recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 1979. , Vietnam has never participated in the Winter Olympics.
A number of sign languages have developed in the cities.
From the 16th century onwards, civil strife and frequent political infighting engulfed much of Vietnam.
The Voice of Vietnam is the official state-run national radio broadcasting service, broadcasting internationally via shortwave using rented transmitters in other countries, and providing broadcasts from its website.
Some elements of the national culture have Chinese origins, drawing on elements of Confucianism and Taoism in its traditional political system and philosophy.
In agricultural genetic diversity, Vietnam is one of the world's twelve original cultivar centers.
Vietnam maintains the death penalty for numerous offences; as of February 2014, there are around 700 inmates on death row in Vietnam.
In 2011, Vietnam's military expenditure totalled approximately US$2.48 billion, equivalent to around 2.5% of its 2010 GDP.
However, their rule did not last long, and they were defeated by the remnants of the Nguyễn lords, led by Nguyễn Ánh and aided by the French.
However, in 1955, the State of Vietnam's Prime Minister, Ngô Đình Diệm, toppled Bảo Đại in a fraudulent referendum organised by his brother Ngô Đình Nhu, and proclaimed himself president of the Republic of Vietnam.
Much of Vietnam's modern transport network was originally developed under French rule to facilitate the transportation of raw materials, and was reconstructed and extensively modernized following the Vietnam War.
Vietnam is one of twenty-five countries considered to possess a uniquely high level of biodiversity.
Vietnam has the highest proportion of land use for permanent crops – 6.93% – of any nation in the Greater Mekong Subregion.
Tan Son Nhat is the nation's largest airport, handling 75% of international passenger traffic.
The division of the country ended a century later when the Tây Sơn brothers established a new dynasty.
Vietnam has an extensive state-controlled network of schools, colleges and universities, and a growing number of privately run and partially privatised institutions.
A large number of Vietnam's most acclaimed universities are based in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.
This was a ruthless program that incarcerated many non-communists, although it was also successful at curtailing communist activity in the country, if only for a time.
Following the 1406–7 Ming–Hồ War which overthrew the Hồ dynasty, Vietnamese independence was briefly interrupted by the Chinese Ming dynasty, but was restored by Lê Lợi, the founder of the Lê dynasty.
Its successful economic reforms resulted in its joining the World Trade Organization in 2007.
The U.S. was the country that purchased the highest amount of Vietnam's exports, while Chinese goods were the most popular Vietnamese import.
Military courts possess special jurisdiction in matters of national security.
The country was usually called Annam until 1945, when both the imperial government in Huế and the Viet Minh government in Hanoi adopted ''Việt Nam''.
During this time, the Nguyễn expanded southern Vietnam into the Mekong Delta, annexing the Central Highlands and the Khmer lands in the Mekong Delta.
Once an inlet of the Gulf of Tonkin, it has been filled in over the millennia by riverine alluvial deposits.
The Diệm era was followed by more than a dozen successive military governments, before the pairing of Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ and General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu took control in mid-1965.
Several private airlines are also in operation in Vietnam, including Air Mekong, Jetstar Pacific Airlines, VASCO and VietJet Air.
The reformers were led by 71-year-old Nguyễn Văn Linh, who became the party's new general secretary.
Following the military defeat of Japan and the fall of its puppet Empire of Vietnam in August 1945, the Viet Minh occupied Hanoi and proclaimed a provisional government, which asserted national independence on 2 September.
During the winter or dry season, extending roughly from November to April, the monsoon winds usually blow from the northeast along the Chinese coast and across the Gulf of Tonkin, picking up considerable moisture.
Developing a plantation economy to promote the export of tobacco, indigo, tea and coffee, the French largely ignored increasing calls for Vietnamese self-government and civil rights.
The population had grown significantly from the 1979 census, which showed the total population of reunified Vietnam to be 52.7 million.
Though the government of Vietnam claims to safeguard the country against obscene or sexually explicit content through its blocking efforts, many politically and religiously sensitive websites are also banned.
With an intensified vaccination program, better hygiene, and foreign assistance, Vietnam hopes to reduce sharply the number of TB cases and annual new TB infections.
The Vatican Church is officially banned, and only government-controlled Catholic organisations are permitted.
It is criss-crossed by a maze of rivers and canals, which carry so much sediment that the delta advances  into the sea every year.
The Red River Delta, a flat, roughly triangular region covering , is smaller but more intensely developed and more densely populated than the Mekong River Delta.
General education in Vietnam is divided into five categories: kindergarten, elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, and universities.
With an estimated 90.5 million inhabitants , it is the world's 14th-most-populous country, and the eighth-most-populous Asian country.
Beneath the Supreme People's Court stand the provincial municipal courts and numerous local courts.
Headed by a Chairman, it is superior to both the executive and judicial branches, with all government ministers being appointed from members of the National Assembly.
This conflict caused Vietnam to rely even more heavily on Soviet economic and military aid.
However, the Vatican has attempted to negotiate the opening of diplomatic relations with Vietnam in recent years.
Vietnam's independence was gradually eroded by France – aided by large Catholic militias – in a series of military conquests between 1859 and 1885.
Vietnam has been for much of its history a predominantly agricultural civilization based on wet rice cultivation.
A significant number of people are adherents of Caodaism, an indigenous folk religion which has structured itself on the model of the Catholic Church.
During the rule of the Trần Dynasty, Đại Việt repelled three Mongol invasions.
According to the 2005 National Environmental Present Condition Report.
In 1802, Nguyễn Phúc Ánh established the Nguyễn dynasty, and in the second year, he asked the Qing Emperor Jiaqing to confer him the title 'King of Nam Viet/Nanyue'(南越 in Chinese), but the Grand Secretariat of Qing dynasty pointed out that the name Nam Viet/Nanyue includes regions of Guangxi and Guangdong in China, and  'Nguyễn Phúc Ánh only has Annam, which is simply the area of our old Jiaozhi (交趾), how can they be called Nam Viet/Nanyue?'
