In the Viking colony of Iceland, an extraordinary vernacular literature blossomed in the 12th through 14th centuries, and many traditions connected with the Viking Age were written down for the first time in the Icelandic sagas.
The ''Snorri'' (a Skuldelev I Knarr), was sailed from Greenland to Newfoundland in 1998.
a long-distance sea journey, because in the pre-sail era, the shifting of rowers would distinguish long-distance sea journeys.
The thralls or servants took care of most of the daily chores, while the Jarls engaged in administration, politics, hunting, sports, paid visits to other Jarls or were abroad on expeditions.
Some of these place names and words are still in direct use today, almost unchanged, and sheds light on where they settled and what specific places meant to them, as seen in place names like Egilsay (from ''Eigils Ø'' meaning Eigil's Island), Ormskirk (from ''Ormr kirkja'' meaning Orms Church or Church of the Worm), Meols (from ''merl'' meaning Sand Dunes), Snaefell (Snow Fell), Ravenscar (Ravens Rock), Vinland (Land of Wine or Land of Winberry), Kaupanger (Market Harbour), Tórshavn (Thor's Harbour), and the religious centre of Odense, meaning a place where Odin was worshipped.
According to the Icelandic sagas, many Norwegian Vikings also went to eastern Europe.
In the southern regions, herring was also important.
Some of the burial sites that are most important to our understanding of the Vikings include:
The larger stone was raised by his son, Harald Bluetooth, to celebrate the conquest of Denmark and Norway and the conversion of the Danes to Christianity.
Gascony and vicinity is an active area of Viking archaeology at present.
They also held a major religious importance.
Studies of genetic diversity provide some indication of the origin and expansion of the Viking population.
It was valued by many European cultures of the time, and the Vikings used it to illustrate status such as wealth and nobility.
Meat products of all kinds, such as cured, smoked and whey-preserved meat, sausages, and boiled or fried fresh meat cuts, were prepared and consumed.
The Sagas tell us about the diet and cuisine of the Vikings, but first hand evidence, like cesspits, kitchen middens and garbage dumps have proved to be of great value and importance.
Chess also appeared at the end of the Viking Age.
The 200-year Viking influence on European history is filled with tales of plunder and colonization, and the majority of these chronicles came from western witnesses and their descendants.
Most contemporary literary and written sources on the Vikings come from other cultures that were in contact with them.
The milk came from cows, goats and sheep, with priorities varying from location to location, and fermented milk products like skyr or surmjölk were produced as well as butter and cheese.
In daily life, there were many intermediate positions in the overall social structure and it is believed that there must have been some social mobility.
It was common for seafaring Viking ships to tow or carry a smaller boat to transfer crews and cargo from the ship to shore.
In Germany, awareness of Viking history in the 19th century had been stimulated by the border dispute with Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein and the use of Scandinavian mythology by Richard Wagner.
The Vikings were skilled spinners and weavers and exported woollen cloth of a high quality.
They were probably used for ceremonial purposes.
In 1962, American comic book writer Stan Lee and his brother Larry Lieber, together with Jack Kirby, created the Marvel Comics superhero Thor, which they based on the Norse god of the same name.
Whatever the rules were, the fights often resulted in the death of one of the stallions.
It is also common near the southern Baltic and North Sea coasts, and then successively decreasing further to the south geographically.
The Jutes invaded the British Isles three centuries earlier, pouring out from Jutland during the Age of Migrations, before the Danes settled there.
Current popular representations of the Vikings are typically based on cultural clichés and stereotypes, complicating modern appreciation of the Viking legacy.
Early on it was the Saxons, who occupied Old Saxony, located in what is now Northern Germany.
The Vikings in York mostly ate beef, mutton, and pork with small amounts of horse meat.
The Saxon defeat resulted in their forced christening and the absorption of Old Saxony into the Carolingian Empire.
The Norse regularly plied the Volga with their trade goods: furs, tusks, seal fat for boat sealant, and slaves.
More than 40% of all known textile recoveries from the Viking Age can be traced as linen.
Towns appeared that functioned as secular and ecclesiastical administrative centres and market sites, and monetary economies began to emerge based on English and German models.
The Old Norse feminine víking (as in the phrase fara í víking) may originally have been a sea journey characterized by the shifting of rowers, i.e.
Popular, modern conceptions of the Vikings—the term frequently applied casually to their modern descendants and the inhabitants of modern Scandinavia—often strongly differ from the complex picture that emerges from archaeology and historical sources.
Remains of bread from primarily Birka in Sweden were made of barley and wheat.
The south coast of the Baltic Sea was ruled by the Obotrites, a federation of Slavic tribes loyal to the Carolingians and later the Frankish empire.
In the 300 years from the late 8th century, when contemporary chroniclers first commented on the appearance of Viking raiders, to the end of the 11th century, Scandinavia underwent profound cultural changes.
Norse Mythology, sagas, and literature tell of Scandinavian culture and religion through tales of heroic and mythological heroes.
On their raids, the Vikings captured many people, among them monks and clergymen.
Seafood was an important part of the diet, in some places even more so than meat.
The longship allowed the Norse to ''go Viking'', which might explain why this type of ship has become almost synonymous with the concept of Vikings.
This period of Norse military, mercantile and demographic expansion constitutes an important element in the early medieval history of Scandinavia, the British Isles, Ireland, France, Kievan Rus' and Sicily.
In Old English, and in the history of the archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen written by Adam of Bremen in about 1070, the term generally referred to Scandinavian pirates or raiders.
The term is also commonly extended in modern English and other vernaculars to the inhabitants of Viking home communities during what has become known as the Viking Age.
The funerals involved either burial or cremation, depending on local customs.
In Normandy, which had been settled by Vikings, the Viking ship became an uncontroversial regional symbol.
Seeds of carrots, parsnip, and brassicas were also discovered, but they were poor specimens and tend to come from white carrots and bitter tasting cabbages.
They were sometimes sold as slaves to Arab merchants in exchange for silver.
Pioneering 19th-century scholarly editions of the Viking Age began to reach a small readership in Britain, archaeologists began to dig up Britain's Viking past, and linguistic enthusiasts started to identify the Viking-Age origins of rural idioms and proverbs.
The invention and introduction of the mouldboard plough revolutionized agriculture in Scandinavia in the early Viking Age and made it possible to farm even the poor soils.
One reason is that the cultures of north-eastern Europe at the time were non-literate, and did not produce a legacy of literature.
There was no distinction made between children born inside or outside of marriage: both had the right to inherit property after their parents, and there was no "legitimate" or "illegitimate" children.
The Ockelbo Runestone shows two men engaged in Hnefatafl, and the sagas suggest that money or valuables could have been involved in some dice games.
Other names for Karls were 'bonde' or simply free men.
The Viking Rurik dynasty took control of territories in Slavic and Finno-Ugric-dominated areas of Eastern Europe; they annexed Kiev in 882 to serve as the capital of the Kievan Rus'.
This was done to legitimize the Vikings and their mythology by associating it with the Classical world, which had long been idealized in European culture.
Home grown spices that were used included caraway, mustard and horseradish as evidenced from the Oseberg ship burial or dill, coriander, and wild celery, as found during the archaeological examinations of cesspits at Coppergate in York.
There are archaeological signs of organized textile productions in Scandinavia, reaching as far back as the early Iron Ages.
This period of expansion witnessed the wider dissemination of Norse culture, while simultaneously introducing strong foreign cultural influences into Scandinavia itself, with profound developmental implications in both directions.
Skiing and ice skating were the primary winter sports of the Vikings, although skiing was also used as everyday means of transport in winter time and in the colder regions of the north.
The techniques were stalking, snare and traps and ''par force'' hunting with dog packs.
Swimming was a popular sport and Snorri Sturluson describes three types: diving, long-distance swimming and a contest in which two swimmers try to duck one another.
It is used in distinction from Anglo-Saxon.
Alcoholic drinks like beer, mead, bjórr (a strong fruit wine) and, for the rich, imported wine, were served.
Common words in everyday English language, like some of the weekdays (Thursday means Thor's day), axle, crook, raft, knife, plough, leather, berserk, bylaw, thorp, skerry, ombudsman, husband, , Hell, Norman and ransack stem from the Old Norse of the Vikings and give us an opportunity to understand their interactions with the people and cultures of the British Isles.
Vikings collected and ate fruits, berries and nuts.
Among the Swedish runestones mentioning expeditions overseas, almost half tell of raids and travels to western Europe.
The Slavs and the Byzantines also called them Varangians (, , from ''vàr''- "confidence, vow of fealty," related to Old English ''wær'' "agreement, treaty, promise," Old High German ''wara'' "faithfulness").
They are usually in memory of the dead, though not necessarily placed at graves.
Later writings on the Vikings and the Viking Age can also be important for understanding them and their culture, although they need to be treated cautiously.
An exception to her independence was the right to choose a marriage partner, as marriages were normally arranged by the clan.
Icelandic sources refer to the sport of ''knattleik''.
Lack of organised naval opposition throughout Western Europe allowed Viking ships to travel freely, raiding or trading as opportunity permitted.
The Viking raids were, however, the first to be documented in writing by eyewitnesses, and they were much larger in scale and frequency than in previous times.
The kings of Norway continued to assert power in parts of northern Britain and Ireland, and raids continued into the 12th century, but the military ambitions of Scandinavian rulers were now directed toward new paths.
* Spices were obtained from Chinese and Persian traders, who met with the Viking traders in Russia.
The Viking ship designs, like that of the knarr, were an important factor in their success as merchants.
Evidence to the contrary was suppressed until the 1990s.
A ball game akin to hockey, knattleik involved a bat and a small hard ball and was usually played on a smooth field of ice.
Hunting, as a sport, was limited to Denmark, where it was not regarded as an important occupation.
The ships were scuttled there in the 11th century to block a navigation channel and thus protect Roskilde, then the Danish capital, from seaborne assault.
In the area that is now Sweden, cremations were predominant; in Denmark burial was more common; and in Norway both were common.
The most important primary sources on the Vikings are contemporary texts from Scandinavia and regions where the Vikings were active.
Building on the linguistic and cultural connections between Norse-speaking Scandinavians and other Germanic groups in the distant past, Scandinavian Vikings were portrayed in Nazi Germany as a pure Germanic type.
By the late 11th century, royal dynasties legitimised by the Catholic Church (which had had little influence in Scandinavia 300 years earlier) were asserting their power with increasing authority and ambition, and the three kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden had taken shape.
Less common, though equally relevant, are the Viking chronicles that originated in the east, including the Nestor chronicles, Novgorod chronicles, Ibn Fadlan chronicles, Ibn Rusta chronicles, and brief mentions by Photius, patriarch of Constantinople, regarding their first attack on the Byzantine Empire.
Until recently, the history of the Viking Age was largely based on Icelandic sagas, the history of the Danes written by Saxo Grammaticus, the Russian ''Primary Chronicle'', and ''Cogad Gáedel re Gallaib''.
A variety of sources illuminate the culture, activities, and beliefs of the Vikings.
Members of the latter were referred to as ''drenge'', one of the words for warrior.
Some archaeologists and historians of today believe that these Scandinavian settlements in the Slavic lands played a significant role in the formation of the Kievan Rus' federation, and hence the names and early states of Russia and Belarus.
*Faroe Islands: Hov.
The paternal aunt, paternal niece and paternal granddaughter, referred to as ''odalkvinna'', all had the right to inherit property from a deceased man.
A romanticized picture of Vikings as noble savages began to emerge in the 18th century; this developed and became widely propagated during the 19th-century Viking revival.
Runestones are important sources in the study of Norse society and early medieval Scandinavia, not only of the Viking segment of the population.
* Norway: Oseberg; Gokstad; Borrehaugene.
According to the Rigsthula, Thralls were despised and looked down upon.
In communist Russia, the ideology of Slavic racial purity led to the complete denial that Scandinavians had played a part in the emergence of the principalities of the Rus', which were supposed to have been founded by Slavs.
After the age of 20, an unmarried woman, referred to as ''maer'' and ''mey'', reached legal majority and had the right to decide of her place of residence and was regarded as her own person before the law.
Preserved gaming pieces and boards show game boards made of easily available materials like wood, with game pieces manufactured from stone, wood or bone, while other finds include elaborately carved boards and game pieces of glass, amber, antler or walrus tusk, together with materials of foreign origin, such as ivory.
The Vikings built many unique types of watercraft, often used for more peaceful tasks.
This included the furs of pine martens, foxes, bears, otters and beavers.
The items buried with the dead give some indication as to what was considered important to possess in the afterlife.
Soapstone was traded with the Norse on Iceland and in Jutland, who used it for pottery.
The Jarls were the aristocracy of the Viking society.
the Muslim world), England (including London), and various places in Eastern Europe.
Scandinavian predation in Christian lands around the North and Irish Seas diminished markedly.
Runestones attest to voyages to locations such as Bath, Greece, Khwaresm, Jerusalem, Italy (as Langobardland), Serkland (i.e.
Agility and balance were built and tested by running and jumping for sport, and there is mention of a sport that involved jumping from oar to oar on the outside of a ship's railing as it was being rowed.
Vikings were relatively unusual for the time in their use of axes as a main battle weapon.
Viking barrows are one of the primary source of evidence for circumstances in the Viking Age.
Down was used for bedding and quilted clothing.
Silver was the most common metal in the economy, although gold was also used to some extent.
In that respect, descendants of the Vikings continued to have an influence in northern Europe.
By 1103, the first archbishopric was founded in Scandinavia, at Lund, Scania, then part of Denmark.
Horned helmets from the Bronze Age were shown in petroglyphs and appeared in archaeological finds (see Bohuslän and Vikso helmets).
Cartoons like ''Hägar the Horrible'' and ''Vicky the Viking'', and sports kits such as those of the Minnesota Vikings and Canberra Raiders have perpetuated the myth of the horned helmet.
King Olaf Tryggvason was hailed as a master of both mountain climbing and oar-jumping, and was said to have excelled in the art of knife juggling as well.
Åhus in Scania and the old market town of Ribe had major production of glass beads.
In the Northern Isles of Shetland and Orkney, Old Norse completely replaced the local languages and over time evolved into the now extinct Norn language.
A consequence of the available written sources, which may have coloured how we perceive the Viking Age as a historical period, is that we know a lot more of the Vikings' activities in western Europe than in the East.
The form also occurs as a personal name on some Swedish rune stones.
They were used as raw material for making everyday utensils like combs.
The Scandinavians did write inscriptions in runes, but these are usually very short and formulaic.
In the absence of male relatives, an unmarried woman with no son could inherit not only property but also the position as head of the family from a deceased father or brother.
The older, smaller stone was raised by King Gorm the Old, the last pagan king of Denmark, as a memorial honouring Queen Thyre.
Linguistic and etymological studies continue to provide a vital source of information on the Viking culture, their social structure and history and how they interacted with the people and cultures they met, traded, attacked or lived with in overseas settlements.
This helmet is made of iron and has been dated to the 10th century.
Slavery was of vital importance to Viking society, for everyday chores and large scale construction and also to trade and the economy.
The new thralls were then brought back home to Scandinavia by boat, used on location or in newer settlements to build needed structures or sold, often to the Arabs in exchange for silver.
Generally speaking, the Norwegians expanded to the north and west to places such as Ireland, Scotland, Iceland, and Greenland; the Danes to England and France, settling in the Danelaw (northern/eastern England) and Normandy; and the Swedes to the east, founding Kievan Rus'.
Another is that the vast majority of written sources on Scandinavia in the Viking Age come from Iceland, a nation originally settled by Norwegian colonists.
The longship had a long, narrow hull and shallow draught to facilitate landings and troop deployments in shallow water.
Viking helmets were conical, made from hard leather with wood and metallic reinforcement for regular troops.
To counter the Saxon aggression and solidify their own presence, the Danes constructed the huge defence fortification of Danevirke in and around Hedeby.
After the end of the Viking Age the separate kingdoms gradually acquired distinct identities as nations, which went hand-in-hand with their Christianization.
Their realm was bordered by powerful cultures to the south.
The Vikings soon witnessed the violent subduing of the Saxons by Charlemagne, in the thirty-year Saxon Wars in 772-804.
The Vikings—led by King Gudfred—destroyed the Obotrite city of Reric on the southern Baltic coast in 808 AD and transferred the merchants and traders to Hedeby.
Professor Rudolf Simek states that "it is not a coincidence if the early Viking activity occurred during the reign of Charlemagne".
* Fur was also exported as it provided warmth.
Thyme, juniper berry, sweet gale, yarrow, rue and peppercress were also used and cultivated in herb gardens.
Various theories have been offered that the word ''viking'' may be derived from the name of the historical Norwegian district of Viken (or Víkin in Old Norse), meaning "a person from ''Viken''".
The Vikings played several types of ''tafl'' games; ''hnefatafl'', ''nitavl'' (Nine Men's Morris) and the less common ''kvatrutafl''.
The use of ''runor'' survived into the 15th century, used in parallel with the Latin alphabet.
The Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League are so-named owing to the large Scandinavian population in the US state of Minnesota.
The latter-day ''mythos'' created by national romantic ideas blended the Viking Age with aspects of the Nordic Bronze Age some 2,000 years earlier.
Other runestones mention men who died on Viking expeditions.
This period of energetic activity also had a pronounced effect in the Scandinavian homelands, which were subject to a variety of new influences.
The archaeological record is particularly rich and varied, providing knowledge of their rural and urban settlement, crafts and production, ships and military equipment, trading networks, as well as their pagan and Christian religious artefacts and practices.
The idealised view of the Vikings appealed to Germanic supremacists who transformed the figure of the Viking in accordance with the ideology of the Germanic master race.
Horse fighting was practised for sport, although the rules are unclear.
Our knowledge about the arms and armour of the Viking age is based on archaeological finds, pictorial representation, and to some extent on the accounts in the Norse sagas and Norse laws recorded in the 13th century.
In Ribe, grains of rye, barley, oat and wheat dated to the 8th century have been found and examined, and these are believed to have been cultivated locally.
Oysters, mussels and shrimps were eaten in large quantities and cod and salmon were popular fish.
It appears to have involved two stallions pitted against each other, within smell and sight of fenced-off mares.
The word "viking" was first popularised at the beginning of the 19th century by Erik Gustaf Geijer in his poem, ''The Viking''.
They were wealthy and owned large estates with huge longhouses, horses and many thralls.
Flax was a very important crop for the Vikings.
* Glass was much prized by the Norse.
There were also official communities within towns and villages, the overall defence, religion, the legal system and the Things.
The Geatish Society, of which Geijer was a member, popularised this myth to a great extent.
Medieval Christians in Europe were totally unprepared for the Viking incursions and could find no explanation for their arrival and the accompanying suffering they experienced at their hands save the "Wrath of God".
The expansion of Islam in the 7th century had also affected trade with western Europe.
It was played on a board with squares using black and white pieces, with moves made according to dice rolls.
The Norse named some of the rapids on the Dnieper, but this can hardly be seen from the modern names.
The Vikings are known to have played instruments including harps, fiddles, lyres and lutes.
According to written sources, most of the funerals took place at sea.
Perceived views of the Vikings as alternatively violent, piratical heathens or as intrepid adventurers owe much to conflicting varieties of the modern Viking myth that had taken shape by the early 20th century.
The pace of publication increased during the 17th century with Latin translations of the Edda (notably Peder Resen's ''Edda Islandorum'' of 1665).
Novgorod now enthusiastically acknowledges its Viking history and has included a Viking ship in its logo.
Ship burials were also practised by Vikings abroad, as evidenced by the excavations of the Salme ships on the Estonian island of Saaremaa.
Finger rings were seldom used and earrings were not used at all, as they were seen as a Slavic phenomenon.
Such tactics may have been deployed intentionally by shock troops, and the berserk-state may have been induced through ingestion of materials with psychoactive properties, such as the hallucinogenic mushrooms, ''Amanita muscaria'', or large amounts of alcohol.
Modern reconstructions of Viking mythology have shown a persistent influence in late 20th- and early 21st-century popular culture in some countries, inspiring comics, role-playing games, computer games, and music, including Viking metal, a subgenre of heavy metal music.
The Slavs, the Arabs and the Byzantines knew them as the ''Rus''' or ''Rhōs'', probably derived from various uses of ''rōþs-'', "related to rowing", or derived from the area of Roslagen in east-central Sweden, where most of the Vikings who visited the Slavic lands came from.
* Greenland: Brattahlíð.
Facilitated by advanced seafaring skills, and characterised by the longship, Viking activities at times also extended into the Mediterranean littoral, North Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia.
* Iceland: Mosfellsbær in Capital Region; the boat burial in Vatnsdalur, Austur-Húnavatnssýsla.
Artisans and craftsmen in the larger towns were supplied with antlers from organized hunting with large-scale reindeer traps in the far north.
Undigested remains of plants from cesspits at Coppergate in York have provided a lot of information in this respect.
Longships were intended for warfare and exploration, designed for speed and agility, and were equipped with oars to complement the sail, making navigation possible independently of the wind.
Trade between western Europe and the rest of Eurasia suffered a severe blow when the Roman Empire fell in the 5th century.
Following extended phases of (primarily sea- or river-borne) exploration, expansion and settlement, Viking (Norse) communities and polities were established in diverse areas of north-western Europe, European Russia, the North Atlantic islands and as far as the north-eastern coast of North America.
Whales and walrus were hunted for food in Norway and the north-western parts of the North Atlantic region, and seals were hunted nearly everywhere.
Fowling on the steep slopes and cliffs was dangerous work and was often lethal.
The medieval Church held that Christians should not own fellow Christians as slaves, so chattel slavery diminished as a practice throughout northern Europe.
On festive occasions storytelling, skaldic poetry, music and alcoholic drinks, like beer and mead, contributed to the atmosphere.
Hens were kept for both their meat and eggs, and the bones of game birds such as the black grouse, golden plover, wild ducks, and geese have also been found.
The frequent remains of pig skull and foot bones found on house floors indicate that brawn and trotters were also popular.
This is described vividly in the Eddic poem of Rigsthula, which also explains that it was the God Ríg - father of mankind also known as Heimdallr - who created the three classes.
Led by the operas of German composer Richard Wagner, such as ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'', Vikings and the Romanticist Viking Revival have inspired many creative works.
The Greenland settlement eventually died out, possibly due to climate change.
The Norwegian west coast supplied eiderdowns and sometimes feathers were bought from the Samis.
The shells were used for dyeing and it is assumed the nuts were enjoyed as well.
Other names for thrall were 'træl' and 'ty'.
Anglo-Scandinavian is an academic term referring to the people, and archaeological and historical periods during the 8th to 13th centuries in which there was migration to—and occupation of—the British Isles by Scandinavian peoples generally known in English as Vikings.
To counter these valuable imports, the Vikings exported a large variety of goods.
