Summer is also when many villages are host to a range of folk festivals and fairs, taking advantage of the fact that many of the locals who reside abroad tend to come back to their native village for the holidays.
La Bisbal should be next on the list.
As a general rule, ''desa'' and ''kelurahan'' are groupings of hamlets (''kampung'' in Indonesian, ''dusun'' in the Javanese language, ''banjar'' in Bali).
All villages have a church or hermitage.
In Bulgaria, it is becoming popular to visit villages for the atmosphere, culture, crafts, hospitality of the people and the surrounding nature.
Vietnam's village typically contains: a village gate, "lũy tre" (bamboo hedges), "đình làng" (communal house) where "thành hoàng" (tutelary god) is worshiped, a common well, "đồng lúa" (rice field), "chùa" (temple) and houses of all families in the village.
But many of these facilities are now gone, and many villages are dormitories for commuters.
See also Li (unit).
A village is distinguished from a town in that:
In Michigan, a village is always legally part of a township.
In the flood prone districts of the Netherlands, villages were traditionally built on low man-made hills called terps before the introduction of regional dyke-systems.
The term ''aul''/''aal'' is used to refer mostly Muslim-populated villages in Caucasus and Idel-Ural, without regard to the number of residents.
However, this is a generality; in many states, there are villages that are an order of magnitude larger than the smallest cities in the state.
In Ukraine, a village, known locally as a ''"selo"'' (село), is considered the lowest administrative unit.
A Malay village typically contains a ''"masjid"'' (mosque) or ''"surau"'', paddy fields and Malay houses on stilts.
Villages can incorporated land in multiple townships and even multiple counties.
Sometimes the term ''"selysche"'' is also used in a more general way to refer to adjacent settlements near a bigger city, including urban-type settlements (''selysche miskoho typu'') and/or villages; however, ambiguity is often avoided in connection with urbanized settlements by referring to them using the three-letter abbreviation ''smt'' instead.
Some show archaeological evidence of settlement at three or four different layers, each distinct from the previous one.
Villages may have an individual administration (''silrada'') or a joint administration, combining two or more villages.
In the Minangkabau country in West Sumatra province, traditional villages are called ''nagari'' (a term deriving from another Sanskrit word meaning "city", which can be found in a name like "Srinagar").
For example, in areas such as the Lincolnshire Wolds, the villages are often found along the spring line halfway down the hillsides, and originate as spring line settlements, with the original open field systems around the village.
In Sarawak and East Kalimantan, some villages are called 'long', primarily inhabited by the Orang Ulu.
The region lies east of Tripoli, extends north as far as Akkar District, south to Bsharri District and Zgharta District and as far east as Baalbek and Hermel.
In urban areas of the Philippines, the term "village" most commonly refers to private subdivisions, especially gated communities.
In some areas such as Tanah Toraja, elders take turns watching over the village at a command post.
Most of them have a church and a "Casa do Povo" (people's house), where the village's summer '''romarias''' or religious festivities are usually held.
A typical large village might have a few thousand persons who shared the same market, meeting place and beliefs.
The ''stanitsa'' likewise has not survived as an administrative term.
'''Southern Nigeria'''
In some cases, the village may be coterminous with the town or township.
They are all very important because of their medieval patrimony.
Some other villages, such as Marmarita depend heavily on tourist activity.
Angles also possesses outstanding medieval constructions throughout its village.
The largest village is Menomonee Falls, which has over 32,000 residents.
In Bulgaria, the different types of ''sela'' vary from a small selo of 5 to 30 families to one of several thousand people.
A ''desa'' or ''kelurahan'' is the subdivision of a ''kecamatan'' (district), in turn the subdivision of a ''kabupaten'' (regency) or ''kota'' (city).
Michigan and Illinois also have no set population limit for villages and there are many villages that are larger than cities in those states.
All the people in Vietnam's villages usually have a blood relationship.
However, larger councils may elect to call themselves town councils.
In comparison with an urban-type settlement, Ukrainian legislation does not have a concrete definition or a criterion to differentiate such settlements from villages.
This concept of an unspoilt Arcadia is present in many popular representations of the village such as the radio serial ''The Archers'' or the best kept village competitions.
However, government is now providing them with water bore holes.
Further, the dwellings of a village are fairly close to one another, not scattered broadly over the landscape, as a dispersed settlement.
Some pit villages outgrew nearby towns by area and population; for example, Rossington in South Yorkshire came to have over four times more people than the nearby town of Bawtry.
The distinction is not necessarily based on population, but on the relative powers granted to the different types of municipalities and correspondingly, different obligations to provide specific services to residents.
While peasants of central Russia lived in a village around the lord's manor, a Cossack family often lived on its own farm, called ''khutor''.
Seen as being far from the bustle of modern life, it is represented as quiet and harmonious, if a little inward-looking.
Syria contains a large number of villages that vary in size and importance, including the ancient, historical and religious villages, such as Ma'loula, Sednaya, and Brad (Mar Maroun’s time).
A ''desa'' (a term that derives from a Sanskrit word meaning "country" that is found in a name such as "Bangladesh") is administered according to traditions and customary law (''adat''), while a ''kelurahan'' is administered along more "modern" principles.
Danniyeh (known also as Addinniyeh, Al Dinniyeh, Al Danniyeh, Arabic: سير الضنية) is a region located in Miniyeh-Danniyeh District in the North Governorate of Lebanon.
So they fetch water from ponds and streams.
The size of these villages varies considerably.
The term "kampung", sometimes spelled "kampong", is one of many Malay words to have entered common usage in Malaysia and Singapore.
Others are lucky to have wells within a walking distance.
This is called ''selski turizam'' (), meaning "village tourism".
San Marti Vell is a charming small village well known for its Gothic spire.
In some states such as New York, Wisconsin, or Michigan, a village is usually an incorporated municipality, within a single town or civil township.
This also enabled specialization of labor and crafts, and development of many trades.
In the 1960s–1970s, the depopulation of the smaller villages was driven by the central planners' drive in order to get the farm workers out of smaller, "prospect-less" hamlets and into the collective or state farms' main villages or even larger towns and city, with more amenities.
For example, there are numerous ''sela'' (plural of ''selo'') called ''Novo Selo'' in Bulgaria, Croatia, Montenegro and others in Serbia, and Macedonia.
Today, ''stanitsa''-type formations have only survived in Kuban (Russian Federation) where Ukrainians were resettled during the time of the Russian Empire.
In Hausa language, village is called '''ƙauye''' and every local government area is made up of several small and large '''ƙauyuka''' (villages).
The diversity of the Syrian environments creates significant differences between the Syrian villages in terms of the economic activity and the method of adoption.
It also stated that
The traditional Māori village was the pā, a fortified hill-top settlement.
Many villages are now predominantly dormitory locations and have suffered the loss of shops, churches and other facilities.
In the state of Wisconsin, a village is always legally separate from the towns that it has been incorporated from.
In modern days, the term ''dorp'' (lit.
The largest village in the state is Beverly Hills in Southfield Township which had a population of 10,267 as of the 2010 census.
"village") is usually applied to settlements no larger than 20,000, though there's no official law regarding status of settlements in the Netherlands.
An example of a typical mountainous Lebanese village in Dannieh would be Hakel al Azimah which is a small village that belongs to the district of Danniyeh, situated between Bakhoun and Assoun's boundaries.
In the past, there were many ''kampung'' villages in Singapore but development and urbanization have replaced them.
A 2004 Human Settlement Profile on Bulgaria conducted by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs stated that:
The major factors in the type of settlement are location of water sources, organisation of agriculture and landholding, and likelihood of flooding.
236,004 Indian villages have a population of fewer than 500, while 3,976 villages have a population of 10,000+.
However, there is some variation among the vast numbers of Austronesian ethnic groups.
The town is worth visiting for its Main Square and the castle.
Women rush in the morning to fetch water in their clay pots from wells, boreholes and streams.
In states that have New England towns, a "village" is a center of population or trade, including the town center, in an otherwise sparsely developed town or city&nbsp;— for instance, the village of Hyannis in the town of the Barnstable, Massachusetts.
For many British people, the village represents an ideal of Great Britain.
According to a 2002 census, in that year there were 2,385,000 Bulgarian citizens living in settlements classified as ''villages''.
Homes were situated together for sociability and defence, and land surrounding the living quarters was farmed.
In twenty U.S. states, the term "village" refers to a specific form of incorporated municipal government, similar to a city but with less authority and geographic scope.
* If a village is the principal settlement of a civil parish, then any administrative body that administers it at parish level should be called a parish council or parish meeting, and not a town council or city council.
The historically Cossack regions of Southern Russia and parts of Ukraine, with their fertile soil and absence of serfdom, had a rather different pattern of settlement from central and northern Russia.
Small rural communities are usually known as townships.
In northern Scotland, most villages are planned to a grid pattern located on or close to major roads, whereas in areas such as the Forest of Arden, woodland clearances produced small hamlets around village greens.
The term village often is used in reference to small planned communities such as retirement communities or shopping districts, and tourist areas such as ski resorts.
Several villages are located in this mountainous area, the largest town being Sir Al Dinniyeh.
* A village does not have a town hall nor a mayor.
Village, or "làng", is a basis of Vietnam society.
The Industrial Revolution attracted people in larger numbers to work in mills and factories; the concentration of people caused many villages to grow into towns and cities.
They have mud houses with thatched roofing though, like in most of villages in the North, zinc roofing is becoming a common sight.
Some villages have disappeared (for example, deserted medieval villages), sometimes leaving behind a church or manor house and sometimes nothing but bumps in the fields.
Village dwellers in the Southeastern region lived separately in 'clusters of huts belonging to the patrilinage'.
Its sandstones buildings have a beautiful lustre giving the city the nickname, La Ciudad Dorada.
As prosperous urbanites purchase village houses for their second homes, Russian villages sometimes are transformed into dacha settlements, used mostly for seasonal residence.
The population of such settlements ranges from a few hundred people to around five thousand.
In contrast to the Old World, the concept of village in today's North America north of Mexico is largely disconnected from its rural and communal origins.
In Slovenia, the word ''selo'' is used for very small villages (fewer than 100 people) and in dialects; the Slovene word ''vas'' is used all over Slovenia.
In Maryland, a locality designated "Village of ..." may be either an incorporated town or a special tax district.
* There should be a clear green belt or open fields, as, for example, seen on aerial maps for Ouston surrounding its parish borders.
Still in many villages in the North, people do not have access to portable water.
For instance, Girka is a village in Kaita town in Katsina state in Nigeria.
The ''khutir'' (хутір) and ''stanytsia'' (станиця) are not part of the administrative division any longer, primarily due to collectivization.
They are administered by a ''silrada'' (council) located in a nearby adjacent village.
In Ohio villages are often legally part of the township from which they were incorporated, although exceptions such as Hiram exist, in which the village is separate from the township.
Hempstead, the largest village, has 55,000 residents; making it more populous than some of the state's cities.
In Great Britain, a hamlet earned the right to be called a village when it built a church.
Mediterranean cities in Syria, such as Tartus and Latakia have similar types of villages.
They are farmers who grow rice and have the same traditional handicraft.
The village of Arlington Heights, IL had 75,101 residents as of the 2010 census.
Salamanca, an ancient Celtic town, is also a Renaissance city with striking architecture.
A '''village''' is a clustered human settlement or community, larger than a hamlet but smaller than a town, with a population ranging from a few hundred to a few thousand.
There is no population limit to villages in New York.
During the collectivization, however, residents of such settlements were usually declared to be kulaks and had all their property confiscated and distributed to others (nationalized) without any compensation.
A number of such ''khutors'' plus a central village made up the administrative unit with a center in a ''stanitsa'' (; ).
It is in the centre of the valleys that lie between the Arbeen Mountains and the Khanzouh.
Such villages may or may not correspond to administrative units (usually barangays) and/or be privately administered.
These (such as Murton, County Durham) grew from hamlets when the sinking of a colliery in the early 20th century resulted in a rapid growth in their population and the colliery owners built new housing, shops, pubs and churches.
''Khutirs'' were very small rural localities consisting of just few housing units and were sort of individual farms.
The area of al-Sauda is called a ''nahiya'', which is a subdistrict.
This type of community is generally referred to in English as a "settlement".
Those are common in major cities in the country and their residents have a wide range of income levels.
Locally, the term is frequently used to refer to either one's hometown or a rural village, depending on context.
Villages are more usual in the northern and central regions, Azores Islands and in the Alentejo.
Traditional fishing villages were based on artisan fishing and located adjacent to fishing grounds.
Barangays more correspond to the villages of old times, and the chairman (formerly a village datu) now settles administrative, intrapersonal, and political matters or polices the village, though with much less authority and respect than in Indonesia or Malaysia.
Malay and Indonesian villagers practice the culture of helping one another as a community, which is better known as "joint bearing of burdens" (''gotong royong'').
They have no area limitations, but become cities if they grow a population of more than 5,000.
So bad feeder roads may lead to remote villages with electricity and unstable GSM network.
However, some civil parishes may contain more than one village.
An example of a Mediterranean Syrian village in Tartus would be al-Annazah, which is a small village that belongs to the area of al-Sauda.
The situation is different in Mexico because of its large bulk of indigenous population living in traditional villages.
In Indonesia, depending on the principles they are administered, villages are called ''desa'' or ''kelurahan''.
However; villages in the state may not exceed five square miles (13 km²) in area.
In Wales, where the equivalent of an English civil parish is called a Community, the body that administers it is called a Community Council.
Multiple types of rural localities exist, but the two most common are ''derevnya'' () and ''selo'' ().
* A village should not have a regular agricultural market, although today such markets are uncommon even in settlements which clearly are towns.
In many cultures, towns and cities were few, with only a small proportion of the population living in them.
Such ''stanitsas'' often with a few thousand residents, were usually larger than a typical ''selo'' in central Russia.
Another Slavic word for a village is '''ves''' (, , , ).
The village is called a ''tsuen'' or ''cūn'' (村) under a rural township (鄉) and a ''li'' (里) under an urban township (鎮) or a county-controlled city.
Most of the villages have their own temple, mosque, or church, depending on the local religious following.
Villages in the south of Syria (Hauran, Jabal al-Druze), the north-east (the Syrian island) and the Orontes River basin depend mostly on agriculture, mainly grain, vegetables and fruits.
Most Russian rural localities have populations of fewer than 200&nbsp;people, and the smaller places take the brunt of depopulation.
The trend of urbanization continues, though not always in connection with industrialization.
The lowest administrative unit of the Russian Empire, a ''volost'', or its Soviet or modern Russian successor, a ''selsoviet'', was typically headquartered in a ''selo'' and embraced a few neighboring villages.
Maltby was constructed under the auspices of the Sheepbridge Coal and Iron Company and included ample open spaces and provision for gardens.
As of 2008, 152 villages in France have been listed in "The Most Beautiful Villages of France".
Usually set in remote mountainous areas, some also cater to winter sports and/or tourism, see: Uspallata, La Cumbrecita, Villa Traful and La Cumbre
They are family-oriented (especially the concept of respecting one's family particularly the parents and elders), courtesy and practice belief in God (''"Tuhan"'') as paramount to everything else.
Approximately 46% of all migrated people have changed their residence from one city to another.
Electricity and GSM network are reaching more and more villages in the North almost everyday.
As in Australia (see below) the term is now used mainly in respect of shopping or other planned areas.
This Romanesque castle is situated in the middle of the town, giving it a romantic look.
Sitges is a town with a rich connection to art; Picasso and Dalí both spent time here.
In the past, villages were a usual form of community for societies that practise subsistence agriculture, and also for some non-agricultural societies.
Villages may also be under the jurisdiction of a city council (''miskrada'') or town council (''selyshchna rada'') administration.
Morella, Castellón is a medieval village located in the region of "Comunitat Valenciana" with huge castles with a rich renaissance history.
However this may not be applicable to urbanised villages: although these may not considered to be villages, they are often widely referred to as being so; an example of this is Horsforth in Leeds.
Since historical times, every Malay village came under the leadership of a ''penghulu'' (village chief), who has the power to hear civil matters in his village (see Courts of Malaysia for more details).
The typical village had a pub or inn, shops, and a blacksmith.
Mainly, villages were built in very good sites which had the fundamentals of the rural life, like water.
Some pit villages grew to become towns; for example, Maltby in South Yorkshire grew from 600 people in the 19th century to over 17,000 in 2007.
Because of the topography of the Clent Hills the north Worcestershire village of Clent is an example of a village with no centre but instead consists of series of hamlets scattered on and around the Hills.
In the Republic of China (Taiwan), villages are divisions under townships or county-controlled cities.
The most intensive is the migration "city&nbsp;– city".
An independent association named ''Les Plus Beaux Villages de France'', was created in 1982 to promote assets of small and picturesque French villages of quality heritage.
Dinniyeh has an excellent ecological environment filled with woodlands, orchards and groves.
Tree-fern logs and flax were the main building materials.
In the UK, the main historical distinction between a hamlet and a village was that the latter had a church, and so usually was the centre of worship for an ecclesiastical parish.
Other villages have grown and merged and often form hubs within the general mass of suburbia—such as Hampstead, London and Didsbury in Manchester.
Villages are normally permanent, with fixed dwellings; however, transient villages can occur.
Vietnam's village is the typical symbol of Asian agricultural production.
South of Barcelona is Spain's most romantic Mediterranean beach town, with a 2.5&nbsp;km-long (1 1/2-mile) sandy beach and a promenade studded with flowers and palm trees.
The migration "village&nbsp;– village" in 2002 is 11%.
Vietnam's villages have an important role in society (Vietnamese saying: "Custom rules the law" -"Phép vua thua lệ làng" literally: the king's law yields to village customs).
They represent a type of a small rural locality that might have once been a ''khutir'', a fisherman's settlement, or a dacha.
A village head is respectively called ''kepala desa'' or ''lurah''.
For instance, in Bali villages have been created by grouping traditional hamlets or ''banjar'', which constitute the basis of Balinese social life.
''Desa'' are generally located in rural areas while ''kelurahan'' are generally urban subdivisions.
Larger settlements are known as towns.
It is common to see a cemetery near the mosque.
a '''''kampung''''' is defined today as a village in Brunei and Indonesia.
Malaysian ''kampung'' are found in Singapore, but there are few ''kampung'' villages remaining, mostly on islands surrounding Singapore, such as Pulau Ubin.
Although many patterns of village life have existed, the typical village was small, consisting of perhaps 5 to 30 families.
This informal usage may be found even in states that have villages as an incorporated municipality, although such usage might be considered incorrect and confusing.
e.g., in 1959, about one half of Russia's rural population lived in villages of fewer than 500&nbsp;people, while now less than one third does.
However, some civil parishes have no functioning parish, town, or city council nor a functioning parish meeting.
Mérida is an important Roman town with great tapas.
'''Selo''' (Cyrillic: село; ) is a Slavic word meaning "village" in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Russia, Serbia, and Ukraine.
Though often located in rural areas, the term urban village is also applied to certain urban neighbourhoods.
The ''stanitsa'' was a type of a collective community that could include one or more settlements such as villages, ''khutirs'', and others.
In many states, the term "village" is used to refer to a relatively small unincorporated community, similar to a hamlet in New York state.
Rivers, pools and springs abound in this verdant forest, as do underground water caves and caverns with a prehistoric past.
These villages emerged in the mid-20th century and were initially the domain of elite urban dwellers.
Clearances may have been to accommodate sheep or game estates, or enclosure, or may have resulted from depopulation, such as after the Black Death or following a move of the inhabitants to more prosperous districts.
'''''Kampung''''' is a term used in Malaysia, (sometimes spelling ''kampong'' or ''kompong'' in the English language) for "a Malay hamlet or village in a Malay-speaking country".
In Russia, as of the 2010 Census, 26.3% of the country's population lives in rural localities; down from 26.7% recorded in the 2002 Census.
