St. Paraskeva's Orthodox Church in the Old Town is the site of the baptism of Hannibal, the great-grandfather of Pushkin, by Tsar Peter the Great in 1705.
The 17th century brought a number of setbacks.
Many European presidents, prime ministers and other high-ranking officials participated in the event.
A famous Russian Orthodox Monastery of the Holy Spirit, is located near the Gate of Dawn.
The name of the city originates from the Vilnia River.
The Karaim are a Jewish sect who migrated to Lithuania from the Crimea to serve as a military elite unit in the 14th century.
Only in the 1960s did Vilnius begin to grow again, following an influx of Lithuanians and Poles from neighbouring regions as well as from other areas of the Soviet Union (particularly Russia and Belarus).
He was told: "What is destined for the ruler and the State of Lithuania, is thus: the Iron Wolf represents a castle and a city which will be established by you on this site.
Additionally, Eastern Rite Catholicism has maintained a presence in Vilnius since the Union of Brest.
Užupis declared itself an independent republic on April Fool's Day 1997.
A number of Protestant and other Christian groups are represented in Vilnius, most notably the Lutheran Evangelicals and the Baptists.
During the Russo-Polish War (1654–1667), Vilnius was occupied by Russian forces; it was pillaged and burned, and its population was massacred.
Vilnius also has several football teams.
*Homeland Union – Lithuanian Christian Democrats – 8
The largest and oldest is Vilnius University with 23,000 students.
The average annual temperature is ; in January the average temperature is , in July it is .
In 2015 Remigijus Šimašius became the first directly elected mayor of the city.
Poland and Lithuania both perceived the city as their own.
The building complex "Vilnius Business Harbour" was built in 2008, and one of its towers is now the 5th tallest building in Lithuania.
The city has many universities.
FK Žalgiris is the main football team.
*2003 – Gediminas Paviržis
*Order and Justice – 3
Like most medieval towns, Vilnius was developed around its Town Hall.
The club plays at LFF Stadium in Vilnius (capacity 5,067).
The exact location of Vilnius' largest synagogue, built in the early 1630s and wrecked by Nazi Germany during its occupation of Lithuania, was pinpointed by ground-penetrating radar in June 2015, with excavations set to begin in 2016.
Following the November Uprising in 1831, Vilnius University was closed and Russian repressions halted the further development of the city.
The pre-Christian religion of Lithuania, centred on the forces of nature as personified by deities such as Perkūnas (the Thunder God), is experiencing some increased interest.
The main artery, Pilies Street, links the Royal Palace with Town Hall.
*Social Democratic Party of Lithuania – 4
As a result of these declarations, on 9 January 1991, the Soviet Union sent in troops.
On 20 October 2013, Bernardinai garden, previously known as Sereikiškės Park, was opened after reconstruction.
Many Old Believers, who split from the Russian Orthodox Church in 1667, settled in Lithuania.
The predominant languages of the city were still Polish and, to a lesser extent, Yiddish.
In 1934 the first Divine Mercy painting was painted by Eugene Kazimierowski under the supervision of Faustina and it presently hangs in the Divine Mercy Sanctuary in Vilnius.
On 10 November 2007, the Jonas Mekas Visual Arts Center was opened by avant-garde filmmaker Jonas Mekas.
Single trip tickets have been replaced by 30 and 60-minute tickets.
Inhabitants expected Tsar Alexander I to grant them autonomy in response to Napoleon's promises to restore the Commonwealth, but Vilnius didn't become autonomous by itself nor as a part of Congress Poland.
The biggest book fair in Baltic States is annually held in Vilnius at LITEXPO, the Baltic's biggest exhibition centre.
After the ultimatum was issued and Lithuania further occupied, a Soviet government was installed with Vilnius as the capital of the newly created Lithuanian SSR.
*2007 – Juozas Imbrasas (2nd time)
Church architecture includes Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque and Neoclassical styles, with important examples of each found in the Old Town.
The National M. K. Čiurlionis School of Art, European Humanities University, Vilnius Academy of Business Law, Vilnius University International Business School, and ISM University of Management and Economics offer post-secondary degrees in several areas.
Although Vilnius is known as a Baroque city, there are examples of Gothic (e.g.
On the other side of the Neris, the National Art Gallery holds a permanent exhibition on Lithuanian 20th-century art, as well as numerous exhibitions on modern art.
There are 65 churches in Vilnius.
The city's growth lost its momentum for many years, but even despite this fact, at the end of the 18th century and before the Napoleon wars, Vilnius, with 56,000 inhabitants, entered the Russian Empire as its 3rd largest city.
GDP per capita (nominal) in Vilnius county was about €18,100 in 2014, making it the wealthiest region in Lithuania.
This area includes modern residential and retail space, with the municipality building and the 129-metre (423') Europa Tower as its most prominent buildings.
Students, elderly, and the disabled receive large discounts (up to 80%) on the tickets.
Three partitions took place, dividing its territory among the Russian Empire, the Habsburg Empire, and the Kingdom of Prussia.
Jewish life in Vilnius was destroyed during the Holocaust; there is a memorial stone dedicated to victims of Nazi genocide located in the centre of the former Jewish Ghetto — now Mėsinių Street.
*1995 – Alis Vidūnas
The two later settled their differences; after a series of treaties culminating in the 1569 Union of Lublin, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was formed.
*2009 – Vilius Navickas
Vilnius University was reopened in 1919 under the name of Stefan Batory University By 1931, the city had 195,000 inhabitants, making it the fifth largest city in Poland with varied industries, such as Elektrit, a factory that produced radio receivers.
The construction of Swedbank's headquarters is symbolic of the importance of Scandinavian banks in Vilnius.
On 20 February 1922 after the highly contested election in Central Lithuania, the entire area was annexed by Poland, with the city becoming the capital of the Wilno Voivodship (Wilno being the name of Vilnius in Polish).
The university has a recognised high standard of education, participating in projects with UNESCO and NATO, among others.
The green area next to the White Bridge is another popular area to enjoy good weather, and has become venue for several music and large screen events.
Vilnius was the flourishing capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the residence of the Grand Duke.
*2000 – Rolandas Paksas (2nd time)
The rulers of this federation held either or both of two titles: Grand Duke of Lithuania or King of Poland.
The climate of Vilnius is humid continental (Köppen climate classification ''Dfb'').
Today, Vilnius' population and economy are rapidly growing.
Vilnius was captured on 24 June.
On 9 October 1920, the Polish Army surreptitiously, under General Lucjan Żeligowski, seized Vilnius during an operation known as Żeligowski's Mutiny.
The neighborhoods of Vilnius also have names in other languages, which represent the languages spoken by various ethnic groups in the area.
Currently, the airport has 89 destinations in 28 different countries.
His grandchildren Vytautas the Great and Jogaila, however, fought civil wars.
Lukiškės Square is the largest, bordered by several governmental buildings: the Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, the Polish Embassy, and the Genocide Victims' Museum, where the KGB tortured and murdered numerous opposers of the communist regime.
The Grande Armée was welcomed in Vilnius.
In preparation, the historical centre of the city was restored, and its main monuments were renovated.
An outbreak of bubonic plague in 1710 killed about 35,000 residents; devastating fires occurred in 1715, 1737, 1741, 1748, and 1749.
This culminated in the 13 January attack on the State Radio and Television Building and the Vilnius TV Tower, killing at least fourteen civilians and seriously injuring 700 more.
Vilnius's rivers freeze over in particularly cold winters, and the lakes surrounding the city are almost always permanently frozen during this time of year.
The most notable non-Lithuanian names for the city include: , , , , , , .
*2010 – Raimundas Alekna
There are plans to build the Guggenheim-Hermitage museum, designed by Zaha Hadid.
Vilnius is the seat of the main government institutions of Lithuania as well as of the Vilnius District Municipality.
Vilnius has access to groundwater, and there is no need to use extensive chemicals in treating surface water from lakes or rivers, providing residents with some of the cleanest and healthiest tap water access in Europe.
An oversized statue of Lenin in its centre was removed in 1991.
Shortly afterwards, the town was once again incorporated into the Soviet Union as the capital of the Lithuanian SSR.
The authentic 19th-century Vladislovas Štrausas environment was restored.
The city and its surroundings were designated as a separate state, called the Republic of Central Lithuania.
During its rapid development, the city was open to migrants from the territories of the Grand Duchy and further.
Narrow, curved streets and intimate courtyards developed in the radial layout of medieval Vilnius.
The last election was held in March 2015, terms are 4 years.
On 19 September 1939, Vilnius was seized by the Soviet Union (which invaded Poland on 17 September).
Vilnius is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vilnius, with the main church institutions and Archdiocesan Cathedral (Vilnius Cathedral) located here.
The global economic crisis led to a drop in tourism which prevented many of the projects from reaching their planned extent, and allegations of corruption and incompetence were made against the organisers, while tax increases for cultural activity led to public protests and the general economic conditions sparked riots.
The USSR and Lithuania concluded a mutual assistance treaty on 10 October 1939, with which the Lithuanian government accepted the presence of Soviet military bases in various parts of the country.
Over 250 buses and 260 trolleybuses transport about 500,000 passengers every workday.
His students have significant influence among Orthodox Jews in Israel and around the globe.
Town Hall Square has long been a centre of trade fairs, celebrations, and events in Vilnius, including the Kaziukas Fair.
More buildings are scheduled for construction in the area.
During the Lithuanian Civil War of 1389–1392, Vytautas besieged and razed the city in an attempt to wrest control from Jogaila.
The Užupis district near the Old Town, which used to be one of the most run down districts of Vilnius during the Soviet Union, is home to a movement of bohemian artists, who operate numerous art galleries and workshops.
The budget of Vilnius is about €0.5 billion in 2016.
On 28 October 1939, the Red Army withdrew from the city to its suburbs (to Naujoji Vilnia) and Vilnius was given over to Lithuania.
The Act of Independence of Lithuania, declaring Lithuanian independence from any affiliation to any other nation, was issued in the city on 16 February 1918.
The fortunes of the Commonwealth declined during the 18th century.
Vilnius has some of the highest internet speeds in the world, with an average download speed of 36.37 MB/s and upload speed of 28.51 MB/s.
Olympic champions in swimming Lina Kačiušytė and Robertas Žulpa are from Vilnius.
Winters can be very cold, with temperatures rarely reaching above freezing – temperatures below  are not unheard-of in January and February.
The House of the Signatories, where the 1918 Act of Independence of Lithuania was signed, is now a historic landmark.
The monthly e-ticket cards could be bought once and credited with an appropriate amount of money in various ways including the Internet.
Two of the three Jewish cemeteries in Vilnius were destroyed during the Soviet era; the remains of the Vilna Gaon were moved to the remaining one.
The Commonwealth was involved in a series of wars, collectively known as The Deluge.
Average annual temperatures in the city have increased significantly during the last 30 years, a change which the Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service attributes to global warming induced by human activities.
This city will be the capital of the Lithuanian lands and the dwelling of their rulers, and the glory of their deeds shall echo throughout the world".
It was possible to buy an electronic card in shops and newspaper stands and have it credited with an appropriate amount of money.
Vilnius City Municipality Gross Regional Product was about €12 billion in 2014.
The most valuable historic and cultural sites are concentrated here.
*1997 – Rolandas Paksas
The public transportation system is dominated by the low-floor Volvo and Mercedes-Benz buses as well as Solaris trolleybuses.
In 1995, the world's first bronze cast of Frank Zappa was installed in the Naujamiestis district with the permission of the government.
The average precipitation is about  per year.
The Council of Ambassadors and the international community (with the exception of Lithuania) recognized Polish sovereignty over Vilnus region in 1923.
Its premiere exhibition was entitled ''The Avant-Garde: From Futurism to Fluxus''.
In 2004, a contract was signed with Volvo Buses to buy 90 brand-new  7700 buses over the following three years.
Cathedral Square in Old Town is surrounded by a number of the city's most historically significant sites.
*1993 – Valentinas Šapalas (the president of council)
Vilnius changed hands again during the Polish-Soviet War and the Lithuanian Wars of Independence: it was taken by the Polish Army, only to fall to Soviet forces again.
After the uprising, all civil liberties were withdrawn, and use of the Polish and Lithuanian languages was banned.
Rasos Cemetery, consecrated in 1801, is the burial site of Jonas Basanavičius and other signatories of the 1918 Act of Independence, along with the heart of Polish leader Józef Piłsudski.
Although neither Vilnius or the surrounding region was explicitly addressed in the agreement, numerous historians have described the agreement as allotting Vilnius to Lithuania.
*Liberal Movement – 15 seats
Starting with the elections in 2015, the mayors are elected directly by the residents.
Its 2009 New Year's Eve celebration, marking the event, featured a light show said to be "visible from outer space".
A variety of languages were spoken: Lithuanian, Polish, Ruthenian, Russian, Old Church Slavonic, Latin, German, Yiddish, Hebrew, and Turkic languages; the city was compared to Babylon.
World War II began with the German invasion of Poland in September 1939.
The ticket system changed again from 15 August 2012.
Its Jewish influence until the 20th century has led to it being described as the "Jerusalem of Lithuania" and Napoleon named it "the Jerusalem of the North" as he was passing through in 1812.
Their combination is also a gateway to the historic centre of the capital.
*The coalition of the Electoral Action of Poles in Lithuania and Lithuanian Russian Union – 10
Vilnius is connected by highways to other major Lithuanian cities, such as Kaunas ( away), Šiauliai ( away) and Panevėžys ( away).
On 11 March 1990, the Supreme Council of the Lithuanian SSR announced its secession from the Soviet Union and intention to restore an independent Republic of Lithuania.
Vilnius was selected as a 2009 European Capital of Culture, along with Linz, the capital of Upper Austria.
The first regular bus routes were established in 1926, and the first trolleybuses were introduced in 1956.
There are also plenty of the traditional Skoda vehicles, built in the Czech Republic, still in service, and many of these have been extensively refurbished internally.
Previously, Ukraine and Armenia were also expected to sign the agreements but postponed the decision, sparking large protests in the former country.
Specialized higher schools with university status include General Jonas Žemaitis Military Academy of Lithuania and Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre.
A monument was erected at the place where Užupis Old Jewish Cemetery was.
*2011 – Artūras Zuokas (3rd time)
On 29 November 2013, Georgia and Moldova signed association and free trade agreements with the European Union.
Vingis Park, the city's largest, hosted several major rallies during Lithuania's drive towards independence in the 1980s.
The Soviets devastated city industries, moving the major Polish radio factory Elektrit, along with a part of its labour force, to Minsk in Belarus, where it was renamed the Vyacheslav Molotov Radio Factory, after Stalin's Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Lithuania's largest art collection is housed in the Lithuanian Art Museum.
On 20 December 2013, CNN named Vilnius Cathedral Square's Christmas tree as the best in the world, while EssentialTravel.co.uk mentioned Vilnius as one of the ten best destinations to spend your Christmas.
The Vilna Gaon Jewish State Museum is dedicated to the history of Lithuanian Jewish life.
The museum associated with the Vilnius Academy of Fine Arts holds about 12,000 artworks.
The city's off-centre location can be attributed to the changing shape of the nation's borders through the centuries; Vilnius was once not only culturally but also geographically at the centre of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
The airport is situated only  away from the centre of the city, and has a direct rail link to Vilnius railway station.
Each group made its unique contribution to the life of the city, and crafts, trade, and science prospered.
Vilnius has been home to an Eastern Orthodox Christian presence since the 13th or even the 12th century.
Microdistricts were built in the elderates of Šeškinė, Žirmūnai, Justiniškės and Fabijoniškės.
The League brokered the Suwałki Agreement on 7 October 1920.
Kaunas then became the temporary capital of Lithuania.
The larger ghetto lasted until 1943, though its population was regularly deported in roundups known as "Aktionen".
The League of Nations became involved in the subsequent dispute between the two countries.
The museum would host exhibitions featuring works from Saint Petersburg's Hermitage Museum and the Guggenheim Museums, along with non-commercial avant-garde cinema, a library, a museum of Lithuanian Jewish culture, and collections of works by Jonas Mekas and Jurgis Mačiūnas.
Shortly after its defeat in the battle of Warsaw, the retreating Red Army, in order to delay the Polish advance, ceded the city to Lithuania after signing the Soviet-Lithuanian Treaty on 12 July 1920.
Vilnius Old Town, the historical centre of Vilnius, is one of the largest in Europe, at .
The war had irreversibly altered the town – most of the predominantly Polish and Jewish population had been expelled and exterminated respectively, during and after the German occupation.
E-Cards were replaced by Vilnius Citizen Cards ("Vilniečio Kortelė").
Vilnius is located in the southeast part of Lithuania and is the second largest city in the Baltic states.
Night-life in Vilnius is in full swing at this time of year, and outdoor bars, restaurants and cafés become very popular during the daytime.
Remigijus Šimašius became the first directly elected mayor of the city.
The city Christmas tree is decorated there.
*1990 – Arūnas Grumadas (the president of council)
The duchy had been subject to intrusions by the Teutonic Knights.
About 18,000 burials have been made in the Bernardine Cemetery, established in 1810; it was closed during the 1970s and is now being restored.
According to legend, Gediminas dreamt of an iron wolf howling on a hilltop and consulted a pagan priest for its interpretation.
The Museum of Genocide Victims is dedicated to the victims of the Soviet era.
St Anne's Church), Renaissance, and other styles.
Romuva established a Vilnius branch in 1991.
Thousands of soldiers died in the city during the eventual retreat; the mass graves were uncovered in 2002.
Vilnius is a cosmopolitan city with diverse architecture.
An older Russian name was Вильна/Вильно (''Vilna/Vilno''), although Вильнюс (''Vilnius'') is now used.
The Church of St. Michael and St. Constantine was built in 1913.
The Vilnius–Panevėžys motorway is a branch of the Via Baltica.
At the end of 2007, a new electronic monthly ticket system was introduced.
Even though it is home to only 20% of Lithuania's population, it generates about one third of Lithuania's GDP.
Owing to its uniqueness, the Old Town of Vilnius was inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1994.
Summer days are pleasantly warm and sometimes hot, especially in July and August, with temperatures above  throughout the day during periodic heat waves.
At its height it covered the territory of modern-day Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Transnistria, and portions of modern-day Poland and Russia.
However, neither has progressed beyond initial planning.
The current area of Vilnius is .
Demographic evolution of Vilnius between 1796 and 2015:
The Martynas Mažvydas National Library of Lithuania, named for the author of the first book printed in the Lithuanian language, holds 6,912,266 physical items.
The Lithuanians immediately attempted to Lithuanize the city, for example by Lithuanizing Polish schools.
Vilnius contributed almost €3 billion to the national budget in 2008, making up about 40% of the budget.
State ceremonies are often held in Daukantas Square, facing the Presidential Palace.
The majority of the remaining population was compelled to relocate to Communist Poland by 1946, and Sovietization began in earnest.
An electric tram and a metro system through the city were proposed in the 2000s.
Other streets meander through the palaces of feudal lords and landlords, churches, shops and craftsmen's workrooms.
There are several public swimming pools in Vilnius with Lazdynai Swimming Pool being the only Olympic-size swimming pool of the city.
In July 1944, Vilnius was taken from the Germans by the Soviet Army and the Polish Armia Krajowa (see Operation Ostra Brama and the Vilnius Offensive).
The names ''Wilno'', ''Wilna'' and ''Vilna'' have also been used in older English, German, French and Italian language publications when the city was one of the capitals of Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and later of Second Polish Republic.
