By Sunday, December 2, when the season ended, it had been sung to fifteen full houses".
The two men set to work, but with the winter weather in Venice becoming increasingly bad, Bellini fell ill; however, he had to continue to work under great pressure within a now-limited timetable.
Nothing happened in November; Bellini announced that he would arrive in Venice in early December and after 10th, he became preoccupied with rehearsals for ''Norma''.
His involvement in Zingarelli's class took place over the 1822/23 school year.
As for singers, it appears there was some doubt about the tenor, but that Henriette Méric-Lalande, Luigi Lablache (or Tamburini), would be available.
They remained in Messina for two days, attending a performance of ''Il pirata'' at the Teatro della Munizione, where he was greeted with "loud shouts of pleasure, hand-clapping, and words of praise".
About 50 years later, Florimo gave an account of the meeting of the two men: "Carlo Conti one of Bellini's tutors said to Bellini and me, "Go and hear Donizetti's ''La zingara'', for which my admiration increases at every performance."
Several reasons have been put forward: Lippmann and McGuire note, it was because "Bellini showed too little enthusiasm for the undertaking".
In addition—and separate from Bellini's troupe at the King's Theatre—Maria Malibran was about to present her London debut in ''La sonnamula'' at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane on 1 May in an English version with "an adapted Bellini score".
In the latter, he mentions that "for three days I've been slightly disturbed by a diarrhea, but I am better now, and think that it is over."
In addition, it was uncertain as to whether Pasta was interested in singing a trousers role, that of the protagonist, Ernani.
Another writer attributes it to Parma's traditional love of and favouritism towards the music of Rossini, while yet another notes that a combination of the composer being constantly seen in cafes around the city (when it was assumed that he should have been composing) and the fact that Romani had included a long explanation of the difficulties of adapting Voltaire in the printed libretto provided to all operagoers.
The librettist had vastly over-committed himself: by the time that ''Christina'' became ''Beatrice'', he had made commitments to Mercadante for an October opera; also to Carlo Coccia for an opera for La Scala on 14 February 1833; and further, to Luigi Majocchi for a Parma production on 26 February; to Mercadante for La Scala on 10 March; and to Donizetti for Florence on 17 March.
"—and the premiere, postponed by two days, took place on 24 January 1835.
Finally, when asked what it was that he was seeking, Bellini replied: "I want a thought that will be at one and the same time a prayer, an imprecation, a warning, a delirium&nbsp;...".
He provided Bellini with precise details of his vocal capabilities which were confirmed by a report which Mercadante also provided.
Although weather delayed their departure for Naples, they continued to spend an enjoyable time there, but Bellini was anxious to return to Naples before Easter and to be with Giuditta Turina, who had remained in that city.
At around the same time, Bellini reported to Florimo that he had been approached by Merelli about writing an inaugural opera for the soon-to-be completed Teatro Ducale (now the Teatro Regio) in Parma which was due to open during the following year on 12 May 1829.
The reviewer continued to declare that this duality had never been expressed in other operas in which he had performed.
She felt that it was "ill adapted to her vocal abilities", but Bellini was able to persuade her to keep trying for a week, after which she adapted to it and confessed her earlier error.
Bellini discusses the tiredness of the singers (after rehearing the entire second on the day of the premiere) as well as noting how certain numbers failed to please—and failed to please the composer as well!
theory, and was successful enough to gain an annual scholarship, which meant that his stipend from Catania could be used to help his family.
After  Zingarelli used his influence to secure this honour for his promising student, Bellini was able to obtain agreement that he could write a full-length opera and, furthermore, that the libretto did not have to be written by Tottola, the theatres' official dramatic poet.
By late June, there had been considerable progress and, in a letter copied into one written to Florimo on 25 July, Bellini writes in reply to Alesandro Lanari, now the director of the Royal Theatres of Naples.
Bellini then had to deal with the issue of piracy in regard to vocal reductions for piano of ''La sonnambula'' as published by Casa Ricordi.
: he likes Romanticism and exaggeration.
The librettist finally arrived in Venice on 1 January 1833.
Initially, Rossini regarded burial in Père Lachaise cemetery as a short-term arrangement, not knowing where the final resting place would turn out to be.
: Carve into your head in adamantine letters: ''The opera must draw tears, terrify people, make them die through singing''
The premiere, given on 17 October 1827, was "an immediate and then an increasing, success.
Given his status at the conservatoire, Bellini learned that he had been selected to compose an opera for presentation at the Collegio's ''teatrino''.
This was utterly rejected by Maddalena's father, who returned all the letters which she had received along with a letter from him stating that "my daughter will never marry a poor piano banger (''suonatore di cembalo'')".
Both composer and librettist were somewhat dilatory, delaying work as much and as long as possible.
Immediately taking charge of arrangements, Rossini began to plan Bellini's funeral and entombment, as well as caring for his estate.
Attempting to reconcile the two men, Madame Joubert, who had attended the summer event, invited both to dinner, along with her friend the Princess Belgioioso.
Thus, Bellini wrote back to the intermediary stating: "Tell my dear Romani that I still love him even though he is a cruel man" and he continues by wondering if Romani ever thinks about him where he, Bellini, says "whereas I do nothing but to talk about him to the entire universe".
''Adelson'' was first given sometime between mid-January and mid-March 1825.
However, by one month later, Bellini was writing to Pasta to state that:
I wanted you near me so that I could have these emotions with you, my good advisor and collaborator, because you along understand me.
Bellini's music was highly regarded, with the ''Giornale delle Due Sicilie'' on 13 June noting that "several of the arias and duets are some of the most laudable pieces of new music heard in recent times at the San Carlo."
The Giulietta was to be sung by Rosalbina Caradori-Allan.
Her salon became a meeting place for Italian revolutionaries such as Vincenzo Gioberti, Niccolò Tommaseo, and Camillo Cavour, and it was there that he would have most likely made the acquaintance of Count Carlo Pepoli.
Bellini then experienced the re-occurrence of an illness which had emerged in Venice due to pressure of work and the bad weather, but which consistently recurred after each opera and which would eventually cause his death.
Fortunately, having received good reports of the young tenor Domenico Reina, he was able to secure his services, describing him in a letter to Florimo as "one who will want to do himself honour; everyone tells me that his voice is beautiful, and that he has all the acting and spirit one could wish for."
In a post script, Bellini adds an indignant objection to what he has heard about the proposed casting of ''Capuleti'' in Naples.
After some delays caused by King Francesco I forcing postponement, the opera—now named ''Bianca e Gernando''—was given its premiere performance at the Teatro di San Carlo on 30 May 1826, Prince Ferdinando's name day.
She died on 1 December 1871.
The two men never did meet again.
For the composer, the decision hung on the availability of singers for each of the houses, especially because Rubini was contracted to sing only in Naples.
But by then—with the efforts to build his career and with time and distance between him and Maddalena—his feelings had changed and, using Florimo to communicate to the family, he rejected the offer, expressing the feeling that he would be unable to support her financially.
Bellini remained in Genoa until 30 April and then returned to Milan, but with no specific opportunity in place.
Both ''I Capuleti ed i Montecchi'' at La Fenice in 1830 and ''La sonnambula'' in Milan in 1831 reached new triumphal heights, although initially ''Norma'', given at La Scala in 1831 did not fare as well until later performances elsewhere.
To Bellini, he appeared to be a rival, and with his recent success, Pacini received offers to compose an opera for both Turin and Venice for the Carnival season.
In the same letter, Bellini informed his publisher that:
My glory is intrinsic to yours.
For ''La straniera'', Bellini received a fee which was sufficient for him to be able to make his living solely by composing music, and this new work became an even greater success than ''Il pirata'' had been.
The central relationship in Bellini's life seems to have been with Francesco Florimo, originally a student friend at the Naples Conservatory.
Additionally, he makes the point in regard to Bellini's apparent knowledge of languages and philosophy: "Bellini never became a well-educated man".
For his part, Bellini admired "the sonorous and elegance of the poet's verses"
As has been observed, "no other Italian opera composer of the time showed such an attachment to a single librettist" and although Romani was known to treat composers poorly, he evidently had great respect for Bellini, even acceding to his requests for revisions.
Over the summer, Bellini's general mood was reported to be "dark":  discussion with the Opéra could not proceed until a new director was appointed; "he writes long letters, crowded with projects, ideas, reveries that the hand seems to have trouble restraining"; and, as Weintock concludes, all of these things seem to "inescapably suggest a man deeply disturbed physically, psychologically, or both".
He was greeted by the city's authorities and citizens who also feted him at a concert the following evening.
The Adalgisa of Anna Del Serre and the Pollione of Alberico Curioni were mediocre; Bellini feared for how ''Beatrice'' would turn out.
Otherwise, you will end up being a good organist in some village.
", asserting that Bellini and Romani were trying to achieve perfection before taking the opera to London.
Rehearsals began in early January with the premiere planned for 14 February 1829; it was an immediate and resounding success with the ''Gazzetta privilegiata di Milano'' on 16 February declaring it to be a:
With that achievement behind him, it is believed that the young Bellini, who had been away from home for six years, set out for Catania to visit his family.
For Rubini, "it marked the defining performance for the tenor", and the newspaper reviews which followed all agreed with the composer's own assessment.
Returning within half an hour, the second version left Bellini equally cold—as did a third draft.
It appears that Bellini had his first meeting with Malibran when attending a performance where, as he states:
Therefore, if you train your heart to give you melody and then you set it forth as simply as possible, your success will be assured.
However, it is known that he was back in Naples by the summer or early autumn of 1825 in order to fulfill a contract to write an opera for the San Carlo or one of the other royal theatres, the Teatro Fondo.
Both men then attended a dinner that summer, at which the writer is reported to have remarked:
At the same time, he stated that, with music composed to those verses now in place, "I was not permitted to go back over what already had been done; and poetry and music were finished in less than a month".
They encouraged the young man to petition the city fathers for a stipend to support his musical studies.
It appears that by 6 October, a subject had been agreed upon: it would be ''Christina regina di Svenzia'' from a play by Alexander Dumas which had appeared in Paris in 1830.
He wrote to Florimo, telling him about the lodgings and that he had written to Turina not to sell any of his furniture, but to send some of it to him.
changes began to appear in the management of La Scala.
Firstly, an outbreak of cholera had occurred in Austria in July, and concern about its spread to Italy was real, to the point that, by late September, Bellini was writing to Florimo: "I am composing the opera without any real zeal because I am almost certain that the cholera will arrive in time to close the theatres; but as soon it threatens to come near, I'll leave Milan."
Today, the Museo Belliniano, housed in the Gravina Cruyllas Palace in Catania—Bellini's birthplace—preserves memorabilia and scores.
Despite attempts over many years to have Bellini's remains transferred to Catania, that did not take place until 1876, when the casket containing his remains was taken to the cathedral in Catania and reburied.
: My style is now heard in the most important theatres in the world&nbsp;... and with the greatest enthusiasm.
Weinstock assumes that it is Locatelli who replied to "A.B.
In the summer or early autumn of 1825 Bellini began work on what was to become his first professionally produced opera.
Also, Heine's literary portrait of Bellini, which became part of his unfinished novel ''Florentinische Nächte'' (''Florentine Nights'') published in 1837, emphasized the less-appealing aspects of the composer's personality, summing up a description of him as "a sigh in dancing pumps".
Among the many musical figures were several Italian such as Michele Carafa and the imposing Luigi Cherubini, then in his seventies.
: If your compositions "sing", your music will most certainly please.&nbsp;...
But over a year later and with hindsight—after ''Puritani'''s great success which came way ahead of that of Donizetti's first work for Paris, ''Marin Faliero''—he outlines "the plot which was being hatched against me" and the strategies which he adopted to counter it.
By September he was writing to Florimo of being able to "polish and re-polish" in the three remaining months before rehearsals and he expresses happiness with Pepoli's verses ("a very beautiful trio for the two basses and ''La Grisi''")and by around mid-December he had submitted the score for Rossini's approval, with rehearsals planned for late December/early January.
Verdi raved about his "long, long, long melodies&nbsp;..." Wagner, who rarely liked anyone but himself, was spellbound by Bellini's almost uncanny ability to match music with text and psychology.
Their relationship quickly began to deteriorate: greetings including ''tu'' (the informal "you") gave way to ''voi'' (the formal "you") and they lived in different parts of Venice.
: I hope that you will find this subject to your liking.
Berardo Calvari (known as Winter) was rejected because audiences had disliked him the previous July when he appeared in both a Pacini and a Donizetti opera at La Scala.
An anonymous twelve-page hand-written history, held in Catania's Museo Belliniano, states that he could sing an aria by Valentino Fioravanti at eighteen months, that he began studying music theory at two years of age and the piano at three.
It appears that Bellini's exhortations bore fruit, based on his own account of the audience's reactions to the first performance, as well as the reaction of the ''Gazzetta privilegiata di Milano'' of 2 December which noted that this opera "introduced us to Rubini's dual personality as a singer and actor".
In conclusion, Bellini suggests "drawing a veil over everything that happened", stating that he cannot come to Milan at this time but, since he was planning to write the opera for Naples for 1836, he could do so in January 1835: presumably after ''I puritani''.
In "Two Words for Signor Felice Romani" but which takes five pages in print, he states that it is not his intention to defend the composer but "only to vent my displeasure given me and all sensitive people by the very sarcastic manner, full of personal rancor and hauteur, with which Signor Romani has undertaken to assail his antagonist."
In addition, in a letter to his uncle on 28 December, Bellini tries to explain the reasons for the reactions.
I thought I was in Paradise".
After the poor response in Parma to ''Zaira'', Bellini stayed with Ferdinando and Giuditta Turina's family for a short period in May/June and then returned to Milan by the end of June and discovered that his grandfather, then 85, had died in Catania.
Although the frustrating affair with Maddalena Fumaroli which, as noted above, came to nothing during these early years, the success achieved by ''Bianca e Gernado'' gave Bellini fresh hope that her parents would finally relent, and a new appeal was made through a friend.
He ended by mentioning that "my future plans are to be able to arrange a contract with the French Grand Opéra and remain in Paris, making it my home for the present.
Planning to leave Naples by 25 February, he dealt with the invitation from Lanari at La Fenice to compose for that house by stating that he would not work for less than the sum received from the last production, and that he was also in discussions with the San Carlo.
: my music was tortured, torn to shreds.&nbsp;... Only when Malibran was singing did I recognise my opera&nbsp;... but in the ''allegro'' of the final scene, and precisely at the words 'Ah!
''Beatrice di Tenda'', with the leading role requiring a strong female character to be written for Pasta, composer and librettist met to consider a subject.
He accepted both offers, but the La Fenice impresario included a proviso that if he were to be unable to fulfill the Venice contract, then it would be transferred to Bellini.
He ends by saying that, if he does not hear back from Romani, he will not write to him again.
Other fellow students—who were to become opera composers—included Francesco Stabile and the Ricci brothers—Luigi and Federico—as well as Saverio Mercadante who, by this time, was a graduate student.
He is a man of good will, and I want him to show it also in wanting to prepare at least the first act for me swiftly."
However, when Florimo gave him the news, he said that he was going to try again and win, but the next move was to come later from the Fumarolis family.
Arriving in Messina along with Florimo on the morning of 27 February, Bellini was greeted by several members of his family including his father.
Three days before the premiere, the Venetian daily, the ''Gazzetta privilegiata di Venezia'', had published a letter purportedly written to its editor by 'A.B.'
After Bellini's death Florimo  became his literary executor and was treated as his spiritual heir.
In all, ''Norma'' was given 39 performances in its first season at La Scala, and reports from elsewhere, especially those from Bergamo when performances were given there in late 1832, suggested that it was becoming more and more popular.
Through an intermediary, Bordesi (or Bordese), a mutual friend of both men, Romani initially expressed interest in re-establishing friendly relations with Bellini.
For Bellini, it meant the possibility of taking on responsibility for her, and he had no interest in doing that, having cooled in his feelings for her.
asked the librettist—and he was embraced by the young composer.
: The French had all gone mad; there were such noise and such shouts that they themselves were astonished at being so carried away.&nbsp;...
A single day took him from me!
His name is listed as an attendee in the ''Morning Chronicle'' of 29 April at a performance of Rossini's ''La cenerentola'', along with those of Maria Malibran, Felix Mendelssohn, Nicolo Paganini, as well as Pasta, Rubini, and other visiting Italian singers.
He continues by stating that, in addition, he will receive one hundred percent of the rental rights of the scores.
A local newspaper, ''I Teatri'', reported that "all things considered, this opera by Bellini has aroused as much enthusiasm in Venice as ''La straniera'' aroused in Milan from the first evening on".
But he had forgotten how much he had demanded: writing to Giuditta Pasta's husband, Giuseppe, he asked for the letter he had written to him (in which he had revealed the terms offered) to be sent to him to await his arrival in Florence.
When it came time to compose the final aria ''Or sei pago, ol ciel tremendo'', the librettist's words gave him no inspiration at all and, at their next meeting, Romani agreed to re-write the text.
When no alternatives appeared, he accepted Genoa's offer in February, but it was then too late to write anything new.
It was clear from Bellini's reaction to Heine's remarks, that he did not like Heine.
However, Turina maintained contact with Florimo throughout her life, although was heard from her after his death until she wrote a sad-but-friendly letter to Florimo Florimo returned the friendship and, as Galatopoulos notes, "the death of Bellini was a mutual loss and Florimo needed Giuditta as much as she needed him" so that the two corresponded for years and Florimo visited her in Milan "at least once, in 1858".
Bellini never married, which has led to speculation as to his sexuality.
When he wrote to Florimo from Paris the following year, he clearly stated that "I constantly am being threatened from Milan with Giuditta's coming to Paris", at which point he says he'll leave that city if that were to happen.
This was successfully achieved in May 1819 with unanimous agreement for a four-year pension to allow him to study at the Real Collegio di Musica di San Sebastiano in Naples.
In order to contract with Bellini, he had to be released from his obligation to Venice; this was achieved by Litta buying out the Venice contract.
During that time he remained busy, spending some time with Turina (who was ill for part of it), visiting the conservatory and meeting with many of the students and his old teacher, Zingarelli (to whom he had dedicated ''Norma''), and attending a performance of ''Capuleti'' at the San Carlo with Turina and Florimo on 5 February in the presence of King Ferdinand II.
In the same letter he continues by stating that he was working towards finding a subject with the Italian emigré, Count Pepoli, who came from a prominent Bologna family and who had been active in opposition to Austrian rule of Italy, until forced into exile in France and England.
In his letter, he continues by providing a synopsis,  indicating that his favourite singers—Giulia Grisi, Rubini, Tamburini, and Lablache—would be available for the principal roles, and that he would begin to write the music by 15 April if he has received the verses.
When planning the subject of his next opera after La Scala's ''Il pirata'', Bellini had been invited to write an opera for Parma's inauguration of the new Teatro Ducale in early 1829.
Of the many tributes which poured forth following Bellini's death, one stands out.
Then he ends with: "Give him a kiss for me".
Within a few days, Bellini was in Milan, from there writing to his friend Santocanale in Palermo that "I'm&nbsp;... trying to find a good subject for my new opera for Venice.
Because Lanari had written to him on 10 April 1834 regarding an opera for Naples, Bellini tells him that the first act of ''Puritani'' is finished and that he expects to complete the opera by September, in order that he may then have time to write for Naples.
Romani believes it to be very effective, and precisely because of the all-inclusive character for you, which is that of Norma.
By 7 January 1829, with Romani having recovered and set off for Venice to fulfill a contract, the composer was "almost up to the 2nd act".
However, without knowing which singers would be engaged, he was unwilling to commit at that time, but remained in hope of something definite from La Scala for the autumn.
Not unexpectedly, a further "cannonade" (says Weinstock) appeared from Romani, published this time in ''L'Eco'' on 12 April 1833 with both an editor's preface, decrying the poor taste displayed by both sides, and a brief final response from Marinetti.
Florimo immediately began to try to persuade his friend, indicating that Malibran had been engaged for Naples in January 1835.
: I have arranged the contract with Lanari to compose the opera for Venice; there I'll have the divine Pasta, and on the same terms as the contract with La Scala for ''Norma''".
: clamorous success..with the poet serving the composer well, and the composer could not have served the singers better; all competed to render themselves pleasing to the public, and succeeded in such a way as to be applauded greatly.
He concludes by noting the success of the singers: "Lablache sang like a god, Grisi like a little angel, Rubini and Tamburini the same."
The gastro-enteric condition—which he describes as "a tremendous inflammatory gastric bilious fever"— resulted in his being cared for by Francesco Pollini and his wife at their home because, as Bellini wrote, "he loves me more than a son".
Both productions starred Rubini, Tamburini, and—in the role of Imogene—Rubini's wife, Adelaide Comelli-Rubini, about whom Bellini had initial misgivings, although it appears that she acquitted herself very well.
Bellini then dedicated ''I puritiani'' "To the Queen of the French", Queen Marie-Emélie.
His last-known letter to Filippo Santocanale Bellini wrote on 16 August, followed by one to Florimo on 2 September.
m'abbraccia'&nbsp;...
An additional challenge confronted the young composer: how to win the hand of young Maddalena Fumarolis whom he had met as a guest in her home and then had become her music tutor.
As Weinstock notes, when the Italians arrived in London by 27 April, Bellini was a known factor, many of his operas having already been given over the previous few years.
In the immediate aftermath of ''I puritani'' 's success, Bellini was awarded two honours: the first by King Louis-Philippe, naming him as ''chevalier'' of the Légion d'honneur; the second by King Ferdinand II in Naples, awarding him the cross of the "Order of Francesco I".
Among the external reasons, Bellini cites the adverse reaction caused by the attitudes of both the owner of a journal (and his claque) and also of "a very rich woman"—who Weinstock identifies as Contessa Giulia Samoyloff— who was Pacini's mistress.
Initially, the opera was to be ''Carlo di Borgogna'', but composer and librettist decided to tackle "a drama so&nbsp;... hallowed as Voltaire's ''Zaïre''", but this proved to be more challenging for Romani than first imagined.
:&nbsp;... Perhaps no composers other than ours, know as well as Bellini the necessity for a close union of music with poetry, dramatic truth, the language of emotions, the proof of expression.&nbsp;...
Among them were the nine ''Versetti da cantarsi il Venerdi Santo'', eight of which were based on texts by Metastasio.
After hearing the opera, Bellini acquired the score, convinced Conti to introduce him, and Florimo reports that Bellini's reaction was that he was "a truly beautiful, big man, and his noble countenance—sweet, but at the same time majestic—arouses affection as well as respect."
He ordered that a post-mortem be performed, following an order which came directly from the King.
The focus of study was on the masters of the Neapolitan school and the orchestral works of Haydn and Mozart, with the emphasis put upon the Italian classical era composers such as Pergolesi and Paisiello, rather than the "modern-day" approaches of composers such as Rossini.
The young composer chose Domenico Gilardoni, a young writer who then prepared his first libretto, which he named ''Bianca e Fernando'', based on an 1820 play, ''Bianca e Fernando alla tomba di Carlo IV, Duca d'Agrigento'' and set in Sicily.
Additionally, reports in the London press were favourable including the review which appeared in ''The Times'' of 23 June 1833.
However, for the most part, the singers were applauded, even if the composer received little.
It was with Giuditta Turina that he began an affair in 1828 during the premiere performances of ''Bianca e Fernando'' in Genoa.
During the final preparations in 1834 for the staging of ''Puritani'' and up to its delay into 1835, Bellini had concluded an agreement with Naples to present three operas there—including the re-writing of parts of the music for Malibran—beginning in the following January.
In a word, my dear Florimo, it was an unheard of thing, and since Saturday, Paris has spoken of it in amazement.&nbsp;...
: You are a genius, Bellini, but you will pay for your great gift with a premature death.
But from a personal point of view, Bellini expressed his sadness at not having seen Florimo for so long, and there flowed a succession of invitations, then demands that Florimo come to Paris to visit him, but from February to July, Florimo ignored the offers and finally, in a letter to him, Bellini stated: "I'll no longer ask for reasons, and I'll see you when I see you."
Upon his arrival, Bellini wrote to his new friend Santocanale in Palermo, telling him that he would be accepting a contract from La Fenice so the issue had resurfaced in the form of a contract from Lanari which appeared to have accepted  the composer's terms.
At some in the late Spring (specific date unknown) Bellini wrote to Pepoli to remind him that he should bring the first act of the opera with him the following day "so that we can finish discussing the first act, which&nbsp;... will be interesting, magnificent, and proper poetry for music in spite of you and all your absurd rules&nbsp;..."  At the same time, he lays out one basic rule for the librettist to follow:
This became ''Adelson e Salvini'' an ''opera semi-seria'' (half-serious) from a libretto by the Neapolitan Andrea Leone Tottola, who had written the one for Donizetti's ''La zingara''.
This was followed by a letter to Florimo in late May where Bellini wishes to know if Romani reciprocated his feelings, which—it appears—did happen when he writes to Romani himself (most likely expansion of the initial draft) laying out a series of concerns, but quoting back to him a part of his own letter to Bordese in which Romani states "I have not ceased to love him Bellini, for I recognise that the blame is not all his".
As the opera season progressed, Bellini found himself caught up in the social whirl, with invitations coming from all around him.
Increasingly, Bellini did better and better in his studies: in January 1820 he passed his examinations in
Although beyond the normal age for admission, Bellini had submitted ten pieces of music for consideration; these clearly demonstrated his talent, although he did need to do remedial work to correct some of his faulty technique.
It is clear that he regards Barbaja as an enemy.
While his family wasn't wealthy enough to support that lifestyle, Bellini's growing reputation could not be overlooked.
According to Weinstock, quoting letters sent to Florimo in Italy at around that time (and continuing almost up to the premiere of ''I puritani''), Bellini perceived this to be a plot orchestrated by Rossini.
His fame was now secure—''La sonnambula'' having established it—and the premiere of ''Norma'', given on 21 June with Pasta in the title role, was a triumph according to a long letter which Giuseppe Pasta wrote about the experience and his wife's huge success.
Their relationship lasted until Bellini went to Paris.
Bellini left Milan for Naples, and then Sicily, on 5 January 1832, but for the first time since 1827, it was a year in which he did not write an opera.
However, the artistic director of the school was the opera composer, Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli.
Meanwhile, Florimo remained in Naples, ultimately becoming the Conservatory librarian.
As a result, in the April–May 1830 period, Bellini was able to negotiate a contract with both the Litta group—which was planning performances in a smaller Milan house, the Teatro Carcano—and with the Criveli group to obtain a contract for an opera for the autumn of 1831 and another for the 1832 Carnival season.
By 15 July they had decided on an adaptation of Victor Hugo's play, ''Hernani'', although Weinstock speculates as to how this decision could have come about.
After ''Semiramide'', it's futile for us to try and achieve anything' "
However, the title ''Bianca e Fernando'' had to be changed, because Ferdinando was the name of the heir to the throne, and no form of it could be used on a royal stage.
He was ready for further study.
Count Sanvitale's request on 17 April, asking "to let me know the reasons why our copyists are kept idle", did not receive much of response to satisfy the theatre's management.
Throughout May, accounts came to him from London of the success of ''I puritani'' and the failure of a revival of ''Norma'' (due to the poor performances by both the Adelgisa and Pollione), although later reports of Giulietta Grisi's Norma—in contrast to those of Pasta—were not good either, and Bellini was pleased that it was not Grisi who gave the opera in Paris.
About this time he had received an offer to compose for the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples and, in return, had imposed some harsh terms, totally objecting to the English soprano Marianna Lewis, "a donna who is below mediocrity: does not know how to sing, is a sausage on stage&nbsp;..."  He continues by stressing the need for a good tenor were he to come to Naples and, in a separate letter to be forwarded by Florimo, tells Principe di Ruffano, then the superintendent of the royal theatres, that he doubts that Barbaja would even agree to the fee already offered to him by La Scala, a total of 2,400 ducati, when he would want 3,000 ducati from Naples for all the additional expenses which he would incur.
''Zaira'' was the opera which came into being following discussions with Barbaja in Milan in June 1828 for a second opera for La Scala.
Both singers had starred in ''Bianca'' in the original 1826 production.
During July and August, the composer Gioachino Rossini visited Milan on his way to Bologna.
The dress rehearsal on 20 January 1835 was attended by many people—"All of high society, all the great artists, and everyone most distinguished in Paris were in the theatre, enthusiastic.
The two men addressed each in very affectionate terms.
However, there were reservations about Gilardoni's contribution.
This letter removes the blame from Bellini and lays it at the feet of Romani, outlining the timetable for the delivery of the libretto, which was contracted to be due in two parts: one in October and then the second in November.
