In 1892 Émile Bernard organised a small solo show of Van Gogh's paintings in Paris, and Julien Tanguy exhibited his Van Gogh paintings with several consigned from Johanna van Gogh-Bonger.
The background is a deep violet.
In July, Van Gogh wrote that he had become absorbed "in the immense plain against the hills, boundless as the sea, delicate yellow."
To support Van Gogh's religious convictions and his desire to become a pastor, in 1877 the family sent him to stay with his uncle Johannes Stricker, a respected theologian, in Amsterdam.
His younger brother, Theo, supported him financially, and the two kept up a long correspondence by letter.
Today the major pieces of the series are among his best known, celebrated for the sickly connotations of the colour yellow and its tie-in with the Yellow House, the expressionism of the brush strokes, and their contrast against often dark backgrounds.
Van Gogh was an admirer of the Realism of Jules Breton, Gustave Courbet and Millet, and he compared his copies to a musician's interpreting Beethoven.
While in the asylum in Saint-Rémy, Van Gogh spent time outside painting pictures of the trees in the olive groves.
It is one of his most renowned self-portraits of that period, "with its highly organized rhythmic brushstrokes, and the novel halo derived from the Neo-Impressionist repertoire was what Van Gogh himself called a 'purposeful' canvas".
Van Gogh was left to work on interpretations of other artist's paintings, such as Millet's ''The Sower'' and ''Noon&nbsp;– Rest from Work (after Millet)'', as well as variations on his own earlier work.
The ploughed soil is grey, and behind it rises a standing crop, and in the left distance, a farmhouse.
These are rendered as gnarled and arthritic as if a personification of the natural world, which are, according to Hughes, filled with "a continuous field of energy of which nature is a manifestation".
File:Vincent Van Gogh 0018.jpg|''View of Arles, Flowering Orchards'', 1889.
The following morning Theo rushed to his brother's side, finding him in good spirits.
Theo's widow Johanna van Gogh-Bonger was a Dutchwoman in her twenties who had not known either her husband or her brother-in law very long and who suddenly had to take care of several hundreds of paintings, letters and drawings, as well as her infant son, Vincent Willem van Gogh.
His philosophy was to reject technique in favour of capturing the impressions of things, particularly nature or common objects.
Those he considered finished paintings are identifiable by the subject holding an object, such as a book, and tend to exhibit more stylisation than his other work.
In August 1882 Theo gave Vincent money to buy materials for working ''en plein air''.
Theo's wife later remarked that this was the best year of his life.
There are more than 600 letters from Vincent to Theo, and 40 from Theo to Vincent.
His squalid living conditions did not endear him to church authorities, who dismissed him for "undermining the dignity of the priesthood".
He wrote that he was surprised at how good the results were.
A few appeared in 1906 and 1913; the remaining majority were published in 1914.
There are also 22 to his sister Wil, 58 to the painter Anthon van Rappard, 22 to Émile Bernard, and individual letters to Paul Signac, Paul Gauguin and the critic Albert Aurier.
Albright–Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York|alt=A large building under a clear sky with a landscape in the background and two people in the near distance
File:Cipressen en twee vrouwen - s0147V1962 - Van Gogh Museum.jpg|''Cypresses and Two Women'', 1890.
Van Gogh made several painting excursions during visits to the landscape around Arles.
He brought life to the trees, which were traditionally seen as emblematic of death.
Problems in transcription and dating remain, mainly with those posted from Arles.
Kröller-Müller Museum, Otterlo, Netherlands|alt= A painting of a large group of cypress trees, beside which two young women are walking, a large house in the background, under a cloudy blue sky.
Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam|alt=A Japanese woman looks to the left in a Ukiyo-e style painting
He turned to religion, and spent time as a missionary in southern Belgium.
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York|alt= A portrait of Vincent van Gogh from the left, with a relaxed look, a red beard and wearing a straw hat.
During Van Gogh's last weeks at Saint-Rémy, his thoughts returned to his "memories of the North", and several of the approximately 70 oils, painted during as many days in Auvers-sur-Oise, are reminiscent of northern scenes.
File:Vincent van Gogh - Eugène Boch - Google Art Project.jpg|''Eugène Boch, (The Poet Against a Starry Sky)'', 1888, Musée d'Orsay, Paris|alt=A closeup portrait of an intense young man well-dressed with suit and tie, facing to his right (the viewer's left), he has a moustache and goatee and he is standing in front of a starry sky in the background.
Limited access to life outside the clinic resulted in a shortage of subject matter.
Some of the portraits are studies.
In early 1882, his uncle, Cornelis Marinus, owner of a well-known gallery of contemporary art in Amsterdam, asked for drawings of The Hague.
File:Vincent van Gogh - Corridor in the Asylum.JPG|''Corridor in Saint-Paul Hospital'', September 1889, oil colour and essence over black chalk on pink laid ("Ingres") paper, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York|alt=A view down a long hospital corridor; one or two people are in sight, way down the hall.
On or about 10 July 1890 Van Gogh wrote to Theo of "vast fields of wheat under troubled skies".
Van Gogh returned to Etten in April 1881 for an extended stay with his parents.
Van Gogh had begun to drink heavily again, especially absinthe.
Important group exhibitions took place with the Sonderbund artists in Cologne in 1912, the Armory Show, New York in 1913, and Berlin in 1914.
His evolution as an artist was slow, and he was aware of his painterly limitations.
File:Van Gogh - Blühender Obstgarten, von Zypressen umgeben.jpeg|''Orchard in Blossom, Bordered by Cypresses'', April, 1888.
After Kee returned to Amsterdam, Van Gogh went to The Hague to sell paintings and to meet with his cousin by marriage, Anton Mauve.
Among these "imaginative" paintings is ''Memory of the Garden at Etten''.
Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam|alt= A portrait of Vincent van Gogh from the left, with a relaxed but intent look, a red beard and wearing a grey hat.
File:Vincent Van Gogh 0014.jpg|''Langlois Bridge at Arles'', 1888.
According to Hughes, Van Gogh perceived colour as having a "psychological and moral weight", as exemplified in the garish reds and greens of ''The Night Cafe'', a work he wanted to "express the terrible passions of humanity".
Constantijn C. Huysmans, who had been a successful artist in Paris, taught the students at Tilburg.
File:Stilleven met bijbel - s0008V1962 - Van Gogh Museum.jpg|''Still Life with Open Bible, Extinguished Candle and Novel'' also ''Still Life with Bible'', 1885.
Vincent wrote to Theo on 21 April 1888 that he had 10 orchards and "one big painting of a cherry tree, which I've spoiled".
The project began in 1963; architect Gerrit Rietveld was commissioned to design it, and after his death in 1964 Kisho Kurokawa took charge.
This account is uncorroborated, although Gauguin was almost certainly absent from the Yellow House that night, most likely in a hotel.
The series of cypresses he began in Arles featured the trees in the distance, as windbreaks in fields; when he was at Saint-Rémy he brought them to the foreground.
File:Vincent Willem van Gogh, Dutch - Rain - Google Art Project.jpg|''Rain'' or ''Enclosed Wheat Field in the Rain,'' November 1889, Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia|alt= A squarish painting of a wheatfield in a dense pouring rain.
Van Gogh had met Sien towards the end of January 1882, when she had a five-year-old daughter and was pregnant.
The juxtaposition of saturated complementary colours and the single figure in the landscape represent a unique and innovative style.
Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam|alt=A woman sits in contemplation at a table in a cafe
Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam|alt=Closeup of a tree branch and landscape in the background, in a Ukiyo-e style painting
Some show him with full lips, a long face or prominent skull, or sharpened, alert features.
Influenced by Van Gogh, Matisse abandoned his earth-coloured palette for bright colours.
Theo died in January 1891, removing Vincent's most vocal and well-connected champion.
Hours before his departure, accompanied by Theo, he paid his first and only visit to Seurat in his studio.
File:Irises-Vincent van Gogh.jpg|''Irises'', 1889.
In August 1881, his recently widowed cousin, Cornelia "Kee" Vos-Stricker, daughter of his mother's older sister Willemina and Johannes Stricker, arrived for a visit.
He moved home often, perhaps to expose himself to new visual stimuli, and through exposure develop his technical skill.
Working outside and very quickly, he completed sketches and paintings of weavers and their cottages.
This was a happy time for Van Gogh; he was successful at work, and at 20 was earning more than his father.
Van Gogh's mental and physical condition is usually apparent; he may appear unkempt, unshaven or with a neglected beard, with deeply sunken eyes, a weak jaw, or having lost teeth.
He made paintings of harvests, wheat fields and other rural landmarks of the area, including ''The Old Mill'' (1888); a good example of a picturesque structure bordering the wheat fields beyond.
Van Gogh suffered from psychotic episodes and delusions and, though he worried about his mental stability, he often neglected his physical health, not eating properly and drinking heavily.
She has her hands clasped together on her lap, and she is dressed in a dark top and green dress in front of a vivid flower wallpaper background.
Pushkin Museum, Moscow.
Neue Pinakothek, Munich|alt=A close view of three blossoming trees behind which can be seen a large orchard and field in which a man is working, a village filled with buildings and houses in the background, under a bright sky.
He was inclined to immerse himself in local cultures and lighting conditions, although he maintained a highly individual visual outlook throughout.
He considered ''The Bedroom'' his best work of that period, because of the inventive use of perspective, combined with Impressionist techniques.
A lit lamp is on the wall.
On 23 December, after days of rain with the two men shut in the Yellow House together, there was an argument between them.
Hulsker believes that this small group of paintings formed the nucleus of many drawings and study sheets depicting landscapes and figures that Van Gogh worked on during this time.
Among these was ''Two Peasant Women Digging in a Snow-Covered Field at Sunset''.
In the left foreground a cypress tree extends from the bottom to the top of the picture.
Van Gogh considered portraits an important element of his ''oeuvre''.
At various points, Van Gogh painted the view from his window – at The Hague, Antwerp, and Paris.
In Paris, Vincent painted portraits of friends and acquaintances, still life paintings, views of Le Moulin de la Galette, scenes in Montmartre, Asnières and along the Seine.
His ''Portrait of Père Tanguy'' (1887) shows his success with the brighter palette, and is evidence of an evolving personal style.
File:Van Gogh - Selbstbildnisse.jpeg|''Two Self-Portraits and Several Details'', Drawing, Paris, 1886.
He said of portrait studies  that they were "the only thing in painting that moves me deeply and that gives me a sense of the infinite."
File:Vincent van Gogh - Self-Portrait - Google Art Project (719161).jpg|''Self-Portrait'', 1889.
His friendship with Gauguin came to an end after he threatened the Frenchman with a razor, and in a rage, cut off part of his own left ear.
He died from his injuries two days later.
He worked at the studio in April and May 1886, where he frequented the circle of the Australian artist John Peter Russell, and met fellow students Émile Bernard, Louis Anquetin and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec – who painted a portrait of him in pastel.
In November 1885 Van Gogh moved to Antwerp, where he rented a small room above a paint dealer's shop in the rue des Images (''Lange Beeldekensstraat'').
When Van Gogh's father discovered the details of their relationship, he put pressure on his son to abandon Sien and her two children.
Musée d'Orsay, Paris|alt=A grey church against a deep blue sky.
File: Vincent van Gogh - The Church in Auvers-sur-Oise, View from the Chevet - Google Art Project.jpg|''The Church at Auvers'', 1890.
Van Gogh was enthralled by the landscape and vegetation of the south of France, and often visited the farm gardens near Arles.
Gauguin immediately notified Theo, who on 24 December had proposed marriage to his old friend Andries Bonger's sister Johanna.
He undertook, but also failed, a three-month course at a Protestant missionary school in Laken, near Brussels.
The Yellow House had to be furnished before he could fully move in, but he was able to use it as a studio.
When Gauguin agreed to visit Arles in 1888, Van Gogh hoped for friendship, and the realisation of his idea of an artists' collective.
There was another brother, Cor, and three sisters: Elisabeth, Anna, and Willemina (known as "Wil").
De Groux apologised for the slight and left the group.
Gauguin was deeply impressed and later acquired two of the Paris versions.
Portraiture represented Van Gogh's best opportunity of earning money.
In September 1883 Van Gogh moved to Drenthe in the northern Netherlands.
Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam|alt=A stylised painting of gnarled tree roots, leaves and foliage, against brown soil.
By March 1882 Mauve appears to have gone cold towards Van Gogh, and stopped replying to his letters.
But within hours Vincent began to fail, suffering from an untreated infection resulting from the wound.
Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam|alt=Pale pink blossoms on the branches of a tree against a pale blue sky.
After the birth of his nephew, Van Gogh wrote "I started right away to make a picture for him, to hang in their bedroom, branches of white almond blossom against a blue sky."
File:Landscape with wheat sheaves and rising moon.jpg|''Wheat Fields (Van Gogh series)'', early June 1889.
Later, they were recognised as his first masterpieces.
In May 1890 Van Gogh left the clinic in Saint-Rémy to move nearer to both Dr Paul Gachet in Auvers-sur-Oise and to Theo.
Van Gogh painted several groups of still lifes in 1885.
In December 1888 Van Gogh painted ''La Berceuse'' – a figure that he thought as good as his sunflower still lifes.
Kröller-Müller Museum, Otterlo|alt= A squarish painting of a darkened wheatfield of stacks, with a river and mountains in the background under a rising full moon.
File:Vincent van Gogh - De slaapkamer - Google Art Project.jpg|''Bedroom in Arles'', 1888.
Between February and April 1890 Van Gogh suffered a severe relapse.
The style stresses the ability of complementary colours – including blue and orange – to form vibrant contrasts when juxtaposed.
As a young man he was deeply religious and principled, and was fired several times, including as a clergyman, before he became a painter.
Bacon was inspired by an image he described as "haunting", and regarded Van Gogh as an alienated outsider, a position which resonated with him.
Sien drowned herself in the River Scheldt in 1904.
If I carry out this plan there'll be a dozen or so panels.
Hiroshima Museum of Art, Hiroshima|alt=A formal garden with a church and a large house in the background.
The portrayals of the Arles landscape are informed by Van Gogh's Dutch upbringing; the patchworks of fields and avenues appear flat and lacking perspective, but excel in their use of colour.
Also in February, Van Gogh was invited by ''Les XX'', a society of avant-garde painters in Brussels, to participate in their annual exhibition.
He moved to the Auberge Ravoux in Auvers-sur-Oise near Paris under the care of the homeopathic doctor and artist, Paul Gachet.
She refused with the words "No, nay, never" ("''nooit, neen, nimmer''").
File:Vincent Willem van Gogh 086.jpg|''Portrait of Patience Escalier'', second version, end August 1888, Private collection|alt=A closeup portrait of an elderly man with a moustache and beard facing to his left (the viewer's right).
Mauve invited him to return in a few months, and suggested he spend the intervening time working in charcoal and pastels; Van Gogh went back to Etten and followed this advice.
In July 1869 Van Gogh's uncle Cent obtained a position for him at the art dealers Goupil & Cie in The Hague.
Kee would not meet him, and her parents wrote that his "persistence is ''disgusting''."
Its dark palette and heavy brushstrokes convey a sense of menace.
They were usually completed in series, such as those painted in Paris in mid-1887, and continued until shortly before his death.
Gachet was an amateur painter and had treated several other artists – Camille Pissarro had recommended him.
Van Gogh's life, mental health and status as a societal outsider, or "stranger on earth" have been idealised in many biographies, newspaper and magazine articles, speculative medical journal articles, novels, films, and songs.
Vincent wrote to Theo in May 1889: "Cypresses still preoccupy me, I should like to do something with them like my canvases of sunflowers"; he went on to say "They are beautiful in line and proportion like an Egyptian obelisk."
In part because of this, he is today romanticised as the quintessential misunderstood outsider artist, for whom "discourses on madness and creativity converge", and whose work is often seen as outbursts of spontaneous emotion.
The Danish artist Christian Mourier-Petersen became his companion for two months, and at first Arles appeared exotic.
Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam|alt=On the edge of the sea four boats on the water in the distance; closer, four boats are on the dry sand on the beach
The hospital diagnosis was "acute mania with generalised delirium", and within a few days the local police ordered that he be placed in hospital care.
Neue Pinakothek, Munich|alt=A ceramic vase with sunflowers on a yellow surface against a pale blue background.
Van Gogh was buried on 30 July, in the municipal cemetery of Auvers-sur-Oise.
His interest in art began at a young age; encouraged to draw as a child by his mother, his early drawings are expressive, but do not approach the intensity developed in his later work.
His letters are expressive and literate, and have been described as among the foremost 19th-century writings of their kind.
Van Gogh wrote that with ''The Night Café'' he tried "to express the idea that the café is a place where one can ruin oneself, go mad, or commit a crime."
The ear was delivered to the hospital, but Rey did not attempt to reattach it as too much time had passed.
In 1864 he was placed in a boarding school at Zevenbergen, where he felt abandoned, and campaigned to come home.
The Van Gogh Museum opened in the Museumplein in Amsterdam in 1973.
The New Art Gallery Walsall, Walsall|alt=A naked woman sits facing down with her arms on her bent knees
Gauguin fled Arles, never to see Van Gogh again.
He was able to walk back to the Auberge Ravoux, where he was attended to by two doctors, but without a surgeon present the bullet could not be removed.
Van Gogh learned about Fernand Cormon's atelier from Theo.
The first was painted in Paris in 1887 and shows flowers lying on the ground.
While in Asnières Van Gogh painted parks, restaurants and the Seine, including ''Bridges across the Seine at Asnières''.
File:De zaaier - s0029V1962 - Van Gogh Museum.jpg|''The Sower with Setting Sun'', 1888.
He was treated by Doctor Amadeus Cavenaile in February and March 1886, possibly for syphilis; he recorded the treatment of alum irrigation and sitz baths in one of his notebooks.
In later life Van Gogh remained in touch only with Willemina and Theo.
In 2015 ''L'Allée des Alyscamps'' sold for US$66.3&nbsp;million at Sotheby's, New York, easily exceeding its reserve of US$40&nbsp;million.
Private collection|alt=A melancholy-faced man sits at a table.
In each the emphasis is on Gachet's melancholic disposition.
Their relationship began to deteriorate; Van Gogh admired Gauguin and wanted to be treated as his equal, but Gauguin was arrogant and domineering, which frustrated Van Gogh.
Van Gogh turned to well-known Hague School artists like Weissenbruch and Blommers, and received technical advice from them, as well as from painters like De Bock and Van der Weele, both artists of the Hague School's second generation.
The ''Flowering Orchards'' (also the ''Orchards in Blossom'') are among the first groups of work completed after Van Gogh's arrival in Arles in February 1888.
Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut|alt=A billiard table in the centre of a room of a cafe surrounded by tables.
His reputation began to grow in the early 20th century as elements of his painting style came to be incorporated by the Fauves and German Expressionists.
After completing his training in 1873, he was transferred to Goupil's London branch, at 17 Southampton Street, and took lodgings at 87 Hackford Road, Stockwell.
File:Vincent Willem van Gogh 113.jpg|''Souvenir de Mauve'', March 1888, Kröller-Müller Museum, Otterlo, Netherlands|alt=A painting of two pink peach trees in a blossoming orchard of trees near a wooden fence under a bright blue sky.
He registered at the Académie in November 1880, where he studied anatomy and the standard rules of modelling and perspective.
Weak and unable to come to terms with Vincent's absence, he died on 25 January 1891 at Den Dolder, and was buried in Utrecht.
His ''The Round of the Prisoners'' (1890) was painted after an engraving by Gustave Doré (1832–1883).
The bullet was deflected by a rib and passed through his chest without doing apparent damage to internal organs – probably stopped by his spine.
In 2015 it had a record 1.9 million; 85 percent of the visitors come from other countries.
File:Vincent van Gogh - Portrait of Doctor Félix Rey (F500).jpg|''Portrait of Doctor Félix Rey,'' 1889, Pushkin Museum, Moscow|alt=A portrait of a young man from the left; he is looking intense, wearing a moustache and goatee beard.
File:Vincent van Gogh - Self-portrait with bandaged ear (1889, Courtauld Institute).jpg|''Self-portrait with Bandaged Ear'', 1889, Courtauld Institute of Art, London|alt=A portrait of Vincent van Gogh from the right; he is wearing a winter hat, his ear is bandaged and he has no beard.
Many are undated, but art historians have been able to place most in chronological order.
Biochemist Wilfred Arnold has countered that the symptoms are more consistent with acute intermittent porphyria, noting that the popular link between bipolar disorder and creativity might be spurious.
In despair, he held his left hand in the flame of a lamp, with the words: "Let me see her for as long as I can keep my hand in the flame."
Van Gogh painted several landscapes with flowers, including roses, lilacs, irises, and sunflowers.
The time in Arles became one of Van Gogh's more prolific periods: he completed 200 paintings, and more than 100 drawings and watercolours.
He comments that this short period was the only time that Van Gogh's illness had a significant effect on his work.
A yellow book and some flowers in a glass are on the table.
In September 1889 he produced two further versions of ''Bedroom in Arles''.
He wrote that they represented his "sadness and extreme loneliness", and that the "canvases will tell you what I cannot say in words, that is, how healthy and invigorating I find the countryside."
He almost always alienated members of the communities he hoped to join.
File:The Sower.jpg|''The Sower,'' (after Millet), 1888.
They show a shift in style from the fluid and restrained brushstrokes and even surface of ''Portrait of the Postman'' to the frenetic style, rough surface, broad brushstrokes and use of a palette knife in ''Madame Roulin with Baby''.
During the first days of his treatment, Van Gogh repeatedly and unsuccessfully asked for Gauguin, who asked a policeman attending the case to "be kind enough, Monsieur, to awaken this man with great care, and if he asks for me tell him I have left for Paris; the sight of me might prove fatal for him."
His teeth became loose and painful.
The style Van Gogh found was revolutionary "in the very look of his pictures, their coarseness and deliberately unfinished quality, and the vigor with which they were painted."
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York|alt= A painting of two large cypress trees, under a late afternoon sky, with a crescent moon.
He completed two chair paintings: ''Van Gogh's Chair'' and ''Gauguin's Chair.''
These were themes and motifs he returned to often to rework and develop.
Bacon identified with Van Gogh's theories of art and quoted lines written to Theo: "Real painters do not paint things as they are&nbsp;...
Art historian Melissa McQuillan believes the moves also reflect later stylistic changes, and that Van Gogh used the moves to avoid conflict, and as a coping mechanism for when the idealistic artist was faced with the realities of his then current situation.
In March 1868, he abruptly returned home.
The works are characterised by swirls and densely painted impasto, and include ''The Starry Night'', in which cypresses dominate the foreground.
In a contemporary account, Bernard wrote that the exhibition was ahead of anything else in Paris.
