Letting the first finger take the first-position place of the third finger brings the player to ''third position'', and so on.
The tailpiece anchors the strings to the lower bout of the violin by means of the tailgut, which loops around an ebony button called the tailpin (sometimes confusingly called the ''endpin'', like the cello's spike), which fits into a tapered hole in the bottom block.
Since violins are tuned in perfect fifths, and each subsequent note is stopped at a pitch the player perceives as the most harmonious, "when unaccompanied, a violinist does not play consistently in either the tempered or the natural just scale, but tends on the whole to conform with the Pythagorean scale."
Especially in instructional editions of violin music, numbers over the notes may indicate which finger to use, with ''0'' indicating an open string.
Dr. Suzuki referred to the sounding point as the ''Kreisler highway''; one may think of different sounding points as ''lanes'' in the highway.
Some players of American styles of folk fiddling (such as bluegrass or old-time) have their bridge's top edge cut to a slightly flatter curve, making techniques such as a "double shuffle" less taxing on the bow arm.
Some such instruments are somewhat longer and should be regarded as violas.
Yet higher notes (up to C8) can be sounded using harmonics, either natural or artificial.
While related in some sense to the dimensions of the instruments, the fractional sizes are not intended to be literal descriptions of relative proportions.
In orchestral parts, violinists often have to make very quick shifts from arco to pizzicato, and vice versa.
Tremolo is often used as a sound effect in orchestral music.
The very great majority of glued joints in the instrument use animal hide glue for a number of reasons: it is capable of making a thinner joint than most other glues, it is reversible (brittle enough to crack with carefully applied force, and removable with warm water) when disassembly is needed, and since fresh hide glue sticks to old hide glue, more original wood can be preserved when repairing a joint.
Ebony is the preferred material because of its hardness, beauty, and superior resistance to wear.
As significant value may be attached to violins made either by specific makers or at specific times and locations, forgery and other methods of fraudulent misrepresentation can be used to inflate the value of an instrument.
Significant changes occurred in the construction of the violin in the 18th century, particularly in the length and angle of the neck, as well as a heavier bass bar.
Through practice and ear training, the violinist's left hand finds the notes intuitively by muscle memory.
Other tunings are occasionally employed; the G string, for example, can be tuned up to A.
A patch cable or wireless transmitter sends the signal to an amplifier.
Using the ''octave frame'' (the normal distance between the first and fourth fingers in any given position) with the fourth finger just touching the string a fourth higher than the stopped note produces the fourth harmonic, two octaves above the stopped note.
(In the Indian posture the stability of the violin is guaranteed by its scroll resting on the side of the foot).
The two methods are not equivalent, because they produce different timbres; pressing down on the string tends to produce a harsher, more intense sound.
One can also achieve a louder sound by placing the bow closer to the bridge.
Sometimes called a ''lady's violin'', these instruments are slightly shorter than a full size violin, but tend to be high-quality instruments capable of producing a sound that is comparable to that of fine full size violins.
They were extensively used in popular music throughout the 1920s and early 1930s.
Ethnomusicologists have observed its widespread use in Europe, Asia, and the Americas.
The rise of disco music in the 1970s continued this trend with the heavy use of string instruments in popular disco orchestras (e.g., Love Unlimited Orchestra, Biddu Orchestra, Monster Orchestra, Salsoul Orchestra, MFSB).
The strings of the mezzo violin are the same length as those of the standard violin.
Popular Motown recordings of the late 1960s and 1970s relied heavily on strings as part of their trademark texture.
The violin appears prominently in the music of Spanish folk metal group Mägo de Oz (for example, in their 1998 hit "Molinos de viento").
Dave Matthews Band features violinist Boyd Tinsley.
A responsive instrument will sound numerous possible harmonic nodes along the length of the string.
Pizzicato are used in orchestral works and in solo showpieces.
Attaching a small metal, rubber, leather, or wooden device called a ''mute'', or ''sordino'', to the bridge of the violin gives a softer, more mellow tone, with fewer audible overtones; the sound of an entire orchestral string section playing with mutes has a hushed quality.
With the rise of electronically created music in the 1980s, violins declined in use, as synthesized string sounds played by a keyboardist with a synthesizer took their place.
The most essential part of bowing technique is the bow grip.
Fiddle players who use solid steel core strings may prefer to use a tailpiece with fine tuners on all four strings, instead of the single fine tuner on the E string used by many classical players.
Originally the stick was made out of snakewood, but modern day bows are now traditionally made of brazilwood, although a stick made from a more select quality (and more expensive) brazilwood is called pernambuco.
Vibrato can be produced by a proper combination of finger, wrist and arm motions.
A string quartet similarly has parts for first and second violins, as well as a viola part, and a bass instrument, such as the cello or, rarely, the double bass.
Martelé can be played in any part of the bow.
As the violin has no frets to stop the strings, the player must know exactly where to place the fingers on the strings to play with good intonation.
Benjamin Britten's ''The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra'' demands its use in the "Percussion" Variation.
The history of small violins is not well documented.
For instance, the note of open A can be played in the D string (in first to fourth positions) or even on the G string (in sixth to ninth positions).
In left-hand pizzicato, two fingers are put on the string; one (usually the index or middle finger) is put on the correct note, and the other (usually the ring finger or little finger) is put above the note.
It is most likely that the first makers of violins borrowed from three types of current instruments: the rebec, in use since the 10th century (itself derived from the Byzantine lyra and the Arabic ''rebab''), the Renaissance fiddle, and the ''lira da braccio'' (both derived from the ''Byzantine lira'').
The successful indie rock and baroque pop band Arcade Fire use violins extensively in their arrangements.
Following a stage of intensive development in the late Renaissance, largely in Italy, the violin had improved (in volume, tone, and agility), to the point that it not only became a very important instrument in art music, but proved highly appealing to folk musicians as well, ultimately spreading very widely, sometimes displacing earlier bowed instruments.
This, like any other unwarranted tension, would limit freedom of motion, and increase the risk of injury.
The "when" and "what for" of violin vibrato are artistic matters of style and taste.
These harmonics are less commonly used; in the case of the major third, both the stopped note and touched note must be played slightly sharp otherwise the harmonic does not speak as readily.
Strings were first made of sheep gut (commonly known as catgut), or simply gut, which was stretched, dried, and twisted.
Since that time there have been many improvising violinists including Stéphane Grappelli, Stuff Smith, Eddie South, Regina Carter, Johnny Frigo, John Blake, Adam Taubitz, Leroy Jenkins, and Jean-Luc Ponty.
Patterns of the node made by sand or glitter sprinkled on the plates with the plate vibrated at certain frequencies, called ''Chladni patterns'', are occasionally used by luthiers to verify their work before assembling the instrument.
Secondly, the much shorter sounding length of the string in very high positions gives challenges for the right arm and bow in sounding the instrument effectively.
When played as a folk instrument, the violin is usually referred to in English as a ''fiddle'' (although the term ''fiddle'' can be used informally no matter what the genre of music.)
Modern strings may be gut, solid steel, stranded steel, or various synthetic materials, wound with various metals, and sometimes plated with silver.
(For practicing purposes there is also the mute violin, a violin without a sound box.)
Different types of vibrato will bring different moods to the piece, and the varying degrees and styles of vibrato are often characteristics that stand out in well-known violinists.
Such mutes are generally not used in performance, but are used to deaden the sound of the violin in practice areas such as hotel rooms.
** The Inverardi family active 1550–1580 in Brescia
James' Saul Davies, who is also a guitarist, was enlisted by the band as a violinist.
** The Linarolo family, active 1505-1640 in Venice
** Matteo Goffriller, known for his celli, active 1685-1742 in Venice
It is important to remember that the chin rest was a relatively recent invention.
Since electric violins do not rely on string tension and resonance to amplify their sound they can have more strings.
The placement of the left hand on the fingerboard is characterized by "positions".
The purfling running around the edge of the spruce top provides some protection against cracks originating at the edge.
In the classical tradition, violinists will often use a string crossing or shift of position to allow them to avoid the change of timbre introduced by an open string.
The instrument is also used often in symphonic metal, particularly by bands such as Therion, Nightwish, Within Temptation, Haggard, and Epica, although it can also be found in Gothic Metal bands such as Tristania and Theater of Tragedy.
While most violins have four strings, there are violins with as many as seven strings.
In elementary shifting exercises the "guide finger" is often voiced while it glides up and down the string, so the player can establish by ear whether they are landing in the correct place, however outside of these exercises it should rarely be audible (unless the performer is consciously applying a portamento effect).
In the early years of the 20th century, strings were made of either gut, silk, aluminum, or steel.
** The Stradivari family, active 1644–1737 in Cremona
The sound of the second harmonic is the clearest of them all, because it is a common node with all the succeeding even-numbered harmonics (4th, 6th, etc.).
Occasional rubbing with rosin makes the hair grip the strings intermittently, causing them to vibrate.
If the instrument's playing length, or string length from nut to bridge, is equal to that of an ordinary full-scale violin; i.e., a bit less than , then it may be properly termed a violin.
The first specially built electric violins date back to 1928 and were made by Victor Pfeil, Oskar Vierling, George Eisenberg, Benjamin Miessner, George Beauchamp, Hugo Benioff and Fredray Kislingbury.
Dmitri Shostakovich uses it in his Fourteenth Symphony in the movement 'At the Sante Jail'.
The bow will not naturally strike three strings at once, but if there is sufficient pressure in the bowstroke the middle string can be bent down temporarily so all three can sound.
The finest Renaissance carved and decorated violin in the world is the Gasparo da Salò (1574 c.) owned by Ferdinand II, Archduke of Austria and later, from 1841, by the Norwegian virtuoso Ole Bull, who used it for forty years and thousands of concerts, for its very powerful and beautiful tone, similar to those of a Guarneri.
The earliest references to jazz performance using the violin as a solo instrument are documented during the first decades of the 20th century.
The parts of a violin are usually made from different types of wood (although electric violins may not be made of wood at all, since their sound may not be dependent on specific acoustic characteristics of the instrument's construction), and it is usually strung with gut, Perlon or other synthetic, or steel strings.
** The Micheli family, active 1530–1615 in Brescia
When playing with an instrument tuned to equal temperament, such as a piano, skilled violinists adjust their tuning to avoid discordant notes.
The second harmonic is in the middle of the string and sounds an octave higher than the string's pitch.
A typical violin bow may be 75&nbsp;cm (29&nbsp;inches) overall, and weigh about .
Strings usually have a colored silk wrapping at both ends, for identification and to provide friction against the pegs.
Another example is in the third movement of ''Contrasts'', by Béla Bartók, where the E string is tuned down to E flat and the G tuned to a G sharp, or the set of pieces called the Mystery Sonatas by Biber.
During the later part of the 19th century and early part of the 20th century, makers in Saxony produced many of these fractional violins.
In the hands of a good player, the violin is extremely agile, and can execute rapid and difficult sequences of notes.
A "triple stop" with three simultaneous notes is possible in some circumstances.
Each node is at an integer division of the string, for example half-way or one-third along the length of the string.
Most E strings are unwound, either plain or gold-plated steel.
Since the Baroque era, the violin has been one of the most important of all instruments in classical music, for several reasons.
Where three or four more simultaneous notes are written, the violinist will typically "split" the chord, choosing the lower one or two notes to play first before promptly continuing onto the upper one or two notes.
The neck is usually maple with a flamed figure compatible with that of the ribs and back.
It has been used in the post-rock genre by bands such as A Genuine Freakshow, Sigur Rós, Zox, Broken Social Scene, and A Silver Mt.
The body may be finished in bright colors and made from alternative materials to wood.
At the frog end, a screw adjuster tightens or loosens the hair.
Some student bows (particularly the ones made of solid fiberglass) substitute a plastic sleeve for grip and winding.
There are a few books dedicated solely to the study of violin harmonics.
In very high positions, the thumb is unable to move with the fingers as the body of the instrument gets in the way.
Recently some orchestras performing Baroque music (such as the Freiburg Baroque Orchestra) have had all of their violins and violas, solo and ensemble, perform standing up.
Two notable examples of this are an entire section of Vittorio Monti's ''Csárdás'' and a passage towards the middle of the third movement of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto.
The modern European violin evolved from various bowed stringed instruments from the Middle East and the Byzantine Empire.
One method, called ''hand vibrato'', involves rocking the hand back at the wrist to achieve oscillation, while another method, ''arm vibrato'', modulates the pitch by rocking at the elbow.
Bowed instruments may have originated in the equestrian cultures of Central Asia, an example being the Tanbur originated in modern-day Uzbekistan or Kobyz () (kyl-kobyz) - an ancient Turkic, Kazakh string instrument or Mongolian instrument Morin huur:
The highest position, practically speaking, is 13th position.
By "pointing" the sound at different parts of the room in a rhythmic way, vibrato adds a "shimmer" or "liveliness" to the sound of a well-made violin.
Tremolo is marked with three short, slanted lines across the stem of the note.
'', meaning 'mute off'.
However all insist on the importance of a natural relaxed position without tension or rigidity.
advice as to what good posture is and how to achieve it differs in details.
Composers often assign the melody to the first violins, typically a more difficult part using higher positions, while second violins play harmony, accompaniment patterns or the melody an octave lower than the first violins.
Fine tuners may also be applied to the other strings, especially on a student instrument, and are sometimes built into the tailpiece.
Violins also appear in ensembles supplying orchestral backgrounds to many jazz recordings.
Not shown on this chart is the way the spacing between note positions becomes closer as the fingers move up (in pitch) from the nut.
:Turkic and Mongolian horsemen from Inner Asia were probably the world’s earliest fiddlers.
The popularity of crossover music beginning in the last years of the 20th century has brought the violin back into the popular music arena, with both electric and acoustic violins being used by popular bands.
It also transmits vibrations between the top and the back of the instrument.
Tremolo is the very rapid repetition (typically of a single note, but occasionally of multiple notes), usually played at the tip of the bow.
In the course of a shift in low positions, the thumb of the left hand moves up or down the neck of the instrument so as to remain in the same position relative to the fingers (though the movement of the thumb may occur slightly before, or slightly after, the movement of the fingers).
However, violins are also frequently used in jazz, in some forms of rock music, and genres of folk including country music and bluegrass music.
Vibrato does little, if anything, to disguise an out-of-tune note; in other words, misapplied vibrato is a poor substitute for good intonation.
Lindsey Stirling plays the violin in conjunction with electronic/dubstep/trance rifts and beats.
The '''violin''' is a wooden string instrument in the violin family.
The violin was first known in 16th-century Italy, with some further modifications occurring in the 18th and 19th centuries.
The term "double stop" is often used to encompass sounding an open string alongside a fingered note.
The lowest position on the violin is referred to as "half position".
Small violins were made at least during the late Renaissance Period and quite probably into the Baroque period that were a fourth higher in pitch than standard violins.
It is usually with the thumb bent in the small area between the frog and the winding of the bow.
The tuning G-D-A-E is used for most violin music.
Great numbers of instruments have come from the hands of "lesser" makers, as well as still greater numbers of mass-produced commercial "trade violins" coming from cottage industries in places such as Saxony, Bohemia, and Mirecourt.
In many traditions of folk music, the tunes are not written but are memorized by successive generations of musicians and passed on, in what is known as the oral tradition.
The second finger will lightly touch the string above the first finger causing the pitch to change.
These smaller instruments are commonly used by young players, whose fingers are not long enough to reach the correct positions on full-sized instruments.
In Iranian classical music and Iranian light music,the violin ls different tunings in any Dastgah, the violin is likely to be tuned  (E-A-E-A) in Dastgah-h Esfahan or in  Dastgāh-e Šur is (E-A-D-E) and (E-A-E-E), in Dastgāh-e Māhur is (E-A-D-A).
Indian, Pakistani, Turkish, and Arabic pop music is filled with the sound of violins, both soloists and ensembles.
The jaw and the shoulder must hold the violin firmly enough to allow it to remain stable when the left hand goes from a high position to a low one.
However, while the violin has had very little usage in mainstream rock music, it has some history in progressive rock (e.g., Electric Light Orchestra, King Crimson, Kansas, Gentle Giant).
Some old violins (and some made to appear old) have a grafted scroll, evidenced by a glue joint between the pegbox and neck.
The violin is sometimes informally called a fiddle, regardless of the type of music played on it.
To this day, instruments from the so-called Golden Age of violin making, especially those made by Stradivari, Guarneri del Gesù and Montagnana are the most sought-after instruments by both collectors and performers.
Playing close to the bridge (''sul ponticello'') gives a more intense sound than usual, emphasizing the higher harmonics; and playing with the bow over the end of the fingerboard (''sul tasto'') makes for a delicate, ethereal sound, emphasizing the fundamental frequency.
Very high positions are a particular technical challenge, for two reasons.
This could correspond to F-B-F-B, for instance.
"Mars" from Gustav Holst's "The Planets" uses ''col legno'' to play a repeated rhythm in 5/4 time signature.
According to their reputation, the quality of their sound has defied attempts to explain or equal it, though this belief is disputed.
Strings have a limited lifetime.
Two comprehensive works are Henryk Heller's seven-volume ''Theory of Harmonics'', published by Simrock in 1928, and Michelangelo Abbado's five-volume ''Tecnica dei suoni armonici'' published by Ricordi in 1934.
While all authorities insist on the vital importance of good posture both for the sake of the quality of the playing and to reduce the chance of repetitive strain injury,
Weaker, diluted glue is usually used to fasten the top to the ribs, and the nut to the fingerboard, since common repairs involve removing these parts.
The use of nonstandard tunings in classical music is known as ''scordatura''; in some folk styles, it is called ''cross tuning''.
While various parts of the hand or arm may be involved in the motion, the end result is a movement of the fingertip bringing about a slight change in vibrating string length.
After tuning, the instrument's bridge may be examined to ensure that it is standing straight and centered between the inner nicks of the f-holes; a crooked bridge may significantly affect the sound of an otherwise well-made violin.
Very often the E string will have a fine tuning lever worked by a small screw turned by the fingers.
A violin generally consists of a spruce top (the soundboard, also known as the ''top plate'', ''table'', or ''belly''), maple ribs and back, two endblocks, a neck, a bridge, a soundpost, four strings, and various fittings, optionally including a chinrest, which may attach directly over, or to the left of, the tailpiece.
A minutely higher tuning is sometimes employed for solo playing to give the instrument a brighter sound; conversely, Baroque music is sometimes played using lower tunings to make the violin's sound more gentle.
There are many bowing techniques that allow for every range of playing style and many teachers, players, and orchestras spend a lot of time developing techniques and creating a unified technique within the group.
(More modern glues must be cleaned off entirely for the new joint to be sound, which generally involves scraping off some wood along with the old glue.)
Painted-on faux purfling on the top is usually a sign of an inferior instrument.
The majority of old instruments have undergone these modifications, and hence are in a significantly different state than when they left the hands of their makers, doubtless with differences in sound and response.
A 3/4 violin's body length is 335&nbsp;mm (about 13&nbsp;inches), and a 1/2 size is 310&nbsp;mm (about 12&nbsp;inches).
Many old-time pieces call for cross-tuning the instrument out of standard GDAE tuning.
'', or ''con sordina'', meaning 'with mute'; and ''senza sord.
Since modern E strings are steel, a fine tuner is typically fitted for that string.
The eerie quality of a violin section playing ''col legno'' is exploited in some symphonic pieces, notably the "Witches' Dance" of the last movement of Berlioz's Symphonie Fantastique.
** The Amati family, active 1550–1740 in Cremona
The current record amount paid for a Stradivari violin is £9.8 million (US$15.9 million), when the instrument known as the Lady Blunt was sold by Tarisio Auctions in an online auction on June 20, 2011.
Firstly, the difference in location of different notes becomes much narrower in high positions, making the notes more challenging to locate and in some cases to distinguish.
The violins, violas, and cellos we play today, and whose bows are still strung with horsehair, are a legacy of the nomads.
Sometimes the two notes are identical (for instance, playing a fingered A on the D string against the open A string), giving a ringing sort of "fiddling" sound.
The other fingers are spread somewhat evenly across the top part of the bow.
This bowing technique is somewhat rarely used, and results in a muted percussive sound.
"The Messiah" or ''"Le Messie"'' (also known as the "Salabue") made by Antonio Stradivari in 1716 remains pristine.
It is now in the Vestlandske Kustindustrimuseum in Bergen (Norway).
** Domenico Montagnana, active circa 1700-1750 in Venice
Vibrato can also be used for a fast trill.
The hair of the bow traditionally comes from the tail of a grey male horse (which has predominantly white hair), though some cheaper bows use synthetic fiber.
The bridge is a precisely cut piece of maple that forms the lower anchor point of the vibrating length of the strings and transmits the vibration of the strings to the body of the instrument.
The third harmonic breaks the string into thirds and sounds an octave and a fifth above the fundamental, and the fourth harmonic breaks the string into quarters sounding two octaves above the first.
The sounding point where the bow intersects the string also influences timbre.
String longevity depends on string quality and playing intensity.
As there is no concept of absolute pitch in Indian classical music, any convenient tuning maintaining these relative pitch intervals between the strings can be used.
It also allows the top to flex more independently of the rib structure.
Some recent bow design innovations use carbon fiber for the stick, at all levels of craftsmanship.
This process is similar to that used to determine the provenance of art works.
D natural on the A string, with the other two fingers placed in between as required.
Violins are tuned by turning the pegs in the pegbox under the scroll, or by adjusting the ''fine tuner'' screws at the tailpiece.
Sometimes in virtuoso solo music where the bow hand is occupied (or for show-off effect), ''left-hand pizzicato'' will be indicated by a ''+'' (plus sign) below or above the note.
The violin typically has four strings tuned in perfect fifths, and is most commonly played by drawing a bow across its strings, though it can also be played by plucking the strings (pizzicato).
To tune a violin, the A string is first tuned to a standard pitch (usually 440&nbsp;Hz).
A section of the third movement of Violin Concerto No.
Violinists and collectors particularly prize the instruments made by the Stradivari, Guarneri and Amati families from the 16th to the 18th century in Brescia and Cremona and by Jacob Stainer in Austria.
(The index finger is most commonly used here.)
The lowest note available in this position in standard tuning is an open G; the highest note in first position is played with the fourth finger on the E-string, sounding a B.
A person who makes or repairs violins is called a luthier.
The fingers are conventionally numbered 1 (index) through 4 (little finger).
These violins could be used either by children, or by musicians who had parts that were then outside of the range of standard violins.
