In countries with high levels of violence, economic growth can be slowed down, personal and collective security eroded, and social development impeded.
Some critics have therefore argued that Pinker suffers from "a reductive vision of what it means to be violent."
Some of the most pervasive and most dangerous forms of violence are those that are often hidden from view (against women and children, especially); just beneath the surface in many of our homes, churches, and communities is abuse enough to freeze the
Approximately 20% of women and 5–10% of men report being sexually abused as children, while 25–50% of all children report being physically abused.
Few intervention to prevent sexual violence have been demonstrated to be effective.
Forced movement, such as this forced movement applied by Pol Pot, is a clear display of structural violence.
Self-directed violence is subdivided into suicidal behaviour and self-abuse.
The public health approach is a science-driven, population-based, interdisciplinary, intersectoral approach based on the ecological model which emphasizes primary prevention.
Moreover, many forms of systemic violence often slip past our attention because they are so much a part of the infrastructure of life (e.g., racism, sexism, ageism).
Violence is primarily classified as either instrumental or reactive / hostile.
Finally, the fourth level looks at the broad societal factors that help to create a climate in which violence is encouraged or inhibited: the responsiveness of the criminal justice system, social and cultural norms regarding gender roles or parent-child relationships, income inequality, the strength of the social welfare system, the social acceptability of violence, the availability of weapons, the exposure to violence in mass media, and political instability.
These are just as natural to us as the aggressive tendencies."
However, some newer research in archaeology and bioarchaeology may provide evidence that violence within and among groups is not a recent phenomenon.
Indeed, some police leaders have gone so far as to say the police should primarily be a crime prevention agency.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, for example, requires that countries party to the Convention take all appropriate steps to end violence against women.
In the US, the criminal justice system has, for instance, funded school- and community-based initiatives to reduce children's access to guns and teach conflict resolution.
Third, the criminal justice approach, the other main approach to addressing violence (link to entry above), has traditionally been more geared towards violence that occurs between male youths and adults in the street and other public places – which makes up the bulk of homicides in most countries – than towards violence occurring in private settings such as child maltreatment, intimate partner violence and elder abuse – which makes up the largest share of non-fatal violence.
In the United States, domestic corporal punishment has been linked to later violent acts against family members and spouses.
While studies showing associations between physical punishment of children and later aggression cannot prove that physical punishment causes an increase in aggression, a number of longitudinal studies suggest that the experience of physical punishment has a direct causal effect on later aggressive behaviors.
Modern political ideologies which espouse similar views include pacifist varieties of voluntarism, mutualism, anarchism and libertarianism.
The former includes suicidal thoughts, attempted suicides – also called ''para suicide'' or ''deliberate self-injury'' in some countries – and completed suicides.
Fourth, evidence is beginning to accumulate that a science-based public health approach is effective at preventing interpersonal violence.
As an anthropological concept, this kind of violence may refers to the incorporation of different forms of violence (mainly political violence) into daily practices.
Political violence includes war and related violent conflicts, state violence and similar acts carried out by larger groups.
#Defining the problem conceptually and numerically, using statistics that accurately describe the nature and scale of violence, the characteristics of those most affected, the geographical distribution of incidents, and the consequences of exposure to such violence.
Steven Pinker argues that by every possible measure, every type of violence has drastically decreased since ancient and medieval times.
Many forms of violence against women, children and the elderly, for instance, can result in physical, psychological and social problems that do not necessarily lead to injury, disability or death.
Communities can be caught in poverty traps where pervasive violence and deprivation form a vicious circle that stifles economic growth.
World War I casualties were over 40 million and World War II casualties were over 70 million.
stopping them from occurring in the first place.
Data on the extent of the problem in institutions such as hospitals, nursing homes and other long-term care facilities are scarce.
However, German political theorist Hannah Arendt noted: "Violence can be justifiable, but it never will be legitimate ... Its justification loses in plausibility the farther its intended end recedes into the future.
Approaches to prevent violence, whether targeted at individuals or entire communities, must be properly evaluated for their effectiveness and the results shared.
The use of violence often is a source of pride and a defence of honor, especially among males who often believe violence defines manhood.
This step also includes adapting programmes to local contexts and subjecting them to rigorous re-evaluation to ensure their effectiveness in the new setting.
From the Battlefield to the Schoolyard&mdash;A New Perspective on Violent Conflict and Its Prevention" criticizes the "killer ape" myth in his book which brings together discussions from two Harvard Law School symposiums.
Clearly, acts committed by larger groups can have multiple motives.
James Gilligan writes violence is often pursued as an antidote to shame or humiliation.
Until recently, this approach has been relatively neglected in the field, with the majority of resources directed towards secondary or tertiary prevention.
Violent acts that are not carried out by the military or police and that are not in self-defense are usually classified as crimes, although not all crimes are violent crimes.
To represent this complexity, the ecological, or social ecological model is often used.
Victims may engage in high-risk behaviours such as alcohol and substance misuse, smoking, and unsafe sex, which in turn can contribute to cardiovascular disorders, cancers, depression, diabetes and HIV/AIDS, resulting in premature death Violence may beget violence.
In many countries, violence prevention is still a new or emerging field in public health.
As part of Pol Pot's "ideological intent…to create a purely agrarian society or cooperative", he "dismantled the country's existing economic infrastructure and depopulated every urban area".
Collective violence that is committed to advance a particular social agenda includes, for example, crimes of hate committed by organized groups, terrorist acts and mob violence.
However, when this "in limbo" reality is designed to be in place "until further notice…the state of exception thus ceases to be referred to as an external and provisional state of factual danger and comes to be confused with juridical rule itself".
Because all forms of violence are multi-faceted problems, the public health approach emphasizes a multi-sectoral response.
Examples for which evidence of effectiveness is emerging includes: screening tools to identify victims of intimate partner violence and refer them to appropriate services; psychosocial interventions – such as trauma-focused cognitive behavioural therapy – to reduce mental health problems associated with violence, including post-traumatic stress disorder; and protection orders, which prohibit a perpetrator from contacting the victim, to reduce repeat victimization among victims of intimate partner violence.
To achieve lasting change, it is important to enact legislation and develop policies that protect women; address discrimination against women and promote gender equality; and help to move the culture away from violence.
In academia, the idea of the peaceful pre-history and non-violent tribal societies gained popularity with the post-colonial perspective.
Human geography, though coming late to the theorizing table, has tackled violence through many lenses, including anarchist geography, feminist geography, Marxist geography, political geography, and critical geography.
Although some scholars had claimed media violence may increase aggression, this view is coming increasingly in doubt both in the scholarly community and was rejected by the US Supreme Court in the Brown v EMA case, as well as in a review of video game violence by the Australian Government (2010) which concluded evidence for harmful effects were inconclusive at best and the rhetoric of some scholars was not matched by good data.
Goetz writes that most homicides seem to start from relatively trivial disputes between unrelated men who then escalate to violence and death.
In 2008, over 16 million cases of non-fatal violence-related injuries were severe enough to require medical attention.
Although suicide rates have traditionally been highest among the male elderly, rates among young people have been increasing to such an extent that they are now the group at highest risk in a third of countries, in both developed and developing countries.
Dale Peterson and Richard Wranghamin "Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of Human Violence" write that violence is inherent in humans, though not inevitable.
For each single death due to violence, there are dozens of hospitalizations, hundreds of emergency department visits, and thousands of doctors' appointments.
A WHO multi-country study found that between 15–71% of women reported experiencing physical and/or sexual violence by an intimate partner at some point in their lives.
Not surprisingly, scientific evidence about the effectiveness of interventions to prevent collective violence is lacking.
The notions of individual blame, responsibility, guilt, and culpability are central to criminal justice's approach to violence and one of the criminal justice system's main tasks is to "do justice", i.e.
It is used in various degrees in most countries.
Data for many countries, especially low- and middle-income countries, are lacking.
Governments regulate the use of violence through legal systems governing individuals and political authorities, including the police and military.
Thus defined and delineated, it is of note, as Hyndman says, that "geography came late to theorizing violence" in comparison to other social sciences.
However, non-lethal violence, such as assaults or bullying appear to be declining as well.
The Killing Fields—manifestations of Agamben's concept of camps beyond the normal rule of law—featured the state of exception.
Gandhi himself once wrote: "A society organized and run on the basis of complete non-violence would be the purest anarchy."
Evaluation studies are beginning to support community interventions that aim to prevent violence against women by promoting gender equality.
No one questions the use of violence in self-defence, because the danger is not only clear but also present, and the end justifying the means is immediate".
Keeping this idea of social/spatial justice via geography in mind, it is worthwhile to look at geographical approaches to violence in the context of politics.
When planning responses to violent conflicts, recommended approaches include assessing at an early stage who is most vulnerable and what their needs are, co-ordination of activities between various players and working towards global, national and local capabilities so as to deliver effective health services during the various stages of an emergency.
Ongoing care of children and families can reduce the risk of maltreatment reoccurring and can minimize its consequences.
Research into the media and violence examines whether links between consuming media violence and subsequent aggressive and violent behaviour exists.
Youth violence greatly increases the costs of health, welfare and criminal justice services; reduces productivity; decreases the value of property; and generally undermines the fabric of society.
stress management, respite care), adult protective services and self-help groups.
There is a strong relationship between levels of violence and modifiable factors such as concentrated poverty, income and gender inequality, the harmful use of alcohol, and the absence of safe, stable, and nurturing relationships between children and parents.
To prevent and respond to violence, the criminal justice approach relies primarily on deterrence, incarceration and the punishment and rehabilitation of perpetrators.
Although there is a widespread perception that war is the most dangerous form of armed violence in the world, the average person living in a conflict-affected country had a risk of dying violently in the conflict of about 2.0 per 100,000 population between 2004 and 2007.
The public health approach is an evidence-based and systematic process involving the following four steps:
The state, in the grip of a perceived, potential crisis (whether legitimate or not) takes preventative legal measures, such as a suspension of rights (it is in this climate, as Agamben demonstrates, that the formation of the Social Democratic and Nazi government's lager or concentration camp can occur).
Since violence is a matter of perception as well as a measurable phenomenon, psychologists have found variability in whether people perceive certain physical acts as "violent".
If there is a great initial status difference, then the lower status individual usually offers no challenge and if challenged the higher status individual usually ignores the lower status individual.
It includes all types of physical and/or emotional ill-treatment, sexual abuse, neglect, negligence and commercial or other child exploitation, which results in actual or potential harm to the child’s health, survival, development or dignity in the context of a relationship of responsibility, trust or power.
For example, between 1976 and 2008, African Americans were victims of 329,825 homicides.
Worldwide some 250,000 homicides occur among youth 10–29 years of age each year, which is 41% of the total number of homicides globally each year ("Global Burden of Disease", World Health Organization, 2008).
Fry determines that all present ethnographically studied tribal societies, "by the very fact of having been described and published by anthropologists, have been irrevocably impacted by history and modern colonial nation states" and that "many have been affected by state societies for at least 5000 years."
The global public health response to interpersonal violence began in earnest in the mid-1990s.
We must insist that violence also refers to that which is psychologically destructive, that which demeans, damages, or depersonalizes others.
For many people, ... only physical violence truly qualifies as violence.
Beyond deaths and injuries, highly prevalent forms of violence (such as child maltreatment and intimate partner violence) have serious lifelong non-injury health consequences.
Anti-capitalists assert that capitalism is violent.
Risk factors specific to sexual violence perpetration include beliefs in family honour and sexual purity, ideologies of male sexual entitlement and weak legal sanctions for sexual violence.
Additionally, communities with high level of violence do not provide the level of stability and predictability vital for a prospering business economy.
About fourteen thousand of these murders occurred at Choeung Ek, which is the best-known of the extermination camps referred to as the Killing Fields.
He concluded: "Gun violence is a threat to the public health of our country."
Suicide accounts for about 883,000, interpersonal violence for 456,000 and collective violence for 18,000.
Civil societies authorize some amount of violence, exercised through the police power, to maintain the status quo and enforce laws.
Strategies addressing the underlying causes of violence can be effective in preventing violence.
#Disseminating information on the effectiveness of programmes and increasing the scale of proven effective programmes.
For intimate partner violence, a consistent marker at this level of the model is marital conflict or discord in the relationship.
Violence cannot be attributed to a single factor.
Goetz (2010) argues that humans are similar to most mammal species and use violence in specific situations.
They suggest that research typically focuses on lethal violence, often looks at homicide rates of death due to warfare, but ignore the less obvious forms of violence.
The second level focuses on close relationships, such as those with family and friends.
Sexual violence has serious short- and long-term consequences on physical, mental, sexual and reproductive health for victims and for their children as described in the section on intimate partner violence.
Evidence is emerging for the effectiveness of several other primary prevention strategies – those that: combine microfinance with gender equality training; promote communication and relationship skills within communities; reduce access to, and the harmful use of alcohol; and change cultural gender norms.
Poorer countries, especially those with large gaps between the rich and the poor, tend to have higher rates of homicide than wealthier countries.
For instance, evidence suggests that programmes that combine microfinance with gender equity training can reduce intimate partner violence.
Pinker's observation of the decline in interpersonal violence echoes the work of Norbert Elias, who attributes the decline to a "civilizing process", in which the state's monopolization of violence, the maintenance of socioeconomic interdependencies or "figurations", and the maintenance of behavioural codes in culture all contribute to the development of individual sensibilities, which increase the repugnance of individuals towards violent acts.
The information, resources, and infrastructures the health care sector has at its disposal are an important asset for research and prevention work.
school, job, and relationship difficulties).
Individuals will be less likely to invest money and effort towards growth in such unstable and violent conditions.
There is also emerging evidence that these programmes reduce convictions and violent acts in adolescence and early adulthood, and probably help decrease intimate partner violence and self-directed violence in later life.
Gender differences are least marked for children.
In recent decades in many countries in the world, the criminal justice system has taken an increasing interest in preventing violence before it occurs.
Perhaps the most critical element of a public health approach to prevention is the ability to identify underlying causes rather than focusing upon more visible "symptoms".
The World Health Organization's initial response to this resolution was to create the Department of Violence and Injury Prevention and Disability and to publish the World report on violence and health (2002).
Frantz Fanon critiqued the violence of colonialism and wrote about the counter violence of the "colonized victims."
For Agamben, the physical space of the camp "is a piece of land placed outside the normal juridical order, but it is nevertheless not simply an external space".
In 2013, assault by firearm was the leading cause of death due to interpersonal violence, with 180,000 such deaths estimated to have occurred.
However, it is only in the last 30 years that public health has begun to address violence, and only in the last fifteen has it done so at the global level.
Violence includes those acts that result from a power relationship, including threats and intimidation, neglect or acts of omission.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child in its Article 19 states that States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the child.
With geography often adding the forgotten spatial aspect to theories of social science, rather than creating them solely within the discipline, it seems that the self-reflexive contemporary geography of today may have an extremely important place in this current (re)imaging of violence, exemplified by Cavarero.
'''Violence''' is defined by the World Health Organization as "the intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, against oneself, another person, or against a group or community, which either results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelopment, or deprivation", although the group acknowledges that the inclusion of "the use of power" in its definition expands on the conventional meaning of the word.
It also overcomes many of the limitations of other typologies by capturing the nature of violent acts, the relevance of the setting, the relationship between the perpetrator and the victim, and – in the case of collective violence – possible motivations for the violence.
*Primary prevention – approaches that aim to prevent violence before it occurs.
It has been proved time and again that cooperative efforts from such diverse sectors as health, education, social welfare, and criminal justice are often necessary to solve what are usually assumed to be purely "criminal" or "medical" problems.
This can be compared to the average world homicide rate of 7.6 per 100,000 people.
The following four-level version of the ecological model is often used in the study of violence:
These can ultimately slow a country's economic and social development.
The killings were arbitrary; for example, a person could be killed for wearing glasses, since that was seen as associating them with intellectuals and therefore as making them part of the enemy.
Deaths due to collective violence have decreased from 64,000 in 1990.
When interpersonal violence occurs in families, its psychological consequences can affect parents, children, and their relationship in the short- and long-terms.
One of the main functions of law is to regulate violence.
From a public health perspective, prevention strategies can be classified into three types:
For every death due to violence, there are numerous nonfatal injuries.
Social and human geography, rooted in the humanist, Marxist, and feminist subfields that emerged following the early positivist approaches and subsequent behavioral turn, have long been concerned with social and spatial justice.
The public health approach is interdisciplinary, drawing upon knowledge from many disciplines including medicine, epidemiology, sociology, psychology, criminology, education and economics.
He defined violence as an issue that public health experts needed to address and stated that it should not be the primary domain of lawyers, military personnel, or politicians.
Such non-physical violence has a broad range of outcomes – including psychological harm, deprivation and maldevelopment.
The latter includes youth violence, random acts of violence, rape or sexual assault by strangers, and violence in institutional settings such as schools, workplaces, prisons and nursing homes.
Evidence shows that the life skills acquired in social development programmes can reduce involvement in violence, improve social skills, boost educational achievement and improve job prospects.
Population-level surveys based on reports from victims estimate that between 0.3–11.5% of women reported experiencing sexual violence.
They believe private property, trade, interest and profit survive only because police violence defends them and that capitalist economies need war to expand.
Unlike the other two broad categories, the subcategories of collective violence suggest possible motives for violence committed by larger groups of individuals or by states.
The much larger indirect costs of violence due to lost productivity and lost investment in education work together to slow economic development, increase socioeconomic inequality, and erode human and social capital.
Effective prevention programmes support parents and teach positive parenting skills.
Exposure to intimate partner violence is also sometimes included as a form of child maltreatment.
The human rights approach is based on the obligations of states to respect, protect and fulfill human rights and therefore to prevent, eradicate and punish violence.
In the 1970s, genocides in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge and Pol Pot resulted in the deaths of over two million Cambodians (which was 25% of the Cambodian population), forming one of the many contemporary examples of state-sponsored violence.
Certainly, there are huge variations in the risk of dying from armed conflict at the national and subnational level, and the risk of dying violently in a conflict in specific countries remains extremely high.
Violence may not necessarily result in injury or death, but nonetheless poses a substantial burden on individuals, families, communities and health care systems worldwide.
Violence, as defined in the dictionary of human geography, "appears whenever power is in jeopardy" and "in and of itself stands emptied of strength and purpose: it is part of a larger matrix of socio-political power struggles".
Law enforcement is the main means of regulating nonmilitary violence in society.
Damage to property is classified as violent crime in some jurisdictions but not in all.
School-based programmes such as Safe Dates programme in the United States of America and the Youth Relationship Project in Canada have been found to be effective for reducing dating violence.
He writes that the attrition rate of numerous close-quarter clashes, which characterize endemic warfare, produces casualty rates of up to 60%, compared to 1% of the combatants as is typical in modern warfare.
School-based programmes to prevent child sexual abuse by teaching children to recognize and avoid potentially sexually abusive situations are run in many parts of the world and appear promising, but require further research.
Furthermore, violence often has lifelong consequences for physical and mental health and social functioning and can slow economic and social development.
Second, the magnitude of the problem and its potentially severe lifelong consequences and high costs to individuals and wider society call for population-level interventions typical of the public health approach.
Child maltreatment is a global problem with serious lifelong consequences, which is, however, complex and difficult to study.
Several rare but painful episodes of assassination, attempted assassination and school shootings at elementary, middle, high schools as well as colleges and universities in the United States led to a considerable body of research on ascertainable behaviours of persons who have planned or carried out such attacks.
Their effectiveness has, however, not so far been well-established.
Fry explores Keeley's argument in depth and counters that such sources erroneously focus on the ethnography of hunters and gatherers in the present, whose culture and values have been infiltrated externally by modern civilization, rather than the actual archaeological record spanning some two million years of human existence.
In 1962, Gomez, referring to the WHO definition of health, stated that it is obvious that violence does not contribute to "extending life" or to a "complete state of well-being".
Economic violence includes attacks by larger groups motivated by economic gain – such as attacks carried out with the purpose of disrupting economic activity, denying access to essential services, or creating economic division and fragmentation.
Also, given significant neighbourhood effects on youth violence, interventions involving relocating families to less poor environments have shown promising results.
Risk at this level may be affected by factors such as the existence of a local drug trade, the absence of social networks, and concentrated poverty.
Violence can be broadly divided into three broad categories – direct violence, structural violence and cultural violence.
Many of the risk factors for sexual violence are the same as for domestic violence.
Self-abuse, in contrast, includes acts such as self-mutilation.
These figures do not include suicide attempts which are up to 20 times more frequent than completed suicide.
Youth violence has a serious, often lifelong, impact on a person's psychological and social functioning.
However, generally, anything that is excited in an injurious or damaging way may be described as violent even if not meant to be violence (by a person and against a person).
The effectiveness of interventions addressing dating violence and sexual abuse among teenagers and young adults by challenging social and cultural norms related to gender is supported by some evidence.
In Iraq, for example, the direct conflict death rate for 2004–07 was 65 per 100,000 people per year and, in Somalia, 24 per 100,000 people.
Current estimates vary widely depending on the country and the method of research used.
Interventions that challenge cultural and social norms supportive of violence can prevent acts of violence and have been widely used, but the evidence base for their effectiveness is currently weak.
Sociologist Max Weber stated that the state claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of force practised within the confines of a specific territory.
*Secondary prevention – approaches that focus on the more immediate responses to violence, such as pre-hospital care, emergency services or treatment for sexually transmitted infections following a rape.
The "violent male ape" image is often brought up in discussions of human violence.
But, certainly, violence is more than killing people, unless one includes all those words and actions that kill people slowly.
He writes that "Buss and Shackelford (1997a) proposed seven adaptive problems our ancestors recurrently faced that might have been solved by aggression: co-opting the resources of others, defending against attack, inflicting costs on same-sex rivals, negotiating status and hierarchies, deterring rivals from future aggression, deterring mate from infidelity, and reducing resources expended on genetically unrelated children."
Beyond deaths and injuries, forms of violence such as child maltreatment, intimate partner violence, and elder maltreatment have been found to be highly prevalent.
By way of comparison, the 1.5 millions deaths a year due to violence is greater than the number of deaths due to tuberculosis (1.34 million), road traffic injuries (1.21 million), and malaria (830'000), but slightly less than the number of people who die from HIV/AIDS (1.77 million).
A major point from these research studies is that targeted violence does not just "come out of the blue".
Lawrence H. Keeley at the University of Illinois writes in ''War Before Civilization'' that 87% of tribal societies were at war more than once per year, and that 65% of them were fighting continuously.
The former group includes forms of violence such as child abuse, intimate partner violence and abuse of the elderly.
This definition involves intentionality with the committing of the act itself, irrespective of the outcome it produces.
The American family violence researcher Murray A. Straus believes that disciplinary spanking forms "the most prevalent and important form of violence in American families", whose effects contribute to several major societal problems, including later domestic violence and crime.
Violence in many forms is preventable.
Likewise, understandings of violence are linked to a perceived aggressor-victim relationship: hence psychologists have shown that people may not recognise defensive use of force as violent, even in cases where the amount of force used is significantly greater than in the original aggression.
In youth violence, for example, having friends who engage in or encourage violence can increase a young person’s risk of being a victim or perpetrator of violence.
People were murdered with impunity because it was no crime; Cambodians were made ''homo sacer'' in a condition of bare life.
It is also associated with perpetration of violence and being a victim of violence.
Elder maltreatment is predicted to increase as many countries are experiencing rapidly ageing populations.
At the same an environment of great inequalities between people may cause those at the bottom to use more violence in attempts to gain status.
Rules or expectations of behaviour – norms – within a cultural or social group can encourage violence.
It recognizes violence as a violation of many human rights: the rights to life, liberty, autonomy and security of the person; the rights to equality and non-discrimination; the rights to be free from torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment; the right to privacy; and the right to the highest attainable standard of health.
