Instead "junge Frau" can be used.
For example, while ages from 10 to 13 were typically acceptable in Western countries during the mid-19th century, the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century were marked by changing attitudes resulting in raising the ages of consent to ages generally ranging from 16 to&nbsp;18.
Halakhah also contains rules related to protecting female virgins, and rules regarding pre-marital sex, rape, and the effects of each.
Its significance is reflected in expressions such as "saving oneself", "losing one's virginity," "taking someone's virginity" and sometimes as "deflowering."
According to a 2001 UNICEF survey, in 10 out of 12 developed nations with available data, more than two thirds of young people have had sexual intercourse while still in their teens.
In the latter usage, ''virgin'' means uninitiated.
The concept of virginity has significance only in a particular social, cultural and moral context.
The ''Apostolic Decree'' of the Council of Jerusalem also includes a prohibition on fornication.
The traditional view is that virginity is only lost through vaginal penetration by the penis, consensual or non-consensual, and that acts of oral sex, anal sex, mutual masturbation or other forms of non-penetrative sex do not result in loss of virginity.
Traditionally, there was a cultural expectation that a female would not engage in premarital sex and would come to her wedding a virgin and that she would "give up" her virginity to her new husband in the act of consummation of the marriage.
Like chastity, the concept of virginity has traditionally involved sexual abstinence.
An imperative given in 1&nbsp;Corinthians says, "Flee from sexual immorality.
Further, there is the case of women with damaged hymens undergoing hymenorrhaphy (or hymenoplasty) to repair or replace their hymens, and cause vaginal bleeding on the next intercourse as proof of virginity.
However, in reference to women, historically, it was sometimes used to refer to an engaged woman—''parthenos autou'' (παρθένος αὐτού, his virgin) = his fiancée as opposed to ''gunē autou'' (γυνή αὐτού, his woman) = his wife.
Some studies suggest that people commence sexual activity at an earlier age than previous generations.
"About 80 percent of respondents said penile-anal intercourse meant 'had sex.'
There are a number of groups within societies promoting their views of sexual morality in a variety of ways, including through sex education, religious teachings, seeking commitments or virginity pledges, and other means.
In the third group, age of men and women at sexual initiation was more closely matched.
Catholics, Orthodox Christians and other groups may refer to Mary as ''the Virgin Mary'' or ''the Blessed Virgin Mary''.
Though Islamic law prescribes punishments for Muslim men and women for the act of zinā, in practice it is an extremely difficult offense to prove, requiring four respectable witnesses to the actual act of penetration.
(2003), Michael Bozon of the French Institut national d'études démographiques found that contemporary cultures fall into three broad categories.
In a cross-cultural study, ''At what age do women and men have their first sexual intercourse?''
The first known use of ''virgin'' in English is found in a Middle English manuscript held at Trinity College, Cambridge of about 1200:
The survey revealed that the majority of the students were still virgins (they had no experience of sexual intercourse), and, among those who were sexually active, the majority (82%) used contraception.
The rather dated German word for a young (unmarried) woman, without implications regarding sexuality, is ''Fräulein''.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO): "Sexual violence encompasses a wide range of acts including (...) violent acts against the sexual integrity of women, including female genital mutilation and ''obligatory inspections for virginity''".
Islam considers extramarital sex to be sinful and forbidden.
Aquinas went further, emphasizing that acts other than copulation destroy virginity, and clarifying that involuntary sexual pleasure does not destroy virginity.
For example, though most religions disapprove of premarital sexual relations, it has always been widely practiced.
For example, a slip while riding a bicycle may, on occasion, result in the bicycle's saddle-horn entering the introitus just far enough to break the hymen.
On the other hand, Buddhist monks and nuns of most traditions are expected to refrain from all sexual activity and the Buddha is said to have admonished his followers to avoid unchastity "as if it were a pit of burning cinders."
According to classicist Evelyn Stagg and New Testament scholar Frank Stagg, the New Testament holds that sex is reserved for marriage.
The term ''virgin'' originally only referred to sexually inexperienced women, but has evolved to encompass a range of definitions, as found in traditional, modern, and ethical concepts.
However, he stated that sexual relations are expected between a married couple.
On such cases virginity is not forfeit, because such like pollution is not the result of impurity which excludes virginity."
Psychology explores the connection between thought and behavior.
A part of the funding was earmarked specifically for "abstinence-only-until-marriage" programs.
Feminine sexual practices have revolved around the idea of females waiting to have sex until they are married.
The discussion turns on two Greek words — ''moicheia'' (''μοιχεία'', adultery) and ''porneia'' (''πορνεία'', fornication, see also pornography).
About 70 percent of people believed oral sex was sex."
In addition, children born as a result of premarital sex were subject to various legal and social disabilities such as being considered illegitimate and thus barred from inheriting from the putative father's estate, from bearing the father's surname or title, and support from the putative father.
Nevertheless, these religious codes have always had a strong influence on peoples' attitudes to sexual issues.
This also sets the precedent for Israelites to avoid homosexual activity (cf.
Among various countries or cultures, males are expected or encouraged to want to engage in sexual activity, and to be more sexually experienced.
The concept of "technical virginity" or sexual abstinence through oral sex is popular among teenagers.
Some call themselves born-again virgins.
Unlike English, German also has a specific word for a male virgin ''Jüngling'' ("''Youngling''").
Several polls have indicated peer pressure as a factor in encouraging both girls and boys to have sex.
Modern virginity auctions, like that of Natalie Dylan, are discussed in the 2013 documentary ''How to Lose Your Virginity.''
If this be the result of the mind's purpose, it destroys virginity, ''whether copulation takes place or not''.
A 2002 international survey sought to study the sexual behavior of teenagers.
In Roman times, the Vestal Virgins were the highly respected, strictly celibate (although not necessarily virginal) priestesses of Vesta, and keepers of the sacred fire of Vesta.
The penalty for a Vestal Virgin found to have had sexual relations while in office was being buried alive.
Though these moral codes do not address issues of sexuality directly, they seek to regulate the situations which can give rise to sexual interest and to influence people's sexual activities and practices.
And aren't His sisters here with us?".
The teenage pregnancy rates between countries must take into account the level of general sex education available and access to contraceptive options.
In the first reference, in , Lot offers his virgin daughters to the people of Sodom for sexual purposes in an attempt to protect his guests (cf.
33,943 students aged 15, from 24 countries, completed a self-administered, anonymous, classroom survey, consisting of a standard questionnaire, developed by the HBSC (Health Behaviour in School-aged Children) international research network.
The rate for the United States is 52.1 per 1000, the highest in the developed world – and about four times the European Union average.
There were two sub-groups, however.
Most countries have laws which set a minimum marriage age, with the most common age being 18 years, reduced to 16 in "special circumstances", typically when the female partner is pregnant, but the actual age at first marriage can be considerably higher.
These precepts take the form of voluntary, personal undertakings, not divine mandate or instruction.
The Catholic Church holds that in Semitic usage the terms "brother," "sister" are applied not only to children of the same parents, but to nephews, nieces, cousins, half-brothers, and half-sisters.
Historically, and in modern times, female virginity has been regarded as more significant than male virginity; the perception that sexual prowess as fundamental to masculinity has lowered the expectation of male virginity without lowering the social status.
This distinction is necessary due to there being no specific word for wife (or husband) in Greek.
According to Hanne Blank, "virginity reflects no known biological imperative and grants no demonstrable evolutionary advantage."
Elsewhere in , incest, homosexual intercourse (according to some interpretations) and prostitution are all explicitly forbidden by name (however, the Septuagint uses "porneia" to refer to male temple prostitution).
Note that the term used for the starsign virgo also is Jungfrau (even it had a similar term used in Swedish was "Jungfrun" however, the Swedish title for the film used the English title instead), which makes the above movie title ambiguous.
Some countries outlaw any sex outside marriage entirely.
In fact, the precedent for the ''mitzvot'' which are related in Deuteronomy 22:25-29, which regard what happens when a man rapes a virgin, may well have been set at Shechem after the rape of Dinah (cf.
Not following these standards often leads to teasing and other such ridicule from their male peers.
Historically, and still in many countries and jurisdictions today, a female's sexual experience is sometimes considered a relevant factor in the prosecution of a perpetrator of rape.
A different study by the Kinsey Institute sampled 484 people, ranging in ages 18–96.
Today, the age of consent varies from 12 years (or onset of puberty) to 21, but 16 to 18 is the most common range of ages of consent, but some jurisdictions also have a "close-in-age" exception, allowing two adolescents (as young as 12 years of age) to have sex with each other provided their ages are not more than 2 years apart.
A 2003 study by the Guttmacher Institute showed that in most countries most men have experienced sexual intercourse by their 20th birthdays.
In the second group, the data indicated families encouraged daughters to delay marriage, and to abstain from sexual activity before that time.
Although typically applied to women, like English, it is also applied to men, in both cases specifically denoting absence of sexual experience.
Some medical procedures, such as hymenotomy, may require a woman's hymen to be opened.
The first word is restricted to contexts involving sexual betrayal of a spouse; however, the second word is used as a generic term for illegitimate sexual activity.
Human sexual activity, like many other kinds of activity engaged in by humans, is generally influenced by social rules that are culturally specific and vary widely.
Also, historically, a man who "took" a female's virginity could be forced to marry her.
In Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States, approximately 25% of 15-year-olds and 50% of 17-year-olds have had sex.
All major religions have moral codes covering issues of sexuality, morality, and ethics.
Whether a person can lose his or her virginity through rape is also subject to debate, with the belief that virginity can only be lost through consensual sex being prevalent in some studies.
German is not the only language to have a specific name for male virginity; in French, male virgins are called "puceau".
The same pattern of late marriage and reciprocal valuing of virginity was reflected in Singapore and Sri Lanka.
In some countries, until the late 20th century, a woman could sue a man who had taken her virginity but did not marry her.
Leviticus 18:22, 20:13.
Within American culture in particular, male virginity has been made an object of embarrassment and ridicule in films such as ''Summer of '42'', ''American Pie'' and ''The 40-Year-Old Virgin'', with the male virgin typically being presented as socially inept.
Age of men at sexual initiation in these societies is at later ages than that of women, but is often extra-marital.
In 1996, the United States federal government shifted the objective of sex education towards "abstinence-only sex education" programs, promoting sexual abstinence before marriage (i.e., virginity) and prohibiting information on birth control and contraception.
The occasion is at times seen as the end of innocence, integrity, or purity, and the sexualization of the individual.
By about 1300, the word was expanded to apply also to Mary, the mother of Jesus, hence to sexual virginity explicitly:
However, sons are encouraged to gain experience with older women or prostitutes before marriage.
In non-Latin, Catholic countries (Poland and Lithuania are mentioned), age at sexual initiation was higher, suggesting later marriage and reciprocal valuing of male and female virginity.
The hymen is a thin film of membrane situated just inside the vulva which can partially occlude the entrance to the vaginal canal.
This group included sub-Saharan Africa (the study listed Mali, Senegal and Ethiopia).
''Fräulein'' was used in German as a title of respect, equivalent to current usage of Miss in English.
Premarital sex is forbidden in Judaism, and there is a requirement for a female to be a virgin at her marriage unless she has been seduced (cf.
The Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Oriental Orthodox Churches additionally hold to the dogma of the perpetual virginity of Mary.
However, a hymen may also be broken during physical activity.
The ''Catholic Encyclopedia'' says: "There are two elements in virginity: the material element, that is to say, the absence, in the past and in the present, of all complete and voluntary delectation, whether from lust or from the lawful use of marriage; and the formal element, that is the firm resolution to abstain forever from sexual pleasure" and that "Virginity is irreparably lost by sexual pleasure, voluntarily and completely experienced."
In some cultures, the nuptial blood-spotted bed sheet would be displayed as proof of both consummation of marriage and that the bride had been a virgin.
The study considered China and Vietnam to also fall into this group, although data were not available.
Paul the Apostle expressed the view that a person's body belongs to God and is God's temple (, ), and that premarital sex is immoral () on an equal level as adultery.
Age of men at sexual initiation in these societies is at lower ages than that of women.
Virginity, specifically, is not mentioned in the Canon.
The Vestals were committed to the priesthood before puberty (when 6–10 years old) and sworn to celibacy for a period of 30 years.
The study considered many Asian societies to also fall into this group, although matching data was only available from Thailand.
Some cultures require proof of a bride's virginity before her marriage.
It is, however, dated too and rarely used.
It was the law and custom in some societies that required a man who seduced or raped a virgin to marry the girl or pay compensation to her father.
Stephanie Sanders of the Kinsey Institute, co-author of the study, stated, "That's the 'technical virginity' thing that's going on."
The first act of sexual intercourse by a female is commonly considered within many cultures to be an important personal milestone.
In some cultures, an unmarried female who is found not to be a virgin, whether by choice or as a result of a rape, can be subject to shame, ostracism or even an honor killing.
Allowing the sacred fire of Vesta to die out, suggesting that the goddess had withdrawn her protection from the city, was a serious offence and was punishable by scourging.
However, for the purposes of consecrated virgins it is canonically enough that they have never been married or lived in open violation of chastity.
The chastity of the Vestals was considered to have a direct bearing on the health of the Roman state.
A 2003 study published in the ''Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality'' focusing on definitions of having sex and noting studies concerning university students from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia reported that "while the vast majority of respondents (more than 97%) in these three studies included penile-vaginal intercourse in their definition of sex, fewer (between 70% and 90%) respondents considered penile-anal intercourse to constitute having sex" and that "oral-genital behaviours were defined as sex by between 32% and 58% of respondents".
However, most Protestants reject the dogma, citing sources such as : "Isn't this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James, Joses, Judas, and Simon?
The word ''virgin'' comes via Old French ''virgine'' from the root form of Latin , genitive , meaning literally "maiden" or "virgin"—a sexually intact young woman or "sexually inexperienced woman".
Deuteronomy 22:13-29).
In other cultures, for example in many modern-day Western cultures, sexual abstinence before marriage is not taken as seriously as it is in those discussed above.
The Greek word for "virgin" is ''parthenos'' (παρθένος, see Parthenon).
Genesis 19:4-11), with the implication that the people of Sodom would be more likely to accept the offer in view of the girls' virginity than they would otherwise.
By contrast, gay or lesbian individuals often describe such acts as resulting in loss of virginity.
However, the 2005 Durex Global sex survey found that people worldwide are having sex for the first time at an average age of 17.3, ranging from 15.6 in Iceland to 19.8 in India (though evidence has shown that the average age is not a good indicator of sexual initiation, and that percentages of sexually initiated youth at each age are preferred).
The concept of virginity usually involves moral or religious issues and can have consequences in terms of social status and in interpersonal relationships.
Some females who have been previously sexually active (or their hymen has been otherwise damaged) may undergo a surgical procedure, called hymenorrhaphy or hymenoplasty, to repair or replace her hymen, and cause vaginal bleeding on the next intercourse as proof of virginity (see below).
In Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States, the proportion is over 80%.
The next reference is at , where Eliezer is seeking a wife for his master, Abraham's son.
''Jungfrau'', with some masculine modifier, is more typical, as evidenced by the film, ''The 40-Year-Old Virgin'', about a 40-year-old ''male'' virgin, titled in German, "Jungfrau (40), männlich, sucht…".
A 2008 survey of UK teenagers between the ages of 14 and 17 (conducted by YouGov for Channel 4), showed that only 6% of these teenagers intended to wait until marriage before having sex.
Social (and legal) attitudes toward the appropriate age of consent have drifted upwards in modern times.
In a peer-reviewed study by sociologists Peter Bearman and Hannah Brueckner, which looked at virginity pledgers five years after their pledge, they found that the pledgers have similar proportions of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and at least as high proportions of anal and oral sex as those who have not made a virginity pledge, and deduced that there was substitution of oral and anal sex for vaginal sex among the pledgers.
And so those become, like markers, for when virginity is lost."
For example, oral sex is common among adolescent girls who not only fellate their boyfriends to preserve their virginity, but also to create and maintain intimacy or to avoid pregnancy.
Virginity is an important aspect of spirituality and it has to be preserved before marriage, or when one is ready to move into another sacred state of being with their significant other.
For example, in some Islamic cultures, though premarital sex is forbidden in the Quran with regard to both men and women, unmarried women who have been sexually active or raped may be subject to name-calling, shunning, or family shame, while unmarried men who have lost their virginities are not.
There are other references in the Torah to virginity.
When used of men, it does not carry a strong association of "never-married" status.
Others consider the practice to be virginity fraud or unnecessary.
As for any child born to a single woman, he or she is not regarded as illegitimate (a ''mamzer'') or subject to any social or religious disabilities—Perez and Zerach, for example (and although their mother was a widow whom was willingly impregnated by her father-in-law), were not counted as ''mamzerim'' (cf.
Paul is preaching about activities based on sexual prohibitions in Leviticus, in the context of achieving holiness.
In a 1999 study published in ''JAMA'' (the ''Journal of the American Medical Association''), the definition of sex was examined based on a 1991 random sample of 599 college students from 29 US states; it found that 60% said oral-genital contact (like fellatio, cunnilingus) did not constitute having sex.
Augustine, however, mentions copulation, because such like resolution is the ordinary and natural result thereof.
He meets Rebecca, and the narrative tells us, "the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her" (in biblical terms, "to know" is a euphemism for sexual relations).
Seeking understanding of social (or anti-social) behaviors includes sexual behavior.
The most common formulation of Buddhist ethics for lay followers are the Five Precepts and the Eightfold Path.
The study considered the Indian subcontinent to also fall into this group, although data was only available from Nepal.
According to a 2011 CDC study, in the 15-to-19-year-old age group 43 percent of males and 48 percent of females in the United States reported never having an opposite-sex partner.
On another way this may happen beside the purpose of the mind, either during sleep, or through violence and without the mind's consent, although the flesh derives pleasure from it, or again through weakness of nature, as in the case of those who are subject to a flow of semen.
11 percent of respondents based "had sex" on whether the man had achieved an orgasm, concluding that absence of an orgasm does not constitute "having had" sex.
But the numbers changed as the questions got more specific."
However, the data for anal sex without vaginal sex reported by males did not reflect this directly.
Although virginity has social implications and had significant legal implications in some societies in the past, it has no legal consequences in most societies today.
In the film ''Pretty Baby'' (1978) there is an auction for the virginity of 12-year-old Violet.
The strongest argument against this theory is that the modern interpretation of the New Testament, outside Corinthians, speaks against premarital sex;
In a peer-reviewed study about virginity pledges (commitments made by teenagers and young adults to refrain from sexual intercourse until marriage), sociologists Peter Bearman of Columbia and Hannah Brueckner of Yale estimated that male pledgers were 4.1 times more likely to remain virgins by age 25 than those who did not pledge (25% vs 6%), and estimated that female pledgers were 3.5 times more likely to remain virgins by age 25 than those who did not pledge (21% vs 6%).
Though in Western cultures premarital sex and loss of virginity may be considered shameful to the individual, in some Muslim societies an act of premarital sex, even if not falling within the legal standards of proof, may result in personal shame and loss of family honor.
These are three of the eighteen definitions of ''virgin'' from the first edition of the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' (''OED1'', pages 230–232).
And if you're a gay woman, then you're supposed to have oral sex, because that's what gay women do.
''Jungfrau'' is the word reserved specifically for sexual inexperience.
Some lesbians who debate the traditional definition consider whether or not non-penile forms of vaginal penetration constitute virginity loss, while other gay men and lesbians assert that the term ''virginity'' is meaningless to them because of the prevalence of the traditional definition.
There are varying understandings as to which types of sexual activities result in loss of virginity.
Further expansion of the word to include virtuous (or naïve) young women, irrespective of religious connection, occurred over about another century, until by about 1400 we find:
A person who engages in such acts without having engaged in vaginal intercourse is often regarded among heterosexuals and researchers as "technically a virgin".
() Paul also expressed the view in  that sexual abstinence is the preferred state for both men and women.
Some have theorized that the New Testament was not against sex before marriage.
She and other researchers titled their findings "Would You Say You 'Had Sex' If ...?"
In this case, more mature women can be virgins (The Virgin Queen), men can be virgins, and potential initiates into many fields can be colloquially termed ''virgins''; for example, a skydiving "virgin".
By extension from its primary sense, the idea that a virgin has a sexual "blank slate", unchanged by any past intimate connection or experience, can imply that the person is of unadulterated purity.
The study listed Switzerland, Germany and the Czech Republic as members of this group.
Some gay males regard penile-anal penetration as resulting in loss of virginity, but not oral sex or non-penetrative sex, and lesbians may regard oral sex or fingering as loss of virginity.
There is also a legendary ''droit du seigneur'' ("the lord's right", often conflated with the Latin phrase "''ius primae noctis''") which allegedly entitled the lord of an estate to take the virginity of the estate's virgins on the night of their marriage, a right which the lord can trade for money.
As in Latin, the English word is also often used with wider reference, by relaxing the age, gender or sexual criteria.
Researchers stress that the presence or absence of a hymen is not a reliable indicator of whether or not a female has been vaginally penetrated.
Joan Kahn and Kathryn London studied U.S. women married between 1965 and 1985 to see if virginity at marriage influenced risk of divorce.
Because a Vestal's chastity was thought to be directly correlated to the sacred burning of the fire, if the fire were extinguished it might be assumed that a Vestal had been unchaste.
In this, and many later contexts, the reference is specifically Christian, alluding to members of the Ordo Virginum (Order of Virgins), which applies to the consecrated virgins known to have existed since the early church from the writings of the Church Fathers.
Virginity pledges (or abstinence pledges) made by heterosexual teenagers and young adults may also include the practice of "technical virginity".
It is likely that almost all women are born with a hymen, but not necessarily ones that will experience a measurable change during first experience of vaginal intercourse.
All other sins people commit are outside their bodies, but those who sin sexually sin against their own bodies."
Finally, in northern and eastern European countries, age at sexual initiation was lower, with both men and women involved in sexual activity before any union formation.
Researcher and author Laura M. Carpenter states that despite perceptions of what determines virginity loss being as varied among gay men and lesbians as they are among heterosexuals, and in some cases more varied among the former, that the matter has been described to her as people viewing sexual acts relating to virginity loss as "acts that correspond to your sexual orientation," which suggests the following: "So if you're a gay male, you're supposed to have anal sex because that's what gay men do.
Sex had never been a taboo in ancient India and intactness of the hymen had nothing to do with virginity.
Christian orthodoxy accepts that Mary, the mother of Jesus, was a virgin at the time Jesus was conceived, based on the accounts in the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke.
Virginity is regarded as a valuable commodity in some cultures, and the right to have sexual intercourse with a virgin can be bought.
Many women possess such thin, fragile hymens, easily stretched and already perforated at birth, that the hymen can be broken in childhood without the girl even being aware of it, often through athletic activities.
Sikhism advises against premarital sex, as it has a high potential of being an indulgence of lust (''kaam'', or extreme sexual desire).
In some parts of Africa, the myth that sex with a virgin can cure HIV/AIDS continues to prevail, leading to girls and women being raped.
These social rules are referred to as sexual morality (what can and can not be done by society's rules) and sexual norms (what is and is not expected).
"Nearly 95 percent of people in the study agreed that penile-vaginal intercourse meant 'had sex.'
From his ''Summa Theologica'', "Pleasure resulting from resolution of semen may arise in two ways.
Most of the ''OED1'' definitions, however, are similar.
German also distinguishes between young women and girls, who are denoted by the word ''Mädchen''.
By contrast, in a study released in 2008 by the Guttmacher Institute, author of the findings Laura Lindberg stated that there "is a widespread belief that teens engage in nonvaginal forms of sex, especially oral sex, as a way to be sexually active while still claiming that technically, they are virgins", but that her study drew the conclusion that "research shows that this supposed substitution of oral sex for vaginal sex is largely a myth".
The English cognate "maid" was often used to imply virginity, especially in poetry.
It is flexible and can be stretched or torn during first engagement in vaginal intercourse.
The third of the Five Precepts is "To refrain from committing sensual misconduct".
