The judicial system, the oldest in America, consists of a hierarchy from the Supreme Court of Virginia and the Court of Appeals of Virginia to the Circuit Courts, the trial courts of general jurisdiction, and the lower General District Courts and Juvenile and Domestic Relations District Courts.
Several smaller schools compete in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference and the USA South Athletic Conference of NCAA Division III.
Virginia's property tax is set and collected at the local government level and varies throughout the Commonwealth.
In 1584, Raleigh sent an expedition to the Atlantic coast of North America.
However, since the early 1990s, Gypsy moth infestations have eroded the dominance of oak forests.
NASCAR currently schedules Sprint Cup races on two tracks in Virginia: Martinsville Speedway and Richmond International Raceway.
Influenced by the Gulf Stream, coastal weather is subject to hurricanes, most pronouncedly near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay.
The company financed the first permanent English settlement in the "New World", Jamestown.
The Virginia General Assembly is the oldest continuous law-making body in the New World.
Because of the 1932 Byrd Road Act, the state government controls most of Virginia's roads, instead of a local county authority as is usual in other states.
Most Native American groups are located in the Tidewater region.
Norfolk's Harborfest, in June, features boat racing and air shows.
The capital of the Commonwealth is Richmond; Virginia Beach is the most populous city, and Fairfax County is the most populous political subdivision.
Of the English immigrants to Virginia in the 17th century, 75% came as indentured servants.
Fairfax County also sponsors Celebrate Fairfax!
Most African American Virginians have been descendants of enslaved Africans who worked on tobacco, cotton, and hemp plantations.
In Northern Virginia, ''The Washington Post'' is the dominant newspaper, since Northern VA is located in the Washington, DC metropolitan area.
As of 2011, 49.1% of Virginia's population younger than age 1 were minorities (meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white).
Forests cover 65% of the state, primarily with deciduous, broad leaf trees in the western part of the state and evergeens and conifers dominant the central and eastern part of Virginia.
Several European expeditions, including a group of Spanish Jesuits, explored the Chesapeake Bay during the 16th century.
The Igbo ethnic group of what is now southern Nigeria were the single largest African group among slaves in Virginia.
Virginia is nicknamed the "Old Dominion" due to its status as the first colonial possession established in mainland British America, and "Mother of Presidents" because eight U.S. presidents were born there, more than any other state.
Glasgow's peer and close friend James Branch Cabell wrote extensively about the changing position of gentry in the Reconstruction era, and challenged its moral code with ''Jurgen, A Comedy of Justice''.
The climate of Virginia becomes increasingly warmer and more humid farther south and east.
The Virginia reel is among the square dances classified as the state dance.
The Assembly is stronger than the executive, as it selects judges and justices.
William Styron approached history in works such as ''The Confessions of Nat Turner'' and ''Sophie's Choice''.
In the House of Burgesses, opposition to taxation without representation was led by Patrick Henry and Richard Henry Lee, among others.
The state sales and use tax rate is 4.3%, while the tax rate on food is 1.5%.
*Slogan: Virginia is for Lovers
*Insect: Tiger swallowtail
Lower altitudes are more likely to have small but dense stands of moisture-loving hemlocks and mosses in abundance, with hickory and oak in the Blue Ridge.
Virginia has an annual average of 35–45 days of thunderstorm activity, particularly in the western part of the state, and an average annual precipitation of .
The shift to a system of African slavery in Virginia was propelled by the legal cases of John Punch, who was sentenced to lifetime slavery in 1640 for attempting to run away, and of John Casor, who was claimed by Anthony Johnson as his servant for life in 1655.
Warfare, including among these groups, has also had an important role.
Virginia has Amtrak passenger rail service along several corridors, and Virginia Railway Express (VRE) maintains two commuter lines into Washington, D.C. from Fredericksburg and Manassas.
By 1500, the Algonquian peoples had founded towns such as Werowocomoco in the Tidewater region, which they referred to as ''Tsenacommacah''.
More recent immigration in the late 20th century and early 21st century has fueled new communities of Hispanics and Asians.
In the lowland tidewater and piedmont, yellow pines tend to dominate, with bald cypress wetland forests in the Great Dismal and Nottoway swamps.
Sports teams from the University of Virginia are called the Cavaliers.
According to CNN Money Magazine the highest-income town in the nation is Great Falls, .
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the state population was 8,382,993 on July 1, 2015, a 4.77% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
In this region, rivers flow northwest, with a dendritic drainage system, into the Ohio River basin.
Roman Catholics are the second-largest religious group with 673,853 members.
In its state government, Virginia employs 106,143&nbsp;public employees, who combined have a median income of $44,656 .
Since 1971, the government has functioned under the seventh Constitution of Virginia, which provides for a strong legislature and a unified judicial system.
Virginia has the fifth-highest number of wineries in the nation.
African workers were first imported to Jamestown in 1619 initially under the rules of indentured servitude.
People of English heritage settled throughout the Commonwealth during the colonial period, and others of British and Irish heritage have since immigrated.
The state nickname is its oldest symbol, though it has never been made official by law.
Virginia has many professional caliber golf courses including the Greg Norman course at Lansdowne Resort and Kingsmill Resort, home of the Kingsmill Championship, an LPGA Tour tournament.
Public K–12 schools in Virginia are generally operated by the counties and cities, and not by the state.
, there are 176&nbsp;colleges and universities in Virginia.
This was the second consecutive time that Virginia received the highest grade in the nation.
George Mason University is the largest university in Virginia with over 32,000&nbsp;students.
The largest minority group in Virginia is African American, at 19.7% .
Twelve other universities compete in NCAA Division I, particularly in the Atlantic 10 Conference, Big South Conference, and Colonial Athletic Association.
Many counties and localities host county fairs and festivals.
Virginia was one of the 13 Colonies in the American Revolution and joined the Confederacy in the American Civil War, during which Richmond was made the Confederate capital and Virginia's northwestern counties seceded to form the state of West Virginia.
The region is carbonate rock based and includes Massanutten Mountain.
Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 159,627&nbsp;people, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 155,205&nbsp;people.
Baptist denominational groups in Virginia include the Baptist General Association of Virginia, with about 1,400&nbsp;member churches, which supports both the Southern Baptist Convention and the moderate Cooperative Baptist Fellowship; and the Southern Baptist Conservatives of Virginia with more than 500 affiliated churches, which supports the Southern Baptist Convention.
The state government does fund some institutions, including the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts and the Science Museum of Virginia.
78% of residents claim to have exercised at least once in the past three months.
Democratic support also persists in union-influenced Roanoke in Southwest Virginia, college towns such as Charlottesville and Blacksburg, and the southeastern Black Belt Region.
This division contributed to the start of the American Civil War.
Though their schools and public services were segregated and underfunded due to a lack of political representation, African Americans were able to unite in communities and take a greater role in Virginia society.
The Episcopal Diocese of Virginia, Southern Virginia, and Southwestern Virginia support the various Episcopal churches.
The Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival is a six-day festival held annually in Winchester that includes parades and bluegrass concerts.
This case, filed by Richmond natives Spottswood Robinson and Oliver Hill, was decided in 1954 with ''Brown v. Board of Education'', which rejected the segregationist doctrine of "separate but equal".
The Virginia Foundation for the Humanities works to improve the Commonwealth's civic, cultural, and intellectual life.
Virginia's boundary with Maryland and Washington, D.C. extends to the low-water mark of the south shore of the Potomac River.
Since Virginia ended prisoner parole in 1995, the rate of recidivism has fallen to 28.3%, among the lowest nationwide.
Virginia has a total area of , including  of water, making it the 35th-largest state by area.
During the war, the capital was moved to Richmond at the urging of Governor Thomas Jefferson, who feared that Williamsburg's coastal location would make it vulnerable to British attack.
The state's motto, ''Sic Semper Tyrannis'', translates from Latin as "Thus Always to Tyrants", and is used on the state seal, which is then used on the flag.
Running brooks with rocky bottoms are often inhabited by plentiful amounts of crayfish and salamanders.
In addition to agriculture, slave labor was increasingly used in mining, shipbuilding and other industries.
The nationally available Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) is headquartered in Arlington.
According to the Pew Research Center, the state has the highest concentration of black and white interracial marriages.
The geography and climate of the Commonwealth are shaped by the Blue Ridge Mountains and the Chesapeake Bay, which provide habitat for much of its flora and fauna.
Also in September is the Neptune Festival in Virginia Beach, which celebrates the city, the waterfront, and regional artists.
Virginia is divided into 95 counties and 38 independent cities, the latter acting in many ways as county-equivalents.
The Gross Domestic Product of Virginia was $452 billion in 2013.
Many Virginians work for federal agencies in Northern Virginia, which include the Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of Defense, as well as the National Science Foundation, the United States Geological Survey and the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
Computer chips became the state's highest-grossing export in 2006, surpassing its traditional top exports of coal and tobacco combined, reaching a total export value of $717 million in 2015.
The Code of Virginia is the statutory law, and consists of the codified legislation of the General Assembly.
Norfolk is host to two minor league teams: The AAA Norfolk Tides and the ECHL's Norfolk Admirals.
, a total of 1,267,063&nbsp;students were enrolled in 1,873&nbsp;local and regional schools in the Commonwealth, including three charter schools, and an additional 109&nbsp;alternative and special education centers across 132&nbsp;school divisions.
Tourism in Virginia supported an estimated 210,000 jobs and generated $21.2 billion in 2012.
Two important film festivals, the Virginia Film Festival and the VCU French Film Festival, are held annually in Charlottesville and Richmond, respectively.
Virginia hit peak car usage before the year 2000, making it one of the first such states.
Several Washington, D.C. papers are based in Northern Virginia, such as ''The Washington Examiner'' and ''Politico''.
Arlington County is the top tourist destination in the state by domestic spending, followed by Fairfax County, Loudoun County, and Virginia Beach.
The execution of Gabriel Prosser in 1800, Nat Turner's slave rebellion in 1831 and John Brown's Raid on Harpers Ferry in 1859 marked the growing social discontent over slavery and its role in the plantation economy.
Though the black population was reduced by the Great Migration, since 1965 there has been a reverse migration of blacks returning south.
Besides the general cuisine of the Southern United States, Virginia maintains its own particular traditions.
The peregrine falcon was reintroduced into Shenandoah National Park in the mid-1990s.
A 5.8 magnitude earthquake struck central Virginia on August 23, 2011, near Mineral.
Contemporary Virginia is also known for folk rock artists like Dave Matthews and Jason Mraz, hip hop stars like Pharrell Williams and Missy Elliott, as well as thrash metal groups like GWAR and Lamb of God.
Additionally, the Washington Nationals, Boston Red Sox, Cleveland Indians, Atlanta Braves, Pittsburgh Pirates, New York Yankees, and Toronto Blue Jays  also have Single-A and Rookie-level farm teams in Virginia.
However, in recent years, the city of Virginia Beach has proposed a new arena designed to lure a major league franchise.
Virginia is known for its tradition in the music genres of old-time string and bluegrass, with groups such as the Carter Family and Stanley Brothers, as well as gospel, blues, and shout bands.
Virginia has a mixed health record, and is ranked as the 26th overall healthiest state according to the 2013 United Health Foundation's Health Rankings.
Although the Commonwealth was under one-party rule for nearly a century following Reconstruction, both major national parties are competitive in modern Virginia.
The Barter Theatre, designated the State Theatre of Virginia, in Abingdon won the first ever Regional Theatre Tony Award in 1948, while the Signature Theatre in Arlington won it in 2009.
Virginia is also home to the pileated woodpecker as well as the red-bellied woodpecker.
2.9% of Virginians also describe themselves as biracial.
About 30% of Virginia's 10- to 17-year-olds are overweight or obese.
His surrender on October 19, 1781 led to peace negotiations in Paris and secured the independence of the colonies.
While the state's Jewish population is small, organized Jewish sites date to 1789 with Congregation Beth Ahabah.
Walleye, brook trout, Roanoke bass, and blue catfish are among the 210 known species of freshwater fish.
Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, part of the Hampton Roads based Sentara Health System and a teaching institution of Eastern Virginia Medical School, was the site of the first successful in-vitro fertilization birth.
Virginia is an employment-at-will state; its economy has diverse sources of income, including local and federal government, military, farming and business.
The other major language groups in the area were the Siouan to the west, and the Iroquoians, who included the Nottoway and Meherrin, to the north and south.
Largest ancestries by county
The NCAA currently holds its Division III championships in football, men's basketball, volleyball and softball in Salem.
Also among the federal developments was the Pentagon, built during World War II as the headquarters for the Department of Defense.
Finally there are hundreds of unincorporated communities within the counties.
In 2011, non-Hispanic Whites were involved in 50.9% of all the births.
As of 2015, both the state's population density and median household income are nearly identical to that of Hawaii, while Virginia's total population is closest in size to New Jersey.
Similar to the federal structure, the government is divided in three branches: legislative, executive, and judicial.
Tomatoes surpassed soy as the most profitable crop in Virginia in 2006, with peanuts and hay as other agricultural products.
*Mammal: Virginia big-eared bat
Virginia was a focal point in conflicts from the French and Indian War, the American Revolution and the Civil War, to the Cold War and the War on Terrorism.
Additionally, 0.5% of Virginians are American Indian or Alaska Native, and 0.1% are Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander.
*Songs: "Our Great Virginia", "Sweet Virginia Breeze"
Both feature live music performances, and other unique events.
Eastern oyster harvests have increased from 23,000 bushels in 2001 to over 500,000 in 2013.
Virginia Tech and Virginia State University are the state's land-grant universities.
Virginia's educational system consistently ranks in the top ten states on the U.S. Department of Education's National Assessment of Educational Progress, with Virginia students outperforming the average in all subject areas and grade levels tested.
In 1886, railroad magnate Collis Potter Huntington founded Newport News Shipbuilding, which was responsible for building six major World War I-era battleships for the U.S. Navy from 1907–1923.
Space tourism is also offered through Vienna-based Space Adventures.
By 1624, only 3,400&nbsp;of the 6,000&nbsp;early settlers had survived.
Virginia has 4.1&nbsp;million civilian workers, and one-third of the jobs are in the service sector.
Virginia has one of the highest concentrations of veterans of any state, and is second to California in total Department of Defense employees.
The populist Readjuster Party ran an inclusive coalition until the conservative white Democratic Party gained power after 1883.
Several Christian universities are also based in the state, including Regent University, Liberty University, and Lynchburg College.
Virginia is predominantly Christian and Protestant; Baptists are the largest single group with 27% of the population .
Besides the general public schools in Virginia, there are Governor's Schools and selective magnet schools.
The Central Intelligence Agency in Langley was involved in various Cold War events, including as the target of Soviet espionage activities.
The 2011 ''Quality Counts'' report ranked Virginia's K–12 education fourth best in the country.
The Atlantic ocean has a strong effect on eastern and southeastern coastal areas of the state.
Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts is located in Vienna and is the only national park intended for use as a performing arts center.
Agriculture occupies 32% of the land in Virginia.
The interaction of these elements with the state's topography creates distinct microclimates in the Shenandoah Valley, the mountainous southwest, and the coastal plains.
Over the 20th century, Virginia shifted from a largely rural, politically Southern and conservative state to a more urbanized, pluralistic, and politically moderate environment.
The Chesapeake Bay separates the contiguous portion of the Commonwealth from the two-county peninsula of Virginia's Eastern Shore.
Coal mining takes place in the three mountainous regions at 45 distinct coal beds near Mesozoic basins.
Virginia has five major airports: Washington Dulles International and Reagan Washington National in Northern Virginia, both of which handle over 20 million passengers a year; Richmond International; and Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport and Norfolk International serving the Hampton Roads area.
In the 2007 state elections, Democrats regained control of the State Senate, and narrowed the Republican majority in the House of Delegates to eight seats.
Smithfield ham, sometimes called "Virginia ham", is a type of country ham which is protected by state law, and can only be produced in the town of Smithfield.
The Filipino American community has about 45,000 in the Hampton Roads area, many of whom have ties to the U.S. Navy and armed forces.
Aside from Virginia, the top birth state for Virginians is New York, having overtaken North Carolina in the 1990s, with the Northeast accounting for the largest number of migrants into the state by region.
Besides these sites, many open-air museums are located in the Commonwealth, such as Colonial Williamsburg, the Frontier Culture Museum, and various historic battlefields.
The most circulated native newspapers in the Commonwealth are Norfolk's ''The Virginian-Pilot'' (142,476 daily subscribers), the ''Richmond Times-Dispatch'' (108,559), and ''The Roanoke Times'' (78,663), .
Presbyterian, Pentecostal, Congregationalist, and Episcopalian adherents each composed less than 2% of the population .
The University of Virginia Medical Center, part of the University of Virginia Health System, is highly ranked in endocrinology according to ''U.S.News & World Report''.
Thomas Jefferson and many of the state's early leaders favored the Neoclassical architecture style, leading to its use for important state buildings.
The Virginia Lake Festival is held during the third weekend in July in Clarksville.
As of 2000, the center of population is located in Goochland County, near Richmond.
Virginia has a ratio of 127 primary care physicians per 10,000 residents, which is the 16th highest nationally.
, the Virginia Department of Transportation owns and operates  of the total  of roads in the state, making it the third largest state highway system in the United States.
The Virginia Symphony Orchestra operates in and around Hampton Roads.
The San Francisco Giants' AA team, the Richmond Flying Squirrels, began play at The Diamond in 2010, replacing the AAA Richmond Braves, who relocated after 2008.
*Boat: Chesapeake Bay deadrise
Virginia Commonwealth University is ranked the top public graduate school in fine arts, while James Madison University has been recognized as the top regional public master's program in The South since 1993.
Despite this, both the Virginia Cavaliers and Virginia Tech Hokies have been able to field competitive teams in the Atlantic Coast Conference and maintain modern facilities.
The state has the highest average and peak Internet speeds in the United States, with the third-highest worldwide.
Haze in the mountains is caused in part by coal power plants.
Political party strength in Virginia has likewise been in flux.
*Motto: Sic Semper Tyrannis
Following the 2013 elections, Democrat Terry McAuliffe was elected Governor by two percentage points, and Democrat Ralph Northam was elected Lieutenant Governor by double digits.
The state government was ranked most effective by the Pew Center on the States in both 2005 and 2008.
The largest areas of wilderness are along the Atlantic coast and in the western mountains, where the largest populations of trillium wildflowers in North America are found.
Fairfax County has a major urban business and shopping center in Tysons Corner, Virginia's largest office market.
It achieved the moral force and support to gain passage of national legislation with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
Richmond is the capital of Virginia, and its metropolitan area has a population of over 1.2&nbsp;million.
In 1607, the native Tidewater population was between 13,000 and 14,000.
After the House of Burgesses was dissolved by the royal governor in 1774, Virginia's revolutionary leaders continued to govern via the Virginia Conventions.
Slavery first appears in Virginia statutes in 1661 and 1662, when a law made it hereditary based on the mother's status.
Earthquakes are rarely above 4.5&nbsp;in magnitude, because Virginia is located away from the edges of the North American Plate.
Virginia's economy has many sectors: agriculture in the Shenandoah Valley; federal agencies in Northern Virginia, including the headquarters of the Department of Defense and CIA; and military facilities in Hampton Roads, the site of the region's main seaport.
Middle Plantation saw the founding of The College of William & Mary in 1693 and was renamed Williamsburg as it became the colonial capital in 1699.
Virginia does not allow state appropriated funds to be used for either operational or capital expenses for intercollegiate athletics.
Although the Washington Metropolitan Area, which includes Northern Virginia, has the second worst traffic in the nation, Virginia as a whole has the 21st-lowest congestion and the average commute time is 26.9&nbsp;minutes.
Neighboring Loudoun County, with the county seat at Leesburg, is both the fastest-growing county in Virginia and has the highest median household income ($114,204) in the country .
Though agriculture has declined significantly since 1960 when there were twice as many farms, it remains the largest single industry in Virginia.
With the bankruptcy of the London Company in 1624, the settlement was taken into royal authority as an English crown colony.
The Smithsonian Institution divides Virginia into nine cultural regions.
Resident and touring theater troupes operate from the American Shakespeare Center in Staunton.
Birds include cardinals (the state bird), barred owls, Carolina chickadees, red-tailed hawks, ospreys, brown pelicans, quail, seagulls, bald eagles, and wild turkeys.
Theaters and venues in the Commonwealth are found both in the cities and suburbs.
These men, women and children were brought from West and  West-Central Africa, primarily from Angola and the Bight of Biafra.
Virginia has extended state recognition to eight Native American tribes resident in the state, though some lack federal recognition status.
The Hampton Roads area has the largest concentration of military personnel and assets of any metropolitan area in the world, including the largest naval base in the world, Naval Station Norfolk.
Slave labor and the land acquired from displaced Native American tribes each played a significant role in the colony's early politics and plantation economy.
On the Eastern Shore island of Chincoteague the annual Pony Swim & Auction of feral Chincoteague ponies at the end of July is a unique local tradition expanded into a week-long carnival.
Mount Vernon native Matt Bondurant received critical acclaim for his historic novel ''The Wettest County in the World'' about moonshiners in Franklin County during prohibition.
The Virginia Synod is responsible for the congregations of the Lutheran Church.
