Seeking to advance the Russian economy through foreign trade, Sovnarkom sent delegates to the Genoa Conference; Lenin had hoped to attend but was prevented by ill health.
Lenin's factionalism began to alienate increasing numbers of Bolsheviks, including his former close supporters Alexei Rykov and Lev Kamenev.
However, the Polish–Soviet War broke out that year, after Poland tried to annex parts of Belarus and Western Ukraine; by May 1920 it had captured Kiev.
After the Treaty, Sovnarkom focused on trying to foment proletarian revolution in Germany, issuing an array of anti-war and anti-government publications in the country; the German government retaliated by expelling Russia's diplomats.
He also authored a political tract criticising the Narodnik agrarian-socialists, ''What the "Friends of the People" Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats'', based largely on his experiences in Samara; around 200 copies were illegally printed in 1894.
Despite this lower-class background he had risen to middle-class status, studying physics and mathematics at Kazan Imperial University before teaching at the Penza Institute for the Nobility.
Tikhon opposed the sale of items used within the Eucharist and many clergy resisted the appropriations, resulting in violence.
In February 1897, he was sentenced without trial to three years exile in eastern Siberia, although granted a few days in Saint Petersburg to put his affairs in order.
Recognising that these dissidents could cause problems for their Russian enemies, the German government agreed to permit 32 Russian citizens to travel in a train carriage through their territory, among them Lenin and his wife.
In February 1921, Lenin introduced a New Economic Policy (NEP) to the Politburo; he convinced most senior Bolsheviks of its necessity and it passed into law in April.
A Socialist Revolutionary, Fanny Kaplan, was arrested and executed.
After the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, the Left Socialist Revolutionaries had abandoned the coalition and increasingly viewed the Bolsheviks as traitors to the revolution.
Adopting a left libertarian perspective, both the Left Communists and other factions in the Communist Party critiqued the decline of democratic institutions in Russia.
This Marxist view contrasted with the view of the agrarian-socialist Narodnik movement, which held that the peasantry could establish socialism in Russia by forming peasant communes, thereby bypassing capitalism.
He expressed the view that "Soviet government is many millions of times more democratic than the most democratic-bourgeois republic", the latter of which was simply "a democracy for the rich".
He deemed his "dictatorship of the proletariat" to be democratic through the election of representatives to the soviets, and by workers electing their own officials, with regular rotation and involvement of all workers in the administration of the country.
In November, armistice talks began at Brest-Litovsk, the headquarters of the German high command on the Eastern Front, with the Russian delegation being led by Trotsky and Adolph Joffe.
Some left-wing intellectuals, among them Slavoj Žižek, Alain Badiou, Lars T. Lih, and Fredric Jameson, advocate reviving Lenin's uncompromising revolutionary spirit to address contemporary global problems.
Over the following days, he spoke at Bolshevik meetings, lambasting those who wanted reconciliation with the Mensheviks and revealing his ''April Theses'', an outline of his plans for the Bolsheviks, which he had written on the journey from Switzerland.
Despite the emotional trauma of his father's and brother's deaths, Lenin continued studying, graduated with a gold medal for exceptional performance, and decided to study law at Kazan University.
Wary of his political views, Lenin's mother bought a country estate in Alakaevka village, Samara Oblast, in the hope that her son would turn his attention to agriculture.
Various senior Bolsheviks wanted these absorbed into the Russian state; Lenin insisted that national sensibilities should be respected, but reassured them that these nations' new Communist Party administrations were ''de facto'' regional branches of Moscow's government.
He stayed in close contact with the RSDLP, which was operating in the Russian Empire, convincing the Duma's Bolshevik members to split from their parliamentary alliance with the Mensheviks.
That month they also issued an order requisitioning the country's gold, and nationalised the banks, which Lenin saw as a major step toward socialism.
Aside from Russian, Lenin spoke and read French, German, and English.
This sparked his interest in Marxism, a socio-political theory that argued that society developed in stages, that this development resulted from class struggle, and that capitalist society would ultimately give way to socialist society and then communist society.
He decided to return to Russia to take charge of the Bolsheviks, but found that most passages into the country were blocked due to the ongoing conflict.
The symptoms continued after this, with Lenin's doctors unsure of the cause; some suggested that he was suffering from neurasthenia or cerebral arteriosclerosis, although others believed that he had syphilis, an idea endorsed in a 2004 report by a team of neuroscientists, who suggested that this was later deliberately concealed by the government.
Ilya married Maria Alexandrovna Blank in mid-1863.
In July 1918, Sverdlov informed Sovnarkom that the Ural Regional Soviet had overseen the execution of the former Tsar and his immediate family in Yekaterinburg to prevent them from being rescued by advancing White troops.
Lenin remained in Samara for several years, working first as a legal assistant for a regional court and then for a local lawyer.
It redistributed land among the peasantry and nationalised banks and large-scale industry.
The policy also allowed for a return to privately owned small industry, although basic industry, transport and foreign trade remained under state control.
In response to the revolution of 1905, Tsar Nicholas II accepted a series of liberal reforms in his October Manifesto, after which Lenin felt it safe to return to St. Petersburg.
The only individual to have anywhere near this influence was Lenin's right-hand man, Yakov Sverdlov, who died in March 1919 during a flu pandemic.
The attack was widely covered in the Russian press, generating much sympathy for him and boosting his popularity.
Among the most significant was the Tambov Rebellion, which was put down by the Red Army.
After Lenin's death, Stalin's administration established an ideology known as Marxism-Leninism, a movement that came to be interpreted differently by various contending factions in the Communist movement.
In January 1913, Stalin&nbsp;– whom Lenin referred to as the "wonderful Georgian"&nbsp;– visited him, and they discussed the future of non-Russian ethnic groups in the Empire.
Against Krupskaya's protestations, Lenin's body was mummified to preserve it for long-term public display in the Red Square mausoleum.
To Lenin's embarrassment and horror, in April 1920 the Bolsheviks held a party to celebrate his fiftieth birthday, which was also marked by widespread celebrations across Russia and the publication of poems and biographies dedicated to him.
Condemning bureaucratic attitudes, he suggested a total overhaul to deal with such problems, in one letter complaining that "we are being sucked into a foul bureaucratic swamp".
The ensuing Russian Civil War pitted the pro-Bolshevik Reds against the anti-Bolshevik Whites, but also encompassed ethnic conflicts on Russia's borders and conflict between both Red and White armies and local peasant groups, the Green armies, throughout the former Empire.
Accordingly, the Bolsheviks dominated proceedings, with Lenin subsequently authoring a series of regulations that meant that only socialist parties that endorsed the Bolsheviks' views were permitted to join Comintern.
In particular, his Jewish ancestry was suppressed until the 1980s, perhaps out of Soviet anti-Semitism, and so as not to undermine Stalin's Russification efforts, and perhaps so as not to provide fuel for anti-Soviet sentiment among international anti-semites.
Concerned with physical fitness, he exercised regularly, enjoyed cycling, swimming, and hunting, and also developed a passion for mountain walking in the Swiss peaks.
Under Trotsky's leadership, the Red Army put down the rebellion on 17 March, resulting in thousands of deaths and the internment of survivors in labour camps.
His journey to eastern Siberia took 11 weeks, for much of which he was accompanied by his mother and sisters.
Instead he recommended Trotsky for the job, describing him as "the most capable man in the present Central Committee"; he highlighted Trotsky's superior intellect but at the same time criticised his self-assurance and inclination toward excess administration.
He convalesced at Gorki, and had largely recovered by July.
Conversely, various Marxist observers – including Western historians Hill and John Rees – argued against the view that Lenin's government was a dictatorship, viewing it instead as an imperfect way of preserving elements of democracy without some of the processes found in liberal democratic states.
As a respite, in September 1918 Lenin was driven to the Gorki estate, just outside Moscow, recently acquired for him by the government.
Lenin began to contemplate the possibility of suicide, asking both Krupskaya and Stalin to acquire potassium cyanide for him.
Lenin saw this as an expression of Great Russian ethnic chauvinism by Stalin and his supporters, instead calling for these nation-states to join Russia as semi-independent parts of a greater union, which he suggested be called the Union of Soviet Republics of Europe and Asia.
Encouraging insurrection during Russia's failed Revolution of 1905, he later campaigned for the First World War to be transformed into a Europe-wide proletarian revolution, which as a Marxist he believed would cause the overthrow of capitalism and its replacement with socialism.
Instead, Lenin favoured a vanguard of socialist intelligentsia who would lead the working-classes in revolution.
Financed by his mother, he stayed in a Swiss health spa before travelling to Berlin, where he studied for six weeks at the Staatsbibliothek and met the Marxist activist Wilhelm Liebknecht.
There he tried to exchange those banknotes stolen in Tiflis that had identifiable serial numbers on them.
Nevertheless, the newly elected Russian Constituent Assembly convened in Petrograd in January 1918.
From 1941 to 1945 the body was moved from Moscow and stored in Tyumen for safety amid the Second World War.
The historian Albert Resis suggested that if the October Revolution is considered the most significant event of the 20th century, then Lenin "must for good or ill be considered the century's most significant political leader".
Between 1920 and 1926, twenty volumes of Lenin's ''Collected Works'' were published; some material was omitted.
A number of later biographers, such as Read and Lars Lih, sought to avoid making either hostile or positive comments about him, thereby evading politicised stereotypes.
By 1919, the White armies were in retreat and by the start of 1920 they were defeated on all three fronts.
Responding to the violence, the government ordered the arrest of Lenin and other prominent Bolsheviks, raiding their offices, and publicly alleging that he was a German ''agent provocateur''.
Anti-Bolshevik armies carried out the White Terror, a campaign of violence against perceived Bolshevik supporters, although this was typically more spontaneous than the state-sanctioned Red Terror.
Many Bolsheviks expressed disapproval of the Cheka's mass executions and feared the organisation's apparent unaccountability.
Lenin's ideas were heavily influenced both by pre-existing thought within the Russian revolutionary movement, and by theoretical variants of Russian Marxism, which had focused heavily on how Marx and Engels' writings would apply to Russia.
Upon taking power, Lenin's regime issued a series of decrees.
On 26 January, the eleventh All-Union Congress of Soviets met to pay respects to the deceased leader, with speeches being made by Kalinin, Zinoviev, and Stalin, but notably not Trotsky, who had been convalescing in the Caucasus.
Lenin believed that the representative democracy of capitalist countries had been used to give the illusion of democracy while maintaining the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie; describing the representative democratic system of the United States, he referred to the "spectacular and meaningless duels between two bourgeois parties", both of whom were led by "astute multimillionaires" that exploited the American proletariat.
A decree in April 1919 resulted in the establishment of concentration camps, which were entrusted to the Cheka, although they were later administered by a new government agency, Gulag.
The Bolsheviks presented the Assembly with a motion that would strip it of most of its legal powers; when the Assembly rejected the motion, Sovnarkom declared this as evidence of its counter-revolutionary nature and forcibly disbanded it.
He organised this conference with the aid of Zinoviev, Trotsky, Christian Rakovsky, and Angelica Balabanoff.
It resulted in massive territorial losses for Russia, with 26% of the former Empire's population, 37% of its agricultural harvest area, 28% of its industry, 26% of its railway tracks, and three-quarters of its coal and iron deposits being transferred to German control.
Lenin proposed a three-month armistice in his Decree on Peace of November 1917, which was approved by the Second Congress of Soviets and presented to the German and Austro-Hungarian governments.
There, he worked as a barrister's assistant and rose to a senior position in a Marxist revolutionary cell that called itself the "Social-Democrats" after the Marxist Social Democratic Party of Germany.
During negotiations, the Germans insisted on keeping their wartime conquests – which included Poland, Lithuania, and Courland – whereas the Russians countered that this was a violation of these nations' rights to self-determination.
Bolsheviks besieged the government in the Winter Palace, and overcame it and arrested its ministers after the cruiser ''Aurora'', controlled by Bolshevik seamen, fired on the building.
The Order of Lenin was established as one of the country's highest decorations.
In May 1918, he issued a requisitioning order that established armed detachments to confiscate grain from kulaks for distribution in the cities, and in June called for the formation of Committees of Poor Peasants to aid in requisitioning.
Lenin also had a conservative attitude towards sex and marriage.
Full-scale nationalisation did not take place until November 1920, when small-scale industrial enterprises were brought under state control.
The Bolsheviks declared the formation of a new government, the Council of People's Commissars or "Sovnarkom".
In May 1922, he suffered his first stroke, temporarily losing his ability to speak and being paralysed on his right side.
He devoted much time to radical politics, remaining active in Skylarenko's group and formulating ideas about how Marxism applied to Russia.
Lenin's administration laid the framework for the system of government that ruled Russia for seven decades and provided the model for later Communist-led states that came to cover a third of the inhabited world in the mid-20th century.
Militantly atheist, Lenin and the Communist Party wanted to demolish organised religion, and in January 1918 the government decreed the separation of church and state and prohibited religious instruction in schools.
Lenin disliked Moscow, although he rarely left the city centre during the rest of his life.
However, amid deteriorating health, he left the city to recuperate in the Finnish village of Neivola.
Subsequently, Lenin's behaviour became erratic and confrontational, and he soon renounced his belief in God.
Lenin and other Bolsheviks then attended the Second Congress of Soviets on 26 and 27 October, and announced the creation of the new government.
Caused in part by a drought, the Russian famine of 1921 was the most severe that the country had experienced since that of 1891, resulting in around five million deaths.
Every summer they holidayed at a rural manor in Kokushkino.
The latter were therefore hindered by being both fragmented and geographically scattered, and because their ethnic Russian supremacism alienated the region's national minorities.
Settling into a family life with Nadya's mother Elizaveta Vasilyevna, in Shushenskoye the couple translated English socialist literature into Russian.
Although initially posted to Ufa, she persuaded the authorities to move her to Shushenskoye, claiming that she and Lenin were engaged; they married in a church on 10 July 1898.
Refused legal representation or bail, Lenin denied all charges against him but remained imprisoned for a year before sentencing.
Under the lead of Leonid Krasin, a group of Bolsheviks began carrying out such criminal actions, the best known taking place in June 1907, when a group of Bolsheviks acting under the leadership of Joseph Stalin committed an armed robbery of the State Bank in Tiflis, Georgia.
After Stalin's death, Nikita Khruschev became leader of the Soviet Union and began a process of de-Stalinisation, citing Lenin's writings, including those on Stalin, to legitimise this process.
Various historians and biographers have characterised Lenin's administration as totalitarian, and as a police state, and many have described it as a one-party dictatorship.
Lenin was however increasingly critical of Stalin; while Lenin was insisting that the state should retain its monopoly on international trade during the summer of 1922, Stalin was leading a number of other Bolsheviks in unsuccessfully opposing this.
In Russia in 2012, a proposal from the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, with the support of some members of the governing United Russia party, proposed the removal of all Lenin monuments, a proposal strongly opposed by the Communist Party of the Russian Federation.
Highlighting Lenin's "extraordinary capacity for disciplined work" and "devotion to the revolutionary cause", Pipes noted that he exhibited much charisma.
In January 1918, he survived an assassination attempt in Petrograd; Fritz Platten, who was with Lenin at the time, shielded him and was injured by a bullet.
Premier Alexander Kerensky turned to the Petrograd Soviet – including its Bolshevik members – for help, allowing the revolutionaries to organise workers as Red Guards to defend the city.
Even during his lifetime, Lenin "was loved and hated, admired and scorned" by the Russian people.
Responding to wartime devastation, famine, and popular uprisings, in 1921 Lenin promoted economic growth through a mixed economic system.
Accordingly, Lenin was also influenced by earlier currents of Russian socialist thought such as those of the Narodnik agrarian-socialists.
There, Lenin began work on the book that became ''The State and Revolution'', an exposition on how he believed the socialist state would develop after the proletariat revolution, and how from then on the state would gradually wither away, leaving a pure communist society.
Lenin termed this "state capitalism", and many Bolsheviks thought it to be a betrayal of socialist principles.
Stalin initially resisted the proposal, but ultimately accepted it, although – with Lenin's agreement – he changed the name of the newly proposed state to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR).
Seeking to modernise the country, the government officially converted Russia from the Julian calendar to the Gregorian calendar used in Europe.
Marxism-Leninism would be adapted to many of the 20th century's most prominent revolutionary movements, forming into variants such as Stalinism, Maoism, Juche, Ho Chi Minh Thought, and Castroism.
They continued their political agitation, as Lenin wrote for ''Iskra'' and drafted the RSDLP programme, attacking ideological dissenters and external critics, particularly the Socialist Revolutionary Party (SR), a Narodnik agrarian-socialist group founded in 1901.
Under this pseudonym, he published the political pamphlet ''What Is To Be Done?''
In July 1916, Lenin's mother died, but he was unable to attend her funeral.
Although sometimes described as an attempt to eliminate the entire bourgeoisie, Lenin did not want to exterminate all members of this class, merely those who sought to reinstate their rule.
With Lenin's support, the government also succeeded in virtually eradicating Menshevism in Russia by expelling all Mensheviks from state institutions and enterprises in March 1923 and then imprisoning the party's membership in concentration camps.
Lenin tasked Trotsky with establishing a Workers' and Peasants' Red Army, and with his support, Trotsky organised a Revolutionary Military Council in September 1918, remaining its chairman until 1925.
Although Lenin rejected the premise of the agrarian-socialist argument, he was influenced by agrarian-socialists like Pëtr Tkachëvi and Sergei Nechaev, and befriended several Narodniks.
Seeking to rebuild his influence in the party, Lenin arranged for a party conference to be held in Prague in January 1912, and although 16 of the 18 attendants were Bolsheviks, he was heavily criticised for his factionalist tendencies and failed to boost his status within the party.
Although lacking proof, biographers and historians like Richard Pipes and Dmitri Volkogonov have expressed the view that the killing was probably sanctioned by Lenin; conversely, historian James Ryan cautioned that there was "no reason" to believe this.
Similarly, Volkogonov believed that "by the very force of his personality, Lenin had an influence over people."
In the constitutional election, the Bolsheviks gained approximately a quarter of the vote, being defeated by the agrarian-focused Socialist Revolutionary Party.
However, Lenin's Marxist beliefs led him to the view that society could not transform directly from its present state to communism, but must first enter a period of socialism, and so his main concern was how to convert Russia into a socialist society.
Although Trotsky and other Bolsheviks were sceptical, they eventually agreed to the invasion.
The Soviet view characterised him as a man who recognised the historically inevitable and accordingly helped to make the inevitable happen.
Lenin sent Trotsky to speak on his behalf at a Central Committee plenum in December, where the plans for the USSR were sanctioned; these plans were then ratified on 30 December by the Congress of Soviets, resulting in the formation of the Soviet Union.
Both parents were monarchists and liberal conservatives, being committed to the emancipation reform of 1861 introduced by the reformist Tsar Alexander II; they avoided political radicals and there is no evidence that the police ever put them under surveillance for subversive thought.
Adopting an amoral stance, in Lenin's view the end always justified the means; according to Service, Lenin's "criterion of morality was simple: does a certain action advance or hinder the cause of the Revolution?"
In Ukraine, during the 2013–14 Euromaidan protests, several Lenin statues were damaged or destroyed by protesters who viewed them as a symbol of Russian imperialism, and in April 2015 the Ukrainian government ordered that all others be dismantled to comply with decommunisation laws.
He sent her to a sanatorium in Kislovodsk in the Northern Caucasus to recover, but she died there in September 1920 during a cholera epidemic.
Anti-Bolshevik armies, established by both right and left-wing groups, were defeated in the Russian Civil War from 1917 to 1922.
A Bolshevik women's organisation, Zhenotdel, was established to further these aims.
Among sympathisers, he was portrayed as having made a genuine adjustment of Marxist theory that enabled it to suit Russia's particular socio-economic conditions.
Various biographers have stated that Lenin's writings were treated in a manner akin to holy scripture within the Soviet Union, while Pipes added that "his every opinion was cited to justify one policy or another and treated as gospel."
By contrast, the Mensheviks believed that Russia was insufficiently developed to transition to socialism and accused Lenin of trying to plunge the new Republic into civil war.
Lenin incorporated changing circumstances into his belief system, and the pragmatic realities of governing Russia amid war, famine, and economic collapse resulted in him deviating from many of the Marxist ideas he had articulated before the October Revolution.
Lenin's mother was concerned by her son's radicalisation, and was instrumental in convincing the Interior Ministry to allow him to return to the city of Kazan, although not the university.
He ignored facts that did not suit his argument, abhorred compromise, and very rarely admitted his own errors.
Furthermore, Bogdanov&nbsp;– influenced by Ernest Mach&nbsp;– believed that all concepts of the world were relative, whereas Lenin stuck to the orthodox Marxist view that there was an objective reality independent of human observation.
In Europe, this resulted in the creation of new Communist-led states in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, and Ukraine, all of which were officially independent of Russia, while further east it led to the creation of Communist governments in Georgia, and then in Outer Mongolia.
Returning to Russia with a stash of illegal revolutionary publications, he travelled to various cities distributing literature to striking workers.
Arriving at Petrograd's Finland Station, Lenin gave a speech to Bolshevik supporters condemning the Provisional Government and again calling for a continent-wide European proletariat revolution.
This time the argument won with ten votes against two.
The first was a Decree on Land, which declared that the landed estates of the aristocracy and the Orthodox Church should be nationalised and redistributed to peasants by local governments.
Keen to keep up with developments in German Marxism&nbsp;– where there had been an ideological split, with revisionists like Eduard Bernstein advocating a peaceful, electoral path to socialism&nbsp;– Lenin remained devoted to violent revolution, attacking revisionist arguments in ''A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats''.
The stress made Lenin ill, and to recuperate he went on a hiking holiday in rural Switzerland.
German Marxist Rosa Luxemburg echoed Kautsky's views, while the Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin described the Bolshevik seizure of power as "the burial of the Russian Revolution".
In September 1918, Sovnarkom passed a decree that inaugurated the Red Terror, a system of oppression orchestrated by the Cheka.
The State Duma took over control of the country, establishing a Provisional Government and converting the Empire into a new Russian Republic.
Lenin's interpretation of socialism was centralised, planned, and statist, with both production and distribution strictly controlled.
Realising that the Committees of the Poor Peasants were also persecuting peasants who were not kulaks and thus contributing to anti-government feeling among the peasantry, in December 1918 Lenin abolished them.
His dedication to education earned him the Order of St. Vladimir, which bestowed on him the status of hereditary nobleman.
In January 1920, the government brought in universal labour conscription, ensuring that all citizens aged between 16 and 50 had to work.
They claimed the measure would be temporary, although the decree was widely criticised, including by many Bolsheviks, for compromising freedom of the press.
Alexander Bogdanov and other prominent Bolsheviks decided to relocate the Bolshevik Centre to Paris; although Lenin disagreed, he moved to the city in December 1908.
Conversely, many later Western communists such as Manuel Azcárate and Jean Ellenstein who were involved in the Eurocommunist movement expressed the view that Lenin and his ideas were irrelevant to their own objectives, thereby embracing a Marxist but not Marxist-Leninist perspective.
In autumn 1893, Lenin moved to Saint Petersburg.
Recognising that the situation was safer for him, Lenin returned to Petrograd.
Service stated that Lenin could be "moody and volatile", and Pipes deemed him to be "a thoroughgoing misanthrope", a view rejected by Read, who highlighted many instances in which Lenin displayed kindness, particularly toward children.
The Whites were also backed by Western governments who perceived the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk as a betrayal of the Allied war effort and feared the Bolsheviks' calls for world revolution.
The group travelled by train from Zürich to Sassnitz, proceeding by ferry to Trelleborg, Sweden, and from there to Helsinki before taking the final train to Petrograd.
The places where he had lived or stayed were converted into museums devoted to him.
The Bolshevik faction grew in strength; by the spring, the whole RSDLP Central Committee was Bolshevik, and in December they founded the newspaper ''Vperëd'' (''Forward'').
Lenin died at his Gorki home on 21 January 1924, having fallen into a coma earlier in the day.
More recently, revisionists in both Russia and the West have highlighted the impact that pre-existing ideas and popular pressures exerted on Lenin and his policies.
Lenin argued that the election was not a fair reflection of the people's will, that the electorate had not had time to learn the Bolsheviks' political programme, and that the candidacy lists had been drawn up before the Left Socialist Revolutionaries split from the Socialist Revolutionaries.
However, as the Tsarist government cracked down on opposition – both by disbanding Russia's legislative assembly, the Second Duma, and by ordering its secret police, the Okhrana, to arrest revolutionaries – Lenin fled Finland for Switzerland.
There he attended a meeting of the Bolshevik Central Committee on 10 October, where he again argued that the party should lead an armed insurrection to topple the Provisional Government.
According to Volkogonov, Lenin "deeply and sincerely" believed that the path he was setting Russia on would ultimately lead to the establishment of this communist society.
There, he read voraciously, becoming enamoured with Nikolay Chernyshevsky's 1863 pro-revolutionary novel ''What Is To Be Done?
Before the attack could take place the conspirators were arrested and tried, and in May, his brother Alexander was executed by hanging.
The courts were replaced by a two-tier system: Revolutionary Tribunals to deal with counter-revolutionary crimes, and People's Courts to deal with civil and other criminal offences.
According to Lenin biographer James D. White, Lenin treated their writings as "holy writ", a "religious dogma", which should "not be questioned but believed in".
As a result, Sovnarkom proclaimed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk void.
In late 1991, amid the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russian President Boris Yeltsin ordered the Lenin archive be removed from Communist Party control and placed under the control of a state organ, the Russian Centre for the Preservation and Study of Documents of Recent History, at which it was revealed that over 6,000 of Lenin's writings had gone unpublished.
To aid the famine victims, the U.S. government established an American Relief Administration to distribute food, although Lenin was suspicious of this aid and had it closely monitored.
The most significant political division between the two emerged during the Georgian Affair.
Despite his illness, Lenin remained keenly interested in political developments.
The unrest spread to other parts of Russia, and fearing that he would be violently overthrown, Tsar Nicholas II abdicated.
Despite remaining a Marxist, he accepted the Narodnik view on the revolutionary power of the Russian peasantry, accordingly penning the 1903 pamphlet ''To the Village Poor''.
During Russia's Civil War, the Red Army was sent into the newly independent national republics on Russia's borders to aid Marxists there in establishing soviet systems of government.
The party's leaders and many members were arrested and imprisoned, but were treated more leniently than other opponents of the Bolsheviks.
Considering the government to be just as imperialist as the Tsarist regime, he advocated immediate peace with Germany and Austria-Hungary, rule by soviets, the nationalisation of industry and banks, and the state expropriation of land, all with the intention of establishing a proletariat government and pushing toward a socialist society.
In the Western world, biographers began writing about Lenin soon after his death; some – like Christopher Hill – were sympathetic to him, and others – like Richard Pipes and Robert Gellately – expressly hostile.
In June 1918, it decreed nationalisation of public utilities, railways, engineering, textiles, metallurgy, and mining, although often these were state-owned in name only.
He also finished ''The Development of Capitalism in Russia'' (1899), his longest book to date, which criticised the agrarian-socialists and promoted a Marxist analysis of Russian economic development.
In April 1918, it nationalised foreign trade, establishing a state monopoly on imports and exports.
Some suggested that his sickness could have been caused by metal oxidation from the bullets that were lodged in his body from the 1918 assassination attempt; in April 1922 he underwent a surgical operation to remove them.
Tending to eschew luxury, he lived a spartan lifestyle, and Pipes noted that Lenin was "exceedingly modest in his personal wants", leading "an austere, almost ascetic, style of life".
Enraged at the Mensheviks, Lenin resigned from the ''Iskra'' editorial board and in May 1904 published the anti-Menshevik tract ''One Step Forward, Two Steps Back''.
After his exile, he moved to Western Europe, where he became a prominent party theorist through his publications.
The Bolsheviks' armed demonstration, the July Days, took place while Lenin was away, but upon learning that demonstrators had violently clashed with government forces, he returned to Petrograd and called for calm.
The second RSDLP Congress was held in London in July 1903.
The White armies were established by former Tsarist military officers, and included Anton Denikin's Volunteer Army in South Russia, Alexander Kolchak's forces in Siberia, and Nikolai Yudenich's troops in the newly independent Baltic states.
Accordingly, the Treaty was deeply unpopular across Russia's political spectrum, and several Bolsheviks and Left Socialist Revolutionaries resigned from Sovnarkom in protest.
From his Marxist perspective, Lenin argued that this Russian proletariat would develop class consciousness, which would in turn lead them to violently overthrow Tsarism, the aristocracy, and the bourgeoisie and to establish a proletariat state that would move toward socialism.
Inspired by Plekhanov's work, Lenin collected data on Russian society, using it to support a Marxist interpretation of societal development and counter the claims of the Narodniks.
