On 12 September 2007, Putin dissolved the government upon the request of Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov.
Buddhism, Eastern Orthodox Christianity, Islam, and Judaism, defined by law as Russia's traditional religions and a part of Russia's historical heritage enjoyed limited state support in the Putin era.
An estimated 8,000–20,000 protesters gathered in Moscow on 6 May, when eighty people were injured in confrontations with police, and 450 were arrested, with another 120 arrests taking place the following day.
While his opponents had been preparing for an election in June 2000, Yeltsin's resignation resulted in the Presidential elections being held within three months, on 26 March 2000; Putin won in the first round with 53% of the vote.
Throughout the war, Russia severely disabled the Chechen rebel movement; however, sporadic attacks by rebels continued to occur throughout the northern Caucasus.
Russia responded with its own sanctions against the West.
Given United Russia's near-total dominance of Russian politics, many observers believed that Putin was assured of a third term.
Putin has two dogs, Buffy and Yume.
According to Russia scholar Stephen F. Cohen, the narrative of the mainstream U.S. media, following that of the White House, became anti-Putin.
The Beslan school hostage crisis took place in September 2004, in which hundreds died.
Putin's parents were Vladimir Spiridonovich Putin (1911–1999) and Maria Ivanovna Putina (''née'' Shelomova; 1911–1998).
In April 2016, 11 million documents belonging to a Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca were leaked to the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung and the Washington-based International Consortium of Investigative Journalists.
According to the report, "The FSB operation to kill Mr Litvinenko was probably approved by Mr Patrushev and also by President Putin."
Putin himself said that her death caused the government more problems than her writings.
In a power-switching operation on 8 May 2008, only a day after handing the presidency to Medvedev, Putin was appointed Prime Minister of Russia, maintaining his political dominance.
The Arctic policy of Russia also includes an offshore oilfield in the Pechora Sea is expected to start producing in early 2012, with the world's first ice-resistant oil platform and first offshore Arctic platform.
Shortly before an official visit to Israel, Putin's mother gave him his baptismal cross, telling him to get it blessed.
Many of them were first made during his annual Q&A conferences, where Putin answered questions from journalists and other people in the studio, as well as from Russians throughout the country, who either phoned in or spoke from studios and outdoor sites across Russia.
", the song, originally emerged as chants Ukrainian football fans and spread in Ukraine (among supporters Euromaidan), then in other countries.
Some of the attendees stated that they had been paid to come, were forced to come by their employers, or were misled into believing that they were going to attend a folk festival instead.
In July 2000, according to a law proposed by Putin and approved by the Federal Assembly of Russia, Putin gained the right to dismiss heads of the 89 federal subjects.
In March 1994, Putin was appointed as First Deputy Chairman of the Government of Saint Petersburg.
At the United Russia Congress in Moscow on 24 September 2011, Medvedev officially proposed that Putin stand for the Presidency in 2012, an offer Putin accepted.
while the following year Putin referred to Ukraine as "Little Russia".
For example, in 2007, the tabloid ''Komsomolskaya Pravda'' published a huge photograph of a bare-chested Putin vacationing in the Siberian mountains under the headline: "Be Like Putin."
The country has sought to strengthen ties especially with the People's Republic of China by signing the Treaty of Friendship as well as building the Trans-Siberian oil pipeline geared toward growing Chinese energy needs.
Putin met Anatoly Sobchak, an Assistant Professor who taught business law (khozyaystvennoye pravo), and was influential in Putin's career.
The number of Russia's military districts was reduced to just 4.
By 2 March, Russian troops had complete control over Crimea.
The move was expected to see Medvedev stand on the United Russia ticket in the parliamentary elections in December, with a goal of becoming Prime Minister at the end of his presidential term.
Despite existing or past tensions between Russia and most of the post-Soviet states, Putin has followed the policy of Eurasian integration.
The movie is said to be based on biography of Vladimir Putin and his former wife, Lyudmila.
During his first term in office, Putin opposed some of the Yeltsin-era oligarchs, as well as his political opponents, resulting in the exile or imprisonment of such people as Boris Berezovsky, Vladimir Gusinsky, Mikhail Khodorkovsky; other oligarchs such as Roman Abramovich and Arkady Rotenberg
In November 2008, both countries held a joint naval exercise in the Caribbean.
The Russian military activities consisted of air strikes, cruise missile strikes and the use of front line advisors against militant groups opposed to the Syrian government, including the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), al-Nusra Front (al-Qaeda in the Levant) and the Army of Conquest.
A significant proportion of the money trail leads to Putin's best friend Sergei Roldugin.
On 16 August, the State Duma approved his appointment as Prime Minister with 233 votes in favour (vs. 84 against, 17 abstained), while a simple majority of 226 was required, making him Russia's fifth PM in fewer than eighteen months.
In an interview with Michael Stürmer, Putin said there were three questions which most concerned Russia and Eastern Europe: namely, the status of Kosovo, the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty and American plans to build missile defence sites in Poland and the Czech Republic, and suggested that all three were linked.
The government said that Khodorkovsky was "corrupting" a large segment of the Duma to prevent changes to the tax code.
On his first day as President, Putin issued 14 Presidential decrees, which are sometimes called the "May Decrees" by the media, including a lengthy one stating wide-ranging goals for the Russian economy.
Then, on 16 March, a referendum on Crimean status was held in which, according to official results, a majority of 93 percent of voters voted to secede from Ukraine and join Russia; the referendum was regarded as illegitimate by most of the international community because of the events surrounding it including the plebiscite being held while the peninsula was occupied by Russian soldiers.
:Reporters Without Borders, for instance, ranked Russia 148 in its 2013 list of 179 countries in terms of freedom of the press.
Construction of major hydropower plants, such as the Bureya Dam and the Boguchany Dam, as well as the restoration of the nuclear industry of Russia, with 1&nbsp;trillion rubles ($42.7&nbsp;billion) were allocated from the federal budget to nuclear power and industry development before 2015.
In February 2007, Putin criticized what he called the United States' monopolistic dominance in global relations, and "almost uncontained hyper use of force in international relations".
On 14 March 2004, Putin was elected to the presidency for a second term, receiving 71% of the vote.
Putin has enjoyed very high domestic approval ratings during his career, and has received extensive international attention as one of the world's most powerful leaders.
In September 2007, Putin visited Indonesia and in doing so became the first Russian leader to visit the country in more than 50 years.
Putin regularly attends the most important services of the Russian Orthodox Church on the main Orthodox Christian holidays.
A counter-protest of Putin supporters occurred which culminated into a gathering of an estimated 130,000 supporters at the Luzhniki Stadium, Russia's largest stadium.
Of course such a policy stimulates an arms race".
Control over the economy was increased by placing individuals from the intelligence services and the military, in key positions of the Russian economy, including on boards of large companies.
The term of draft service was reduced from two years to one, which put an end to the old harassment traditions in Russian army, since all conscripts became very close by draft age.
Protesters criticized Putin and United Russia and demanded annulment of the election results.
On 26 March 1997, President Boris Yeltsin appointed Putin deputy chief of Presidential Staff, which he remained until May 1998, and chief of the Main Control Directorate of the Presidential Property Management Department (until June 1998).
He said his country wanted a political compromise and promised the interests of Russian-speaking people in eastern Ukraine would be respected.
The new laws include the so-called “foreign agents” law, which is widely regarded as overbroad by including Russian human rights organizations which receive some international grant funding, the treason law, and the assembly law which penalizes many expressions of dissent.
Following the Crimean referendum unrest increased in eastern Ukraine apart from Crimea.
Following the 2014 Ukrainian revolution in March 2014, the Russian Federation annexed Crimea.
Critics state that Putin has moved Russia in an autocratic direction.
Putin has won international support for sport in Russia.
The gradual transition to the majority professional army by the late 2010s was announced, and a large programme of supplying the Armed Forces with new military equipment and ships was started.
The vast construction and restoration of churches, started in the 1990s, continued under Putin, and the state allowed the teaching of religion in schools (parents are provided with a choice for their children to learn the basics of one of the traditional religions or secular ethics).
Russia has also recently built several major oil and gas refineries, plants and ports.
Did they become safer?
United Russia's victory in December 2007 elections was seen by many as an indication of strong popular support of the then Russian leadership and its policies.
Some of the activities have been criticised for being staged.
Many in the Russian press and in the international media warned that the death of 130 hostages in the special forces' rescue operation during the 2002 Moscow theater hostage crisis would severely damage President Putin's popularity.
Although a musician, and in his own words not a businessman, it appears he has accumulated assets valued at $100m, and possibly more.
He wished to emulate the intelligence officers portrayed in Soviet cinema.
The announcement made during the SCO summit that Russia resumes on a permanent basis the long-distance patrol flights of its strategic bombers (suspended in 1992) in the light of joint Russian-Chinese military exercises, first-ever in history held on Russian territory, made some experts believe that Putin is inclined to set up an anti-NATO bloc or the Asian version of OPEC.
Between 2000 and 2004, Putin set about reconstruction of the impoverished condition of the country, apparently winning a power-struggle with the Russian oligarchs, reaching a 'grand-bargain' with them.
His approach to religious policy has been characterised as one of support for religious freedoms, but also the attempt to unify different religions under the authority of the state.
As a result, several countries imposed sanctions on Russia; more followed after pro-Russian unrest spread to the south and east of Ukraine and Russia's subsequent military intervention.
In a mid-November ARD interview Putin said Russia would not allow a military defeat of the pro-Russian side in the War in Donbass.
According to Russian opposition politicians and journalists, Putin secretly possesses a multi-billion fortune via successive ownership of stakes in a number of Russian companies.
During Putin's first eight years in office, industry grew substantially, as did production, construction, real incomes, credit, and the middle class.
Both Russian submarines and troops deployed in the Arctic have been increasing.
From 2003, when Russia did not support the Iraq War and when Putin became ever more distant from the West in his internal and external policies, relations continued to deteriorate.
A Russian movie, ''A Kiss Not For Press'', was premiered in 2008 on DVD.
The mutual-security cooperation of the two countries and their central Asian neighbours is facilitated by the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation which was founded in 2001 in Shanghai by the leaders of China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
Poroshenko responded by asking that Russia halt supplying arms to the Russian backed separatist fighters.
In a July 2014 speech midst an armed insurgency in Eastern Ukraine Putin stated he would use Russia's "entire arsenal" and "the right of self defence" to protect Russian speakers outside Russia.
Former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger writes that the West has demonized Putin.
In 2012, Putin reported an income of 3.6 million rubles ($113,000).
A few months before elections, Putin fired Prime Minister Kasyanov's cabinet, and appointed Mikhail Fradkov to his place.
The other was the stabilizing the size of Russia's population between 2008–2011 following a long period of demographic collapse that began in the 1990s.
In 2013, 2014, and 2015, he was ranked first on the ''Forbes'' List of The World's Most Powerful People.'''
However, the U.S. responded by further expansion of NATO to Russia's borders and by unilateral withdrawal from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
In a reference to 25 May 2014 presidential elections in Ukraine, Putin said that the Ukrainian elections were a step in the right direction.
The months following Putin's Munich Speech were marked by tension and a surge in rhetoric on both sides of the Atlantic.
Robert W. Orttung and Christopher Walker report:
Yeltsin's main opponents and would-be successors were already campaigning to replace the ailing president, and they fought hard to prevent Putin's emergence as a potential successor.
Also on 18 March Putin and the new leadership of Crimea signed a bill that led to the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
Putin sometimes uses  Russian criminal language (fenya), not always correctly.
193 at Baskov Lane, near his home.
At the summit he told US President George W. Bush that "Ukraine is not even a state!"
Earlier in 2000, Putin had re-established stronger ties with Fidel Castro's Cuba.
Under Putin, Russia's relationships with NATO and the U.S. have passed through several stages.
Relations were further strained after the 2014-15 Russian military intervention in Ukraine and the Annexation of Crimea.
Putin has promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers.
In June 2012, in Paris, he rejected the statement of French President Francois Hollande who called on Bashar Al-Assad to step down.
Those protests sparked the fear of a colour revolution in society.
Outside of Russia, Putin's macho image has been the subject of parody.
Inflation remained a problem however.
Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, head of the Church, endorsed his election in 2012 stating Putin's terms were like "a miracle of God."
In 2015, he was #1 on the ''Time's'' Most Influential People List.
On 26 August 2014 Putin met with Ukraine President Petro Poroshenko in Minsk where he expressed a willingness to discuss the situation.
In 2010, Ukraine did abandon these plans.
Some analysts have summarized Putin as being allied with Shiites and Alawites in the Middle East.
As President and then Prime-Minister, apart from the Moscow Kremlin and the White House, Putin has used numerous official residences throughout the country.
Marian K. Leighton says, "Having muzzled Russia's print and broadcast media, Putin focused his energies on the Internet."
Putin was one of a few in the class of approximately 45 pupils who was not yet a member of the Young Pioneer organization.
In the wake of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution, Putin ordered Russian troops to seize Crimea from Ukraine.
In 2007, the crisis in relations continued with expulsion of four Russian envoys over Russia's refusal to extradite former KGB bodyguard Andrei Lugovoi to face charges in the alleged murder of Litvinenko.
The death of Politkovskaya triggered international criticism, with accusations that Putin has failed to protect the country's new independent media.
He moved to Moscow in 1996 and joined President Boris Yeltsin's administration, rising quickly through the ranks and becoming Acting President on 31 December 1999, when Yeltsin resigned.
Putin cultivates an outdoor, sporty, tough guy public image, demonstrating his physical prowess and taking part in unusual or dangerous acts, such as extreme sports and interaction with wild animals, part of a public relations approach that, according to ''Wired'', "deliberately cultivates the macho, take-charge superhero image".
Its report was released in January 2016.
The rally is considered to be the largest in support of Putin to date.
Putin began training in sambo at the age of 14, before switching to judo, which he continues to practice.
Putin's former dog, Konni, a female black Labrador Retriever, was a gift in 2000 from Sergey Shoygu.
The dacha had burned down in 1996.
In 2014, a detailed study of the alleged corruption of Putin and his inner circle – ''Putin's Kleptocracy: Who Owns Russia?''
Putin allegedly organized a number of paramilitary groups loyal to himself and to the United Russia party in the period between 2005 and 2012.
However, shortly after the siege had ended, the Russian president enjoyed record public approval ratings – 83% of Russians declared themselves satisfied with Putin and his handling of the siege.
In May 1995, he organized the Saint Petersburg branch of the pro-government Our Home Is Russia political party, the liberal party of power founded by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin.
It was done in order to prevent the bloodshed”.
During his second term as Prime Minister, he was the Chairman of the United Russia Party, the ruling party.
On 27 June 1997, at the Saint Petersburg Mining Institute, guided by rector Vladimir Litvinenko, Putin defended his Candidate of Science dissertation in economics, titled "The Strategic Planning of Regional Resources Under the Formation of Market Relations".
While not formally associated with any party, Putin pledged his support to the newly formed Unity Party, which won the second largest percentage of the popular vote (23.3%) in the December 1999 Duma elections, and in turn he was supported by it.
By May 2014, Putin's approval rating had rebounded to 85.9%, a six-year high.
Falling oil prices coupled with Western sanctions imposed at the beginning of 2014 after Russia's annexation of Crimea and military intervention in Eastern Ukraine led to GDP shrinking by 3.7% in 2015.
Putin and his successor, Medvedev, enjoyed warm relations with the late Hugo Chávez of Venezuela.
His "cooler" and "more business-like" relationship with Germany's current Chancellor, Angela Merkel is often attributed to Merkel's upbringing in the former DDR, where Putin was stationed as a KGB agent.
In the interview Putin again admitted that during the 2014 Crimean crisis “Our armed forces blocked literally the Ukrainian forces located in Crimea, but it was not in attempt to force anyone to vote, it’s impossible to do so.
It particularly criticized Russia for the crackdown on the political opposition and the failure of the authorities to vigorously pursue and bring to justice criminals who have murdered journalists.
Two brothers, Viktor and Albert, had been born in the mid-1930s.
In 2012, as proposed by Putin's successor, Dmitry Medvedev, the direct election of governors was re-introduced.
She died in late 2014.
Additionally, to compensate for the sanctions, Russia developed closer economic ties with Eastern countries.
In 2012 Sergei Kolesnikov, a former business associate of Putin's, told the BBC's ''Newsnight'' programme, that he had been ordered by deputy prime minister, Igor Sechin, to oversee the building of it.
Former Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev, while acknowledging the flawed democratic procedures and restrictions on media freedom during the Putin presidency, said that Putin had pulled Russia out of chaos at the end of the Yeltsin years, and that Russians "must remember that Putin saved Russia from the beginning of a collapse."
Putin co-authored a book on his favorite sport, published in Russian as ''Judo with Vladimir Putin'', and in English under the title ''Judo: History, Theory, Practice (2004).''
The growth was a result of the 2000s commodities boom, high oil prices, and prudent economic and fiscal policies.
Putin has also been praised for eliminating widespread barter and thus boosting the economy.
Putin subsequently helped to arrange for Syria to disarm itself of chemical weapons.
Although Putin at the time stated that no Russian troops were active in Crimea but only "local forces of self defence" on 17 April 2014 he stated "Of course our troops stood behind Crimea's self-defence forces".
During Putin's first presidency, the Russian economy grew for eight straight years, and GDP measured in purchasing power increased 72%.
Putin publicly opposed plans for the U.S. missile shield in Europe, and presented President George W. Bush with a counterproposal on 7 June 2007 which was declined.
On his appointment, few expected Putin, virtually unknown to the general public, to last any longer than his predecessors.
Putin and United Russia enjoy high electoral support in the national republics of Russia, in particular in the Muslim-majority republics of Povolzhye and the North Caucasus.
Russia's chief rabbi, Berel Lazar, said Putin "paid great attention to the needs of our community and related to us with a deep respect."
Nobody has an answer".
Putin has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural and political matters, both at home and abroad.
Both Russian and American officials, however, denied the idea of a new Cold War.
The first Presidential Decree that Putin signed, on 31 December 1999, was titled "On guarantees for former president of the Russian Federation and members of his family".
The same day he also expressed that the pro-Russian separatists that had self-proclaimed the Donetsk People's Republic and Lugansk People's Republic should wait to hold their 11 May 2014 referendum on independence "in order to create proper conditions for this dialogue", but the Russian backed separatists held the referendum anyway on 11 May 2014, claiming that nearly 90% of voter favoured independence from Ukraine.
It has been suggested he was picked for the role because of his low profile.
This ensured that "corruption charges against the outgoing President and his relatives" would not be pursued.
In 2015–16 the British Government conducted an inquiry into the death of Alexander Litvinenko.
Some of the residences include: Gorki-9 near Moscow, Bocharov Ruchey in Sochi, Dolgiye Borody in Novgorod Oblast, Novo-Ogaryovo in Moscow Oblast and Riviera in Sochi.
In December 2007, United Russia won 64.24% of the popular vote in their run for State Duma according to election preliminary results.
Putin's name and image are widely used in advertisement and product branding.
Putin's mother was a factory worker and his father was a conscript in the Soviet Navy, serving in the submarine fleet in the early 1930s.
This was most notably targeted at Mabetex bribery case in which Yeltsin's family members were involved.
In 2014, the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project named Putin their Person of the Year Award for furthering corruption and organized crime.
In late August 2014, Putin stated: "People who have their own views on history and the history of our country may argue with me, but it seems to me that the Russian and Ukrainian peoples are practically one people".
He was initially regarded as a Yeltsin loyalist; like other prime ministers of Boris Yeltsin, Putin did not choose ministers himself, his cabinet being determined by the presidential administration.
Not long after Putin returned from his KGB service in Dresden, East Germany, Putin built a dacha in Solovyovka on the eastern shore of Lake Komsomolskoye on the Karelian Isthmus in Priozersky District of Leningrad Oblast, near St. Petersburg.
The case of Putin's alleged corruption in metal exports from 1992 was brought back by Marina Salye, but she was silenced and forced to leave St Petersburg.
Putin has said that overcoming the consequences of the world economic crisis was one of the two main achievements of his second Premiership.
In June 2013, Putin attended a televised rally of the All-Russia People's Front where he was elected head of the movement, which was set up in 2011.
He was reelected President in 2004 with 72% of the vote.
His view was that concessions by the West on one of the questions might be met with concessions from Russia on another.
In 2005 an industry consolidation programme was launched to bring the main aircraft producing companies under a single umbrella organization, the United Aircraft Corporation (UAC).
Putin opposed any foreign intervention.
On 30 August 2000 a criminal investigation (number 18/238278-95) was dropped in which Putin himself was one of suspects as a member of the Saint Petersburg city government.
According to Human Rights Watch since May 2012, when Vladimir Putin was reelected as president, Russia has enacted many restrictive laws, started inspections of nongovernmental organizations, harassed, intimidated, and imprisoned political activists, and started to restrict critics.
Steven Myers reports,  "The church, once heavily repressed, had emerged from the Soviet collapse as one of the most respected institutions....Now Kiril led the faithful directly into an alliance with the state."
The Internet has attracted Putin's attention because his critics have tried to use it to challenge his control of information.
A large number of nuclear power stations and units are currently being constructed by the state corporation Rosatom in Russia and abroad.
Later, he was transferred to the regular army and was severely wounded in 1942.
Putin is known for his often tough and sharp language, often alluding at Russian jokes and folk sayings.
On 9 August 1999, Vladimir Putin was appointed one of three First Deputy Prime Ministers, and later on that day was appointed acting Prime Minister of the Government of the Russian Federation by President Yeltsin.
He went on to declare that the February 2014 ousting of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych had been orchestrated by the West as an attempt to weaken Russia.
In late 2013, Russian-American relations deteriorated further when the United States canceled a summit (for the first time since 1960) after Putin gave asylum to Edward Snowden, who had leaked classified information from the NSA.
It was concluded that he had understated prices and permitted the export of metals valued at $93 million in exchange for foreign food aid that never arrived.
This was underscored in July 2014 when shareholders of Yukos were awarded $50 billion in compensation by the Permanent Arbitration Court in The Hague.
In September 2011, after presidential terms were extended from four to six years, Putin announced he would seek a third term as president.
Putin has attacked globalism and economic liberalism and is identified by scholars with Russian conservatism.
He occupied this position until March 1997.
Putin had friendly relations with former American President George W. Bush, and many European leaders.
On 11 September 2013, an opinion, written by Putin, was published in the ''New York Times'' regarding international events related to the United States, Russia and Syria.
Following prior warnings, demonstrations in several Russian cities were met by police action, which included interfering with the travel of the protesters and the arrests of as many as 150 people who attempted to break through police lines.
His predecessor on this position was Alexei Kudrin and the successor was Nikolai Patrushev, both future prominent politicians and Putin's associates.
During his tenure Putin was responsible for the foreign property of the state and organized transfer of the former assets of the Soviet Union and Communist Party to the Russian Federation.
The Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People called for a boycott of the referendum.
Putin studied law at the Saint Petersburg State University in 1970 and graduated in 1975.
Relations between Russia and the United Kingdom deteriorated when the United Kingdom granted political asylum to Putin's former patron, oligarch Boris Berezovsky in 2003.
According to Putin, his religious awakening began after a serious car crash involving his wife in 1993, and a life-threatening fire that burned down their dacha in August 1996.
