In other contexts the vocative remains prevalent.
("What are you staring at, idiot!")
Many modern Indo-European languages have lost the vocative case.
Nouns that end in ''-ius'' have distinct vocatives, but instead of the expected ending ''-ie'' they simply end with ''-ī''.
νύξ, night), otherwise, the stem (with necessary alterations, such as dropping final consonants) serves as the vocative (cf.
Notes on notation: The elements separated with hyphens denote the stem, the so-called thematic vowel of the case and the actual suffix.
In plural this form is used with words such as ''"ребят"'', ''"девчат"'' (nominative: ''"ребята"'' ''"девчата"'', guys gals).
This shortening does not shift the accent, so the vocative of ''Vergilius'' is ''Vergilī'', with accent on the first ''i'', even though it is short.
Paul, come over please!
A vocative expression is an expression of direct address where the identity of the party spoken to is set forth expressly within a sentence.
*: O my dear coffee pot, you are dripping!
In the second phrase, both the adjective and the noun are declined.
''ciemność'' (darkness)
''Meus'' forms the vocative irregularly as ''mī'', while ''deus'' does not have a distinct vocative, and retains the form ''deus''.
Some linguists argue that the vocative form is not a case but a special form of nouns not belonging to any case, since vocative expressions are not related syntactically to other words in sentences.
:''Иван'' (nominative case)
Except for forms that end in -''е'', these are considered rude, and are normally avoided.
"Dö" is commonly used to get someone's attention when addressing one another.
Vocative phrases like ''господин министре'' (Mr. Minister) have almost completely been replaced by corresponding common case forms, especially in official writing.
A famous example is the title and first line of the Canadian national anthem, ''O Canada'' which is a vocative phrase addressing Canada.
An example would be the famous line from Shakespeare, "Et tu, Brute?"
"Врачу, исцелися сам" (''Vraču, iscelisia sam'', "Physician, heal thyself", cf.
In Latin, e.g., the nominative case is ''lupu'''''s''' and the vocative case is ''lupe'', whereas the accusative case is ''lupu'''''m'''.
The second singular and plural personal pronouns are also declined in the vocative case.
In the Beijing dialect of Mandarin Chinese, when expressing strong feeling (especially negative feelings) to some one, "ei" is added to the word you address the one you are calling, and the "ei" is stressed.
In the latter case the vocative form is often also incorrectly used as nominative to refer to bishops and the patriarchs.
Many, however, retain it, including the Baltic languages and most Slavic languages.
Colognian examples:
*After adjectives, demonstrative pronouns, and possessive pronouns
**''Zamknij się, pajac'''u'''!''
Additionally, adjectives in vocative phrases are always weakly declined, whereas elsewhere with proper nouns, they would usually be declined strongly.
*: A dear friend is better than gold.
In modern colloquial Russian given names and a small family of terms often take a special "shortened" form that some linguists consider a reemerging vocative case.
("Lena, where are you?").
**(O) Matko!, (O) Boże!, chłopie
Thus the determiner precedes nouns in all cases but the vocative.
The use of the vocative, aside from literary usage, is mostly confined to personal names, where it is obligatory.
The patriarch and bishops of the Russian Orthodox Church are addressed as "владыко" (''vladyko'', hegemon, cf.
Neuter nouns and all plural nouns are the same as in the nominative case.
Names that end in ''-я'' acquire a soft sign in this case: ''"Оль!"''
English commonly uses the nominative case for vocative expressions, but sets them off from the rest of the sentences with pauses as interjections (rendered in writing as commas).
This is basically equivalent to ''"Лена, где ты?
Traditional male names usually have a vocative ending.
*: You have a nice sweater.
''człowiek'' (human)
(commonly translated as "And you, Brutus?
In Czech, the vocative (''vokativ'', or ''5.
*After "Ty" (second person singular pronoun)
Such usage differs from historical vocative (which would be ''"Лено"'' in the example above) and is not related to such historical usage.
Adjectives that end in ''-ius'' have vocatives in ''-ie''; thus the vocative of ''eximius'' is ''eximie''.
लता (''latā'', fem., 'creeper')
हे लताः ''he latāḥ''
:''господи'' (, Lord,)
:''lamazi kali'' "beautiful woman" (nominative case)
or ''Tęsknię za Tobą, moja Żono.''
In Polish, the vocative (''wołacz'') is formed as follows: Feminine nouns usually take -o, except those that end in -sia, -cia, -nia, and -dzia, which take -u, and those that end in -ść, which take -i. Masculine nouns generally follow the complex pattern of the locative case, with the exception of a handful of words such as Bóg → Boże ("God"), ojciec → ojcze ("father") and chłopiec → chłopcze ("boy").
*: Hey you, nice sweater.
The historical Slavic vocative has been lost in Russian, and currently can only be found in certain cases of archaic expressions.
''Shen'' you (singular) and ''tkven'' you (plural) in the vocative case become, ''she!''
Note how the vocative ending changes the stem consonant in Old Church Slavonic.
Irregular vocatives exist as well, such as nom.
Several of those expressions, mostly of religious origin, are common in colloquial Russian: "Боже!"
*To address an individual in an offensive or condescending manner, e.g.
Examples of the use of the vocative personal names (as in Irish):
For the word roots that end with a consonant, the vocative case suffix is -''o'', and for the words that end with a vowel the suffix for the vocative case is  -''v'' as it was in old Georgian, but for some words it is considered archaic.
This is caused by the so-called First palatalization.
* ''Du(''nominative'') har en snygg tröja.''
**Nie rozumiesz mnie, moja droga Basiu!
It is most often used to address someone or some group of living beings—usually in conjunction with an imperative construct.
This is also the case in traditional English (without the accent) (see above).
However, as the Oxford English Dictionary points out, "O" and "Oh" were originally used interchangeably.
In Sanskrit the vocative (सम्बोधन विभक्ति ''sambodhana vibhakti'') has the same form as the nominative, except in the singular.
Therefore, one could, for instance, say,
in Latin is thus ''mī deus!
The vocative case generally does not appear in Icelandic, though a few words retain an archaic vocative declension from Latin, such as the word ''Jesús'', which is ''Jesú'' in the vocative.
**''Co się gapisz, idiot'''o'''?''
'', ''Iisuse'' vocative of "Иисус" ''Iisus'', "Jesus"), vocative is also used in prayers, e.g.
*: Dear friend, tell me a story.
with the declination of all the elements.
Vocative case forms also normally exist for female given names:
*: Jesus loves you.
Thus, 少年よ、大志を抱け (a quote by William S. Clark) would be translated as
Two exceptions, where Vocative and Nominative case are undistinguishable, are mentioned in the following table.
बाल (''bāla'', masc., 'boy')
pád'' - ''"the fifth case"'') differs from the nominative in masculine and feminine nouns in singular.
Historically, the vocative case was an element of the Indo-European system of cases, and existed in Latin, Sanskrit, and Classical Greek.
Adjectives are also declined in the vocative case.
One of the best known examples of this is ''Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring''.
The '''vocative case''' (abbreviated , voc.)
''Ewusia'' (diminutive form of ''Ewa'')
The most common one is adding "ei" to "孙子" (sunzi, lit.
*To address an individual using his/her function, title, other attribute, family role
These expressions are used to express strong emotions (much like English "O my God!
Third declension nouns that are mono-syllabic and end in -ς have vocatives identical to nominatives (cf.
(''Bože moj'', "My God!
हे फले ''he phale''
("Get lost, peasant!")
Like English, French sometimes uses (or historically used) a particle ''Ô'' to mark vocative phrases rather than by change to the form of the noun.
''pane profesore!''
("Shut up, you buffoon!")
instead of ''pane Nováku!''
nominative "врач", ''vrač'').
The asterisk before the Proto-Indo-European words means that they are theoretical reconstructions, not attested in a written source.
* ''Kæri vin (weak adjective, shortened noun), segðu mér nú sögu.''
The following are examples of proper nouns that are frequently used in vocative:
**Panie doktorze (Doctor!
The native words ''sonur'' ("son") and ''vinur'' ("friend") also sometimes appear in the shortened forms ''son'' and ''vin'' in vocative phrases.
Also, the particle ''a'' is placed before the noun unless it begins with a vowel (or f followed immediately by a vowel, which becomes silent when lenited).
*Set expressions, e.g.
Boys, be ambitious.
In addition, masculine nouns are slenderized if possible (that is, in writing, an 'i' is inserted before the final consonant).
''knížka'' (little book)
Another example is the recurrent use of the phrase "O (my) Best Beloved" by Rudyard Kipling in his ''Just So Stories''.
''pan Dobrý'' (Mr Good)
In Latin the form of the vocative case of a noun is often the same as the nominative.
Note two forms of vocative of ''człowiek'' (human): latter conforming with Old Church Slavonic is considered poetical today.
("I miss you, my wife.")
And the horses are running away.
**Przybywasz za późno, pływaku (You arrive too late, swimmer)
''pan '' (Mr Professor)
:''lamaz'''o''' kal'''o'''!''
The nominative is increasingly used in place of the vocative when addressing people with their proper names.
"Έλα εδώ, Χρήστο" "Come here, Christos" instead of "...Χρήστε".
:''глупако'' (you, fool!)
For example, in the sentence, "I don't know, John", ''John'' is a vocative expression that indicates the party being addressed—as opposed to the sentence, "I don't know John", where ''John'' is the direct object of the verb "know."
(You don't understand me, my dear Basia!)
**''Spadaj wieśniak'''u'''!''
Modern English lacks a formal (morphological) vocative case.
Proper nouns usually also have vocative forms, even though they are used less frequently.
फलम् (''phalam'', neut., 'fruit')
The use of these suffixes is similar to that of the Japanese よ.
In some German dialects, e.g.
With the advent of "Oh" as a written interjection, however, "O" is the preferred modern spelling in vocative phrases.
Exception are female kinship terms, whose vocative is always used: ''баба''/''бабо'' (Granny), ''мама''/''мамо'' (Mom), ''леля''/''лельо'' (aunt), ''сестра''/''сестро'' (sister).
''She lamazo kalo!''
**synu (son), mamo (mum), tato (dad)
The vocative form is the same as the nominative except in non-neuter singular.
In Modern Greek, as in Ancient Greek, second declension masculine nouns have a vocative ending in -ε; however, in practice the accusative case is often used as a vocative in informal speech, e.g.
Unlike other Slavic languages except Macedonian, Bulgarian has lost case marking on nouns.
in the Ripuarian dialect of Cologne, it is common to use the (gender-appropriate) article before a person's name.
This form is applied only to given names and nouns that end in ''-a'' and ''-я'', which are optionally dropped in the vocative form: ''"Лен, где ты?"''
is the case used for a noun that identifies a person (animal, object, etc.)
* ''Kær vinur (''strong adjective, full noun'') er gulli betri.''
All final consonants have been lost in Proto-Slavic so both the nominative and vocative Old Church Slavonic forms do not have true endings, only reflexes of the old thematic vowels.
Consonant-stem nouns have no ending in the vocative.
Two common examples of vocative expressions in English are the phrases "Mr. President" and "Madam Chairwoman".
:''Иисусе'', ''Иисусе Христе''
हे बालौ ''he bālau''
Exceptions include singular second-declension nouns that end in ''-us'' in the nominative case.
The dialect spoken in and around Gothenburg in the western parts of Sweden includes a rare example of vocative.
*: O Jesus, our saviour.
"Józiu przyszedł" instead of "Józio przyszedł" ("Joey's arrived"), yet the nominative may take the place of the vocative as well, e.g.
Breton seems to have lost the vocative.
청년들'''이여''' 대망을 가져라.
instead of "Aniu, chodź tu!"
"), and are often combined ("Господи, Боже мой").
However, Bulgarian preserves vocative forms.
''Panie profesorze!''
Teachers address pupils by first names in vocative, students by surnames mostly in vocative, first names in vocative are a possible alternative depending on individual teachers.
*: Horses, run away!
:''жабо'' (, Frog,)
''Pan profesor'' (Mr.
'''''a''' '''Sh'''euma'''i'''s''
However, a meaning similar to that conveyed by the vocative case in other languages is indicated by the use of the particle ''yā'' () placed before a noun inflected in the accusative case.
Most modern Slavic languages that retain the vocative case have altered the ending to avoid this change—e.g., Bulgarian ''вълко'' occurs far more frequently than ''вълче''.
Thus, ''Julius'' becomes ''Julī'' and ''filius'' becomes ''filī''.
Just like nouns, consonant final stem adjectives take the suffix -''o'' in the vocative case, and the vowel final stems are not changed.
Historically, and in poetic or rhetorical speech, vocative phrases in English were prefaced by the word ''O''.
In informal speech, it is common (but grammatically incorrect) that the male surname (see also Czech name) is in nominative when addressing men, e.g., ''pane Novák!''
"'', the only difference being that the former version suggests a positive personal, emotional bond between the speaker and the person being addressed.
(''Bože'', vocative of "Бог" ''Bog'', "God"), often also used in expression "Боже мой!"
It is the vocative form of "du", meaning "you" in Swedish.
In formal and somewhat archaic Korean, words are suffixed with 여 (yeo) if they end in a vowel and 이여 (iyeo) if they end in a consonant.
("I love you, Chris!")
* ''Dö (''vocative''), snygg tröja.''
Likewise, the name "Vairi" is an English spelling of "Mhàiri".
Nouns that end in ''-aius'' and ''-eius'' have vocatives that end in ''-aī'' or ''-eī'' even though the ''i'' is consonantal in the stem.
In Georgian, the vocative case is used for addressing the second singular and plural persons.
* ''Ó Jesú (''vocative''), frelsari okkar.''
The symbol ◌̩ (vertical line below) indicates a consonant serving as a vowel (it should appear directly below the "l" or "r" in these examples, but may appear after them on some systems due to font display issues).
σῶμα, gen. σώματος, voc.
In vowel-stem nouns, the ''–ḥ'' (if any) of the nominative is omitted and the stem vowel may be altered: ''–ā'' and ''–ĭ'' become ''–e'', ''–ŭ'' becomes ''–o'', long ''–ī'' and ''–ū'' become short, ''–ṛ'' becomes ''–ar''.
See also Apostrophe (figure of speech).
So, any noun not preceded by an article or other determiner is in vocative case.
Ἕλλην (Demotic Έλληνας, "Greek man"), which are homologous in their nominative and vocative forms instead.
*: There is the Paul.
(''Otče naš'', "Our Father!").
Using the appropriate vocative is strongly recommended in the official and written styles.
The name "Hamish" is just the English spelling of "Sheumais", and thus is actually a Gaelic vocative.
The vocative case causes lenition of the initial consonant of nouns.
Here are some examples:
Other nominal declensions employ the same form in the vocative as the accusative in formal or informal speech, with the exception of learned ''Katharevousa'' forms inherited from Ancient Greek, e.g.
हे फलम् ''he phalam''
This comes from Latin, as the Latin word for Jesus is ''Jesus'' and the vocative of that word is ''Jesu''.
In English translations, this is often translated literally as ''O'' instead of being omitted.
'''''a''' '''Ch'''aitrìona''
''Pani Ewa'' (Mrs. Eve)
For example, ''kats-'' is the root for the word "man."
More recent names and foreign names may have a vocative form but it is not used (''Ричарде'', instead of simply ''Ричард'' (Richard) sounds unusual to native speakers).
Nouns and adjectives that end in ''-eus'' do not follow the rules above.
