Contemporary volleyball comprises a number of attacking techniques:
The most frequent errors that are made are either to fail to return the ball over the net within the allowed three touches, or to cause the ball to land outside the court.
Some teams, when they are ready to serve, will line up their other five players in a screen to obscure the view of the receiving team.
Each team consists of six players.
The team will therefore have two front-row attackers at all times.
There are 5 positions filled on every volleyball team at the elite level.
The history of Olympic volleyball traces back to the 1924 Summer Olympics in Paris, where volleyball was played as part of an American sports demonstration event.
By aligning like positions opposite themselves in the rotation, there will always be one of each position in the front and back rows.
* '''Liberos''' are defensive players who are responsible for receiving the attack or serve.
The setter usually stands about ⅔ of the way from the left to the right of the net and faces the left (the larger portion of net that he or she can see).
The libero may function as a setter only under certain restrictions.
Rally point scoring debuted in 2001 and games were played to 30 points through 2007.
More experienced setters toss the ball into the deep corners or spike the ball on the second hit.
In case of a serving error, a second try was allowed.
Similarly, teams might use a Serving Specialist to sub out a poor server situationally.
Coaching for volleyball can be classified under two main categories: match coaching and developmental coaching.
The set is usually the second contact that a team makes with the ball.
Executed by the 5 offensive players not directly attacking the ball, players move to assigned positions around the attacker to dig up any ball that deflects off the block back into their own court.
It can be used to deceive opposite blockers and free a fourth hitter attacking from backcourt, maybe without block at all.
A "roof" is a spectacular offensive block that redirects the power and speed of the attack straight down to the attacker's floor, as if the attacker hit the ball into the underside of a peaked house roof.
The international 4–2 translates more easily into other forms of offense.
They have to be able to operate with the hitters, manage the tempo of their side of the court and choose the right attackers to set.
The 4–2 formation has four hitters and two setters.
They are specialized in blocking, since they must attempt to stop equally fast plays from their opponents and then quickly set up a double block at the sides of the court.
The advantage of the 6–2 is that there are always three front-row hitters available, maximizing the offensive possibilities.
Each of these positions plays a specific, key role in winning a volleyball match.
In 1992, underrated Brazil upset favourites C.I.S., Netherlands, and Italy in the men's competition for the country's first volleyball Olympic gold medal.
Topspin serves are generally hit hard and aimed at a specific returner or part of the court.
The objective of match coaching is to win a match by managing a team's strategy.
The 6–2 lineup thus requires two setters, who line up opposite to each other in the rotation.
Volleyball rules were slightly modified by the International YMCA Training School and the game spread around the country to various YMCAs.
The player opposite the setter in a 5–1 rotation is called the ''opposite hitter''.
Defensive systems are the formations used by the defense to protect against the ball being grounded into their court by the opposing team.
A player may sometimes perform a "dive", i.e., throw his or her body in the air with a forward movement in an attempt to save the ball, and land on his or her chest.
The team that won the point serves for the next point.
The 5–1 offense is actually a mix of 6–2 and 4–2: when the setter is in the front row, the offense looks like a 4–2; when the setter is in the back row, the offense looks like a 6–2.
The receiving team must not let the ball be grounded within their court.
(Scoring differs between leagues, tournaments, and levels; high schools sometimes play best-of-three to 25; in the NCAA matches are played best-of-five to 25 as of the 2008 season.)
A 'bounce' is a slang term for a very hard/loud spike that follows an almost straight trajectory steeply downward into the opponent's court and bounces very high into the air.
* Quick hit/"One": an attack (usually by the middle blocker) where the approach and jump begin before the setter contacts the ball.
In 2008, the NCAA changed the minimum number of points needed to win any of the first four sets from 30 to 25 for women's volleyball (men's volleyball remained at 30.)
Blocking is also classified according to the number of players involved.
The team may touch the ball up to 3 times but individual players may not touch the ball twice consecutively.
It is also used in Women's NCAA play, partially due to the variant rules used which allow 12 substitutions per set (as opposed to the 6 allowed in the standard rules).
Underhand serves are considered very easy to receive and are rarely employed in high-level competitions.
The three front row players are all in attacking positions.
* Tool/Wipe/Block-abuse: the player does not try to make a hard spike, but hits the ball so that it touches the opponent's block and then bounces off-court.
All lines denoting the boundaries of the team court and the attack zone are drawn or painted within the dimensions of the area and are therefore a part of the court or zone.
In general, opposite hitters do not pass; they stand behind their teammates when the opponent is serving.
Their primary responsibilities are to put up a well formed block against the opponents' ''Outside Hitters'' and serve as a backup setter.
In 1998 the libero player was introduced internationally.
These contacts usually consist first of the ''bump'' or ''pass'' so that the ball's trajectory is aimed towards the player designated as the ''setter''; second of the ''set'' (usually an over-hand pass using wrists to push finger-tips at the ball) by the setter so that the ball's trajectory is aimed towards a spot where one of the players designated as an ''attacker'' can hit it, and third by the ''attacker'' who ''spikes'' (jumping, raising one arm above the head and hitting the ball so it will move quickly down to the ground on the opponent's court) to return the ball over the net.
They are usually the players on the court with the quickest reaction time and best passing skills.
That is, the libero can only serve for one person, not for all of the people for whom she goes in.
Digging is the ability to prevent the ball from touching one's court after a spike or attack, particularly a ball that is nearly touching the ground.
The number of teams involved in the Olympic tournament has grown steadily since 1964.
The U.S.S.R. collected their third Olympic Gold Medal in men's volleyball with a 3–1 victory over Bulgaria (the Soviet women won that year as well, their third gold as well).
Runner-up Netherlands, men's silver medalist in 1992, came back under team leaders Ron Zwerver and Olof van der Meulen in the 1996 Games for a five-set win over Italy.
The first official ball used in volleyball is disputed; some sources say that Spalding created the first official ball in 1896, while others claim it was created in 1900.
A serve is called an "ace" when the ball lands directly onto the court or travels outside the court after being touched by an opponent.
The three standard volleyball formations are known as "4–2", "6–2" and "5–1", which refers to the number of hitters and setters respectively.
The ball is usually played with the hands or arms, but players can legally strike or push (short contact) the ball with any part of the body.
In the 2008 Games, the USA beat Brazil in the men's volleyball final.
This allows middles and right sides to become more specialized at hitting and blocking.
After the foundation of FIVB and some continental confederations, it began to be considered for official inclusion.
In lieu of a system, some teams just use a random coverage with the players nearest the hitter.
The American Volleyball Coaches Association is the largest organization in the world dedicated exclusively to volleyball coaching.
So the 6–2 formation is actually a 4–2 system, but the back-row setter penetrates to set.
Palms are held deflected downward about 45–60 degrees toward the interior of the opponents court.
Nudists were early adopters of the game with regular organized play in clubs as early as the late 1920s.
* Topspin: an overhand serve where the player tosses the ball high and hits it with a wrist span, giving it topspin which causes it to drop faster than it would otherwise and helps maintain a straight flight path.
The first country outside the United States to adopt volleyball was Canada in 1900.
It varies from passing however in that is it a much more reflex based skill, especially at the higher levels.
The setters line up opposite each other in the rotation.
A ball passing over the net must pass completely between the antenna (or their theoretical extensions to the ceiling) without contacting them.
It requires anticipating the direction the ball will go once the attack takes place.
Also, the service area was expanded to allow players to serve from anywhere behind the end line but still within the theoretical extension of the sidelines.
Each player rotates only one time after the team gains possession of the serve; the next time each player rotates will be after the other team wins possession of the ball and loses the point.
Another indoor sport, basketball, was catching on in the area, having been invented just ten miles (sixteen kilometers) away in the city of Springfield, Massachusetts, only four years before.
Quick attacks are often effective because they isolate the middle blocker to be the only blocker on the hit.
Thus, all six players act as hitters at one time or another, while two can act as setters.
* foot fault: the foot crosses over the boundary line when serving.
In many aspects, this skill is similar to passing, or bumping: overhand dig and bump are also used to distinguish between defensive actions taken with fingertips or with joined arms.
The setter coordinates the offensive movements of a team, and is the player who ultimately decides which player will actually attack the ball.
But simply, play proceeds as follows: a player on one of the teams begins a 'rally' by serving the ball (tossing or releasing it and then hitting it with a hand or arm), from behind the back boundary line of the court, over the net, and into the receiving team's court.
Ideally the contact with the ball is made at the apex of the hitter's jump.
Before 1999, points could be scored only when a team had the serve (''side-out scoring'') and all sets went up to only 15 points.
This action is only illegal if the server makes use of the screen, so the call is made at the referees discretion as to the impact the screen made on the receivers ability to pass the ball.
There is also a libero tracking sheet, where the referees or officiating team must keep track of whom the libero subs in and out for.
The ball is tossed lower than a topspin jump serve, but contact is still made while in the air.
The hitter uses arm swing, wrist snap, and a rapid forward contraction of the entire body to drive the ball.
This movement is called a "dump".
In addition to the setters, a typical lineup will have two middle hitters and two outside hitters.
After a team gains the serve (also known as siding out), its members must rotate in a clockwise direction, with the player previously in area "2" moving to area "1" and so on, with the player from area "1" moving to area "6".
They do not necessarily need to be tall, as they never play at the net, which allows shorter players with strong passing and defensive skills to excel in the position and play an important role in the team's success.
A line  from and parallel to the net is considered the "attack line".
* Line and Cross-court Shot: refers to whether the ball flies in a straight trajectory parallel to the side lines, or crosses through the court in an angle.
There is another advantage, the same as that of a 4–2 formation: when the setter is a front-row player, he or she is allowed to jump and "dump" the ball onto the opponent's side.
* Sky ball serve: a specific type of underhand serve occasionally used in beach volleyball, where the ball is hit so high it comes down almost in a straight line.
The Olympic volleyball tournament was originally a simple competition: all teams played against each other team and then were ranked by wins, set average, and point average.
* causing the ball to touch the ground or floor outside the opponents' court or without first passing over the net;
A coach will construct drills that simulate match situations thereby encouraging speed of movement, anticipation, timing, communication, and team-work.
* Off-speed hit: the player does not hit the ball hard, reducing its speed and thus confusing the opponent's defense.
The rules evolved over time: in the Philippines by 1916, the skill and power of the set and spike had been introduced, and four years later a "three hits" rule and a rule against hitting from the back row were established.
The most common dumps are to 'throw' the ball behind the setter or in front of the setter to zones 2 and 4.
Each of the five continental volleyball confederations has at least one affiliated national federation involved in the Olympic Games.
These are in turn divided into 3 areas each: these are numbered as follows, starting from area "1", which is the position of the serving player:
When used correctly, it is one of the more spectacular defensive volleyball plays.
Italy won its first medal (bronze in the men's competition) in 1984, foreshadowing a rise in prominence for their volleyball teams.
In addition, the word "game" is now referred to as "set".
* '''Setters''' have the task for orchestrating the offense of the team.
* Slide: a variation of the quick hit that uses a low back set.
The libero is, generally, the most skilled defensive player on the team.
* ''double hit'': two consecutive contacts with the ball made by the same player;
After service, the players in the front row move into their assigned positions, so that the setter is always in middle front.
At the international level, only the Cuban National Women's Team employs this kind of formation.
Other changes were made to lighten up calls on faults for carries and double-touches, such as allowing multiple contacts by a single player ("double-hits") on a team's first contact provided that they are a part of a single play on the ball.
Offensive systems are the formations used by the offense to attempt to ground the ball into the opposing court (or otherwise score points).
A well-executed soft-block is performed by jumping and placing one's hands above the net with no penetration into the opponent's court and with the palms up and fingers pointing backward.
The game continues in this manner, rallying back and forth, until the ball touches the court within the boundaries or until an error is made.
There may only be one libero per set (game), although there may be a different libero in the beginning of any new set (game).
When the player also slides his or her hand under a ball that is almost touching the court, this is called a "pancake".
That year, the introduction of a new offensive skill, the backrow attack, allowed Poland to win the men's competition over the Soviets in a very tight five-set match.
Women's gold went to Japan in 1964 and again in 1976.
They aim for second touch and their main responsibility is to place the ball in the air where the attackers can place the ball into the opponents' court for a point.
One disadvantage of this round-robin system is that medal winners could be determined before the end of the games, making the audience lose interest in the outcome of the remaining matches.
It has been a part of the official program of the Summer Olympic Games since 1964.
After a successful dig, the team transitions to offense.
A defensive specialist is often used if you have a particularly poor back court defender in right side or left side, but your team is already using a libero to take out your middles.
Sometimes a setter refrains from raising the ball for a teammate to perform an attack and tries to play it directly onto the opponent's court.
The sport is now popular in Brazil, in Europe (where especially Italy, the Netherlands, and countries from Eastern Europe have been major forces since the late 1980s), in Russia, and in other countries including China and the rest of Asia, as well as in the United States.
The libero is a player specialized in defensive skills: the libero must wear a contrasting jersey color from his or her teammates and cannot block or attack the ball when it is entirely above net height.
Popular formations include the 2-3 system and the 1-2-2 system.
The team with possession of the ball that is trying to attack the ball as described is said to be on ''offense''.
The jump should be timed so as to intercept the ball's trajectory prior to it crossing over the net.
In 1917, the game was changed from 21 to 15 points.
It is especially important while digging for players to stay on their toes; several players choose to employ a split step to make sure they're ready to move in any direction.
If the team that won the point served in the previous point, the same player serves again.
The main objective is to make it land inside the court; it is also desirable to set the ball's direction, speed and acceleration so that it becomes difficult for the receiver to handle it properly.
The U.S.S.R. won men's gold in both 1964 and 1968.
An antenna is placed on each side of the net perpendicular to the sideline and is a vertical extension of the side boundary of the court.
With the U.S.S.R. boycotting the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles, the U.S. was able to sweep Brazil in the finals to win the men's gold medal.
* net foul: touching the net during play;
The big advantage of this system is that the setter always has 3 hitters to vary sets with.
This position does not have unique rules like the libero position, instead, these players are used to substitute out a poor back row defender using regular substitution rules.
During the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, however, the sky ball serve was extensively played by Italian beach volleyball player Adrian Carambula.
Since most sets to the outside are high, the outside hitter may take a longer approach, always starting from outside the court sideline.
Beach volleyball, a variation of the game played on sand and with only two players per team, became a FIVB-endorsed variation in 1987 and was added to the Olympic program at the 1996 Summer Olympics.
Thus, one may speak of single (or solo), double, or triple block.
A match was composed of nine innings with three serves for each team in each inning, and no limit to the number of ball contacts for each team before sending the ball to the opponents' court.
If the ball hits the line, the ball is counted as in.
Since the former allows for more control over the speed and direction of the ball, the bump is used only when the ball is so low it cannot be properly handled with fingertips, or in beach volleyball where rules regulating overhand setting are more stringent.
If she/he makes an overhand set, she/he must be standing behind (and not stepping on) the 3-meter line; otherwise, the ball cannot be attacked above the net in front of the 3-meter line.
Setter, Outside Hitter/Left Side Hitter, Middle Hitter, Opposite Hitter/Right Side Hitter and Libero/Defensive Specialist.
The set (called a "quick set") is placed only slightly above the net and the ball is struck by the hitter almost immediately after leaving the setter's hands.
As with a set or an overhand pass, the setter/passer must be careful to touch the ball with both hands at the same time.
In non-beginners play, every team will have two middle hitters.
In contemporary volleyball, many types of serves are employed:
These errors include back-row or libero players spiking the ball or blocking (back-row players may spike the ball if they jump from behind the attack line), players not being in the correct position when the ball is served, attacking the serve in the front court and above the height of the net, using another player as a source of support to reach the ball, stepping over the back boundary line when serving, taking more than 8 seconds to serve, or playing the ball when it is above the opponent's court.
If the team that won the point did not serve the previous point, the players of the serving team rotate their position on the court in a clockwise manner.
Alternatively, the setter moves into the right front and has both a middle and an outside attacker; the disadvantage here lies in the lack of an offside hitter, allowing one of the other team's blockers to "cheat in" on a middle block.
Inaccurate first passes usually result in a set to the outside hitter rather than middle or opposite.
After an observer, Alfred Halstead, noticed the volleying nature of the game at its first exhibition match in 1896, played at the International YMCA Training School (now called Springfield College), the game quickly became known as ''volleyball'' (it was originally spelled as two words: "''volley ball''").
The team courts are surrounded by an area called the free zone which is a minimum of 3 meters wide and which the players may enter and play within after the service of the ball.
The opposing team must use a combination of no more than three contacts with the volleyball to return the ball to the opponent's side of the net.
* Jump float: an overhand serve where the ball is tossed high enough that the player may jump before hitting it similarly to a standing float serve.
Popular formations include the 4-2, 6-2, and 5-1 systems (see ''Formations'', below).
A men's bronze medalist in 1996, Serbia and Montenegro (playing in 1996 and 2000 as the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia) beat Russia in the gold medal match in 2000, winning their first gold medal ever.
The middle hitter steps around the setter and hits from behind him or her.
If one hand is noticeably late to touch the ball this could result in a less effective set, as well as the referee calling a 'double hit' and giving the point to the opposing team.
In this situation, the player makes use of a specific rolling technique to minimize the chances of injuries.
* Backcourt (or backrow)/pipe attack: an attack performed by a back row player.
The setters usually set from the middle front or right front position.
This too can confuse the opponent's blocking players: the setter can jump and dump or can set to one of the hitters.
* Underhand: a serve in which the player strikes the ball below the waist instead of tossing it up and striking it with an overhand throwing motion.
* Dip/Dink/Tip/Cheat/Dump: the player does not try to make a hit, but touches the ball lightly, so that it lands on an area of the opponent's court that is not being covered by the defense.
For the 2008 season, games were renamed "sets" and reduced to 25 points to win.
This is the most popular serve amongst college and professional teams.
Each of these skills comprises a number of specific techniques that have been introduced over the years and are now considered standard practice in high-level volleyball.
If a ball comes in contact with the line, the ball is considered to be "in".
''Libero'' means 'free' in Italian—they receive this name as they have the ability to substitute for any other player on the court during each play.
A block that is aimed at completely stopping an attack, thus making the ball remain in the opponent's court, is called offensive.
At the 1988 Games, Karch Kiraly and Steve Timmons led the U.S. men's team to a second straight gold medal, and the Soviets won the fourth gold in the women's tournament.
An underhand pass is allowed from any part of the court.
Brazil was runner-up again at the 2012 Summer Olympics, this time losing to Russia after losing two match points in the third set.
Matches are best-of-five sets and the fifth set, if necessary, is usually played to 15 points.
Each team tries to score points by grounding a ball on the other team's court under organized rules.
An international federation, the Fédération Internationale de Volleyball (FIVB), was founded in 1947, and the first World Championships were held in 1949 for men and 1952 for women.
The rally continues, with each team allowed as many as three consecutive touches, until either (1): a team makes a ''kill'', grounding the ball on the opponent's court and winning the rally; or (2): a team commits a ''fault'' and loses the rally.
The player must jump from behind the 3-meter line before making contact with the ball, but may land in front of the 3-meter line.
By contrast, it is called a defensive, or "soft" block if the goal is to control and deflect the hard-driven ball up so that it slows down and becomes easier to defend.
The typical lineup has two outside hitters.
* Jump serve: an overhand serve where the ball is first tossed high in the air, then the player makes a timed approach and jumps to make contact with the ball, hitting it with much pace and topspin.
The 1984 women's tournament was also won by a rising force, China.
Either are acceptable in professional and beach volleyball, however there are much tighter regulations on the overhand pass in beach volleyball.
While it's obvious that a block was a success when the attacker is roofed, a block that consistently forces the attacker away from his or her 'power' or preferred attack into a more easily controlled shot by the defense is also a highly successful block.
* '''Outside hitters''' or '''Left side hitters''' attack from near the left antenna.
If the ball is hit around, above, or through the block, the defensive players arranged in the rest of the court attempt to control the ball with a ''dig'' (usually a fore-arm pass of a hard-driven ball).
There are also several different attacking schemes teams can use to keep the opposing defense off balance.
Drills promote repetition and refinement of volleyball movements, particularly in footwork patterns, body positioning relative to others, and ball contact.
