This is no matter of faith, but of reason."
Both the Régent and King George I of Great Britain presented Voltaire with medals as a mark of their appreciation.
Commenting on Voltaire's ''Mahomet'', Malise Ruthven has observed:
However, he recovered, and in March saw a performance of ''Irene'', where he was treated by the audience as a returning hero.
He founded the Voltaire Institute and Museum in Geneva where he began publishing collected volumes of Voltaire's correspondence.
One satirical verse, in which Voltaire accused the Régent of incest with his own daughter, led to an eleven-month imprisonment in the Bastille.
A publisher was eventually secured in The Hague.
He soon became ill again and died on 30 May 1778.
Voltaire paid for the building's renovation, and Émilie 's husband, the Marquis du Châtelet, sometimes stayed at the château with his wife and her lover.
On the journey, he was accompanied by his mistress, Marie-Marguerite de Rupelmonde, a young widow.
In pure literary criticism his principal work is the ''Commentaire sur Corneille'', although he wrote many more similar workssometimes (as in his ''Life and Notices of Molière'') independently and sometimes as part of his ''Siècles''.
In a letter to Frederick the Great, Voltaire clarified that the historical Mohammad was not guilty of the treachery that formed the basis of his play ''Mahomet''.
In his native Paris, Voltaire was viewed as the defender of Jean Calas and Pierre Sirven.
It was a flop and only fragments of the text survive.
Richard Holmes supports the anagrammatic derivation of the name, but adds that a writer such as Voltaire would have intended it to also convey its connotations of speed and daring.
At Brussels, Voltaire and Rousseau met up for a few days, before Voltaire and his mistress continued northwards.
Almost all of his more substantive works, whether in verse or prose, are preceded by prefaces of one sort or another, which are models of his caustic yet conversational tone.
The letter continued with an imaginary speech delivered by Voltaire, imitating his literary style, in which he accepts authorship for the book ''Sermon of the Fifty''—a book whose authorship Voltaire had repeatedly denied because it contained many heresies.
In these works, Voltaire's ironic style, free of exaggeration, is apparent, particularly the restraint and simplicity of the verbal treatment.
He campaigned to eradicate priestly and aristo-monarchical authority, and supported a constitutional monarchy that protects people's rights.
According to the historian Will Durant, Voltaire had initially condemned the persecution of Jews on several occasions including in his work ''Henriade''.
There was an elaborate ceremony, complete with an orchestra, and the music included a piece that André Grétry had composed specially for the event, which included a part for the "tuba curva" (an instrument that originated in Roman times as the cornu but had recently been revived under a new name).
Subsequently, when Rousseau sent Voltaire a copy of his book ''Discourse on Inequality'', Voltaire replied, noting his disagreement with the views expressed in the book:
François-Marie Arouet was born in Paris, the youngest of the five children of François Arouet (19 August 1649 – 1 January 1722), a lawyer who was a minor treasury official, and his wife, Marie Marguerite Daumard (c. 1660 – 13 July 1701), whose family was on the lowest rank of the French nobility.
At The Hague, Voltaire fell in love with a French Protestant refugee named Catherine Olympe Dunoyer (known as 'Pimpette').
This greatly angered Frederick, who ordered all copies of the document burned.
The ''Comédie-Française'' had agreed in January 1717 to stage his debut play, ''Œdipe'', and it opened in mid-November 1718, seven months after his release.
The most oft-cited Voltaire quotation is apocryphal.
In late 1758, he bought an even larger estate at Ferney, on the French side of the Franco-Swiss border.
In 1733, Voltaire met Émilie du Châtelet, a married mother of three who was 12 years his junior and with whom he was to have an affair for 16 years.
It is an anagram of ''AROVET LI'', the Latinized spelling of his surname, Arouet, and the initial letters of ''le jeune'' ("the young").
Voltaire held mixed views of the Abrahamic religions but had a favourable view of Hinduism.
He wrote more than 20,000 letters and more than 2,000 books and pamphlets.
It is perfectly evident to my mind that there exists a necessary, eternal, supreme, and intelligent being.
That December, Voltaire moved to Holland for two months and became acquainted with the scientists Herman Boerhaave and 's Gravesande.
His heart and brain were embalmed separately.
In 1764, Rousseau published ''Lettres de la montagne'', containing nine letters on religion and politics.
Amongst other targets, Voltaire criticized France's colonial policy in North America, dismissing the vast territory of New France as "a few acres of snow" (''"quelques arpents de neige"'').
Voltaire long thought only an enlightened monarch could bring about change, given the social structures of the time and the extremely high rates of illiteracy, and that it was in the king's rational interest to improve the education and welfare of his subjects.
Goethe regarded Voltaire to be the greatest literary figure in modern times, and possibly of all times.
It was his response to a priest at the side of his deathbed, asking Voltaire to renounce Satan.
The Foundation has continued to publish the ''Complete Works of Voltaire'', a complete chronological series which is expected to reach completion in 2018, reaching around 200 volumes, fifty years after the series began.
He wrote: "Perhaps there is nothing greater on earth than the sacrifice of youth and beauty, often of high birth, made by the gentle sex in order to work in hospitals for the relief of human misery, the sight of which is so revolting to our delicacy.
Voltaire's wit made him popular among some of the aristocratic families with whom he mixed.
Voltaire and the Marquise analysed the Bible, and concluded that much of its content was dubious.
He was now indisputably rich.
In early 1726, a young French nobleman, the chevalier de Rohan-Chabot, taunted Voltaire about his change of name, and Voltaire retorted that his name would be honoured while de Rohan would dishonour his.
He went on to predict that ''Emile'' would be forgotten after a month.
Catherine the Great had been reading Voltaire for sixteen years prior to becoming Empress of Russia in 1762.
He had been tortured to death in 1763, supposedly because he had murdered his eldest son for wanting to convert to Catholicism.
Most of Voltaire's early life revolved around Paris.
This satire on Leibniz's philosophy of optimistic determinism remains the work for which Voltaire is perhaps best known.
From 1762, he began to champion unjustly persecuted people, the case of Huguenot merchant Jean Calas being the most celebrated.
Astronomers have bestowed his name to the Voltaire crater on Deimos and the asteroid 5676 Voltaire.
By the time he left school, Voltaire had decided he wanted to be a writer, against the wishes of his father, who wanted him to become a lawyer.
On 11 July 1791, he was enshrined in the Panthéon, after the National Assembly of France, which regarded him as a forerunner of the French Revolution, had his remains brought back to Paris.
Much later, they lived together, perhaps platonically, and remained together until Voltaire's death.
Subsequently, Voltaire agreed with the criticism of his anti-Semitic views and stated that he had been "wrong to attribute to a whole nation the vices of some individuals"; he also promised to revise the objectionable passages for forthcoming editions of the ''Dictionnaire philosophique'', but later forgot to do so.
He mainly argued for religious tolerance and freedom of thought.
Then, in his ''Dictionnaire philosophique'', containing such articles as "Abraham", "Genesis", "Church Council", he wrote about what he perceived as the human origins of dogmas and beliefs, as well as inhuman behavior of religious and political institutions in shedding blood over the quarrels of competing sects.
He was intrigued by Britain's constitutional monarchy in contrast to French absolutism, and by the country's greater support of the freedoms of speech and religion.
Denied a licence to publish, in August 1722 Voltaire headed north to find a publisher outside France.
In his ''Essai sur les moeurs'' Voltaire had denounced the ancient Hebrews using strong language; a Catholic priest had protested against this censure.
He continued to write plays, such as ''Mérope'' (or ''La Mérope française'') and began his long research into science and history.
Voltaire was a versatile writer, producing works in almost every literary form, including plays, poems, novels, essays, and historical and scientific works.
In his ''Philosophical Dictionary'', Voltaire endorses Montesquieu's criticism of the slave trade:
The name also reverses the syllables of Airvault, his family's home town in the Poitou region.
In September Voltaire and Frederick met for the first time in Moyland Castle near Cleves and in November Voltaire was Frederick's guest in Berlin for two weeks; in September 1742 they met in Aix-la-Chapelle.
Mahomet here is nothing other than Tartuffe with armies at his command."
After the death of the Marquise in childbirth in September 1749, Voltaire briefly returned to Paris and in mid-1750 moved to Prussia to the court of Frederick the Great.
Many of Voltaire's prose works and romances, usually composed as pamphlets, were written as polemics.
His ''château'' is a museum.
The attack, launched at first against clericalism and theocracy, ended in a furious assault upon Holy Scripture, the dogmas of the Church, and even upon the person of Jesus Christ Himself, who was depicted now as a degenerate".
Having written some literary works and also some music, in December 1745 Rousseau wrote a letter introducing himself to Voltaire, who was by then the most prominent literary figure in France, to which Voltaire replied with a polite response.
;Will Durant's clarification
In the Netherlands, Voltaire was struck and impressed by the openness and tolerance of Dutch society.
Further success followed, in 1732, with his play ''Zaïre'', which when published in 1733 carried a dedication to Fawkener that praised English liberty and commerce.
The town of Ferney, where Voltaire lived out the last 20 years of his life, was officially named Ferney-Voltaire in honour of its most famous resident in 1878.
Subsequently, in 1778, the judgment against de Lally was expunged just before Voltaire's death.
When Voltaire wrote in 1742 to César de Missy, he described Mohammed as a "deceitful character."
On 4 April 1778 Voltaire accompanied his close friend Benjamin Franklin into ''La Loge des Neuf Sœurs'' or Les Neuf Sœurs in Paris, France and became an Entered Apprentice Freemason.
Voltaire was initiated into Freemasonry the month before his death.
The Chinaman my brother?
Nicknamed 'Zozo' by his family, Voltaire was baptized on 22 November 1694, with François de Castagnère, abbé de Châteauneuf, and Marie Daumard, the wife of his mother's cousin, standing as godparents.
According to Joxe Azurmendi this anti-Judaism has a relative importance in Voltaire's philosophy of history.
And Frederick the Great would note the significance of a philosopher capable of getting judges to change their unjust decisions through his influence commenting that this alone is sufficient to ensure the prominence of Voltaire as a humanitarian.
Voltaire distrusted democracy, which he saw as propagating the idiocy of the masses.
According to Malise Ruthven, Voltaire developed a more favorable opinion of Islam with greater knowledge of the religion.
The tragedy ''Fanaticism, or Mahomet the Prophet'' () was written in 1736 by Voltaire.
Although he repeatedly warned against political bias on the part of the historian, he did not miss many opportunities to expose the intolerance and frauds of the church over the ages.
Partly inspired by the visit, the Marquise translated Newton's Latin ''Principia'' into French in full, and it remained the definitive French translation into the 21st century.
Hall intended to summarize in her own words Voltaire's attitude towards Claude Adrien Helvétius and his controversial book ''De l'esprit'', but her first-person expression was mistaken for an actual quotation from Voltaire.
The anti-Semitic passages in Voltaire's ''Dictionnaire philosophique'' were criticized by Issac Pinto in 1762.
Voltaire and the Marquise collected over 21,000 books, an enormous number for the time.
He wrote "Almost nothing great has ever been done in the world except by the genius and firmness of a single man combating the prejudices of the multitude."
These activities were to result in two imprisonments and a temporary exile to England.
Voltaire and the Marquise also studied history, particularly those persons who had contributed to civilization.
His enemies related that he repented and accepted the last rites given by a Catholic priest, or that he died under great torment, while his adherents told how he was defiant to his last breath.
While the poem was an instant success, Voltaire's new play, ''Mariamne'', was a failure when it first opened in March 1724.
He is a man always reasonable, never a charlatan, never a fanatic."
Bertram Schwarzbach's far more detailed studies of Voltaire's dealings with Jewish people throughout his life concluded that he was anti-biblical, not anti-semitic.
Voltaire strongly believed in Newton's theories; he performed experiments in optics at Cirey, and was one of the sources for the famous story of Newton and the apple falling from the tree, which he had learned from Newton's niece in London and first mentioned in his ''Letters''.
In October 1794, Rousseau's remains were moved to the Panthéon, where they were placed near the remains of Voltaire.
Two of his older brothers—Armand-François and Robert—died in infancy and his surviving brother, Armand, and sister Marguerite-Catherine were nine and seven years older, respectively.
His statements on religion also brought down on him the fury of the Jesuits and in particular Claude-Adrien Nonnotte.
A postscript explains: "''J'ai été si malheureux sous le nom d'Arouet que j'en ai pris un autre surtout pour n'être plus confondu avec le poète Roi''", (I was so unhappy under the name of Arouet that I have taken another, primarily so as to cease to be confused with the poet Roi.)
Although he failed in securing the annulment of the execution of La Barre for "blasphemies" against Christianity despite a protracted campaign, the criminal code that sanctioned the execution was revised during Voltaire's lifetime.
Voltaire's junior contemporary Jean Jacques Rousseau commented on how Voltaire's book ''Letters on the English'' played a great role in his intellectual development.
It has been suggested that high amounts of caffeine acted as a mental stimulant to his creativity.
She and her uncle only left Frankfurt in July after she had defended herself from the unwanted advances of one of Frederick's agents and Voltaire's luggage had been ransacked and valuable items taken by the agents.
The reasoning of which may be summed up in his well known quote, "Those who can make you believe absurdities can make you commit atrocities".
This did not hinder his religious practice, though it did win for him a bad reputation in certain religious circles.
Voltaire's next play ''Artémire'', set in ancient Macedonia, opened on 15 February 1720.
Voltaire's work was instrumental in bringing about general acceptance of Newton's optical and gravitational theories in France.
Voltaire may have been present at the funeral of Isaac Newton, and met Newton's niece, Catherine Conduitt.
In 1734, they were published in French as ''Lettres philosophiques'' in Rouen.
''Essay on the Manners and Spirit of Nations'' () is a work of Voltaire, published for the first time in its entirety in 1756.
His book ''Candide'' was listed as one of The 100 Most Influential Books Ever Written, by Martin Seymour-Smith.
However, Voltaire also acknowledged the self-sacrifice of Christians.
His possessions were confiscated and his two daughters were taken from his widow and were forced into Catholic convents.
In a letter to Jean-Baptiste Rousseau in March 1719, Voltaire concludes by asking that, if Rousseau wishes to send him a return letter, he do so by addressing it to Monsieur de Voltaire.
At a dinner, French mathematician Charles Marie de La Condamine proposed buying up the lottery that was organized by the French government to pay off its debts, and Voltaire joined the consortium, earning perhaps a million livres.
In one of his many denunciations of priests of every religious sect, Voltaire describes them as those who "rise from an incestuous bed, manufacture a hundred versions of God, then eat and drink God, then piss and shit God."
In this work, Voltaire deals with the history of Europe before Charlemagne to the dawn of the age of Louis XIV, also evoking that of the colonies and the East.
Voltaire is also known for many memorable aphorisms, such as ''"Si Dieu n'existait pas, il faudrait l'inventer"'' ("If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him"), contained in a verse epistle from 1768, addressed to the anonymous author of a controversial work on ''The Three Impostors''.
Voltaire's best-known histories are ''The Age of Louis XIV'' (1751), and his ''Essay on the Customs and the Spirit of the Nations'' (1756).
He instead turned to an epic poem about Henri IV of France that he had begun in early 1717.
The author adopted the name "Voltaire" in 1718, following his incarceration at the Bastille.
Its origin is unclear.
The five-day journey was too much for the 83-year-old, and he believed he was about to die on 28 February, writing "I die adoring God, loving my friends, not hating my enemies, and detesting superstition."
In the fall of 1735, Voltaire was visited by Francesco Algarotti, who was preparing a book about Newton in Italian.
After Voltaire's recovery from a month-long smallpox infection in November 1723, the first copies were smuggled into Paris and distributed.
Voltaire's exile in Great Britain greatly influenced his thinking.
He used the antiquity of Hinduism to land what he saw as a devastating blow to the Bible's claims and acknowledged that the Hindus' treatment of animals showed a shaming alternative to the immorality of European imperialists.
He broke from the tradition of narrating diplomatic and military events, and emphasized customs, social history and achievements in the arts and sciences.
When Comte de Lally was executed for treason in 1766, Voltaire wrote a 300-page document absolving de Lally.
Most of the architects of modern America were adherents of Voltaire's views.
But his disappointments and disillusions with Frederick the Great changed his philosophy somewhat, and soon gave birth to one of his most enduring works, his novella ''Candide, ou l'Optimisme'' (''Candide, or Optimism,'' 1759), which ends with a new conclusion: "It is up to us to cultivate our garden."
In 1764, he published one of his best-known philosophical works, the ''Dictionnaire philosophique'', a series of articles mainly on Christian history and dogmas, a few of which were originally written in Berlin.
After the fourth performance of the play, it was withdrawn by Voltaire after Cardinal Fleury advised him to do so.
In general, his criticism and miscellaneous writing show a similar style to Voltaire's other works.
Is it to believe that which is evident?
The ''Henriade'' was written in imitation of Virgil, using the alexandrine couplet reformed and rendered monotonous for modern readers but it was a huge success in the 18th and early 19th century, with sixty-five editions and translations into several languages.
When his father found out, he sent Voltaire to study law, this time in Caen, Normandy.
Despite pointing out his deviations from neoclassical standards, Voltaire saw Shakespeare as an example that French writers might emulate, since French drama, despite being more polished, lacked on-stage action.
Macaulay made note of the fear that Voltaire's very name incited in tyrants and fanatics.
He invested the money cleverly and on this basis managed to convince the Court of Finances that he was of good conduct and so was able to take control of a capital inheritance from his father that had hitherto been tied up in trust.
Frederick the Great commented on his good fortune for having lived in the age of Voltaire.
In reviewing Rousseau's book ''Emile'' after its publication, Voltaire dismissed it as "a hodgepodge of a silly wet nurse in four volumes, with forty pages against Christianity, among the boldest ever known."
He was influenced by the writers of the age, and developed an interest in earlier English literature, especially the works of Shakespeare, still relatively unknown in continental Europe.
Voltaire highlighted the Arabian and Turkish courts.
Their scandalous affair was discovered by de Châteauneuf and Voltaire was forced to return to France by the end of the year.
Voltaire's first major philosophical work in his battle against ''"l'infâme"'' was the ''Traité sur la tolérance'' (''Treatise on Tolerance''), exposing the Calas affair, along with the tolerance exercised by other faiths and in other eras (for example, by the Jews, the Romans, the Greeks and the Chinese).
At this time he published his views on British attitudes toward government, literature, religion and science in a collection of essays in letter form entitled ''Letters Concerning the English Nation'' (London, 1733).
Yet "His hatred of religion increased with the passage of years.
In the fifth letter he wondered why Voltaire had not been able to imbue the Genevan councilors, who  frequently met him, "with that spirit of tolerance which he preaches without cease, and of which he sometimes has need".
In February 1778, Voltaire returned for the first time in over 25 years to Paris, among other reasons to see the opening of his latest tragedy, ''Irene''.
Others who agreed with this assessment were Desfontaines and Freron.
Though life went well at first—in 1751 he completed ''Micromégas'', a piece of science fiction involving ambassadors from another planet witnessing the follies of humankind—his relationship with Frederick the Great began to deteriorate after he was accused of theft and forgery by a Jewish financier who had invested in Saxon government bonds, on behalf of Voltaire, at a time when Frederick was involved in sensitive diplomatic negotiations with Saxony.
Voltaire rejected the biblical Adam and Eve story and was a polygenist who speculated that each race had entirely separate origins.
In October 1763, she began a correspondence with him that continued till his death.
Fearing an indefinite prison sentence, Voltaire suggested that he be exiled to England as an alternative punishment, which the French authorities accepted.
The Genevan Protestant minister Pomaret once said to Voltaire, "You seem to attack Christianity, and yet you do the work of a Christian."
Voltaire also engaged in an enormous amount of private correspondence during his life, totalling over 20,000 letters.
Arthur Hertzberg claims that Gay's second suggestion is also untenable, as Voltaire himself denied its validity when he remarked that he had "forgotten about much larger bankruptcies through Christians".
"Benjamin Franklin … urged Voltaire to become a freemason; and Voltaire agreed, perhaps only to please Franklin."
Voltaire perceived the French bourgeoisie to be too small and ineffective, the aristocracy to be parasitic and corrupt, the commoners as ignorant and superstitious, and the Church as a static and oppressive force useful only on occasion as a counterbalance to the rapacity of kings, although all too often, even more rapacious itself.
Voltaire's opinion of the Christian Bible was mixed.
Thus, there are a number of representations of Mohammed by Voltaire, separated, generally, into two categories: a religious one, according to which Mohammed is a prophet like the others, who exploits people's naivety and spreads superstition and fanaticism; and a political one, according to which Mohammed was a legislator who brought his contemporaries out of idolatry.
In the play, the character Mahomet orders the murder of his critics.
According to Diderot, Voltaire's influence on posterity would continue far into the future.
Like other key Enlightenment thinkers, Voltaire was a deist, expressing the idea: "What is faith?
The phrase refers to abuses of the people by royalty and the clergy that Voltaire saw around him, and the superstition and intolerance that the clergy bred within the people.
He regarded Hindus as "a peaceful and innocent people, equally incapable of hurting others or of defending themselves".
Subsequently, commenting on Rousseau's romantic novel ''Julie, or the New Heloise'', Voltaire stated: Voltaire speculated that the first half of ''Julie'' had been written in a whorehouse and the second half in a lunatic asylum.
The content of these letters has been described as being akin to a student writing to a teacher.
Voltaire also has, in common with Jonathan Swift, the distinction of paving the way for science fiction's philosophical irony, particularly in his ''Micromégas'' and the vignette ''Plato's Dream'' (1756).
Her interpretation does capture the spirit of Voltaire's attitude towards Helvetius; it had been said Hall's summary was inspired by a quotation found in a 1770 Voltaire letter to an Abbot le Riche, in which he was reported to have said, "I detest what you write, but I would give my life to make it possible for you to continue to write."
Voltaire was also known to have been an advocate for coffee, as he was reported to have drunk it 50–72 times per day.
In a vast variety of nondescript pamphlets and writings, he displays his skills at journalism.
He was the first to emphasize the debt of medieval culture to Middle Eastern civilization, but otherwise was weak on the Middle Ages.
Later, however, as Shakespeare's influence began growing in France, Voltaire tried to set a contrary example with his own plays, decrying what he considered Shakespeare's barbarities.
He has had his detractors among his later colleagues.
Voltaire's critical views on religion are reflected in his belief in separation of church and state and religious freedom, ideas that he had formed after his stay in England.
Voltaire was highly critical of religious superstitions and deployed the Hindu practice of Sati in his novel ''Zadig'' to condemn self-immolation when it is done "to gratify vanity and in deference to religious prejudice".
Voltaire was later deemed to influence Edward Gibbon in claiming that Christianity was a contributor to the fall of the Roman Empire, in his book Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.As Christianity advances, disasters befall the Roman empire—arts, science, literature, decay—barbarism and all its revolting concomitants are made to seem the consequences of its decisive triumph—and the unwary reader is conducted, with matchless dexterity, to the desired conclusion—the abominable Manicheism of ''Candide'', and, in fact, of all the productions of Voltaire's historic school—viz., "that instead of being a merciful, ameliorating, and benignant visitation, the religion of Christians would rather seem to be a scourge sent on man by the author of all evil."
Voltaire's own book ''Eléments de la philosophie de Newton'' (''Elements of Newton's Philosophy'') made Newton accessible and understandable to a far greater public, and the Marquise wrote a celebratory review in the ''Journal des savants''.
However, Voltaire's  anti-Judaism influences later authors like Ernest Renan.
In England, Voltaire's influence affected Godwin, Paine, Mary Wollstonecraft, Bentham, Byron, and Shelley.
His remarks on the Jews and their "superstitions" were essentially no different from his remarks on Christians.
According to some commentators, when Mahomet's fanatical disciple Seide hesitates to carry out Mahomet's instruction to kill sheik Zopir, the wording in Mahomet's rebuke was reminiscent of language used by the Christian priesthood.
However, subsequently, Voltaire had become strongly anti-Semitic after some regrettable personal financial transactions and quarrels with Jewish financiers.
According to Will Durant:
The ''Ancien Régime'' involved an unfair balance of power and taxes between the three Estates: clergy and nobles on one side, the commoners and middle class, who were burdened with most of the taxes, on the other.
Together, they studied these books and performed experiments in the natural sciences at Cirey, which included an attempt to determine the nature of fire.
Voltaire and the Marquise also explored philosophy, particularly metaphysics, the branch of philosophy that deals with being and with what lies beyond the material realm such as whether or not there is a God and whether people have souls.
Influenced by Bossuet's ''Discourse on the Universal History'' (1682), he was the first scholar to make a serious attempt to write the history of the world, eliminating theological frameworks, and emphasizing economics, culture and political history.
Voltaire's second essay in English had been "Essay upon the Civil Wars in France".
From December 1727 to June 1728 he lodged at Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, now commemorated by a plaque, to be nearer to his British publisher.
''Candide'' in particular is the best example of his style.
