Confusingly, some of the factors that cause internal differences do not seem to apply on a global level.
In each country, some parts of society are more likely to vote than others.
Rules and laws are also generally easier to change than attitudes, so much of the work done on how to improve voter turnout looks at these factors.
A second problem with turnout measurements lies in the way turnout is computed.
Much of the above analysis is predicated on voter turnout as measured as a percentage of the voting-age population.
Some may be turned away because they are ineligible, some may be turned away improperly, and some who sign the voting register may not actually cast ballots.
This does not eliminate uncertainty in the eligible population because this system has been shown to be unreliable, with a large number of eligible but unregistered citizens, creating inflated turnout figures.
The modalities of how electoral registration is conducted can also affect turnout.
Much of the impetus to vote comes from a sense of civic duty, which takes time and certain social conditions that can take decades to develop:
It tends to be lower in the United States, Asia and Latin America than in most of Europe, Canada and Oceania.
Some countries have considered Internet voting as a possible solution.
This is reflected in statistics from the United States Bureau of Census, 1982&ndash;1983.
Holding multiple elections at the same time can increase turnout; however, presenting voters with massive multipage ballots, as occurs in some parts of the United States, can reduce turnouts.
Sanctions for non-voting behaviour were foreseen sometimes even in absence of a formal requirement
In low-turnout Switzerland, the average voter is invited to go to the polls an average of seven times a year; the United States has frequent elections, with two votes per year on average, if one includes all levels of government as well as primaries.
In high-turnout countries, these differences tend to be limited.
48), though electoral participation is not obligatory.
On the other hand, countries with a two party system can experience low turnout if large numbers of potential voters perceive little real difference between the main parties.
Mark N. Franklin argues that salience, the perceived effect that an individual vote will have on how the country is run, has a significant effect on turnout.
In developed countries, non-voters tend to be concentrated in particular demographic and socioeconomic groups, especially the young and the poor.
In general, low turnout may be due to disenchantment, indifference, or contentment.
People have become far more likely to participate in boycotts, demonstrations, and to donate to political campaigns.
Institutional factors have a significant impact on voter turnout.
By contrast Malta, with one of the world's highest voter turnouts, has a single legislature that holds a near monopoly on political power.
In Luxembourg only voters below the age of 75 and those who are not physically handicapped or chronically ill have the legal obligation to vote.
A number of governments and electoral commissions have also launched efforts to boost turnout.
Other demographic factors have an important influence: young people are far less likely to vote than the elderly.
Elections require considerable involvement by the population, and it takes some time to develop the cultural habit of voting, and the associated understanding of and confidence in the electoral process.
Residents are required by law to report any change of address to register within a short time after moving.
Some nations thus have rules that render an election invalid if too few people vote, such as Serbia, where three successive presidential elections were rendered invalid in 2003.
The basic formula for determining whether someone will vote, on the questionable assumption that people act completely rationally, is
*interest in politics, and
Those who began voting prior to 1960 maintain the same high turnout rates of that era.
For the numerator, it is often assumed that the number of voters who went to the polls should equal the number of ballots cast, which in turn should equal the number of votes counted, but this is not the case.
Overvote rates of around 0.3 percent are typical of well-run elections, but in Gadsden County Florida, the overvote rate was 11 percent in November 2000.
By 2004, ineligible voters constituted nearly 10%.
In low-turnout countries, these groups are often significantly under-represented in elections.
Voter fatigue can lower turnout.
However, there is much debate over the relative impact of the various factors.
For instance, a high voter turnout among the elderly coupled with a low turnout among the young may lead to more money for retirees' health care, and less for youth employment schemes.
Not all voters who arrive at the polls necessarily cast ballots.
Many causes have been proposed for this decline; a combination of factors is most likely.
Mark N. Franklin contends that in European Union elections opponents of the federation, and of its legitimacy, are just as likely to vote as proponents.
Once these errors were corrected, there was no longer any statistically significant association between common variants of these two genes and voter turnout.
Wealth and literacy have some effect on turnout, but are not reliable measures.
Before the late 20th century, suffrage — the right to vote — was so limited in most nations that turnout figures have little relevance to today.
There are two main commonly cited causes of these international differences: culture and institutions.
For example, the Holy See instructed Italian Catholics to boycott national elections for several decades after the creation of the state of Italy.
It might also help to explain why voting appears to be habitual.
Socioeconomic factors significantly affect whether or not individuals develop the habit of voting.
It has been a matter of concern and controversy among political scientists for several decades.
In particular, experiments in which subject altruism was measured using a dictator game showed that concern for the well-being of others is a major factor in predicting turnout and political participation.
The elimination of registration as a separate bureaucratic step can result in higher voter turnout.
Occupation has little effect on turnout, with the notable exception of higher voting rates among government employees in many countries.
However, over the last several decades, studies have consistently shown that the amount of leisure time has not decreased.
Bad weather can reduce turnouts, as can the season and the day of the week (although many nations hold all their elections on the same weekday).
Similarly, in Nordic countries, all citizens and residents are included in the official population register, which is simultaneously a tax list, voter registration, and membership in the universal health system.
When asked why they do not vote, many people report that they have too little free time.
Some countries like France and Switzerland use Internet voting.
At the time of that report, the four states that allowed election day registration were Minnesota, Wisconsin, Maine, and Oregon.
*trust in government;
The U.S. saw a steady rise in voter turnout during the century, reaching its peak in the years after the Civil War.
In any large families of twenty the chance of any one vote determining the outcome is low.
Furthermore, they argue that an examination of the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey shows that turnout is low but not declining among the youth, when the high youth turnout of 1972 (the first year 18- to 20-year-olds were eligible to vote in most states) is removed from the trendline.
However, since different ethnic groups typically have different levels of education and income, there are important differences in turnout between such groups in many societies.
Two genes that influence social behavior have been directly associated with voter turnout, specifically those regulating the serotonin system in the brain via the production of monoamine oxidase and 5HTT.
Income has some effect independently: wealthier people are more likely to vote, regardless of their educational background.
Turnout declined from the 1890s until the 1930s, then increased again until 1960 before beginning its current long decline.
Populations that are more mobile and those that have lower marriage rates tend to have lower turnout.
Partisanship is an important impetus to turnout, with the highly partisan more likely to vote.
However, on an international level those states with the most extensive social programs tend to be the ones with the highest turnouts.
The poor, who comprise the majority of the demographic, are more likely to vote than the rich and the middle classes, and turnout is higher in rural areas than urban areas.
Recently, several scholars have considered the possibility that B includes not only a personal interest in the outcome, but also a concern for the welfare of others in the society (or at least other members of one's favorite group or party).
These differences are caused by a mix of cultural and institutional factors.
He presents Switzerland as an example of a nation with low salience.
In the United States, it has been common to report turnout as the sum of votes for the top race on the ballot, because not all jurisdictions report the actual number of people who went to the polls nor the number of undervotes or overvotes.
Runoff elections also tend to attract lower turnouts.
Countries where multiparty systems have developed also tend to have higher turnouts.
Voters' perceptions of fairness also have an important effect on salience.
Robert D. Putnam argues that the collapse in civil engagement is due to the introduction of television.
The decline in voting has also accompanied a general decline in civic participation, such as church attendance, membership in professional, fraternal, and student societies, youth groups, and parent-teacher associations.
The differences between nations tend to be greater than those between classes, ethnic groups, or regions within nations.
Since ''P'' is virtually zero in most elections, ''PB'' is also near zero, and ''D'' is thus the most important element in motivating people to vote.
Western Europe averages a 77% turnout, and South and Central America around 54% since 1945.
Geographic mobility has increased over the last few decades.
(Who is eligible varies by country, and should not be confused with the total adult population.
The dual system in Germany, though, seems to have had no negative impact on voter turnout.
There can also be regional differences in voter turnout.
They listed five major forms of gratification that people receive for voting: complying with the social obligation to vote; affirming one's allegiance to the political system; affirming a partisan preference (also known as expressive voting, or voting for a candidate to express support, not to achieve any outcome); affirming one's importance to the political system; and, for those who find politics interesting and entertaining, researching and making a decision.
'''Voter turnout''' is the percentage of eligible voters who cast a ballot in an election.
Its cause has been attributed to a wide array of economic, demographic, cultural, technological, and institutional factors.
Dictators have often fabricated high turnouts in showcase elections for this purpose.
For example, until "rolling registration" was introduced in the United Kingdom, there was no possibility of the electoral register being updated during its currency, or even amending genuine mistakes after a certain cut off date.
Opposition parties sometimes boycott votes they feel are unfair or illegitimate, or if the election is for a government that is considered illegitimate.
In some countries, there are threats of violence against those who vote, such as during the 2005 Iraq elections, an example of voter suppression.
These declines have been smaller than those in the United States, and in some European countries turnouts have remained stable and even slightly increased.
Some studies show that a single vote in a voting scheme such as the Electoral College in the United States has an even lower chance of determining the outcome.
Scholars recently used twin studies of validated turnout in Los Angeles and self-reported turnout in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to establish that the decision to vote in the United States has very strong heritability.
For a person to vote, these factors must outweigh ''C''.
This may reduce salience, if voters perceive that they have little influence over which parties are included in the coalition.
Globally, voter turnout has decreased by about five percentage points over the last four decades.
* ''C'' is the time, effort, and financial cost involved in voting.
One can count the number of voters, or one can count the number of ballots, and in a vote-for-one race, one can sum the number of votes for each candidate.
Demographics also have an effect.
Another institutional factor that may have an important effect is proportionality, i.e., how closely the legislature reflects the views of the populace.
The age of a democracy is also an important factor.
Several other countries have similar laws, generally with somewhat reduced levels of enforcement.
Many countries have looked into Internet voting as a possible solution for low voter turnout.
During this same period, other forms of political participation have also declined, such as voluntary participation in political parties and the attendance of observers at town meetings.
Other political scientists have since added other motivators and questioned some of Riker and Ordeshook's assumptions.
The United Nations Human Development Index shows some correlation between higher standards of living and higher turnout.
It is extremely rare for factors such as competitiveness, weather, and time of year to cause an increase or decrease in turnout of more than five percentage points, far smaller than the differences between groups within society, and far smaller than turnout differentials between nations.
In the United States, midterm congressional elections attract far lower turnouts than Congressional elections held concurrently with Presidential ones.
*degree of partisanship among the population;
For the denominator, it is often assumed that the number of eligible voters was well defined, but again, this is not the case.
For instance, after the 2005 German election, the creation of the executive not only expressed the will of the voters of the majority party but also was the result of political deal-making.
If there are many elections in close succession, voter turnout will decrease as the public tires of participating.
Nonetheless, there is evidence to support the argument that predictable election results&mdash;where one vote is not seen to be able to make a difference&mdash;have resulted in lower turnouts, such as Bill Clinton's 1996 re-election (which featured the lowest voter turnout in the United States since 1924), the United Kingdom general election of 2001, and the 2005 Spanish referendum on the European Constitution; all of these elections produced decisive results on a low turnout.
A high turnout is generally seen as evidence of the legitimacy of the current system.
If voters feel that the result of an election is more likely to be determined by fraud and corruption than by the will of the people, fewer people will vote.
Although there is no guarantee, this is lessened as the parties usually state with whom they will favour a coalition after the elections.
The most important socioeconomic factor affecting voter turnout is education.
Countries such as Angola and Ethiopia have long had high turnouts, but so have the wealthy states of Europe.
Only new residents and citizens who have moved are responsible for bearing the costs and inconvenience of updating their registration.
In Mexico and Brazil, existing sanctions for non-voting are minimal or are rarely enforced.
Nations with a party specifically geared towards the working class will tend to have higher turnouts among that class than in countries where voters have only big tent parties, which try to appeal to all the voters, to choose from.
While socioeconomic factors undoubtedly play a role in determining voter turnout, new evidence suggests that genetic factors may also be important.
Studies using game theory, which takes into account the ability of voters to interact, have also found that the expected turnout for any large election should be zero.
Simply making it easier for candidates to stand through easier nomination rules is believed to increase voting.
Age and citizenship are usually among the criteria.)
In a 2001 article in the American Political Science Review, Michael McDonald and Samuel Popkin argued, that at least in the United States, voter turnout since 1972 has not actually declined when calculated for those eligible to vote, what they term the voting-eligible population.
Important decisions are placed before the population in a referendum.
Malta has a two-party system in which a small swing in votes can completely alter the executive.
In 1972, noncitizens and ineligible felons (depending on state law) constituted about 2% of the voting-age population.
The introduction of rolling registration where the register is updated monthly has reduced but not entirely eliminated this issue since the process of amending the register is not automatic, and some individuals do not join the electoral register until the annual October compilation process.
If there is an innate predisposition to vote or abstain, this would explain why past voting behavior is such a good predictor of future voter reaction.
The decline in voter turnout is almost wholly concentrated among working age voters.
Since then, Idaho and Maine have changed to allow same day registration.
This meant that elections taking place later in the year tended to have lower turnouts than those earlier in the year.
If a Bolivian voter fails to participate in an election, the citizen may be denied withdrawal of their salary from the bank for three months.
In several recent Australian national elections, the citizens of Western Australia knew which party would form the new government up to an hour before the polling booths in their State closed.
Individual votes for the federal legislature are thus unlikely to have a significant effect on the nation, which probably explains the low average turnouts in that country.
In Greece voting is compulsory, however there are practically no sanctions for those who do not vote.
Over the last 40 years, voter turnout has been steadily declining in the established democracies.
Informing citizens that the special election to break the tie will be close (meaning a high ''P'' term)  has little mobilizing effect on voter turnout.
At the age of eighteen, all youth are automatically registered.
The register was compiled in October, and would come into force the next February, and would remain valid until the next January.
Francis Fukuyama has blamed the welfare state, arguing that the decrease in turnout has come shortly after the government became far more involved in people's lives.
As a result, many scholars think of turnout as habitual behavior that can be learned or unlearned, especially among young adults.
For each subsequent generation, starting with the one that came of age in the 1960s, turnout has steadily declined.
However, some political scientists question the view that high turnout is an implicit endorsement of the system.
Other methods of improving turnout include making voting easier through more available absentee polling and improved access to polls, such as increasing the number of possible voting locations, lowering the average time voters have to spend waiting in line, or requiring companies to give workers some time off on voting day.
The focus placed on get out the vote efforts and mass-marketing can have important effects on turnout.
In Australia, voter registration and attendance at a polling booth have been mandatory since the 1920s, with the most recent federal election in 2013 having turnout figures of 93.23% for the House of Representatives and 93.88% for the Senate.
Conversely, adding barriers, such as a separate registration process, can suppress turnout.
This study was recently reanalyzed and the findings suggested to be the result of several significant errors.
Elections where control of the national executive is not at stake generally have much lower turnouts—often half that for general elections.
As turnout approaches 90%, it becomes difficult to find significant differences between voters and nonvoters, but in low turnout nations the differences between voters and non-voters can be quite marked.
In the United States, for example, there is no accurate registry of exactly who is eligible to vote, since only about 70&ndash;75% of people choose to register themselves.
For example, the US Department of Defense looked into making Internet voting secure, but cancelled the effort.
It replaced earlier more social entertainments such as bridge clubs, church groups, and bowling leagues.
Political scientists are divided on whether proportional representation increases voter turnout, though in countries with proportional representation voter turnout is higher.
States that have same day registration, or no registration requirements, have a higher voter turnout than the national average.
In the United Kingdom, the Electoral Commission distinguishes between "valid vote turnout", which excludes spoilt ballots, and "ballot box turnout", which does not.
After increasing for many decades, there has been a trend of decreasing voter turnout in most established democracies since the 1980s.
Attack ads and smear campaigns give voters a negative impression of the entire political process.
Under a pure proportional representation system the composition of the legislature is fully proportional to the votes of the populace and a voter can be sure that he will be represented in parliament, even if only from the opposition benches.
For the American presidential elections of 2004, turnout could then be expressed as 60.32% of VEP, rather than 55.27% of VAP.
The electoral register would become progressively more out of date during its period of validity, as electors moved or died (also people studying or working away from home often had difficulty voting).
However, the first signs of decreasing voter turnout occurred in the early 1960s, which was before the major upheavals of the late 1960s and 1970s.
One exception was the United States, which had near universal white male suffrage by 1840.
In the United States recent programs to increase the rates of voting among young people—such as MTV's "Rock the Vote" and the "Vote or Die" initiatives may have marginally increased turnouts of those between the ages of 18 and 25 to vote.
Enos and Fowler (2014) conducted a field experiment that exploits the rare opportunity of a tied election for major political office.
In countries that are highly multicultural and multilingual, it can be difficult for national election campaigns to engage all sectors of the population.
For instance, Saddam Hussein's 2002 plebscite was claimed to have had 100% participation.
The nature of elections also varies between nations.
In New Zealand, registration is supposed to be universal.
* ''D'' originally stood for democracy or civic duty, but today represents any social or personal gratification an individual gets from voting, and
In Belgium, which has compulsory voting, and Malta, which does not, participation reaches 95%.
The salience of an election, the effect that a vote will have on policy, and its proportionality, how closely the result reflects the will of the people, are two structural factors that also likely have important effects on turnout.
This has the potential to skew policy.
In Italy the Constitution describes voting as a duty (art.
On the other hand, if low turnout is a reflection of contentment of voters about likely winners or parties, then low turnout is as legitimate as high turnout, as long as the right to vote exists.
This factor may explain the lower turnouts in the newer democracies of Eastern Europe and Latin America.
For instance, nations with better-educated populaces do not have higher turnouts.
When enforced, compulsion has a dramatic effect on turnout.
This trend has been significant in the United States, Western Europe, Japan and Latin America.
There have been many efforts to increase turnout and encourage voting.
In Venezuela and the Netherlands compulsory voting has been rescinded, resulting in substantial decreases in turnout.
From 1946 to 1992, thus, the Italian electoral law included light sanctions for non-voters (lists of non-voters were posted at polling stations).
Canada banned the broadcasting of election results in any region where the polls have not yet closed; this ban was upheld by the Supreme Court of Canada.
Richard Sclove argues in ''Democracy and Technology'' that technological developments in society such as "automobilization," suburban living, and "an explosive proliferation of home entertainment devices" have contributed to a loss of community, which in turn has weakened participation in civic life.
* ''P'' is the probability that an individual's vote will affect the outcome of an election,
There are often barriers to voting in a district where one is a recent arrival, and a new arrival is likely to know little about the local candidate and local issues.
Potential voters' perception that they are busier is common and might be just as important as a real decrease in leisure time.
In the modern era, these resources have been redirected to expensive media campaigns in which the potential voter is a passive participant.
However, these tend to be complex electoral systems, and in some cases complexity appears to suppress voter turnout.
For example, in the United States 2012 presidential election turnout was 55%.
Ineligible voters are not evenly distributed across the country – 20% of California's voting-age population is ineligible to vote – which confounds comparisons of states.
One of the strongest factors affecting voter turnout is whether voting is compulsory.
