In features such as ''It's a Gift'' and ''Man on the Flying Trapeze'', he is reported to have written or improvised more or less all of his own dialogue and material, leaving story structure to other writers.
In 1893 he worked briefly at the Strawbridge and Clothier department store,  and in an oyster house.
By the following year he recovered sufficiently to make one last film for Paramount, ''The Big Broadcast of 1938'', but his troublesome behavior discouraged other producers from hiring him.
The popular success of his next feature film, ''International House'' (1933) established him as a major star.
The first of them, ''The Dentist'', is unusual in that Fields portrays an entirely unsympathetic character: he cheats at golf, assaults his caddy, and treats his patients with unbridled callousness.
William K. Everson says that the cruelty of this comedy made it "hardly less funny", but that "Fields must have known that ''The Dentist'' presented a serious flaw for a comedy image that was intended to endure", and showed a somewhat warmer persona in his subsequent Sennett shorts.
His last film, the musical revue ''Sensations of 1945'', was released in late 1944.
But I got sympathy both times.
His 1934 classic ''It's a Gift'' included his stage sketch of trying to escape his nagging family by sleeping on the back porch and being bedeviled by noisy neighbors and salesmen.
In several of his films, he played hustlers, carnival barkers, and card sharps, spinning yarns and distracting his marks.
Fields' comic persona was a misanthropic and hard-drinking egotist, who remained a sympathetic character despite his snarling contempt for dogs and children.
The characterization he portrayed in films and on radio was so strong it was generally identified with Fields himself.
and ''Man on the Flying Trapeze'', ended happily with a windfall profit that restored his standing in his screen families.
Claude Dukenfield (as he was known) had a volatile relationship with his short-tempered father.
It was Fields' last performance.
Fields wore a scruffy clip-on mustache in all of his silent films.
I was the first comic in world history, so they told me, to pick fights with children.
He joined ventriloquist Edgar Bergen and Bergen's dummy Charlie McCarthy on ''The Chase and Sanborn Hour'' for weekly insult-comedy routines.
His manner of muttering deprecatory asides was an inheritance from his mother, who in Fields' childhood would sit on the porch and mumble sly comments about neighbors who passed by.
Neither Fields nor Poole wanted to abandon touring to raise the child, who was placed in foster care with a childless couple of Bessie's acquaintance.
Hattie was well educated and tutored Fields in reading and writing during their travels.
Fields' funeral took place on January 2, 1947, in Glendale, California.
:'''McCarthy''': "Is it true, Mr. Fields, that when you stood on the corner of Hollywood and Vine, 43 cars waited for your nose to change to green?"
Fields was listed in the 1940 census as single and living at 2015 DeMille Drive (Cecil B. DeMille lived at 2000, the only other address on the street).
I've never heard anything like it."
His first feature for Universal, ''You Can't Cheat an Honest Man'', carried on the Fields&ndash;McCarthy rivalry.
Listening to one of Paul's experimental multi-track recordings, Fields remarked "The music you're making sounds like an octopus.
I can remember when, with my own little unsteady legs, I toddled from room to room."
His illnesses confined him to brief guest-star appearances in other people's films.
In the sound era, Fields appeared in thirteen feature films for Paramount Pictures, beginning with ''Million Dollar Legs'' in 1932.
The Sloper character may in turn have been inspired by Dickens' Mr Micawber, whom Fields later played on film.
It was maintained by the publicity departments at Fields' studios (Paramount and Universal) and was further established by Robert Lewis Taylor's biography, ''W.C.
His subsequent stage and film roles were often similar scoundrels, or else henpecked everyman characters.
During the 1940 presidential campaign, Fields wrote a book entitled ''Fields for President'', consisting of humorous essays in the form of a campaign speech.
That film, like ''You're Telling Me!''
His stage commitments prevented him from doing more movie work until 1924, when he played a supporting role in ''Janice Meredith'', a Revolutionary War romance.
In a 1994 episode of the ''Biography'' television series, Fields' 1941 co-star Gloria Jean recalled her conversations with Fields at his home.
I thought I'd ''lost'' it!"
A popular bit of Fields folklore maintains that his grave marker is inscribed, "I'd rather be in Philadelphia"—a line similar to one he used in ''My Little Chickadee'' when a lynch mob asks if he has any last words: "I'd like to see Paris before I die ... Philadelphia will do ..." Fields was known to disparage his native city on occasion; his mock epitaph for a 1925 ''Vanity Fair'' article, "A Group of Artists Write Their Own Epitaphs", reads, "Here Lies / W.C. Fields / I Would Rather Be Living in Philadelphia."
A shaky outtake from the film, allegedly the only moving image record of the 1933 Long Beach earthquake, was later revealed to have been faked as a publicity stunt for the movie.
:'''Fields:''' "Tell me, Charles, is it true your father was a gate-leg table?"
During the early planning for his film ''It's a Wonderful Life'', director Frank Capra considered Fields for the role of Uncle Billy, which eventually went to Thomas Mitchell.
According to a 2004 documentary, he winked and smiled at a nurse, put a finger to his lips, and died.
They include the seemingly prosaic "Charles Bogle", credited in four of his films in the 1930s; "Otis Criblecoblis", which contains an embedded homophone for "scribble"; and "Mahatma Kane Jeeves", a play on Mahatma and a phrase an aristocrat might use when about to leave the house: "My hat, my cane, Jeeves".
His next starring role was in the Paramount Pictures film ''It's the Old Army Game'' (1926), which featured his friend Louise Brooks, later a screen legend for her role in G. W. Pabst's ''Pandora's Box'' (1929) in Germany.
During his recovery from illness Fields reconciled with his estranged wife, and he established a close relationship with his son after Claude's marriage in 1938.
Beginning in 1915 he appeared on Broadway in Florenz Ziegfeld's ''Ziegfeld Follies'' revue.
''Sucker'' was Fields' last starring film.
Fields met Carlotta Monti (1907–1993) in 1933, and the two began a sporadic relationship that lasted until his death in 1946.
With her he had another son, named William Rexford Fields Morris (August 15, 1917 – November 30, 2014).
After a lengthy period of litigation his remains were cremated on June 2, 1949, and his ashes interred at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale.
A favorite bit of "business", repeated in many of his films, involved his hat going astray—either caught on the end of his cane, or simply facing the wrong way— as he attempts to put it onto his head.
(Despite the charitable nature of the movie, Fields was paid $15,000 for his appearance; he was never able to perform in person for the armed services.)
In 1915, Fields starred in two short comedies, ''Pool Sharks'' and ''His Lordship's Dilemma'', filmed in New York.
According to the film historian William K. Everson, he perversely insisted on wearing the conspicuously fake-looking mustache because he knew it was disliked by audiences.
In 1937, in an article in ''Motion Picture'' magazine, Fields analyzed the characters he played:You've heard the old legend that it's the little put-upon guy who gets the laughs, but I'm the most belligerent guy on the screen.
Fields' 1926 film, which included a silent version of the porch sequence that would later be expanded in the sound film ''It's a Gift'' (1934), had only middling success at the box office.
Studio publicists promoted this image, as did Fields himself in press interviews.
The scene features a temperance meeting with society people at the home of a rich woman, played by Margaret Dumont, in which Fields finds that the punch has been spiked, resulting in a room full of drunken guests and a very happy Fields.
He manipulated cigar boxes, hats, and other objects in what appears to have been a unique and fresh act, parts of which are reproduced in some of his films, notably in ''The Old Fashioned Way'' (1934).
He achieved a career ambition by playing the character Mr. Micawber, in MGM's ''David Copperfield'' in 1935.
Fields enabled his father to retire, purchased him a summer home, and encouraged his parents and siblings to learn to read and write, so they could communicate with him by letter.
He later said, "I wanted to become a real comedian, and there I was, ticketed and pigeonholed as merely a comedy juggler."
Fields never drank in his early career as a juggler, because he did not want to impair his functions while performing.
His role in the show required him to deliver lines of dialogue, which he had never before done onstage.
His father, James Lydon Dukenfield (1840–1913), was from an English family that emigrated to America from Sheffield, England in 1854.
Fields, published the first book to significantly challenge this idea, ''W.
He was determined to make a movie his way, with his own script and staging, and his choice of supporting players.
James Dukenfield served in Company M of the 72nd Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment in the American Civil War and was wounded in 1863.
His stage costume from 1915 onwards featured a top hat, cut-away coat and collar, and a cane—an appearance remarkably similar to the comic strip character Ally Sloper, who may have been the inspiration for Fields' costume, according to Roger Sabin.
Fields later embellished stories of his childhood, depicting himself as a runaway who lived by his wits on the streets of Philadelphia from an early age, but his home life seems to have been reasonably happy.
Among his recognizable trademarks were his raspy drawl and grandiloquent vocabulary.
C. Fields by Himself, His Intended Autobiography'', a compilation of material from private scrapbooks and letters found in the home of Hattie Fields  after her death in 1963.
Poole died of complications of alcoholism in October 1928, and Fields contributed to her son's support until he was 19 years of age.
He had already discovered in himself a facility for juggling, and a performance he witnessed at a local theater inspired him to dedicate substantial time to perfecting his juggling.
In 1905 Fields made his Broadway debut in a musical comedy, ''The Ham Tree''.
Universal finally gave him the chance, and the resulting film, ''Never Give a Sucker an Even Break'' (1941), is a masterpiece of absurd humor in which Fields appeared as himself, "The Great Man".
His family supported his ambitions for the stage and saw him off on the train for his first stage tour.
:'''McCarthy''': "When was that, last night?"
He became a headliner in North America and Europe, and toured Australia and South Africa in 1903.
In 1927, he made a negotiated payment to her of $20,000 upon her signing an affidavit declaring that "W. C. Fields is NOT the father of my child".
During his absence he recorded a brief speech for a radio broadcast.
In others, he cast himself as a victim: a bumbling everyman husband and father whose family does not appreciate him.
According to a popular story (possibly apocryphal, according to biographer James Curtis), Fields once told someone who caught him reading a Bible that he was "looking for loopholes".
During the filming of ''Tales of Manhattan'' (1942), he kept a vacuum flask with him at all times and frequently availed himself of its contents.
Monti had small roles in two of Fields' films, and in 1971 wrote a memoir, ''W.C.
His role in Paramount Pictures' ''International House'' (1933), as an aviator with an unquenchable taste for beer, did much to establish Fields' popular reputation as a prodigious drinker.
Fields' screen character often expressed a fondness for alcohol, a prominent component of the Fields legend.
While performing in New York City at the New Amsterdam Theater in 1916, Fields met Bessie Poole, an established Ziegfeld Follies performer whose beauty and quick wit attracted him, and they began a relationship.
In 1940, Fields made ''My Little Chickadee'', with Mae West, and ''The Bank Dick'', perhaps his best-known film, in which he has the following exchange with bartender Shemp Howard:
His career in show business began in vaudeville, where he attained international success as a silent juggler.
Welles considered an adaptation of Charles Dickens' ''The Pickwick Papers'' which would have starred Fields and John Barrymore, but Fields' schedule would not permit it.
Welles's bosses at RKO Radio Pictures, after losing money on ''Citizen Kane'', urged Welles to choose as his next film a subject with more commercial appeal.
The United States Postal Service issued a W.C. Fields commemorative stamp on the comedian's 100th birthday, in January 1980.
C. Fields''', was an American comedian, actor, juggler and writer.
Fields' film career slowed considerably in the 1940s.
In 1946, on Christmas Day—the holiday he said he despised—he suffered an alcohol-related gastric hemorrhage and died, at the age of 66.
In addition to multiple editions of the ''Follies'', Fields starred in the Broadway musical comedy ''Poppy'' (1923), wherein he perfected his persona as a colorful small-time con man.
:'''Shemp:''' "Yeah."
:'''Fields:''' "Oh, not at all, Edgar, I ''love'' children.
By 1907 he and Hattie separated; she had been pressing him to stop touring and settle into a respectable trade, but he was unwilling to give up show business.
By the time he entered motion pictures, his relationship with his estranged wife had become acrimonious, and he believed she had turned their son Claude—whom he seldom saw—against him.
Physically unable to work in films, Fields was off the screen for more than a year.
When Fields would refer to McCarthy as a "woodpecker's pin-up boy" or a "termite's flophouse," Charlie would fire back at Fields about his drinking:
Fields figured in an Orson Welles project.
After marrying, he worked as an independent produce merchant and a part-time hotel-keeper.
He became a star in the Broadway musical comedy ''Poppy'' (1923), in which he played a colorful small-time con man.
The project was shelved, and Welles went on to adapt ''The Magnificent Ambersons''.
At age 17, he was living with his family and performing a juggling act at church and theater shows.
In ''Song of the Open Road'' (1944), Fields juggled for a few moments, remarking, "This used to be my racket."
Like a guy with a million hands.
Fields' relationship with Poole lasted until 1926.
But, at the same time, I'm afraid of everybody—just a great big frightened bully ....
That's the one thing I am indebted to her for."
By the early 1900s, while touring, he was regularly called the world's greatest juggler.
On March 15, 1941 while Fields was out of town, Christopher Quinn, the two-year-old son of his neighbors, actor Anthony Quinn and his wife Katherine DeMille, drowned in a lily pond on Fields' property.
Fields married a fellow vaudevillian, chorus girl Harriet "Hattie" Hughes (1879&ndash;1963), on April 8, 1900.
Universal's singing star Gloria Jean played opposite Fields, and his cronies Leon Errol and Franklin Pangborn served as his comic foils.
In 1973, the comedian's grandson, Ronald J.
After Fields' next two features for Paramount failed to produce hits, the studio teamed him with Chester Conklin for three features which were commercial failures and are now lost.
The act was a success, and Fields starred in the ''Follies'' from 1916 to 1922, not as a juggler but as a comedian in ensemble sketches.
She became part of Fields' stage act, appearing as his assistant, whom he would entertainingly blame whenever he missed a trick.
John Barrymore, Gene Fowler, and Gregory La Cava were a few of his intimates.
Phil Silvers, who had a minor supporting role in the scene featuring Fields, described in his memoir what happened next:
His education was sporadic, and did not progress beyond grade school.
Until his death, Fields continued to correspond with Hattie and voluntarily sent her a weekly stipend.
Fields was born William Claude Dukenfield in Darby, Pennsylvania, the oldest child of a working-class family.
When Fields played for English-speaking audiences, he found he could get more laughs by adding muttered patter and sarcastic asides to his routines.
He reprised his ''Poppy'' role in a silent-film adaptation, retitled ''Sally of the Sawdust'' (1925) and directed by D. W. Griffith.
An extended sequence in 20th Century Fox's ''Tales of Manhattan'' (1942) was cut from the original release of the film and later reinstated for some home video releases.
In 1936, Fields re-created his signature stage role in ''Poppy'' for Paramount Pictures.
I booted Baby LeRoy ... then, in another picture, I kicked a little dog ....
At age twelve he worked with his father selling produce from a wagon, until the two had a fight that resulted in Fields running away once again.
But the film Fields delivered was so surreal that Universal recut and reshot parts of it, then quietly released both the film and Fields.
Dodd, Mead and Company published it in 1940, with illustrations by Otto Soglow.
He performed his famous billiard table routine one more time for ''Follow the Boys'', an all-star entertainment revue for the Armed Forces.
In 1904 Fields' father visited him for two months in England while he was performing there in music halls.
Fields' mother, Kate Spangler Felton (1854–1925), was a Protestant of British ancestry.
:'''Bergen:''' "Why, Bill, I thought you didn't like children."
Shortly before his death that year, Fields recorded a spoken-word album, including his "Temperance Lecture" and "The Day I Drank a Glass of Water", at Les Paul's studio, where Paul had installed his new multi-track recorder.
Fields spent the last 22 months of his life at the Las Encinas Sanatorium in Pasadena, California.
Although his radio work was not as demanding as motion-picture production, Fields insisted on his established movie-star salary of $5,000 per week.
The oft-repeated anecdote that Fields refused to drink water "because fish fuck in it" is unsubstantiated.
:'''Fields:''' "Oh boy, what a load that is off my mind...
His familiar, snide drawl registered so well with listeners that he quickly became a popular guest on network radio shows.
Fields' most familiar characteristics included a distinctive drawl, which was not his normal speaking voice.
According to W. Buchanan-Taylor, a performer who saw Fields' performance in an English music hall, Fields would "reprimand a particular ball which had not come to his hand accurately", and "mutter weird and unintelligible expletives to his cigar when it missed his mouth".
Equally memorable was a line in the 1940 film ''My Little Chickadee'':  "Once, on a trek through Afghanistan, we lost our corkscrew...and were forced to live on food and water for several days!"
In reality, Fields was somewhat indifferent to dogs, but occasionally owned one.
Fields became an enthusiastic reader and habitually traveled with a trunkful of books that included grammar books, translations of Homer and Ovid, and works by authors ranging from Shakespeare to Dickens to Twain.
Only after he became a ''Follies'' star and abandoned juggling did Fields begin drinking regularly.
James Curtis says of ''Man on the Flying Trapeze'' that the "disapproving mother-in-law, Mrs. Neselrode, was clearly patterned after his wife, Hattie, and the unemployable mama's boy played by Grady Sutton was deliberately named Claude.
Fields and Me,'' which was made into a motion picture at Universal Studios in 1976.
Fields often fraternized at his home with actors, directors, and writers who shared his fondness for good company and good liquor.
Fields by Himself'', it was shown that Fields was married (and subsequently estranged from his wife), and financially supported their son and loved his grandchildren.
:'''McCarthy''': "If it is, ''your'' father was ''under'' it!"
He frequently incorporated his stage sketches into his films—e.g., the "Back Porch" scene he wrote for the ''Follies'' of 1925 was filmed in ''It's the Old Army Game'' (1926) and ''It's a Gift'' (1934); the golf sketch he performed in the lost film ''His Lordship's Dilemma'' (1915) was re-used in the ''Follies'' of 1918, and in the films ''So's Your Old Man'' (1926), ''The Golf Specialist'' (1930), and ''You're Telling Me'' (1934).
Fields' vision and memory had deteriorated to the point that he read his lines from large-print blackboards.
In a testimonial dinner for Fields in 1939, the humorist Leo Rosten remarked of the comedian that "any man who hates dogs and babies can't be all bad".
He was fond of entertaining the children of friends who visited him, and doted on his first grandchild, Bill Fields III, born in 1943.
Fields wore it in his first sound film, ''The Golf Specialist'' (1930)—a two-reeler that faithfully reproduces a sketch he had introduced in 1918 in the ''Follies''—and finally discarded it after his first sound feature film, ''Her Majesty, Love'' (1931), his only Warner Bros. production.
Fields had a substantial library in his home.
The session was arranged by Paul's old Army pal Bill Morrow, one of Fields' radio writers.
On movie sets Fields famously shot most of his scenes in varying states of inebriation.
Fields, His Follies and Fortunes'' by Robert Lewis Taylor, was instrumental in popularizing the idea that Fields' real-life character matched his screen persona.
In 1913 he performed on a bill with Sarah Bernhardt (who regarded Fields as "an artiste who could not fail to please the best class of audience") first at the New York Palace, and then in England in a royal performance for the king and queen.
Fields fought with studio producers, directors, and writers over the content of his films.
They also contested a clause leaving a portion of his estate to establish a "W. C. Fields College for Orphan White Boys and Girls, where no religion of any sort is to be preached".
'''William Claude Dukenfield''' (January 29, 1880 – December 25, 1946), better known as '''W.
She described him as kind and gentle in personal interactions, and believed he yearned for the family environment he never experienced as a child.
:'''Fields:''' "Was I in here last night, and did I spend a $20 bill?"
Fields often reproduced elements of his own family life in his films.
Therein, he delighted audiences with a wild billiards skit, complete with bizarrely shaped cues and a custom-built table used for a number of hilarious gags and surprising trick shots.
In 1971, when Fields was seen as an anti-establishment figure, Dodd, Mead issued a reprint, illustrated with photographs of Fields.
To conceal a stutter, Fields did not speak onstage.
In 1938 he was chronically ill, and suffering from delirium tremens.
(His pool game is reproduced, in part, in some of his films, notably in ''Six of a Kind'' 1934.)
Cremation of Fields' remains, as directed in his will, was delayed pending resolution of an objection filed by Hattie and Claude Fields on religious grounds.
Fields, His Follies and Fortunes'' (1949).
In reality, his interment marker bears only his stage name, and the years of his birth and death.
Inspired by the success of the "Original Tramp Juggler", James Edward Harrigan, Fields adopted a similar costume of scruffy beard and shabby tuxedo and entered vaudeville as a genteel "tramp juggler" in 1898, using the name W. C. Fields.
He sent encouraging replies to all of the letters he received from boys who, inspired by his performance in ''The Old Fashioned Way'', expressed an interest in juggling.
The line—which ''Bartlett's Familiar Quotations'' later erroneously attributed to Fields himself—became famous, and reinforced the popular perception that Fields hated children and dogs.
He delighted in provoking the censors with double entendres and the near-profanities "Godfrey Daniels" and "mother of pearl".
The couple had a son, William Claude Fields, Jr. (July 28, 1904 &ndash; February 16, 1971) and although Fields was an avowed atheist—who, according to James Curtis, "regarded all religions with the suspicion of a seasoned con man"—he yielded to Hattie's wish to have their son baptized.
Grief-stricken over the tragedy, he had the pond filled in.
People didn't know what the unmanageable baby might do to get even, and they thought the dog might bite me.
He continued touring in vaudeville until 1915.
He ran away from home repeatedly, beginning at the age of nine, often to stay with his grandmother or an uncle.
She drove me to drink.
They never divorced.
These shorts, adapted with few alterations from Fields' stage routines and written entirely by himself, were described by Simon Louvish as "the 'essence' of Fields".
In 1936, Fields' heavy drinking precipitated a significant decline in his health.
Eventually, the loneliness of constant travel prompted him to keep liquor in his dressing room as an inducement for fellow performers to socialize with him on the road.
A best-selling biography of Fields published three years after his death, ''W.C.
In 1932 and 1933, Fields made four short subjects for comedy pioneer Mack Sennett, distributed through Paramount Pictures.
Fields hadn't laid eyes on his family in nearly twenty years, and yet the painful memories lingered."
He gradually incorporated comedy into his act, and was a featured comedian in the Ziegfeld Follies for several years.
According to Woody Allen (in a ''New York Times'' interview from January 30, 2000), W. C. Fields is one of six "genuine comic geniuses" he recognized as such in movie history, along with Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, Groucho and Harpo Marx, and Peter Sellers.
Fields' renewed popularity from his radio broadcasts with Bergen & McCarthy earned him a contract with Universal Pictures in 1939.
