The same ambiguity characterized Du Bois's opinions of Joseph Stalin: in 1940 he wrote disdainfully of the "Tyrant Stalin", but when Stalin died in 1953, Du Bois wrote a eulogy characterizing Stalin as "simple, calm and courageous", and lauding him for being the "first to set Russia on the road to conquer race prejudice and make one nation out of its 140 groups without destroying their individuality".
By this I mean that, like Du Bois the American traditional pragmatic religious naturalism, which runs through William James, George Santayana and John Dewey, seeks religion without metaphysical foundations."
His primary concern was world peace, and he railed against military actions, such as the Korean War, which he viewed as efforts by imperialist whites to maintain colored people in a submissive state.
Du Bois's anti-metaphysical viewpoint places him in the sphere of religious naturalism as typified by William James and others.
Despite initially sending congratulations to Washington for his Atlanta Exposition Speech, Du Bois later came to oppose Washington's plan, along with many other African Americans, including Archibald H. Grimke, Kelly Miller, James Weldon Johnson and Paul Laurence Dunbar&nbsp;– representatives of the class of educated blacks that Du Bois would later call the "talented tenth".Croce, Paul, "Accommodation versus Struggle", in Young, pp.
When asked to lead public prayers, Du Bois would refuse.Johnson, p. 55.
The meeting led to the creation of the National Negro Committee, chaired by Oswald Villard, and dedicated to campaigning for civil rights, equal voting rights, and equal educational opportunities.
The introduction famously proclaimed that "...&nbsp;the problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color line."
Sowell has also argued that, despite genuine disagreements between the two leaders, the supposed animosity between Washington and Du Bois actually formed among their followers, not between Washington and Du Bois themselves.
In 1958, Du Bois regained his passport, and with his second wife, Shirley Graham Du Bois, he traveled around the world, visiting Russia and China.
Later in life, Du Bois regretted having been critical of Washington in those essays.
Harvard's decision to ban blacks from its dormitories in 1921 was decried by Du Bois as an instance of a broad effort in the U.S. to renew "the Anglo-Saxon cult; the worship of the Nordic totem, the disfranchisement of Negro, Jew, Irishman, Italian, Hungarian, Asiatic and South Sea Islander&nbsp;– the world rule of Nordic white through brute force."
Failing this, mere murder, arson, barn burning or impudence may do.
Nine years after the 1917 Russian Revolution, Du Bois extended a trip to Europe to include a visit to the Soviet Union.
After publishing a piece in ''Collier's'' magazine warning of the end of "white supremacy", Du Bois had difficulty getting pieces accepted by major periodicals.
The U.S. government prevented Du Bois from attending the 1955 Bandung conference in Indonesia.
Du Bois was a lifelong anti-war activist, but his efforts became more pronounced after World War II.
Sometime before 1860, Alfred Du Bois emigrated to the United States, settling in Massachusetts.
The NAACP leadership was stunned, and asked Du Bois to retract his statement, but he refused, and the dispute led to Du Bois's resignation from the NAACP.
A major theme of the work was the double consciousness faced by African Americans: Being both American and black.
Du Bois was a member of the three-person delegation from the NAACP that attended the 1945 conference in San Francisco at which the United Nations was established.
It reduces colored women in the eyes of the law to the position of dogs.
Around that time, he wrote: "I believe in communism.
The historian David Levering Lewis wrote that Du Bois engaged in several extramarital relationships.
He wrote: "we are Negroes, members of a vast historic race that from the very dawn of creation has slept, but half awakening in the dark forests of its African fatherland".
After two years at Wilberforce, Du Bois accepted a one-year research job from the University of Pennsylvania as an "assistant in sociology" in the summer of 1896.
Du Bois was impressed with the vast amount of publicity and funds the Communists devoted to the partially successful defense effort, and he came to suspect that the Communists were attempting to present their party to African Americans as a better solution than the NAACP.
Du Bois was bitterly disappointed that many of his colleaguesparticularly the NAACPdid not support him during his 1951 PIC trial, whereas working class whites and blacks supported him enthusiastically.
Historian David Levering Lewis concluded that Du Bois distorted some of the facts in order to increase the propaganda value of the article.
During the years 1915 and 1916, some leaders of the NAACP&nbsp;– disturbed by financial losses at ''The Crisis'', and worried about the inflammatory rhetoric of some of its essays&nbsp;– attempted to oust Du Bois from his editorial position.
But the vast majority of the world's peoples will march on over them to freedom!"
He married Mary Silvina Burghardt on February 5, 1867, in Housatonic.
The most egregious episode during the Red Summer was a vicious attack on blacks in Elaine, Arkansas, in which nearly 200 blacks were murdered.
He was a proponent of Pan-Africanism and helped organize several Pan-African Congresses to fight for independence of African colonies from European powers.
Du Bois remained: "convinced that socialism was an excellent way of life, but I thought it might be reached by various methods."
Du Bois popularized the term "talented tenth" in a 1903 essay, but he was not the first to use it.
He attended the local integrated public school and played with white schoolmates.
Online at Library of Congress (retrieved November 20, 2011).
Du Bois's work was largely ignored by white scholars.
Thereafter, however, it ignited a "revisionist" trend in the historiography of Reconstruction, which emphasized black people's search for freedom and the era's radical policy changes.
Throughout his writings, Du Bois supported women's rights,Donaldson, Shawn, "Women's Rights", in Young, pp.
Marable quoted by Gabbidon, p. 55.
In 1949, Du Bois spoke at the Scientific and Cultural Conference for World Peace in New York: "I tell you, people of America, the dark world is on the move!
In his 1933 writings, Du Bois embraced socialism, but asserted that "colored labor has no common ground with white labor", a controversial position that was rooted in Du Bois's dislike of American labor unions, which had systematically excluded blacks for decades.Lewis, p. 551.
He considered the victory of Japan over Tsarist Russia as an example of colored peoples defeating white peoples.
The paper went against the mainstream historical view, promoted by the Dunning School of scholars at Columbia University, that Reconstruction was a disaster, caused by the ineptitude and sloth of blacks.
The title refers to Du Bois's hope that African Americans were passing out of the darkness of racism into an era of greater equality.
He accepted the job in the summer of 1910, and moved to New York after resigning from Atlanta University.
He referred to this group as the Talented Tenth and believed that African Americans needed the chances for advanced education to develop its leadership.
Frustrated by Republican president Taft's failure to address widespread lynching, Du Bois endorsed Democratic candidate Woodrow Wilson in the 1912 presidential race, in exchange for Wilson's promise to support black causes.
The NAACP proposal received support from China, Russia and India, but it was virtually ignored by the other major powers, and the NAACP proposals were not included in the United Nations charter.
Du Bois documented how black people were central figures in the American Civil War and Reconstruction, and also showed how they made alliances with white politicians.
His son Jack Burghardt was the father of Othello Burghardt, who was the father of Mary Silvina Burghardt.
He provided evidence that the coalition governments established public education in the South, and many needed social service programs.
His cause included people of color everywhere, particularly Africans and Asians in colonies.
President Coolidge designated Du Bois an "Envoy Extraordinary" to Liberia and&nbsp;– after the third congress concluded&nbsp;– Du Bois rode a German freighter from the Canary Islands to Africa, visiting Liberia, Sierra Leone and Senegal.
He traveled and worked in Haiti, where he fathered a son, Alfred, with a mistress.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964, embodying many of the reforms Du Bois had campaigned for his entire life, was enacted a year after his death.
That conflict, combined with the financial stresses of the Great Depression, precipitated a power struggle over ''The Crisis''.
Du Bois rallied blacks across America to raise funds for the legal defense, which, six years later, resulted in a Supreme Court victory authored by Oliver Wendell Holmes.
But he did continue to publish columns regularly in ''The Horizon'' magazine.Lewis, p. 249 (Horizon).
Du Bois soon founded and edited another vehicle for his polemics, ''The Horizon: A Journal of the Color Line'', which debuted in 1907.
In 1943, at age 76, Du Bois was abruptly fired from his position at Atlanta University by college president Rufus Clement.
William Du Bois's paternal great-grandfather was James Du Bois of Poughkeepsie, New York, an ethnic French-American who fathered several children with slave mistresses.
Instead, Du&nbsp;Bois insisted on full civil rights and increased political representation, which he believed would be brought about by the African-American intellectual elite.
In 1946, Du Bois wrote articles giving his assessment of the Soviet Union; he did not embrace communism and he criticized its dictatorship.
The NAACP delegation wanted the United Nations to endorse racial equality and to bring an end to the colonial era.
Ignoring the NAACP's desires, Du Bois continued to fraternize with communist sympathizers such as Paul Robeson, Howard Fast and Shirley Graham (his future second wife).
Du Bois insisted that artists recognize their moral responsibilities, writing that "a black artist is first of all a ''black'' artist."
When the silent film ''The Birth of a Nation'' premiered in 1915, Du Bois and the NAACP led the fight to ban the movie, because of its racist portrayal of blacks as brutish and lustful.
She brought her son David Graham to the marriage.
In October 1961, at the age of 93, Du Bois and his wife traveled to Ghana to take up residence and commence work on the encyclopedia.
In 1892, Du Bois received a fellowship from the John F. Slater Fund for the Education of Freedmen to attend the University of Berlin for graduate work.
Du&nbsp;Bois rose to national prominence as the leader of the Niagara Movement, a group of African-American activists who wanted equal rights for blacks.
Most African Americans had been loyal to the Republican Party since the time of Abraham Lincoln.
As an adult, he wrote about racism which he felt as a fatherless child and the experience of being a minority in the town.
In it, he argued that the scramble for Africa was at the root of World War I.
Southern officers in Du Bois's unit objected to his presence, and his commission was withdrawn.
Great Barrington had a majority European American community, who treated Du Bois generally well.
James Weldon Johnson said the book's effect on African Americans was comparable to that of ''Uncle Tom's Cabin''.
Du&nbsp;Bois made several trips to Europe, Africa and Asia.
After the United Nations conference, Du Bois published ''Color and Democracy: Colonies and Peace'', a book that attacked colonial empires and, in the words of one reviewer, "contains enough dynamite to blow up the whole vicious system whereby we have comforted our white souls and lined the pockets of generations of free-booting capitalists."
Du Bois graduated from the town's Searles High School.
His primary duty was editing the NAACP's monthly magazine, which he named ''The Crisis''.
He used this again three years later in the "Forethought" of his book, ''The Souls of Black Folk'' (1903).
Jonathon S. Kahn in ''Divine Discontent: The Religious Imagination of Du Bois'' shows how Du Bois in his ''The Souls of Black Folk'', represents an exemplary text of pragmatic religious naturalism.
This was a unique identity which, according to Du Bois, had been a handicap in the past, but could be a strength in the future: "Henceforth, the destiny of the race could be conceived as leading neither to assimilation nor separatism but to proud, enduring hyphenation."
In the aftermath of the 1906 violence, Du Bois urged blacks to withdraw their support from the Republican Party, because Republicans Roosevelt and William Howard Taft did not sufficiently support blacks.
These culminated in the report and petition called "We Charge Genocide", submitted in 1951 with the Civil Rights Congress.
Du Bois's association with prominent communists made him a liability for the NAACP, especially since the FBI was starting to aggressively investigate communist sympathizers; so&nbsp;– by mutual agreement&nbsp;– he resigned from the NAACP for the second time in late 1948.
Black soldiers returning from overseas felt a new sense of power and worth, and were representative of an emerging attitude referred to as the New Negro.
He was not a strong proponent of labor unions or the Communist Party, but he felt that Marx's scientific explanation of society and the economy were useful for explaining the situation of African Americans in the United States.
The address implored the United States and the imperial European nations to "acknowledge and protect the rights of people of African descent" and to respect the integrity and independence of "the free Negro States of Abyssinia, Liberia, Haiti, etc."
He also provocatively linked African-American Christianity to indigenous African religions.
"The publication lasted two years, from Jan 1920 to Dec 1921.
When Du Bois decided to attend college, the congregation of his childhood church, the First Congregational Church of Great Barrington, raised the money for his tuition.Horne, p. 7.Lewis, pp.
As the United States prepared to enter World War I in 1917, Du Bois's colleague in the NAACP, Joel Spingarn, established a camp to train African Americans to serve as officers in the United States military.Wolters, pp.
In the August 1897 issue of ''Atlantic Monthly'', Du Bois published "Strivings of the Negro People", his first work aimed at the general public, in which he enlarged upon his thesis that African Americans should embrace their African heritage while contributing to American society.
Brown (Vice-President), Williams (General Secretary) and Du Bois (Chairman of the Committee on the Address).
Du Bois also received grants from the U.S. government to prepare reports about African-American workforce and culture.
While visiting Ghana in 1960, Du Bois spoke with its president about the creation of a new encyclopedia of the African diaspora, the ''Encyclopedia Africana''.
This labor strife was one of the causes of the Red Summer of 1919, a horrific series of race riots across America, in which over 300 African Americans were killed in over 30 cities.
In 1950 Du Bois became chairman of the newly created Peace Information Center (PIC), which worked to publicize the Stockholm Peace Appeal in the United States.
Du Bois felt that black schools should focus more on liberal arts and academic curriculum (including the classics, arts, and humanities), because liberal arts were required to develop a leadership elite.
In the study, Du Bois coined the phrase "the submerged tenth" to describe the black underclass.
Retrieved November 25, 2011. but the most aggressive government attack against Du Bois occurred in the early 1950s, as a consequence of Du Bois's opposition to nuclear weapons.
He also anticipated later Communist doctrine, by suggesting that wealthy capitalists had pacified white workers by giving them just enough wealth to prevent them from revolting, and by threatening them with competition by the lower-cost labor of colored workers.
"Quote from "Triumph", ''The Crisis'', 2 (September 1911), p. 195.
After departing the NAACP, Du Bois started writing regularly for the leftist weekly newspaper the ''National Guardian'', a relationship that would endure until 1961.
He was relatively short  and always maintained a well-groomed mustache and goatee.
These two calamities were watershed events for the African-American community, marking the ascendancy of Du Bois's vision of equal rights.
The congress was the most productive of the five congresses, and there Du Bois met Kwame Nkrumah, the future first president of Ghana who would later invite Du Bois to Africa.
The AHA did not invite another African-American speaker until 1940.
However, another analyst of Du Bois's writings concluded that he had a religious voice, albeit radically different from other African-American religious voices of his era, and inaugurated a 20th-century spirituality to which Ralph Ellison, Zora Neale Hurston, and James Baldwin also belong.
The NAACP redoubled their efforts in 1947 after ''Life'' magazine published a piece by Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. claiming that the NAACP was heavily influenced by Communists.
By this time, southern states were passing new laws and constitutions to disfranchise most African Americans, an exclusion from the political system that lasted into the 1960s.
Du Bois and Garvey never made a serious attempt to collaborate, and their dispute was partly rooted in the desire of their respective organizations (NAACP and UNIA) to capture a larger portion of the available philanthropic funding.
Initially published in 1920, it was aimed at black children, who Du Bois called "the children of the sun.
Du Bois wrote "I am not a communist&nbsp;... On the other hand, I&nbsp;... believe&nbsp;... that Karl Marx&nbsp;... put his finger squarely upon our difficulties&nbsp;...".
In early 1961, Ghana notified Du Bois that they had appropriated funds to support the encyclopedia project, and they invited Du Bois to come to Ghana and manage the project there.
Du Bois's reporting resulted in an article "The Massacre of East St. Louis", published in the September issue of ''The Crisis,'' which contained photographs and interviews detailing the violence.
Later in 1903 he popularized the term, the "Talented Tenth", applied to society's elite class.
He admired how the Nazis had improved the German economy, but he was horrified by their treatment of the Jewish people, which he described as "an attack on civilization, comparable only to such horrors as the Spanish Inquisition and the African slave trade."
After the indictment, some of Du Bois's associates distanced themselves from him, and the NAACP refused to issue a statement of support; but many labor figures and leftists&nbsp;– including Langston Hughes&nbsp;– supported Du Bois.
Du Bois described the book as "the autobiography of a concept of race&nbsp;... elucidated and magnified and doubtless distorted in the thoughts and deeds which were mine&nbsp;...
Du&nbsp;Bois and his supporters opposed the Atlanta compromise, an agreement crafted by Booker&nbsp;T. Washington which provided that Southern blacks would work and submit to white political rule, while Southern whites guaranteed that blacks would receive basic educational and economic opportunities.
Alexander returned to Connecticut, leaving Alfred in Haiti with his mother.
In 1909, after five years of effort, he published a biography of abolitionist John Brown.
Of course if possible, the pretext should be great and overwhelming&nbsp;– some awful stunning crime, made even more horrible by the reporters' imagination.
He was a meticulous planner, and frequently mapped out his schedules and goals on large pieces of graph paper.
Senator from New York on the American Labor Party ticket and received about 200,000 votes, or 4% of the statewide total.
Du Bois's memoir of the trial is ''In Battle for Peace''.
First, President Teddy Roosevelt dishonorably discharged 167 black soldiers because they were accused of crimes as a result of the Brownsville Affair.
When walking through Atlanta to discuss the lynching with newspaper editor Joel Chandler Harris, Du Bois encountered Hose's burned knuckles in a storefront display.
Du Bois took a trip around the world in 1936, which included visits to Nazi Germany, China and Japan.
But the historian Raymond Wolters cast doubt on this, based on the lack of corroboration from Du Bois's alleged lovers.
Du Bois later wrote approvingly of the conditions in both countries.
He asserted that it was the federal government's failure to manage the Freedmen's Bureau, to distribute land, and to establish an educational system, that doomed African-American prospects in the South.
It was organized by men from the Caribbean: Haitians Anténor Firmin and Bénito Sylvain and Trinidadian barrister Henry Sylvester Williams.
To the contrary, Du Bois asserted that the brief period of African-American leadership in the South accomplished three important goals&nbsp;: democracy, free public schools, and new social welfare legislation.
Second, in September, riots broke out in Atlanta, precipitated by unfounded allegations of black men assaulting white women.
As an adult, Du Bois described himself as agnostic or a freethinker, but at least one biographer concluded that Du Bois was virtually an atheist.Lewis, p. 550 (agnostic, atheist).Johnson, passim (agnostic).
With blacks threatening to shift their support to President Franklin D. Roosevelt's Republican opponent in the 1940 election, Roosevelt appointed a few blacks to leadership posts in the military.
Du Bois did not have a good working relationship with Walter Francis White, president of the NAACP since 1931.Lewis, pp.
By 1960the "Year of Africa"Du Bois had recovered his passport, and was able to cross the Atlantic and celebrate the creation of the Republic of Ghana.
The League took little action on the requests.
The book also demonstrated the ways in which black emancipation&nbsp;– the crux of Reconstruction&nbsp;– promoted a radical restructuring of United States society, as well as how and why the country failed to continue support for civil rights for blacks in the aftermath of Reconstruction.
In late 1945, Du Bois attended the fifth, and final, Pan-African Congress, in Manchester, England.
Arthur Spingarn remarked that Du Bois spent his time in Atlanta "battering his life out against ignorance, bigotry, intolerance and slothfulness, projecting ideas nobody but he understands, and raising hopes for change which may be comprehended in a hundred years."
"We Charge Genocide" accuses the US of systematically sanctioning murders and inflicting harm against African Americans and therefore committing genocide.
A representative of Japan's "Negro Propaganda Operations" traveled to the United States during the 1920s and 1930s, meeting with Du Bois and giving him a positive impression of Imperial Japan's racial policies.
NAACP chairman Joel Spingarn was enthusiastic about the war, and he persuaded Du Bois to consider an officer's commission in the Army, contingent on Du Bois writing an editorial repudiating his anti-war stance.
The one counsels patient submission to our present humiliations and degradations;&nbsp;...
Du Bois discovered that the vast majority of black American soldiers were relegated to menial labor as stevedores and laborers.
''The Crisis'' continued to wage a campaign against lynching.
Dozens of civil rights supporters, black and white, participated in the founding, but most executive officers were white, including Mary Ovington, Charles Edward Russell, William English Walling, and its first president Moorfield Storey.
Relying on money donated by neighbors, Du Bois attended Fisk University, a historically black college in Nashville, Tennessee, from 1885 to 1888.
While in Germany, Du Bois remarked that he was treated with warmth and respect.Zacharasiewicz, Waldemar (2007), ''Images of Germany in American literature'', University of Iowa Press, p. 120.
Du Bois wrote a series of articles in ''The Crisis'' between 1922 and 1924, attacking Garvey's movement, calling him the "most dangerous enemy of the Negro race in America and the world."
Many scholars expressed outrage, prompting Atlanta University to provide Du Bois with a lifelong pension and the title of professor emeritus.
In 1935, he published his magnum opus, ''Black Reconstruction in America''.Aptheker, Herbert (1989), ''The literary legacy of W. E. B.
The book's thesis ran counter to the orthodox interpretation of Reconstruction maintained by white historians, and the book was virtually ignored by mainstream historians until the 1960s.
Du Bois realized that "the cure wasn't simply telling people the truth, it was inducing them to act on the truth."
In 1915, it published an article with a year-by-year tabulation of 2,732 lynchings from 1884 to 1914.See also the July 1916 article:  "The Waco Horror"  at Brown University library  or  at Google Books The April 1916 edition covered the group lynching of six African Americans in Lee County, Georgia.
In 1915, Du Bois published ''The Negro'', a general history of black Africans, and the first of its kind in English.
In his role as editor of the NAACP's journal ''The Crisis'', he published many influential pieces.
The article broke new ground by utilizing undercover reporting to expose the conduct of local whites in Waco, Texas.
He was deeply disappointed by the US government's plan for African Americans in the armed forces: Blacks were limited to 5.8% of the force, and there were to be no African-American combat units&nbsp;– virtually the same restrictions as in World War I.The military later changed its policy, and units such as the Tuskegee Airmen saw combat.
The fight was not successful, and possibly contributed to the film's fame, but the publicity drew many new supporters to the NAACP.
Du Bois played a leading role, drafting a letter ("Address to the Nations of the World") to European leaders appealing to them to struggle against racism, to grant colonies in Africa and the West Indies the right to self-government and to demand political and other rights for African Americans.
Du Bois restated the resolutions of the congress in his ''Manifesto To the League of Nations'', which implored the newly formed League of Nations to address labor issues and to appoint Africans to key posts.
The United States' Civil Rights Act, embodying many of the reforms for which Du&nbsp;Bois had campaigned his entire life, was enacted a year after his death.
Mary Silvina Burghardt's family was part of the very small free black population of Great Barrington and had long owned land in the state.
William Du Bois's maternal great-great-grandfather was Tom Burghardt, a slave (born in West Africa around 1730), who was held by the Dutch colonist Conraed Burghardt.
In the book, he hoped to lift the veil and show white readers what life was like behind the veil, and how it distorted the viewpoints of those looking through it&nbsp;– in both directions.
Du Bois wrote the essay, "A Litany at Atlanta", which asserted that the riot demonstrated that the Atlanta Compromise was a failure.
This was a catalyst for racial tensions based on a job shortage and employers playing black workers against white workers.
The editors refused and, so, Du Bois withdrew his article.
Du Bois and other PIC leaders refused, and they were indicted for failure to register.Lieberman, Robbie (2000), ''The Strangest Dream:  Communism, Anticommunism, and the U.S. Peace Movement, 1945–1963'', Syracuse University Press, pp.
Although Du Bois generally endorsed socialist principles, his politics were strictly pragmatic: In 1929, Du Bois endorsed Democrat Jimmy Walker for mayor of New York, rather than the socialist Norman Thomas, believing that Walker could do more immediate good for blacks, even though Thomas' platform was more consistent with Du Bois's views.
In addition to writing editorials, Du Bois continued to produce scholarly work at Atlanta University.
Ten thousand whites rampaged through Atlanta, beating every black person they could find, resulting in over 25 deaths.
13–15.Lewis, p. 475 (article).
Du Bois used his influential role in the NAACP to oppose a variety of racist incidents.
The Communist leaders, in turn, accused Du Bois of being a "class enemy", and claimed that the NAACP leadership was an isolated elite, disconnected from the working-class blacks they ostensibly fought for.
When Du Bois became editor of the Crisis magazine in 1911, he joined the Socialist Party of America on the advice of NAACP founders Mary Ovington, William English Walling and Charles Edward Russell.
In the words of biographer David Lewis, Du Bois did not endorse communism for its own sake, but did so because "the enemies of his enemies were his friends".
but he found it difficult to publicly endorse the women's right-to-vote movement because leaders of the suffragism movement refused to support his fight against racial injustice.
Du Bois wrote an editorial supporting the Great Migration, because he felt it would help blacks escape Southern racism, find economic opportunities, and assimilate into American society.
His health declined during the two years he was in Ghana, and he died on August 27, 1963, in the capital of Accra at the age of 95.
In the summer of 1894, Du Bois received several job offers, including one from the prestigious Tuskegee Institute; he accepted a teaching job at Wilberforce University in Ohio.Lewis, p. 111.
The paper was mostly ignored by white historians.
The book rebutted claims of African inferiority, and would come to serve as the basis of much Afrocentric historiography in the 20th century.
In 1920, Du Bois published ''Darkwater: Voices From Within the Veil'', the first of three autobiographies he would write.
Turning down job offers from Fisk and Howard, Du Bois re-joined the NAACP as director of the Department of Special Research.
The conference celebrated their independence, as the nations began to assert their power as non-aligned nations during the cold war.
Du Bois also supported the principles of the Socialist Party (he was briefly a member of the party from 1910 to 1912), but he denounced the racism demonstrated by some socialist leaders.Lewis, p. 275 (denounced).
Du Bois wrote in this period in a dismissive way of the underclass, describing them as "lazy" or "unreliable", but he&nbsp;– in contrast to other scholars&nbsp;– he attributed many of their societal problems to the ravages of slavery.
The camp was controversial, because some whites felt that blacks were not qualified to be officers, and some blacks felt that African Americans should not participate in what they considered a white man's war.
While at Wilberforce, Du Bois married Nina Gomer, one of his students, on May 12, 1896.
