Wahhabism emphasizes "Thaqafah Islamiyyah" or Islamic culture and the importance of avoiding non-Islamic cultural practices and non-Muslim friendship no matter how innocent these may appear, on the grounds that the Sunna forbids imitating non-Muslims.
The Wahhabi ulama also issued a fatwa affirming that "only the ruler could declare a jihad" (a violation of Ibn Abd al-Wahhab's teaching according to DeLong-Bas.)
On the other hand, according to authors at Global Security and Library of Congress the term is now commonplace and used even by Wahhabi scholars in the Najd, a region often called the "heartland" of Wahhabism.
Before Abdul-Aziz, during most of the second half of the 19th century, there was a strong aversion in Wahhabi lands to mixing with "idolaters" (which included most of the Muslim world).
Wahhabism is a major factor behind the rise of such groups as al-Qaeda, ISIS, and Boko Haram, while also inspiring movements such as the Taliban.
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab did not accept that view.
Cyril Glasse's ''New Encyclopedia of Islam'' states that "strictly speaking", Wahhabis "do not see themselves as belonging to any school,"
The Wahhabi mission started as a revivalist movement in the remote, arid region of Najd.
(This strict obedience can become problematic if a dynastic dispute arises and someone rebelling against the ruler succeeds and becomes the ruler, as happened in the late 19th century at the end of the second al-Saud state.
to preach his new interpretation of Islam for the purpose of sowing dissension and disunity among Muslims so that "We, the English people, ... may live in welfare and luxury."
The revivalists and Wahhabis shared a common interest in Ibn Taymiyya's thought, the permissibility of ijtihad, and the need to purify worship practices of innovation.
In a response to the report, the Saudi government stated, "It has worked diligently during the last five years to overhaul its education system" but "overhauling an educational system is a massive undertaking."
The concern resonates at a local level in Europe as well.
Wahhabi scholars have warned against taking non-Muslims as friends, smiling at or wishing them well on their holidays.
According to at least one critic, the 1744–1745 alliance between Ibn Abdul Wahhab and the tribal chief Muhammad bin Saud to wage jihad on neighboring allegedly false-Muslims, was a "consecration" by Ibn Abdul Wahhab of bin Saud tribe's long standing raids on neighboring oases by "renaming those raids jihad."
Many Sunni and Shia Muslims disagree with the Wahhabi movement, and a widely circulated conspiracy theory holds it to have been a product of British secret service efforts for causing the demise of the Ottoman empire.
A major current in regional politics at that time was secular nationalism, which, with Gamal Abdul Nasser,  was sweeping the Arab world.
Over the objections of Wahhabi ulama, Ibn Saud permitted both the driving of automobiles and the attendance of Shia at hajj.
Tens of billions of US dollars of this money were spent on books, media, schools, scholarships for students (from primary to post-graduate), fellowships and subsidies to reward journalists, academics and Islamic scholars, the building of hundreds of Islamic centers and universities, and over one thousand schools and one thousand mosques.
Saudi leadership sought and received Wahhabi fatawa to approve the military removal of the insurgents and after that to execute them.
They call for adherence to the beliefs and practices of the ''salaf'' (exemplary early Muslims).
King Abdul-Aziz put down rebelling  ''Ikhwan'' – nomadic tribesmen turned Wahhabi warriors who opposed his "introducing such innovations as telephones, automobiles, and the telegraph" and his "sending his son to a country of unbelievers (Egypt)".
A ''New York Times'' journalist writes that Saudis "abhor" the term Wahhabism, "feeling it sets them apart and contradicts the notion that Islam is a monolithic faith."
Above all, the Saudis raised a new standard – the virtuous Islamic civilization – as foil for the corrupting influence of the West.
The country sponsors a film festival, has "world-class art museums", hosts Al Jazeera news service, will hold the 2022 football World Cup, and has no religious force that polices public morality.
One of the more detailed estimates of religious population in the Persian Gulf is by Mehrdad Izady who estimates, "using cultural and not confessional criteria", only 4.56 million Wahhabis in the Persian Gulf region, about 4 million from Saudi Arabia, (mostly the Najd), and the rest coming overwhelmingly from the Emirates and Qatar.
In "The Refutation of Wahhabism in Arabic Sources, 1745–1932", Hamadi Redissi provides original references to the description of Wahhabis as a divisive sect (firqa) and outliers (Kharijites) in communications between Ottomans and Egyptian Khedive Muhammad Ali.
"Books, scholarships, fellowships, mosques" (for example,  "more than 1,500 mosques were built from Saudi public funds over the last 50 years") were paid for.
In reply, the Saudi Arabian government "has strenuously denied the above allegations", including that "their government exports religious or cultural extremism or supports extremist religious education."
The founder of Wahhabism, Mohammad ibn Abd-al-Wahhab, was born around 1700 in a small oasis town in the Najd region, in what is now central Saudi Arabia.
It developed closer association between Wahhabis and leading Salafis, and made common cause with the Islamic revivalist Muslim Brotherhood, Ahl-i Hadith and the Jamaat-i Islami, combating Sufism and "innovative" popular religious practices and rejecting the West and Western "ways which were so deleterious of Muslim piety and values."
The Sunni militant groups worldwide that are associated with the Wahhabi ideology include: Al-Shabaab, Ansar Dine, Al-Qaeda, Boko Haram, and ISIS.
Concern has been expressed over the fact that U.S. university branches, like the Georgetown School of Foreign Service and the Northwestern school of Journalism, housed in the wahabbi country of Qatar, are exposed to the extremist propaganda espoused by wahabist imams who preach at the Qatar Foundation mosque in Education City.
Under the reign of Abdul-Aziz, "political considerations trumped religious idealism" favored by pious Wahhabis.
CATF notes that Qatar Charity "was named as a major financial conduit for al-Qaeda in judicial proceedings following the attacks on the U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania", supported al-Qaeda operatives in Northern Mali, and was "heavily involved in Syria."
File:Baqi4.jpg|Al-Baqi' before the demolition by king Ibn Saud in 1925.
Not only is modest dress prescribed, but the type of clothing that should be worn, especially by women (a black abaya, covering all but the eyes and hands) is specified.
In al-Hasa, efforts to stop the observance of Shia religious holidays and replace teaching and preaching duties of Shia clerics with Wahhabi, lasted only a year.
As the realm of Wahhabism expanded under Ibn Saud into areas of Shiite (Al-Hasa, conquered in 1913) and pluralistic Muslim tradition (Hejaz, conquered in 1924–25), Wahhabis pressed for forced conversion of Shia and an eradication of (what they saw as) idolatry.
Ibn Abd al-Wahhab considered some beliefs and practices of the Shia to violate the doctrine of monotheism.
A "badge" of a particularly pious Salafi or Wahhabi man is a robe too short to cover the ankle, an untrimmed beard, and no cord (''Agal'') to hold the head scarf in place.
In 1818 they defeated Al-Saud, leveling the capital Diriyah, executing the Al-Saud emir, exiling the emirate's political and religious leadership, and otherwise unsuccessfully attempted to stamp out not just the House of Saud but the Wahhabi mission as well.
The king also expanded the Council of Senior Scholars (containing officially approved religious scholars) to include scholars from Sunni schools of Islamic jurisprudence other than the Hanbali madhab—Shafi'i, Hanafi and Maliki schools.
or was before slavery was banned in Saudi Arabia in 1962.
In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan concerned about a growing Islamic insurgency against a friendly, pro-modernization regime there.
The House of Saud continued to maintain its politico-religious alliance with the Wahhabi sect through the waxing and waning of its own political fortunes over the next 150 years, through to its eventual proclamation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932, and then afterwards, on into modern times.
Somewhere between 12,000 and 25,000 of these volunteers came from Saudi Arabia.
While this gives the king wide power, respecting shari'a does impose limits, such as giving ''qadi'' (Islamic judges) independence.
But Wahhabi clerics also fell under suspicion for involvement with the insurgents.
The edict was supported by Saudi Arabia's Grand Mufti (highest religious scholar), Abd al-Aziz ibn Baz, among others.
In the late 1800s, Wahhabis found Muslims with at least similar beliefs – first with Ahl-i Hadith in India, and later with Islamic revivalists in Arab states (one being Mahmud Sahiri al-Alusi in Baghdad).
In part as a consequence, Sahwa clerics influenced by Brethren's ideas were given freer rein.
Construction on the mosque began in 2009 and was completed in 2012.
Someone who does such things even if their lives are otherwise exemplary is not a Muslim but an unbeliever (as Ibn Abd al-Wahahb believed).
They emphasize reliance on the literal meaning of the Quran and hadith, rejecting rationalistic theology (''kalam'').
Worldwide Saudi run, sponsored mosques and Islamic schools teach Wahhabi version of the Sunni Islam that labels Shia Muslims, Sufis, Christians, Jews and others as either apostates or infidels, thus paving a way for armed jihad against them by any means necessary till their death or submission to the Wahhabi doctrine.
But it was the 1973 oil crisis and quadrupling in the price of oil that both increased the kingdom's wealth astronomically and enhanced its prestige by demonstrating its international power as a leader of OPEC.
Among those who attended the lectures was a Saudi preacher who has described the ''Charlie Hebdo'' massacre in Paris as "the sequel to the comedy film of 9/11 "and another cleric who says, "Jews and their helpers must be destroyed."
the use of ornamentation on or in mosques.
He urged his followers to "return to the primary sources" of Islam in order "to determine how the Quran and Muhammad dealt with specific situations", when using ''ijtihad''.
The prominent 20th-century Muslim scholar Nasiruddin Albani, who considered himself "of the Salaf," referred to Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab's activities as "Najdi da'wah."
Education City, a large campus where U.S. and European universities reside, hosted a series of religious prayers and lectures as part of a month-long annual Ramadan program in 2015.
According to DeLong-Bas, Ibn Abd al-Wahhab never directly claimed to be a Hanbali jurist, warned his followers about the dangers of adhering unquestionably to fiqh, and did not consider "the opinion of any law school to be binding."
This included not just lax, unlettered, nomadic Bedu, but Shia, Sufi, and Ottomans.
A large number of practices have been reported forbidden by Saudi Wahhabi officials, preachers or religious police.
One of their most noteworthy and controversial attacks was on Karbala in 1802.
Between 1982 and 1992 an estimated 35,000 individual Muslim volunteers went to Afghanistan to fight the Soviets and their Afghan regime.
The ''Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World'' maintains Wahhabis "rejected all jurisprudence that in their opinion did not adhere strictly to the letter of the Qur'an and the hadith".
A second, smaller Saudi state (Emirate of Nejd) lasted from 1819–1891.
In 1801 and 1802, the Saudi Wahhabis under Abdul Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn Saud attacked and captured the holy Shia cities of Karbala and Najaf in Iraq and destroyed the tombs of Husayn ibn Ali who is the grandson of Muhammad, and Ali (Ali bin Abu Talib), the son-in-law of Muhammad (see: Saudi sponsorship mentioned previously).
Foreign non-Muslim troops are forbidden in Arabia, except when the king needed them to confront Saddam Hussein in 1990; gender mixing of men and women is forbidden, and fraternization with non-Muslims is discouraged, but not at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).
In South Asia, Deobandis call the Ahle Hadith "Wahhabis", while Barelvis call Deobandis "Wahhabis."
File:Mecca-1850.jpg|Ottoman return of Mecca 1813 after being ousted by Salafis.
Not only is wine forbidden, but so are "all intoxicating drinks and other stimulants, including tobacco."
DeLong-Bas writes that Ibn Abd al-Wahhab did not denounce Sufism or Sufis as a group, but rather attacked specific practices which he saw as inconsistent with the Quran and hadith.
Enforcement of the commanding right and forbidding wrong, such as enforcing prayer observance and separation of the sexes, developed a prominent place during the second Saudi emirate, and in 1926 a formal committee for enforcement was founded in Mecca.
By 1980, Saudi Arabia was earning every three days the income from oil it had taken a year to earn before the embargo.
Shortly thereafter, Abdullah Yusuf Azzam, a Muslim Brother cleric with ties to Saudi religious institutions,  issued a fatwa declaring defensive jihad in Afghanistan against the atheist Soviet Union, "fard ayn", a personal (or individual) obligation for all Muslims.
He rejected deference to past juridical opinion (''taqlid'') in favor of independent reasoning (''ijtihad''), and opposed using local customs.
Wahhabism is named after an eighteenth-century preacher and scholar, Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab (1703–1792).
Red-and-white checkered or white head scarves known as ''Ghutrah'' are worn.
Over the course of its history, however, Wahhabism has become more accommodating towards the outside world.
In the 1920s, Rashid Rida, a pioneer Salafist whose periodical ''al-Manar'' was widely read in the Muslim world, published an "anthology of Wahhabi treatises," and a work praising the Ibn Saud as "the savior of the Haramayn the two holy cities and a practitioner of authentic Islamic rule".
He also believed that the Shia doctrine of infallibility of the imams constituted associationism with God.
The Wahhabi teachings disapprove of "veneration of the historical sites associated with early Islam", on the grounds that "only God should be worshiped" and "that veneration of sites associated with mortals leads to idolatry".
There he worked to spread (what he believed to be) the call (''da'wa'') for a restoration of true monotheistic worship, purified of innovations, such as invoking or making vows to "holy men" or "saints".
With the help of funding from Saudi petroleum exports (and other factors), the movement underwent "explosive growth" beginning in the 1970s and now has worldwide influence.
Some scholars are ambivalent as to whether Wahhabis belong to the Hanbali legal school.
(In Saudi history the imam has not been a religious preacher or scholar, but Muhammad ibn Saud and subsequent Saudi rulers.)
The "long, white flowing thobe" worn by men of Saudi Arabia has been called the "Wahhabi national dress".
In a bid "to join the Muslim mainstream and to erase the reputation of extreme sectarianism associated with the Ikhwan," in 1926 Ibn Saud convened a Muslim congress of representatives of Muslim governments and popular associations.
(This movement is sometimes called neo-Wahhabi or neo-salafi.)
The pumping and export of oil from Saudi Arabia started during World War II, and its earnings helped fund religious activities in the 1950s and 60s.
Again Saudi authorities sought and received a fatwa from leading Wahhabi ulama supporting their action.
Wahhabi influence in Saudi Arabia, however, remained tangible in the physical conformity in dress, in public deportment and in public prayer.
Women are now allowed to drive and travel independently; non-Muslims are permitted to consume alcohol and pork.
As mentioned before, Wahhabism also forbids the driving of motor vehicles by women.
A Muslim must present a bayah, or oath of allegiance, to a Muslim ruler during his lifetime to ensure his redemption after death.
But many jihad volunteers (most famously Osama bin Laden) returning home to Saudi and elsewhere were often radicalized by Islamic militants who were "much more extreme than their Saudi sponsors."
It quotes correspondence by Ibn Abd al-Wahhab
Ibn Saud managed to establish his rule over southeastern Syria between 1803 and 1812.
However, various scholars, including Simon Ross Valentine, have strongly rejected such a view of Wahhab, arguing that "the image of Abd’al-Wahhab presented by DeLong-Bas is to be seen for what it is, namely a re-writing of history that flies in the face of historical fact".
It was declared that it has always been the role of executive rulers in Islamic history to exercise power and the job of the religious scholars to advise, never to govern.
The Brothers' ideas eventually spread throughout the kingdom and had great effect on Wahhabism – although observers differ as to whether this was by "undermining" it
However, Egyptian forces acting under the Ottoman Empire and led by Ibrahim Pasha, were eventually successful in counterattacking in a campaign starting from 1811.
Most Sunni Qataris are Wahhabis (46.9% of all Qataris) and 44.8% of Emiratis are Wahhabis, 5.7% of Bahrainis are Wahhabis, and 2.2% of Kuwaitis are Wahhabis.
But protests from Wahhabi ulama were overridden when it came to consolidating power in Hijaz and al-Hasa, avoiding clashes with the great power of the region (Britain), adopting modern technology, establishing a simple governmental administrative framework, or signing an oil concession with the U.S.
According to author Robert Lacey, the gatherings and later articles and replies by a top cleric, Abdullah Turki, and two top Al Saud princes, Prince Turki Al-Faisal, Prince Talal bin Abdul Aziz, served as an occasion to sort out who had the ultimate power in the kingdom – the Al Saud dynasty and not the ulema.
Wahhabis share the belief of Islamists such as the Muslim Brotherhood in Islamic dominion over politics and government and the importance of ''dawah'' (proselytizing or preaching of Islam) not just towards non-Muslims but towards erroring Muslims.
Some of the initiatives of the Cultural Islamic Center Sesto San Giovanni in Italy, funded by Qatar Charity, have also raised concerns due to its ties to Wahhabbism.
Ibn Saud sought "a more relaxed approach".
To propagate Islam and "repel inimical trends and dogmas", the League opened branch offices around the globe.
Ibn Abd-Al-Wahhab was averse to the elevation of scholars and other individuals, including using a person's name to label an Islamic school.
Britain had aided Abdul-Aziz, and when the Ikhwan attacked the British protectorates of Transjordan, Iraq and Kuwait, as a continuation of jihad to expand the Wahhabist realm, Abdul-Aziz struck, killing hundreds before the rebels surrendered in 1929.
He studied in Basra, in what is now Iraq, and possibly Mecca and Medina while there to perform Hajj, before returning to his home town of 'Uyayna in 1740.
Its principal influences include Ahmad ibn Hanbal (780–855) and Ibn Taymiyyah (1263–1328).
In Saudi Arabia the strict religious atmosphere of Wahhabi doctrine is visible in the conformity in dress, public deportment, and public prayer, and makes its presence felt by the wide freedom of action of the "religious police", clerics in mosques, teachers in schools, and judges (who are religious legal scholars) in Saudi courts.
Part of the Najd's "Hobbesian state of perpetual war pitted Bedouin tribes against one another for control of the scarce resources that could stave off starvation."
Ironically, despite Wahhabi destruction of many Islamic, non-Islamic, and historical sites associated with the first Muslims, Prophet's family, his companions and a strict prohibition of visiting such (including mosques), Saudis renovated the tomb of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, turning his birthplace into a major tourist attraction and an important place of visitation within the kingdom's modern borders.
Wahhabis do not like – or at least did not like – the term.
Ulema, including Al-Azhar scholars, regularly denounce Wahhabism in terms such as "Satanic faith".
Adherents often object to the term Wahhabi or Wahhabism as derogatory, and prefer to be called ''Salafi'' or ''muwahhid''.
Relations with the Muslim Brotherhood have deteriorated steadily.
What made them pagans whose blood could be shed and wealth plundered was that "they sacrificed animals to other beings; they sought the help of other beings; they swore vows by other beings."
This means not interfering in their deliberations, but also not codifying laws, following precedents or establishing a uniform system of law courts – both of which violate the qadi's independence.
He also taught that the Muslim ruler is owed unquestioned allegiance as a religious obligation from his people so long as he leads the community according to the laws of God.
He started a revivalist movement in the remote, sparsely populated region of Najd, advocating a purging of practices such as the popular "cult of saints", and shrine and tomb visitation, widespread among Muslims, but which he considered idolatry (''shirk''), impurities and innovations in Islam (Bid'ah).
Is the successful rebel a ruler to be obeyed, or a usurper?)
Although it is typically attributed to the influence of Ibn Taymiyyah, Jeffry Halverson argues that Ibn Taymiyyah only opposed what he saw as Sufi excesses and never mysticism in itself, being himself a member of the Qadiriyyah Sufi order.
Wahhabism is the Islamic State's "closest religious cognate."
An Islamic university in Medina created in 1961 to train – mostly non-Saudi – proselytizers to Wahhabism, became "a haven" for Muslim Brother refugees from Egypt.
Muslims visiting the resting places of Ahl al-Bayt or Sahabah still pray to Allah alone while remembering the Prophet's companions and family members.
They strongly oppose what they consider to be heteredox doctrines, particularly those held by Sufis and Shiites, and practices such as the veneration of graves of various figures revered in the Islamic tradition.
In theology Wahhabism is closely aligned with the Athari (traditionalist) school, which represents the prevalent theological position of the Hanbali school of law.
This Saudi/Wahhabi religious triumph further stood out in the Muslim world because many Muslim-majority states (and the PLO) were allied with the Soviet Union and did not support the Afghan jihad.
Estimates of the number of adherents to Wahhabism vary, with one source (Mehrdad Izady) giving a figure of fewer than 5 million Wahhabis in the Persian Gulf region (compared to 28.5 million Sunnis and 89 million Shia).
Saudi Arabia's impact on Muslims throughout the world was less visible than that of Khomeinis Iran, but the effect was deeper and more enduring.
... any act or statement that indicates devotion to a being other than God is to associate another creature with God's power, and that is tantamount to idolatry (''shirk'').
In 1998 the Saudis bulldozed and poured gasoline over the grave of Aminah bint Wahb, the mother of Muhammad, causing resentment throughout the Muslim World.
Some Wahhabi preachers or activists go further than the official Saudi Arabian Council of Senior Scholars in forbidding (what they believe to be) sin.
Tens of billions of dollars have been spent by the Saudi government and charities on mosques, schools, education materials, scholarships, throughout the world to promote Islam and the Wahhabi interpretation of it.
He argued that the criterion for one's standing as either a Muslim or an unbeliever was correct worship as an expression of belief in one God.
After the discovery of petroleum near the Persian Gulf in 1939, it had access to oil export revenues, revenue that grew to billions of dollars.
According to ibn Abdal-Wahhab there are three objectives for Islamic government and society: "to believe in Allah, enjoin good behavior, and forbid wrongdoing."
Committee "field officers" enforce strict closing of shops at prayer time, segregation of the sexes, prohibition of the sale and consumption of alcohol, driving of motor vehicles by women, and other social restrictions.
The "boundaries" of Wahhabism have been called "difficult to pinpoint", but in contemporary usage, the terms ''Wahhabi'' and ''Salafi''  are often used interchangeably, and they are considered to be movements with different roots that have merged since the 1960s.
This financial aid has done much to overwhelm less strict local interpretations of Islam, according to observers like Dawood al-Shirian and Lee Kuan Yew, and has caused the Saudi interpretation (sometimes called "petro-Islam") to be perceived as the correct interpretation—or the "gold standard" of Islam—in many Muslims' minds.
However, in the last couple of decades of the twentieth century several crises worked to erode Wahhabi "credibility" in Saudi Arabia and the rest of the Muslim world – the November 1979 seizure of the Grand Mosque by militants; the deployment of US troops in Saudi during the 1991 Gulf War against Iraq; and the 9/11 2001 al-Qaeda attacks on New York and Washington.
Thousands more attended frontier schools teeming with former and future fighters.
Several articles have been written that list the Cork Islamic Cultural Center as an example of one of many properties throughout Europe, paid for by the Qatari government, in an effort to spread an extreme and intolerant form of Islam known as Wahhabism.
But Wahhabism has also been called "a particular orientation within Salafism", or an ultra-conservative, Saudi brand of Salafism.
Other terms Wahhabis have been said to use and/or prefer include ''ahl al-hadith'' ("people of hadith"), Salafi Da'wa or ''al-da'wa ila al-tawhid''
File:ضريح السيدة آمنة عليها السلام-2.JPG|The grave of Aminah; it was destroyed in 1998 by the Saudi Arabian government.
In May 1962, a conference in Mecca organized by Saudis discussed ways to combat secularism and socialism.
Wahhabis consider Shi'ites to be the archenemies of Islam.
According to Edward Mortimer, it was imitation of past juridical opinion in the face of clear contradictory evidence from hadith or Qur'anic text that Ibn Abd al-Wahhab condemned.
Conquest expanded through the Arabian Peninsula until it conquered Mecca and Medina the early 19th century.
Journalist Karen House calls Salafi, "a more politically correct term" for Wahhabi.
Worship beyond this – making ''du'a'' or tawassul –  are acts of ''shirk'' and in violation of the tenets of Tawhid (montheism).
After 9/11, the then interior minister Prince Nayef, blamed the Brotherhood for extremism in the kingdom, and he declared it guilty of "betrayal of pledges and ingratitude" and "the source of all problems in the Islamic world", after it was elected to power in Egypt.
With the Brotherhood's "hands-on, radical Islam", jihad became a "practical possibility today", not just part of history.
Foreign practices sometimes punished and sometimes simply condemned by Wahhabi preachers as unIslamic, include celebrating foreign days (such as Valentine's Day or Mothers Day) shaving, cutting or trimming of beards,  giving of flowers,  standing up in honor of someone, celebrating birthdays (including the Prophet's), keeping or petting dogs.
During this time and later, many in the Wahhabi/Salafi movement (such as Osama bin Laden) not only no longer looked to the Saudi monarch as an emir of Islam, but supported his overthrow,  focusing on jihad (Salafist jihadists) against the US and (what they believe are) other enemies of Islam.
There are further allegations which suggest that Qatar sent professors back to America for being Jewish and that students attending American Universities in Qatar are required to dress in a manner that is respectful to Wahhabism.
Wahhabism has been associated with the practice of ''takfir'' (labeling Muslims who disagree with their doctrines as apostates).
Movie theaters and driving by women are forbidden, except at the ARAMCO compound in eastern Saudi, populated by workers for the company that provides almost all the government's revenue.
In public women are required to wear a black ''abaya'' or other black clothing that covers every part of their body other than hands and eyes.
While other Muslims might urge abstention from alcohol, modest dress, and salat prayer, for Wahhabis prayer "that is punctual, ritually correct, and communally performed not only is urged but publicly required of men."
Senior Wahhabi leaders in Saudi Arabia have determined that Islam forbids the traveling or working outside the home by a woman without their husband's permission – permission which may be revoked at any time – on the grounds that the different physiological structures and biological functions of the different genders mean that each sex is assigned a different role to play in the family.
Ibn Abd al-Wahhab saw a role for the imam, "responsible for religious matters", and the amir, "in charge of political and military issues".
The Brotherhood's Islamist ideology differed from the more conservative Wahhabism which preached loyal obedience to the king.
In time they took leading roles in key governmental ministries, and had influence on education curriculum.
According to scholar Bernard Haykel, "for Al Qaeda, violence is a means to an ends; for ISIS, it is an end in itself."
One reaction to the attacks was a trimming back of the Wahhabi establishment's domination of religion and society.
In each case the Wahhabi establishment was called on to support the dynasty's efforts to suppress religious dissent – and in each case it did – exposing its dependence on the Saudi dynasty and its often unpopular policies.
Common Muslim practices Wahhabis believe are contrary to Islam include listening to music in praise of Muhammad, praying to God while visiting tombs (including the tomb of Muhammad), celebrating mawlid (birthday of the Prophet),
The ''Consortium Against Terrorist Finance'' (CATF)  said that the mosque has a history of affiliation and cooperation with extremists and terrorists.
Following the preaching and practice of Abdul Wahhab that coercion should be used to enforce following of sharia, an official committee has been empowered to "Command the Good and Forbid the Evil" (the so-called "religious police")
"National Dialogues" were held that "included Shiites, Sufis, liberal reformers, and professional women."
Ingrid Mattson argues that, "'Wahhbism' is not a sect.
One result was the Izala Society which fought Sufism in Nigeria, Chad, Niger, and Cameroon.
According to another source, defining aspects of Wahhabism include a very literal interpretation of the Quran and Sunnah and a tendency to reinforce local practices of the Najd.
The group circulates images of Wahhabi religious textbooks from Saudi Arabia in the schools it controls.
Videos from the group's territory have shown Wahhabi texts plastered on the sides of an official missionary van.
According to Robert Lacey "the Wahhabis have always disliked the name customarily given to them" and preferred to be called ''Muwahhidun'' (Unitarians).
However, a more powerful chief (Sulaiman ibn Muhammad ibn Ghurayr) pressured Uthman ibn Mu'ammar to expel him from 'Uyayna.
... the financial clout of Saudi Arabia had been amply demonstrated during the oil embargo against the United States, following the Arab-Israeli war of 1973.
In 2013 German activists filed a lawsuit in opposition to the construction of the mosque.
For their guiding principles, the leaders of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, are open and clear about their almost exclusive commitment to the Wahhabi movement of Sunni Islam.
The Saudi Grand Mufti, on the other hand has declared football permissible (halal).
Saudi Arabia and the other conservative Gulf monarchies also provided considerable financial support to the jihad -- $600 million a year by 1982.
Wahhabism has been accused of being "a source of global terrorism", inspiring the ideology of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and for causing disunity in Muslim communities by labelling Muslims who disagreed with the Wahhabi definition of monotheism as apostates (takfir) and justifying their killing.
It was at this time, according to DeLong-Bas, that Wahhabis embraced the ideas of Ibn Taymiyya, which allow self-professed Muslim who do not follow Islamic law to be declared non-Muslims – to justify their warring and conquering the Muslim Sharifs of Hijaz.
Practices that have been forbidden as Bida'a (innovation) or shirk and sometimes "punished by flogging" during Wahhabi history include performing or listening to music, dancing, fortune telling, amulets, television programs (unless religious), smoking, playing backgammon, chess, or cards, drawing human or animal figures, acting in a play or writing fiction (both are considered forms of lying), dissecting cadavers (even in criminal investigations and for the purposes of medical research), recorded music played over telephones on hold or the sending of flowers to friends or relatives who are in the hospital.
These publications included statements that Muslims should not only "always oppose" infidels "in every way", but "hate them for their religion … for Allah's sake", that democracy "is responsible for all the horrible wars... the number of wars it started in the 20th century alone is more than 130 wars," and that Shia and certain Sunni Muslims were infidels.
Another source criticized the use of the word for its confusion, as it has different meanings to different groups.
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab included in the category of such acts popular religious practices that made holy men into intercessors with God.
In Mecca and Jeddah (in Hejaz) prohibition of tobacco, alcohol, playing cards and listening to music on the phonograph was looser than in Najd.
To combat it, Wahhabi missionary outreach worked closely with Saudi foreign policy initiatives.
Their ideology was also thought more likely to compete with the recent Islamic revolutionism/third-worldism of the Iranian Revolution.
