This unknown American was soon recaptured and beheaded.
Wake Island's paved roadway network has been adequately maintained to move materials, services, and personnel from the airfield and marina on the southern end to the personnel support area in the Downtown area on the northern end.
On April 8, 1866, after thirteen days of frequent squalls, short rations, and tropical sun, the longboat reached Guam.
C. Stoner'' and its remaining cargo, however, was hampered by strong winds and heavy seas.
that were probably independent discoveries of Wake Island include Discerta, Douglas Island, Eceuil (on French charts), Halcyon Island, Helsion
Wilkes described the atoll as "a low coral one, of triangular form and eight feet above the surface.
On August 17, 1935, the first aircraft landing at Wake Island occurred when a PAA flying boat, on a survey flight of the route between Midway and Wake, landed in the lagoon.
The relief fleet they managed to organize was delayed by bad weather.
Wetmore named the southwest island for Charles Wilkes who had led the original pioneering United States Exploring Expedition to Wake in 1841.
The second launch, on February 11, reached apogee at 1.2 miles and was a failure.
"As far as I know, it wasn't sent at all.
Unable to land a boat, the crew of the ''Benjamin Constant'' executed a challenging three-day rescue operation using rope and cable in order to bring on board the twenty survivors and transport them to Yokohama.
At the boat harbor, the salvage team pumped and skimmed oil which they burned each evening in nearby pits.
We already had more Japs than we could handle."
The civil administration authority at Wake Island has been delegated by the Secretary of the Air Force to the General Counsel of the Air Force in accordance with U.S. federal law known as the ''Wake Island Code''.
With plenty of potable water, fish, birds and eggs, the men were able to survive and live without serious inconvenience.
The proclamation assigned management of the nearby waters and submerged and emergent lands of the islands to the Department of the Interior and management of fishery-related activities in waters beyond 12 nautical miles from the islands' mean low water line to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
In 1973, Marshallese lawmakers meeting in Saipan at the Congress of Micronesia, the legislative body for the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, asserted that "Enen-kio is and always has been the property of the people of the Marshall Islands".
In January 1908 the Japanese ship ''Toyoshima Maru'', en route from Tateyama, Japan to the South Pacific, encountered a heavy storm that disabled the ship and swept the captain and five of the crew overboard.
All non-reinforced structures were demolished.
Among its passengers were the 50-year-old English-born opera singer Madame Anna Bishop (on the first leg of a Far East tour), her second husband and New York diamond merchant Martin Schultz, pianist and vocalist Charles Lascelles, the first Consul General of the then independent Kingdom of Hawaii (also known then by its British name of the Sandwich Islands) to the Court of the Emperor of Japan, who was Eugene Van Reed and Imperial Japanese military officer Yabe Kisaboro.
The USASSDC had been operating on Wake since 1988, when construction of Starbird launch and support facilities was started.
Wake Island is one of the most isolated islands in the world and the nearest inhabited island is Utirik Atoll in the Marshall Islands,  to the southeast.
Following World War I, the Council of the League of Nations had granted the South Pacific Mandate ("Nanyo") to Japan (who had joined the Allied Powers in the First World War) which included the already Japanese-held Micronesia islands north of the equator that were part of the former colony of German New Guinea of the German Empire, these include the modern nation/states of Palau, Federated States of Micronesia, Northern Mariana Islands, Marshall Islands.
As a National Historic Landmark, Wake Island was also included in the National Register of Historic Places.
Wake Island was now clearly a territory of the United States but during this period the island was only occasionally visited by passing American ships.
On July 1, 1973, all FAA activities ended and the U.S. Air Force under Pacific Air Forces (PACAF), Detachment 4, 15th Air Base Wing assumed control of Wake Island.
At 10:30&nbsp;p.m. breakers were seen and the ship struck the reef at Wake Island.
On September 6, 1967, Standard Oil of California's 18,000-ton tanker SS ''R.
Soon thereafter the 80 ton British fur trading merchant brig ''Halcyon'' arrived at Wake and Master Charles William Barkley, unaware of Captain Wake's earlier visit and "discovery", named the atoll Halcyon Island in honor of his ship.
Peale collected an egg from a short-tailed albatross and added other specimens, including a Polynesian rat, to the natural history collections of the expedition.
In 1567, Mendaña and his crew had set off on two ships, ''Los Reyes'' and ''Todos los Santos'', from Callao, Peru on an expedition to search for a gold-rich land in the South Pacific as mentioned in Inca tradition.
Air transportation facilities at Wake are operated by the United States Air Force at Wake Island Airfield in support of trans-Pacific military operations, western Pacific military contingency operations and missile launch activities.
The handover of Wake was conducted in a brief ceremony.
A 60-man civil engineering team was brought in to reopen boarded-up buildings and housing, two complete MASH units arrived to set up field hospitals and three Army field kitchens were deployed.
Since the discovery date, October 2, 1568, was the eve of the feast of Saint Francis of Assisi, the captain named the island San Francisco.
The U.S. Navy salvage team Harbor Clearance Unit Two and Pacific Fleet Salvage Officer, Commander John B. Orem flew to Wake to assess the situation and by September 13, Navy tugs USS ''Mataco'' and USS ''Wandank'', salvage ships USS ''Conserver'' and USS ''Grapple'', tanker USS ''Noxubee'', and USCGC ''Mallow'', arrived from Honolulu, Guam and Subic Bay in the Philippines, to assist in the cleanup and removal of the vessel.
After being impacted by mission scheduling delays caused by the explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger, the program was cancelled in late September 1990 to protect funding for another U.S. Army space-based missile defense program known as ''Brilliant Pebbles''.
On July 29, the Chinese were transported to Wake Island where they were cared for by U.S. military personnel and on August 7, they were safely repatriated to China by commercial air charter.
Sea surface temperatures are warm all year long, reaching above  in summer and autumn.
On October 15, 1950, U.S. President Harry S. Truman and General Douglas MacArthur met at the Wake Island Conference to discuss progress and war strategy for the Korean Peninsula.
The relief fleet, en route, on hearing of the island's loss, turned back.
The Japanese revealed that one of their party needed medical attention and the captain determined from their descriptions of the symptoms that the illness was most likely beriberi.
Picking suggested clearing the channel to the lagoon for "loaded motor sailing launches" so that parties on shore can receive supplies from passing ships and he strongly recommended that Wake be used as a base for aircraft.
It has a large lagoon in the centre, which was well filled with fish of a variety of species among these were some fine mullet."
Naval personnel and about 1,221 civilian workers from the American firm Morrison-Knudsen Corporation.
The storm also had broken the wrecked vessel into three sections and, although delayed by rough seas and harassment by blacktip reef sharks, the salvage team used explosives to flatten and sink the remaining portions of the ship that were still above water.
flag on the pole in front of the airfield terminal building hung at half mast for 16 days to commemorate the number of days that the Americans held the island prior to surrendering to the Japanese 2nd Maizuru Special Naval Landing Force.
During the landing the crosswind was strong and the S-42 stopped just in time to avoid striking a coral head.
The Wake Island Device was created for American veterans of the battle to wear on their Navy or Marine Corps Expeditionary Medals.
After the USAT ''Buford'' reached Manila, Captain Croskey reported on the presence of Japanese at Wake Island.
On November 24, 1985, a Pan American Airlines (Pan Am) Boeing 747, renamed ''China Clipper II'', came through Wake Island on a flight across the Pacific to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the inauguration of Pan American China Clipper Service to the Orient.
Wake Island derives its name from British sea captain Samuel Wake, who rediscovered the atoll in 1796 while in command of the ''Prince William Henry''.
On April 26, 1975, the first C-141 military transport aircraft carrying refugees arrived.
It did however have a large seabird population which attracted Japanese feather poachers.
Captain Henry T. Elrod, USMC, one of the pilots from VMF-211, was awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously for shooting down two Japanese Zero fighters, sinking a destroyer and later fighting on foot, when his plane was destroyed, to defend the island.
Wake Island is administered by the United States Air Force, under agreement with the Department of the Interior.
On April 23, 1998, the Marshall Islands government notified all countries with which it has diplomatic ties that the claims of the Kingdom of EnenKio are fraudulent.
After thirty one days of hardship, drifting westward in the longboat, they eventually reached Kosrae (Strong's Island) in the Caroline Islands.
In the ancient Marshallese religion, rituals surrounding the tattooing of tribal chiefs, called ''Iroijlaplap,'' were done using fresh human bones, which required a human sacrifice.
The  runway is the longest strategic runway in the Pacific islands.
Ground transportation on Wake Island is provided by bus or by contractor or government-owned vehicles.
Located south of the runway is the Wake Island Launch Center, a Reagan Test Site missile launch facility operated by the United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command and the Missile Defense Agency.
The 9,850&nbsp;ft (3,000 m) long runway on Wake is also available to provide services for military and commercial in-flight emergencies.
No archaeological evidence has been found to suggest that there was ever a permanent or temporary settlement by Marshall Islanders on Wake Island.
The objective was to test the ability of the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense and THAAD Weapon Systems to defeat a raid of three near-simultaneous air and missile targets, consisting of one medium-range ballistic missile, one short-range ballistic missile and one cruise missile target.
The northwest island was named for Titian Peale, the chief naturalist of that 1841 expedition.
None of us was that much of a damn fool.
Lieutenant Commander Sherwood Picking reported that from "a strategic point of view, Wake Island could not be better located, dividing as it does with Midway, the passage from Honolulu to Guam into almost exact thirds."
After discovering Tuvalu and the Solomon Islands, the expedition headed north and discovered Wake Island, "a low barren island, judged to be eight leagues in circumference".
Oil did remain, however, embedded in the reef's flat crevices and impregnated in the coral.
The island was "covered with wood, having a very green and rural appearance".
The Spanish Governor of the Mariana Islands, Francisco Moscoso y Lara, welcomed and provided aid to the ''Libelle'' shipwreck survivors on Guam.
The Chinese captain did not reveal his ship's name.
On June 24, 1972, responsibility for the civil administration of Wake Island was transferred from the FAA to the United States Air Force  under an agreement between the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Air Force.
On October 11, the ''China Clipper'' landed at Wake on a press flight with ten journalists on board.
Captain Zenas Bent, first mate Mr. White and seven Hawaiian seamen remained on board the ship.
Captured charts taken by Anson showed Desierta (desert) and La Mira (look out) as Spanish names given to islands in the approximate location of Wake and were eventually relayed back to the Admiralty in London, expanding British and later American colonial knowledge of these waters.
He also learned that the USAT ''Sheridan'' had a similar encounter at Wake with the Japanese men.
Author James A. Michener and Lars Lindbergh, grandson of aviator Charles Lindbergh, were among the dignitaries on board the aircraft.
In 1743, the British Royal Navy warship HMS ''Centurion'' under the command of Commodore George Anson, R.N., captured the Spanish galleon ''Nuestra Senora de Covadonga'' near Samar in the then Spanish colony of the Philippines.
By this proclamation, the area of the monument at Wake Island was increased from 15,085 sq mi (39,069&nbsp;km2) to 167,336 sq mi (433,398&nbsp;km2).
Tachibana's sentence was later commuted to life in prison.
The incident was brought to the attention of Assistant Secretary of the Navy Charles Darling who at once informed the State Department and suggested that an explanation from the Japanese Government was needed.
Typhoons occasionally pass over the island.
When the airlift ended on August 2, a total of about 15,000 refugees had been processed through Wake Island as part of ''Operation New Life''.
On May 9, 1867, the sloop Hokulele from Honolulu, with a party headed by Thomas R. Foster, arrived at Wake and was joined by a brig from China.
A man could save himself from being sacrificed if he obtained a wing bone from a very large seabird said to have existed on Enen-kio.
A week later, on October 18, PAA President Juan Trippe and a group of VIP passengers arrived at Wake on the ''Philippine Clipper'' (NC14715).
In 1989, the U.S. Army Strategic Defense Command (USASDC) constructed two launch pads on Peacock Point, as well as nearby support facilities, for the eight-ton, sixty-foot, multi-stage Starbird test missiles.
Since Wake Island appeared to have neither food nor water, the captain and his twelve-man crew quickly departed, crafting a makeshift sail by attaching a blanket to an oar.
On March 12, 1986, the civil administrator of Wake Island, General Counsel of the Air Force Eugene R. Sullivan, proclaimed that March 22nd of each year will be celebrated as "Wake Island Day" on the atoll.
On February 6, 1904, Rear Admiral Robley D. Evans arrived at Wake Island on the USS ''Adams'' and observed Japanese collecting feathers and catching sharks for their fins.
'''Wake Island''' (also known as '''Wake Atoll''') is a coral atoll located in the western Pacific Ocean in the northeastern area of the Micronesia subregion,  east of Guam,  west of Honolulu and  southeast of Tokyo.
This report is considered to be another sighting of Wake Island.
Island, Haystrous Island, Halverd Island, Lamira, Maloon's Island, San Francisco, Waker's Island, Weeks Island, Wilson Island and Wreck Island.
For statistical purposes, Wake Island is grouped as one of the United States Minor Outlying Islands (UM-79) by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO 3166).
Since Wake Island is an active Air Force airfield, the commander is also the senior officer in charge of all activities on the island.
Large numbers of fish were stranded and killed by the oil spill, and personnel from the FAA and crewman from the ship cleared the area closest to the spill of dead fish.
The PAA facilities staff included a group of Chamorro men from Guam that were employed as kitchen helpers, hotel service attendants and laborers.
The aircraft, which crossed the International Date Line on its westward flight, was a Sikorsky S-42 renamed the ''Pan American Clipper'' and piloted by Captain Ed Musick with Fred Noonan (later famous as accompanying aviator Amelia Earhart when they disappeared on a pioneering around-the-world flight in 1937) as the navigator.
On August 19, the first permanent military garrison, elements of the U.S. Marine Corps' First Marine Defense Battalion, totaling 449 officers and men, were stationed on the island, commanded by Navy Commander Winfield Scott Cunningham.
The village on Peale was nicknamed "PAAville" and was the first "permanent" human settlement on Wake.
On November 26, 1935, the first trans-Pacific airmail flight stopped at Wake Island when Captain Musick landed in a Martin M-130 named the ''China Clipper'' (NC14716).
On September 27, 2014, President Barack Obama issued Executive Order 9173 to expand the area of the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument out to the full 200 nautical mile U.S.
From October 10 to November 21, 1996, military units assigned to ''Operation Marathon Pacific'' used facilities at Wake Island as a staging area for the repatriation of another group of more than 113 Chinese illegal immigrants who had been interdicted in the Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda aboard the human smuggling vessel, the ''Xing Da''.
At the peak of the mission, 8,700 Vietnamese refugees were on Wake.
The second expedition of the SS ''North Haven'' arrived at Wake Island on February 5, 1936 to complete the construction of the PAA facilities.
The US Navy attempted to provide support from Hawaii, but had suffered great losses at Pearl Harbor.
There are about 94 people living on Wake Island and access to the island is restricted.
Small groups would brave traveling to the atoll in hopes of obtaining this bone, saving the life of the potential human sacrifice.
The 611th Air Support Group (ASG), a U.S. Air Force unit based at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson in Anchorage, Alaska took over control of Wake Island from the 15th Wing on October 1, 2010.
The airlift to Wake continued at a rate of one C-141 every hour and 45 minutes, each aircraft with 283 refugees on board.
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) boundary for each island.
Due to the U.S. Army's continued use of the atoll for various missile testing programs, on October 1, 1994, the U.S. Army Space and Strategic Defense Command (USASSDC) assumed administrative command of Wake Island under a caretaker permit from the U.S. Air Force.
Sakaibara and his subordinate, Lieutenant Commander Tachibana, were later sentenced to death after conviction for this and other war crimes.
The expedition's naturalist, Titian Peale, noted that "the only remarkable part in the formation of this island is the enormous blocks of coral which have been thrown up by the violence of the sea."
The first launch, on January 28, 1993, reached apogee at 240 miles and was a success.
He first tried to plot the route on his globe but it showed only open sea between Midway and Guam.
The next day the ''Moi Wahine'' did not return having perished in a gale, stranding the salvage party on Wake.
On January 16, Secretary of the Interior Dirk Kempthorne issued Order Number 3284 which stated that the area at Wake Island assigned to the Department of Interior by Executive Order 8836 will be managed as a National Wildlife Refuge.
Certain authorities have been re-delegated by the general counsel to the Commander, Wake Island, a position currently held by Captain Allen Jaime with Detachment 1, Pacific Air Forces Regional Support Center.
The program was canceled in 1993.
Only a few flasks of quicksilver were recovered using the diving suit so Captain Nickols decided to abandon the effort.
On Peale Island, the Pan American base began to take shape with the construction of a four-hundred-foot long water-resistant redwood seaplane dock with an attached pergola, and several land structures, including a mess hall and kitchen, a refrigerator building, crew dormitory buildings, the station office, a radio transmitter building, a repair shop, the station manager's quarters and an electric power plant.
The Japanese told Captain Croskey that they been put on the island by a schooner from Yokohama in Japan and that they were gathering guano and drying fish.
Wake Island was first discovered on October 2, 1568 by Spanish explorer and navigator Álvaro de Mendaña de Neyra.
Generally, the road network is suitable for low-speed, light-duty use only.
On June 12, the ''North Haven'' departed for Guam, leaving behind various PAA technicians and a construction crew.
In the chaos of the evacuation, the captain secured a chart and nautical instruments, but no compass.
The Chinese immigrants were discovered on July 3 on board the ''M/V Jung Sheng Number 8'' when the 160-foot-long vessel was interdicted by the U.S. Coast Guard south of Hawaii.
By August 31, the southwestern eyewall of the storm passed over the island, with winds well over , driving a  storm surge and waves directly into the lagoon inflicting major damage.
Guests could also be ferried across the lagoon to Wilkes where they could ride the Wilkes Island Railroad, board a launch and go deep-sea fishing.
Together the two ships recovered 495 flasks of the quicksilver with 247 flasks going to the Hokulele.
Wake's defenders sank two Japanese destroyers and one submarine, and shot down 24 Japanese aircraft.
Paved access to Wilkes Island ends at the petroleum, oil, and lubricants tank farm, where a road constructed of crushed coral provides access to the western point of Wilkes Island.
Wake Island is credited as being one of the early successes of hydroponics, which enabled Pan American Airways to grow vegetables for its passengers, as it was very expensive to airlift in fresh vegetables and the island lacked natural soil.
In the aftermath of the battle, most of the captured civilians and military personnel were sent to POW camps in Asia, though some of the civilian laborers were enslaved by the Japanese and tasked with improving the island's defenses.
On December 27, 1972, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force (CSAF) John D. Ryan directed MAC to phase out en route support activity at Wake Island effective June 30, 1973.
When a coral head was encountered in the lagoon landing area, Mullahey would put on goggles he'd made out of bamboo, hold his breath and dive down to tie dynamite sticks to the coral and attach detonator wires.
On February 14, 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8682 to create naval defenses areas in the central Pacific territories.
Workers also erected an Adcock direction finder that would help with aircraft navigation across a vast ocean.
After Mendaña's discovery, other Spanish ships on the galleon route between Manila in the Philippine Islands to the west and Acapulco on the western coast of Mexico in the east, "discovered" Wake Island.
The ''Jung Sheng'' had left Canton, China en route to the United States on June 2 with 147 Chinese illegal immigrants, including 18 "enforcers", and 11 crew on board.
In the evening on the second day, when the winds picked up and shifted, the crew of the schooner pulled anchor and put out to sea to avoid striking the reef.
On September 4, 1945, the Japanese garrison surrendered to a detachment of United States Marines.
American casualties numbered 52 military personnel (Navy and Marine) and approximately 70 civilians killed.
In 1923, a joint expedition by the then Bureau of the Biological Survey (in the U.S. Department of Agriculture), the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum and the United States Navy was organized to conduct a thorough biological reconnaissance of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, then administered by the Biological Survey Bureau as the Hawaiian Islands Bird Reservation.
After the war, when Major James Devereux, USMC learned that he had been credited with sending that message he pointed out that he had not been the commander on Wake Island and denied sending the message.
Sustained winds in the eyewall were 130 knots (241&nbsp;km/h), from the north before the eye, and from the south afterward.
Next he went to the New York Public Library to study 19th century clipper ship logs and charts and he "discovered" a little-known coral atoll named Wake Island.
During this same time period, the U.S. military had transitioned to longer-range C-5A and C-141  aircraft leaving the C-130 as the only aircraft that would continue to regularly use the island's airfield.
Although the Air Force was once again in control, the Missile Defense Agency would continue to operate the Wake Island Launch Center and the U.S. Army's Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site would continue to maintain and operate the launch facilities and also provide instrumentation, communications, flight and ground safety, security, and other support.
He also ordered the schooner ''Ana'', owned and commanded by his son-in-law George H. Johnston, to be dispatched with the first mate Kausch to search for the missing gig and then sail on to Wake Island to confirm the shipwreck story and recover the buried treasure.
Other achievements at Wake included examinations of three abandoned Japanese feather poaching camps, scientific observations of the now extinct Wake Island rail and confirmation that Wake Island is an atoll, with a group comprising three islands with a central lagoon.
On September 16, 1967, at 10:40 pm local time, the eye of Super Typhoon Sarah passed over the island.
A five-ton diesel locomotive for the Wilkes Island Railroad was offloaded and the railway track was extended to run from dock to dock.
The name is sometimes attributed to Captain William Wake, who also is reported to have discovered the atoll from the ''Prince William Henry'' in 1792.
He observed that the boat channel was choked with coral heads and that the lagoon was very shallow and not over fifteen feet in depth and therefore Wake would not be able to serve as a base for surface vessels.
Just earlier in January 1941, the United States Navy began construction of a military base on the atoll.
By inspiration someone had earlier loaded railroad track rails onto the ''North Haven'' so the men built a narrow-gauge railway to make it easier to haul the supplies across Wilkes to the lagoon.
The program involved using electro-optical and laser systems, mounted on the Starlab platform in the payload bay of an orbiting space shuttle, to acquire, track and target Starbird missiles launched from Cape Canaveral and Wake.
On September 16, Super Typhoon Sarah made landfall on Wake Island at peak intensity with winds up to 145-knots, causing widespread damage.
They chose to meet at Wake Island because of its closer proximity to  Korea so that General MacArthur would not have to be away from the troops in the field for long.
In September 1979, a delegation from the Bikini/Kili Council came to Wake Island to assess the island's potential as a possible resettlement site.
There were no serious injuries, and the majority of the civilian population was evacuated after the storm.
About 94 people live on the island, and access to it is restricted.
The hotel consisted of two wings built out from a central lobby with each room having a bathroom with a hot-water shower.
To offload the ship, cargo was lightered (barged) from ship to shore, carried across Wilkes and then transferred to another barge and towed across the lagoon to Peale Island.
Modes of ground transportation include walking, bicycles, light utility carts, standard automobiles, vans, trucks, and larger trucks and equipment.
Although Wake Island is supplied by sea-going barges and ships, the island's only harbor between Wilkes and Wake is too narrow and shallow for sea-going vessels to enter.
Shigematsu Sakaibara was executed on June 18, 1947 on Guam.
The crew loaded a case of wine, some bread and two buckets, but no drinking water.
Juan Trippe, president of the world's then largest airline, Pan American Airways (PAA), wanted to expand globally by offering passenger air service between the United States and China.
Although the proposed route for the submarine cable would be shorter by 137 miles, Midway, and not Wake Island, was chosen as the location for the telegraph cable station between Honolulu and Guam.
– a reply which became famous.
Wilkes also reported that "from appearances, the island must be at times submerged, or the sea makes a complete breach over it."
After a successful American air raid on October 5, 1943, Sakaibara ordered the execution of all of the 98 captured Americans who remained on the island.
The center of activity on the atoll is at Wake Island Airfield  which is primarily used as a mid-Pacific refueling stop for military aircraft and as an emergency landing area.
Their claim was based on oral legends and songs, passed down through generations, describing ancient Marshallese voyages to Wake to gather food and a sacred bird's bone wing used in traditional tattooing ceremonies.
On November 1, 2015, a complex $230 million U.S. military missile defense system test event, called ''Campaign Fierce Sentry'' Flight Test Operational-02 Event 2 (FTO-02 E2), was conducted at Wake Island and the surrounding ocean areas.
On June 23, 1902, the USAT ''Buford'', commanded by Captain Alfred Croskey and bound for Manila, spotted a ship's boat on the beach as it passed closely by Wake Island.
After three weeks with a dwindling water supply and no sign of rescue, the passengers and crew decided to leave Wake and attempt to sail to Guam (the center of the then Spanish colony of the Mariana Islands) on the two remaining boats from the ''Libelle''.
Across the lagoon on Peale, workers assembled the Pan American Hotel, a prefabricated structure with 48 rooms and wide porches and verandas.
To cross the Pacific Ocean his planes would need to island-hop, stopping at various points for refueling and maintenance.
In the early 1980s, the National Park Service conducted an evaluation of Wake Island to determine if the World War II (WWII) cultural resources remaining on Wake, Wilkes and Peale were of national historical significance.
In his 1921 book ''Sea-Power in the Pacific: A Study of the American-Japanese Naval Problem'', Hector C. Bywater recommended establishing a well-defended fueling station at Wake Island in order to provide coal and oil for United States Navy ships engaged in future operations against Japan.
The United States Navy resumed control of the island and in October 1945, 400 Seabees from the 85th Naval Construction Battalion arrived at Wake to clear the island of the effects of the war and to build basic facilities for a Naval Air Base.
On February 1, 1923, Secretary of Agriculture Henry C. Wallace contacted Secretary of Navy Edwin Denby to request Navy participation and to recommended expanding the expedition to Johnston, Midway and Wake, all islands not administered by the Department of Agriculture.
Japanese poachers set up camps to harvest feathers on many remote islands in the Central Pacific.
Aircraft ramps are available for processing passengers and cargo, and for refueling up to 36 aircraft types, including DC-8, C-5, C-130, and C-17 aircraft.
The causeway was rehabilitated in 2003 and is capable of supporting heavy equipment.
With no water, each man was allotted a glass of wine per day until a heavy rain shower came on the sixth day.
Fortunately, one piece of equipment that was unloaded from the ship was an apparatus for distilling water.
The feather trade was primarily focused on Laysan albatross, black-footed albatross, masked booby, lesser frigatebird, greater frigatebird, sooty tern and various other species of tern.
The thirty six remaining crew members managed to make landfall on Wake Island where they faced five months of great hardship, disease and starvation.
Given the potential military value of PAA's base development, on November 13, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral William H. Standley ordered a survey of Wake by the ''USS Nitro'' and on December 29, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 6935 which placed Wake Island, and also Johnston, Sand Island at Midway and Kingman Reef, under the control of the Department of the Navy.
PAAville remained in operation up to the day of the first Japanese air raid in December 1941, forcing the U.S. into World War II (see below).
Japanese losses exceeded 700 dead, with some estimates ranging as high as 1,000.
They were taken to the northern end of the island, blindfolded, and machine-gunned.
