The Act of Union of 1536 formed a linear border stretching from the mouth of the Dee to the mouth of the Wye.
The Welsh landscape (protected by three national parks) and 45 Blue Flag beaches, as well as the unique culture of Wales, attract large numbers of tourists, who play an especially vital role in the economy of rural areas.
Both the Free Wales Army and ''Mudiad Amddiffyn Cymru'' (, abbreviated as MAC) were formed as a direct result of the Tryweryn destruction, conducting campaigns from 1963.
Wales has struggled to develop or attract high value-added employment in sectors such as finance and research and development, attributable in part to a comparative lack of 'economic mass' (i.e.
The ocean current, bringing warmer water to northerly latitudes, has a similar effect on most of north-west Europe.
Cardiff was once the largest coal-exporting port in the world and, for a few years before the First World War, handled a greater tonnage of cargo than either London or Liverpool.
By the late 18th century, the popularity of landscape art grew and clients were found in the larger Welsh towns, allowing more Welsh artists to stay in their homeland.
After the Second World War the substantial number of amateur companies that had existed before the outbreak of hostilities reduced by two thirds.
Code-switching is common in all parts of Wales and is known by various terms, though none is recognised by professional linguists.
The increasing competition from television in the 1950s and 1960s led to a need for greater professionalism in the theatre.
Much of Wales' diverse landscape is mountainous, particularly in the north and central regions.
English is spoken by almost all people in Wales and is the main language in most of the country.
The polecat was nearly driven to extinction in Britain, but hung on in Wales and is now rapidly spreading.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Wales was successful in attracting an above average share of foreign direct investment in the UK.
Diversions was formed in 1983, eventually becoming the National Dance Company Wales, now the resident company at the Wales Millennium Centre.
Maredudd's great-grandson (through his daughter Princess Angharad) Gruffydd ap Llywelyn (r. 1039–63) would conquer his cousins' realms from his base in Powys, and even extend his authority into England.
Coastal areas are the windiest, gales occur most often during winter, on average between 15 and 30 days each year, depending on location.
Many groups emerged during the 1990s, led by Manic Street Preachers, followed by the likes of the Stereophonics and Feeder; notable during this period were Catatonia, Super Furry Animals, and Gorky's Zygotic Mynci who gained popular success as dual-language artists.
Despite 35 of the 36 Welsh MPs voting against the bill (the other one abstained), Parliament passed the bill and the village of Capel Celyn was submerged, highlighting Wales' powerlessness in her own affairs in the face of the numerical superiority of English MPs in the Westminster Parliament.
Wales has over  of coastline and is largely mountainous, with its higher peaks in the north and central areas, including Snowdon (), its highest summit.
However, there is increasing support that the industrial revolution was reliant on harnessing the energy and materials provided by Wales and, in that sense, Wales was of central importance.
Within four years of the Battle of Hastings England had been completely subjugated by the Normans.
Welsh Labour again remained the largest party within the Assembly following the National Assembly for Wales election, 2011 winning 30 of the 60 seats.
BBC Radio Wales is their English-language radio service, broadcasting throughout Wales in English.
Two species of small rodent, the yellow-necked mouse and the dormouse, are of special Welsh note being found at the historically undisturbed border area.
Davies wrote of Cyril Fox's study of Offa's Dyke: "In the planning of it, there was a degree of consultation with the kings of Powys and Gwent.
Before extensive studies of the distribution of R1b Y-DNA subclades, some previously maintained that native Britons were displaced by the invaders.
Wales' main publishing houses include Gomer Press, Gwasg Carreg Gwalch, Honno, the University of Wales Press and Y Lolfa.
''Cambria'', a Welsh affairs magazine published bi-monthly in English, has subscribers in over 30 countries.
* Wettest spot – an average of 4,473 millimetres (176&nbsp;in) rain a year at Crib Goch in Snowdonia, Gwynedd (making it also the wettest spot in the United Kingdom).
Other animals of note include, otter, stoat and weasel.
Members (AMs ()) are elected for four-year terms under an additional member system.
Another theory, after carbon dating placed the dyke's existence 300 years earlier, is that it may have been built by the post-Roman rulers of Wroxeter.
Both Caerwent and Carmarthen, also in southern Wales, became Roman ''civitates''.
(According to a more recent hypothesis, also widely embraced today, Goidelic and Brythonic languages, collectively known as Insular Celtic languages, evolved together for some time separately from Continental Celtic languages such as Gaulish and Celtiberian.)
For the first time in centuries, the population of Wales went into decline; the scourge of unemployment only relented with the production demands of the Second World War.
Historically, Wales was served by smaller 'cottage' hospitals, built as voluntary institutions.
All trains in Wales are diesel-powered, since no lines have been electrified.
Drama in the early 20th century thrived, but the country failed to produce a Welsh National Theatre company.
By the beginning of the Neolithic (c.&nbsp;6,000&nbsp;BP) sea levels in the Bristol Channel were still about  lower than today.
In December 1918, Lloyd George was re-elected at the head of a Conservative-dominated coalition government, and his poor handling of the 1919 coalminers' strike was a key factor in destroying support for the Liberal party in south Wales.
However, the South Wales Main Line branch of the Great Western Main Line used by services from London Paddington to Cardiff and Swansea, is undergoing electrification.
Llywelyn ap Gruffudd's death in 1282 marked the completion of Edward I of England's conquest of Wales, though Owain Glyndŵr briefly restored independence to Wales in the early 15th century.
An early festivity was Mabsant, when local parishes would celebrate the patron saint of their local church.
Welsh national identity emerged among the Celtic Britons after the Roman withdrawal from Britain in the 5th century, and Wales is regarded as one of the modern Celtic nations.
The kingdoms of Gwynedd, Powys, Dyfed and Seisyllwg, Morgannwg and Gwent emerged as independent Welsh successor states.
Initially the eisteddfod was askance with the religious denominations, but in time these bodies came to dominate the competitions, with the bardic themes becoming increasingly scriptural and didactic.
The outbreak of the First World War (1914–1918) saw Wales, as part of the United Kingdom, enter hostilities with Germany.
The Prince of Wales has claimed that only he has the authority to use the symbol.
While there has never been an exclusively Welsh-language college, Welsh-medium higher education is delivered through the individual universities and has since 2011 been supported by the Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol (Welsh National College) as a delocalised federal institution.
English law has been the legal system of Wales and England since 1536, and continues to be, albeit there is now a growing body of contemporary Welsh law since devolution to Wales since 1999.
The further west, the higher the expected rainfall; up to 40% more.
It is attested in a praise poem to Cadwallon ap Cadfan (''Moliant Cadwallon'', by Afan Ferddig) .
Labour remained the largest Assembly party following the 2007 election, winning 26 of the 60 seats.
Referendums held in Wales and Scotland in 1997 chose to establish a form of self-government in both countries.
Wales is a country that is part of the United Kingdom.
Welsh-language magazines include the current affairs titles ''Golwg'' () (published weekly) and ''Barn'' () (monthly).
The dullest time of year tends to be between November and January.
''Y Cymro'' is a Welsh-language newspaper, published weekly.
The principal Welsh festival of music and poetry is the annual ''National Eisteddfod''.
According to John Davies, Wenglish has "been the object of far greater prejudice than anything suffered by Welsh".
Wales has had its own football league, the Welsh Premier League, since 1992.
No British national identity was indicated by 73.7%.
Other parties represented in the assembly are the Welsh Conservatives, the loyal opposition with 14 seats, Plaid Cymru which have 11 seats and the Welsh Liberal Democrats with five seats.
Maredudd ab Owain (r. 986–99) of Deheubarth (Hywel's grandson) would, (again) temporarily oust the Aberffraw line from control of Gwynedd and Powys.
Roberts' style of preaching became the blueprint for new religious bodies such as Pentecostalism and the Apostolic Church.
A number of independent radio stations broadcast to the Welsh regions, predominantly in English.
There are also communities of Hindus and Sikhs, mainly in the south Wales cities of Newport, Cardiff and Swansea, while the largest concentration of Buddhists is in the western rural county of Ceredigion.
Herring, mackerel and hake are the more common of the country's seafish.
Welsh poetry and native lore and learning survived the Dark Ages, through the era of the Poets of the Princes (c. 1100 – 1280) and then the Poets of the Gentry (c. 1350 – 1650).
The main road artery along the south Wales coast is the M4 motorway.
He also enjoyed a reputation as a cultural historian.
The ''Western Mail'' is Wales' only national daily newspaper.
About 78% of the land surface of Wales is given over to agricultural use.
Originally these choirs where formed as the tenor and bass sections of chapel choirs, and embraced the popular secular hymns of the day.
The Presiding Officer of the Assembly is Rosemary Butler of Welsh Labour.
Now that the country's traditional extractive and heavy industries have gone or are in decline, Wales' economy depends on the public sector, light and service industries and tourism.
In 2006 there were 33 nursery, 1555 primary, 244 secondary comprehensive and 43 special schools with 56 independent schools in Wales.
Offa's Dyke was supposed to form an early distinct line but this was thwarted by Gruffudd ap Llewellyn, who reclaimed swathes of land beyond the dyke.
These include the 1958 Commonwealth Games, the 1999 Rugby World Cup and the 2010 Ryder Cup.
Just over 1.75 million Americans report themselves to have Welsh ancestry, as did 440,965 Canadians in Canada's 2006 census.
As well as its printed collection the Library holds important Welsh art collections including portraits and photographs, ephemera such as postcards, posters and Ordnance Survey maps.
BBC Cymru Wales is the national broadcaster.
Owain Gwynedd (1100–70) of the Aberffraw line was the first Welsh ruler to use the title ''princeps Wallensium'' (prince of the Welsh), a title of substance given his victory on the Berwyn Mountains, according to John Davies.
Established under the Government of Wales Act 1998, the National Assembly for Wales holds responsibility for a range of devolved policy matters.
The lowest proportion of White British (80.3%) was in Cardiff.
However, Wales has not been represented on any coin minted from 2008.
Bombing raids brought major loss of life as the German Air Force targeted the docks at Swansea, Cardiff and Pembroke.
As the south Wales coalfield was exploited, mainly in the upland valleys around Aberdare and later the Rhondda, the ports of Swansea, Cardiff and later Penarth, grew into world exporters of coal and, with them, came a population boom.
The March of Wales, which existed for over 450 years, was abolished under the Acts of Union in 1536.
Welsh weather is often cloudy, wet and windy, with warm summers and mild winters.
Plaid Cymru forms the official opposition, having increased its representation to twelve MAs.
The Wales and Berwick Act 1746 provided that all laws that applied to England would automatically apply to Wales (and the Anglo-Scottish border town of Berwick) unless the law explicitly stated otherwise; this act, with regard to Wales, was repealed in 1967.
During the 20th century, a number of small communities of speakers of languages other than Welsh or English, such as Bengali or Cantonese, established themselves in Wales as a result of immigration.
Initially, coal seams were exploited to provide energy for local metal industries but, with the opening of canal systems and later the railways, Welsh coal mining saw a boom in its demand.
These texts also include the earliest forms of the Arthurian legend and the traditional history of post-Roman Britain.
Inland, gales average fewer than six days annually.
Average maximum temperatures range between .
Two-thirds of the population live in south Wales, mainly in and around Cardiff (the capital), Swansea and Newport, and in the nearby valleys.
In June 2008, Wales made history by becoming the first nation in the world to be awarded Fairtrade Status.
A referendum on extending the law-making powers of the National Assembly was accordingly held on 3 March 2011.
By its height in 1913, Wales was producing almost 61 million tons of coal.
Historian Kenneth Morgan described Wales on the eve of the First World War as a "relatively placid, self-confident and successful nation".
On the Long Mountain near Trelystan, the dyke veers to the east, leaving the fertile slopes in the hands of the Welsh; near Rhiwabon, it was designed to ensure that Cadell ap Brochwel retained possession of the Fortress of Penygadden."
It is bordered by England to the east, the Irish Sea to the north and west, and the Bristol Channel to the south.
The 2011 Census showed 562,016 people, 19.0% of the Welsh population, were able to speak Welsh, a decrease from the 20.8% returned in the 2001 census.
It was officially recognised as the Welsh national flag in 1959.
Wales is served by four regional police forces, Dyfed-Powys Police, Gwent Police, North Wales Police and South Wales Police.
Wales has produced several world-class participants of individual sports including snooker players Ray Reardon, Terry Griffiths, Mark Williams and Matthew Stevens.
By the 8th century, the eastern borders with the Anglo-Saxons had broadly been set.
Cardiff is Great Britain's fifth wettest city, with 908 millimetres (35.7&nbsp;in).
The campaigns of conquest are the most widely known feature of Wales during the Roman era, because of the spirited, but ultimately unsuccessful, defence of their homelands by two native tribes: the Silures and the Ordovices.
The Prince of Wales' heraldic badge is also sometimes used to symbolise Wales.
This form also appears at times in literary references, as in the pseudohistorical "''Historia Regum Britanniae''" of Geoffrey of Monmouth, where the character of Camber is described as the eponymous King of Cymru.
South Wales had several notable potteries, one of the first important sites being the Ewenny Pottery in Bridgend, which began producing earthenware in the 17th century.
Wales is also a distinct UK electoral region of the European Union represented by four Members of the European Parliament.
However, Fox's interpretations of both the length and purpose of the Dyke have been questioned by more recent research.
In the three months to July 2010, the employment rate for working-age adults in Wales was 67 per cent, compared to 70.7 per cent across the UK as a whole.
In his 1707 work ''Archaeologia Britannica'' Edward Lhuyd, keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, noted the similarity between the two Celtic language families: Brythonic or P–Celtic (Breton, Cornish and Welsh); and Goidelic or Q–Celtic (Irish, Manx and Scottish Gaelic).
Graduates still very often had to leave Wales to work, but Betws-y-Coed became a popular centre for artists and its artists' colony helped form the Royal Cambrian Academy of Art in 1881.
And, for Gwent, Offa had the dyke built "on the eastern crest of the gorge, clearly with the intention of recognizing that the River Wye and its traffic belonged to the kingdom of Gwent."
The title ''Prince of Wales'' is still conferred on the heir apparent to the British throne, currently Prince Charles.
Augustus John and his sister Gwen John lived mostly in London and Paris.
Until the Industrial Revolution, Wales had always been reliant on its agricultural output for its wealth and employment and the earliest industrial businesses were small scale and localised in manner.
The governments of the United Kingdom and of Wales almost invariably define Wales as a country.
The 2011 census recorded 32.1% of people declaring no religion, while 7.6% did not reply to the question.
Wales is also known for its shellfish, including cockles, limpet, mussels and periwinkles.
In 1904, there was a religious revival (known by some as the 1904–1905 Welsh Revival, or simply The 1904 Revival) which started through the evangelism of Evan Roberts and saw large numbers of people converting to nonconformist and Anglican Christianity, sometimes whole communities.
The Cerdd Dant Society promotes its specific singing art primarily through an annual one-day festival.
Glyndŵr went on to hold parliamentary assemblies at several Welsh towns, including Machynlleth.
Marcher Law and Welsh Law (for civil cases) remained in force until Henry VIII of England annexed the whole of Wales under the Laws in Wales Acts 1535–1542 (often referred to as the Acts of Union of 1536 and 1543), after which English law applied to the whole of Wales.
Sir Frank Brangwyn was Welsh by origin but spent little time in Wales.
According to the Welsh Government: "Our Prince of Wales at the moment is Prince Charles, who is the present heir to the throne.
Dancing is a popular pastime in Wales; traditional dances include folk dancing and clog dancing.
* Maximum rainfall in a day (0900 UTC – 0900 UTC): 211 millimetres (8&nbsp;in) at Rhondda, Glamorgan, on 11 November 1929.
The red dragon was then included in the Tudor royal arms to signify their Welsh descent.
Beeching cuts in the 1960s mean that most of the remaining network is geared toward east-west travel connecting with the Irish Sea ports for ferries to Ireland.
The output of this period was prolific in quantity but unequal in quality.
The BBC National Orchestra of Wales performs in Wales and internationally.
It was believed that the foundations for stable economic growth had been firmly established in Wales during this period; but this view was shown to be wildly optimistic after the recession of the early 1980s saw the collapse of much of the manufacturing base that had been built over the preceding forty years.
The highest of these is Snowdon (), at .
Rugby union is seen as a symbol of Welsh identity and an expression of national consciousness.
King Offa of Mercia seems to have continued this consultative initiative when he created a larger earthwork, now known as Offa's Dyke ().
After 1943, 10% of Welsh conscripts aged 18 were sent to work in the coal mines, where there were labour shortages; they became known as Bevin Boys.
The Swansea to Cork service, cancelled in 2006, was reinstated in March 2010, but has been withdrawn again in 2012.
In ''Armes Prydain'', believed to be written around 930–942, the words ''Cymry'' and ''Cymro'' are used as often as 15 times.
Non-Christian religions are small in Wales, making up approximately 2.7% of the population.
A total of 272,924 Welshmen served in the war, representing 21.5% of the male population.
For about seven brief years, Wales was one, under one ruler, a feat with neither precedent nor successor."
These words (both of which are pronounced ) are descended from the Brythonic word ''combrogi'', meaning "fellow-countrymen".
He argued that the Brythonic languages originated in Gaul (France), and that the Goidelic languages originated in the Iberian Peninsula.
Archaeological evidence, in the Low Countries and what was to become England, shows early Anglo-Saxon migration to Great Britain reversed between 500 to 550, which concurs with Frankish chronicles.
Cardiff International Airport is the only large and international airport in Wales.
Track athletes who have made a mark on the world stage, including the 110-metre hurdler Colin Jackson who is a former world record holder and the winner of numerous Olympic, World and European medals as well as Tanni Grey-Thompson who has won 11 Paralympic gold medals.
Their remaining output is commissioned from ITV and independent producers.
After the Roman departure from Britain in AD 410, much of the lowlands of Britain to the east and south-east was overrun by various Germanic peoples.
The section of the motorway managed by the Welsh Government runs from the Second Severn Crossing to Pont Abraham, Carmarthenshire, connecting the cities of Newport, Cardiff and Swansea.
In poetry R. S. Thomas (1913–2000) was the most important figure throughout the second half of the twentieth century.
Richard Wilson (1714–82) is arguably the first major British landscapist.
Conversely, Wales does not have its own national ballet company.
Wales had a rich mineral wealth.
Technically Wales is represented by the flag of England, as the Laws in Wales Act of 1535 annexed Wales to England, following the 13th-century conquest.
Several Welsh representative teams, including the Welsh rugby union, and Welsh regiments in the British Army (the Royal Welsh, for example) use the badge, or a stylised version of it.
Average annual coastal temperatures reach  and in low lying inland areas,  lower.
The country lies within the north temperate zone and has a changeable, maritime climate.
Edward I of England annexed the Principality of Wales following the death of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd and Welsh Law was replaced for criminal cases under the Statute.
The coasts and surrounding islands are home to colonies of gannets, Manx shearwater, puffins, kittiwakes, shags and razorbills.
By the end of the 1960s, the regional policy of bringing firms into disadvantaged areas of Wales through financial incentives had proven very successful in diversifying the industrial economy.
Since the Second World War, the service sector has come to account for the majority of jobs, a feature typifying most advanced economies.
The 2011 census showed Wales to be less ethnically diverse than any region of England.
Over 50 islands lie off the Welsh mainland; the largest being Anglesey, in the north-west.
At the Olympics Games, Welsh athletes compete alongside those of Scotland, England and Northern Ireland as part of a Great Britain team.
* Highest maximum temperature:  at Hawarden Bridge, Flintshire on 2 August 1990.
Pacifist numbers during both World Wars were fairly low, especially in the Second World War, which was seen as a fight against fascism.
Neolithic colonists integrated with the indigenous people, gradually changing their lifestyles from a nomadic life of hunting and gathering, to become settled farmers about 6,000&nbsp;BP – the Neolithic Revolution.
In 2010, a 30-year traditional dance festival held in Caernarvon came to an end due to a lack of participants, though clog dancing has seen a revival in the 21st century.
The majority of births are to unmarried women (58% of births in 2011 were outside of marriage).
Further matters have been added subsequently, either directly by the UK Parliament or by the UK Parliament approving a Legislative Competence Order (LCO); a request from the National Assembly for additional powers.
Humanists such as William Salesbury and John Davies brought Renaissance ideals from English universities when they returned to Wales.
Owain Gwynedd's grandson Llywelyn Fawr (the Great, 1173–1240), wrested concessions through the Magna Carta in 1215 and receiving the fealty of other Welsh lords in 1216 at the council at Aberdyfi, became the first Prince of Wales.
The origins of the leek can be traced to the 16th century, while the daffodil became popular in the 19th century, encouraged by David Lloyd-George.
Contemporary dance grew out of Cardiff in the 1970s; one of the earliest companies, Moving Being, came from London to Cardiff in 1973.
In turn, responsibility for NHS Wales was passed to the Welsh Assembly and Executive under devolution in 1999.
The prevailing wind is south-westerly.
BBC Cymru Wales is Wales' only national radio broadcaster.
By tradition, Welsh Law was compiled during an assembly held at Whitland circa 930 by Hywel Dda, king of most of Wales between 942 and his death in 950.
An Act of Parliament in 1857 provided for the establishment of a number of art schools throughout the United Kingdom and the Cardiff School of Art opened in 1865.
The long summer days and short winter days result from Wales' northerly latitudes (between 53° 43′ N and 51° 38′ N).
"Wenglish" is the Welsh English language dialect.
Wales' 2010 gross value added (GVA) was £45.5 billion (£15,145 per head, 74.0% of the average for the UK, and the lowest GVA per head in Britain).
The Assembly must elect a First Minister, who selects ministers to form the Welsh Government.
A 2010 study estimated that 35% of the Welsh population have surnames of Welsh origin (5.4% of the English and 1.6% of the Scottish population also bore 'Welsh' names).
The Welsh Books Council (WBC) is the Welsh Government funded body tasked with promoting Welsh literature.
The Welsh Folk Dance Society was founded in 1949; it supports a network of national amateur dance teams and publishes support material.
The larger Welsh mammals died out during the Norman period, including the brown bear, wolf and the wildcat.
* Minimum number of hours of sunshine in a month: 2.7 hours at Llwynon, Brecknockshire in January 1962.
The pine marten which has had the occasional sighting, has not been officially recorded since the 1950s.
The major novelist in the second half of the twentieth century was Emyr Humphreys (1919)., who during his long writing career published over twenty novels, which surveys the political and cultural history of twentieth-century Wales.
Roman rule in Wales was a military occupation, save for the southern coastal region of south Wales, east of the Gower Peninsula, where there is a legacy of Romanisation.
The ''Seven Wonders of Wales'' is a list in doggerel verse of seven geographic and cultural landmarks in Wales probably composed in the late 18th century under the influence of tourism from England.
