In early 1950, Disney produced ''Cinderella'', his studio's first animated feature in eight years.
Disney also oversaw aspects of the full-length features ''Lady and the Tramp'' (the first animated film in CinemaScope) in 1955, ''Sleeping Beauty'' (the first animated film in Technirama 70 mm film) in 1959, ''One Hundred and One Dalmatians'' (the first animated feature film to use Xerox cels) in 1961 and ''The Sword in the Stone'' in 1963.
Several commentators have described him as a cultural icon.
Disney, always keen to embrace new technology, filmed ''Flowers and Trees'' (1932) in full-color three-strip Technicolor; he was also able to negotiate a deal giving him the sole right to use the three-strip process until August 31, 1935.
In 1917, Elias bought stock in a Chicago jelly producer, the O-Zell Company, and moved back to the city with his family.
The heart of Disney World was to be the "Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow" (EPCOT), which he described as:
In mid-1954, Disney sent his Imagineers to every amusement park in the U.S. to analyze what worked and what pitfalls or problems there were in the various locations and incorporated their findings into his design.
The composer Philip Glass later adapted the book into the opera ''The Perfect American'' (2013).
Also hired at this time were several local artists, some of whom stayed with the company as core animators; the group later became known as the Nine Old Men.
When ''Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day'' was released in 1968, it earned Disney an Academy Award in the Short Subject (Cartoon) category, awarded posthumously.
After Disney's death, his brother Roy deferred his retirement to take full control of the Disney companies.
Following the 1927 sensation ''The Jazz Singer'', Disney used synchronized sound on the third short, ''Steamboat Willie'', to create the first sound cartoon.
He changed the focus of the project from a town to an attraction.
The connected themed areas were Adventureland, Frontierland, Fantasyland and Tomorrowland.
His reputation changed in the years after his death, from a purveyor of homely patriotic values to a representative of American imperialism.
With work on ''Snow White'' finished, the studio began producing ''Pinocchio'' in early 1938 and ''Fantasia'' in November of the same year.
Through technological innovations and alliances with governments and corporations, he transformed a minor studio in a marginal form of communication into a multinational leisure industry giant.
Walt Disney does not drink.
Although there have been accusations that he was racist or anti-Semitic, they have been contradicted by many who knew him.
After Mintz requested new material to distribute through Universal Pictures, Disney and Iwerks created Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, a character Disney wanted to be "peppy, alert, saucy and venturesome, keeping him also neat and trim".
Correspondent Alistair Cooke calls Disney a "folk-hero&nbsp;... the Pied Piper of Hollywood", while Gabler considers Disney "reshaped the culture and the American consciousness".
To replace Oswald, Disney and Iwerks developed Mickey Mouse, possibly inspired by a pet mouse that Disney had adopted while working in his Laugh-O-Gram studio, although the origins of the character are unclear.
Disney distanced himself from the Motion Picture Alliance in the 1950s.
The money from ABC was contingent on Disney television programs.
In 1964, Disney produced ''Mary Poppins'', based on the book series by P. L. Travers; he had been trying to acquire the rights to the story since the 1940s.
Disney enrolled at McKinley High School and became the cartoonist of the school newspaper, drawing patriotic pictures about World War I; he also took night courses at the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts.
The military films generated only enough revenue to cover costs, and the feature film ''Bambi''which had been in production since 1937underperformed on its release in April 1942, and lost $200,000 at the box office.
To improve the quality of the music, Disney hired the professional composer and arranger Carl Stalling, on whose suggestion the ''Silly Symphony'' series was developed, providing stories through the use of music; the first in the series, ''The Skeleton Dance'' (1929), was drawn and animated entirely by Iwerks.
The strike temporarily interrupted the studio's next production, ''Dumbo'' (1941), which Disney produced in a simple and inexpensive manner; the film received a positive reaction from audiences and critics alike.
Other all-live-action features followed, many of which had patriotic themes.
The company produced commercials using the cutout animation technique.
Born in Chicago in 1901, Disney developed an early interest in drawing.
The Disneys were careful to keep their daughters out of the public eye as much as possible, particularly in the light of the Lindbergh kidnapping; Disney took steps to ensure his daughters were not photographed by the press.
He was shipped to France but arrived in November, after the armistice.
Film historian Jay P. Telotte acknowledges that many see Disney's studio as an "agent of manipulation and repression", although he observes that it has "labored throughout its history to link its name with notions of fun, family, and fantasy".
She was losing the rights to both the ''Out of the Inkwell'' and ''Felix the Cat'' cartoons, and needed a new series.
It was popular with critics and theater audiences.
Disney and his brother Roy woke up at 4:30 every morning to deliver the ''Times'' before school and repeated the round for the evening ''Star'' after school.
And EPCOT will always be a showcase to the world for the ingenuity and imagination of American free enterprise.
In 1998, the American Film Institute published a list of the 100 greatest American films, according to industry experts; the list included ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'' (at number 49), and ''Fantasia'' (at 58).
Their marriage produced two daughters, Diane (born December 1933) and Sharon (adopted in December 1936, born six weeks previously).
He continued to produce full-length animated features too, including ''Alice in Wonderland'' (1951) and ''Peter Pan'' (1953).
In May 1921, the success of the "Laugh-O-Grams" led to the establishment of Laugh-O-Gram Studio, for which he hired more animators, including Fred Harman's brother Hugh, Rudolf Ising and Iwerks.
His treatment of peopleand by this I mean all peoplecan only be called exemplary."
To portray the changing perspective of the background as a camera moved through a scene, Disney's animators developed a multiplane camera which allowed drawings on pieces of glass to be set at various distances from the camera, creating an illusion of depth.
The Walt Disney Family Museum records that he "along with members of his staff, received more than 950 honors and citations from throughout the world".
The success of ''Snow White'' heralded one of the most productive eras for the studio; the Walt Disney Family Museum calls the following years "the 'Golden Age of Animation'".
Iwerks revised Disney's provisional sketches to make the character easier to animate, and Disney provided Mickey's voice until 1947.
He lived near the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway line and became enamored of trains.
Disney was also inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 1986, the California Hall of Fame in December 2006, and was the inaugural recipient of a star on the Anaheim walk of stars in 2014.
This site proved too small, and a larger plot in Anaheim,  south of the studio, was purchased.
Disney grew more politically conservative as he got older.
The series ran until July 1927, by which time Disney had begun to tire of it and wanted to move away from the mixed format to all animation.
The studio had been involved in a successful television special on Christmas Day 1950 about the making of ''Alice in Wonderland''.
When he visited Griffith Park in Los Angeles with his daughters, he wanted to be in a clean, unspoiled park, where both children and their parents could have fun.
Several of his films are included in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress.
In late 1965, he announced plans to develop another theme park to be called "Disney World" (now Walt Disney World), a few miles southwest of Orlando, Florida.
The latter measure, and Disney's sometimes high-handed and insensitive manner of dealing with staff, led to a 1941 animators' strike which lasted five weeks.
Disney also met with Henry Morgenthau, Jr., the Secretary of the Treasury, and agreed to produce short Donald Duck cartoons to promote war bonds.
The same year he also became involved in plans to expand the California Institute of the Arts (colloquially called CalArts), and had an architect draw up blueprints for a new building.
Early in 1925, Disney hired an ink artist, Lillian Bounds.
As a result, Disney formed his own record production and distribution entity, Disneyland Records.
Disney remains the central figure in the history of animation.
He was consultant to the 1959 American National Exhibition in Moscow; Disney Studios' contribution was ''America the Beautiful'', a 19-minute film in the 360-degree Circarama theater that was one of the most popular attractions.
He moved to Hollywood in the early 1920s and set up the Disney Brothers Studio with his brother Roy.
The remaining 45 percent went into a charitable trust, 95 percent of which was designated for CalArts, to build a new campus (a figure of around $15&nbsp;million); he also donated  of the Golden Oaks ranch in Valencia for construction of that school.
In 1949, Disney and his family moved to a new home in the Holmby Hills district of Los Angeles.
Disney formed the Walt Disney Training Films Unit within the company to produce instruction films for the military such as ''Four Methods of Flush Riveting'' and ''Aircraft Production Methods''.
The results, seen in features such as ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'' (1937), ''Fantasia'', ''Pinocchio'' (both 1940), ''Dumbo'' (1941) and ''Bambi'' (1942), furthered the development of animated film.
Disney asked Powers for an increase in payments for the cartoons.
In Marceline, Disney developed his interest in drawing when he was paid to draw the horse of a retired neighborhood doctor.
Walt Disney was born on December 5, 1901, at 1249 Tripp Avenue, in Chicago's Hermosa neighborhood.
For PepsiCo, who planned to tribute UNICEF, Disney developed It's a Small World, a boat ride with audio-animatronic dolls depicting children of the world; Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln contained an animatronic Abraham Lincoln giving excerpts from his speeches; Carousel of Progress promoted the importance of electricity; and Ford's Magic Skyway portrayed the progress of mankind.
The result, a 12-and-a-half-minute, one-reel film, was completed too late to save Laugh-O-Gram Studio, which went into bankruptcy in 1923.
In mid-1918, Disney attempted to join the United States Army to fight against the Germans, but he was rejected for being too young.
In 1948, Disney initiated a series of popular live-action nature films, titled ''True-Life Adventures'', with ''Seal Island'' the first; the film won the Academy Award in the Best Short Subject (Two-Reel) category.
Although there were early minor problems with the park, it was a success, and after a month's operation, Disneyland was receiving over 20,000 visitors a day; by the end of its first year, it attracted 3.6&nbsp;million guests.
In February 1928, Disney hoped to negotiate a larger fee for producing the ''Oswald'' series, but found Mintz wanting to reduce the payments.
With Ub Iwerks, Walt developed the character Mickey Mouse in 1928, his first highly popular success; he also provided the voice for his creation in the early years.
After Disney's death, his studios continued to produce live-action films prolifically but largely abandoned animation until the late 1980s, after which there was what ''The New York Times'' describes as the "Disney Renaissance" that began with ''The Little Mermaid'' (1989).
He was presented with two Golden Globe Special Achievement Awards and an Emmy Award, among other honors.
Mintz had also persuaded many of the artists involved to work directly for him, including Harman, Ising, Carman Maxwell and Friz Freleng.
Disney had been a heavy smoker since World War&nbsp;I.
There, he drew commercial illustrations for advertising, theater programs and catalogs.
Other national awards include Thailand's Order of the Crown; Brazil's Order of the Southern Cross and Mexico's Order of the Aztec Eagle.
Although Disney's films have been highly praised, very popular and commercially successful over time, there were criticisms by reviewers.
He increased his involvement in the studio's films, and was heavily involved in the story development of ''The Jungle Book'', the live-action musical feature ''The Happiest Millionaire'' (both 1967) and the animated short ''Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day''.
Thousands of artifacts from Disney's life and career are on display, including numerous awards that he received.
He was made a '''' in the French '' in 1935, and in 1952 he was awarded the country's highest artistic decoration, the ''''.
He had high standards and high expectations of those with whom he worked.
The show's theme song, "The Ballad of Davy Crockett", became internationally popular, and ten million records were sold.
In response to the financial crisis, Disney and his brother Roy started the company's first public stock offering in 1940, and implemented heavy salary cuts.
As a film producer, Disney holds the record for most Academy Awards earned by an individual, having won twenty-two Oscars from 59 nominations.
With the assistance of a borrowed book on animation and a camera, he began experimenting at home.
He took art classes as a boy and got a job as a commercial illustrator at the age of 18.
In 1946 he was a founding member of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, an organization who stated they "believed in, and like, the American Way of Life&nbsp;... we find ourselves in sharp revolt against a rising tide of Communism, Fascism and kindred beliefs, that seek by subversive means to undermine and change this way of life".
He and his younger sister Ruth started school at the same time at the Park School in Marceline in late 1909.
Disney was less involved than he had been with previous pictures because of his involvement in his first entirely live-action feature, ''Treasure Island'' (1950), which was shot in Britain, as was ''The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men'' (1952).
In February 1960, Disney was inducted to the Hollywood Walk of Fame with two stars, one for motion pictures and the other for his television work; Mickey Mouse was given his own star for motion pictures in 1978.
In January 1920, as Pesmen-Rubin's revenue declined after Christmas, Disney and Iwerks were laid off.
He came to the conclusion that cel animation was more promising than the cutout method.
Disney's plans for the futuristic city of EPCOT did not come to fruition.
Disney also found out that Universal owned the intellectual property rights to Oswald.
Instead of direct approval, Disney gave high-performing staff financial bonuses, or recommended certain individuals to others, expecting that his praise would be passed on.
The release of ''The Jungle Book'' and ''The Happiest Millionaire'' in 1967 raised the total number of feature films that Disney had been involved in to 81.
Unable to persuade Cauger to try cel animation at the company, Disney opened a new business with a co-worker from the Film Ad Co, Fred Harman.
After obtaining bank funding he invited other stockholders, American Broadcasting-Paramount Theatrespart of American Broadcasting Company (ABC)and Western Printing and Lithographing Company.
Several of his films are included in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant": ''Steamboat Willie'', ''The Three Little Pigs'', ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'', ''Fantasia'', ''Pinocchio'', ''Bambi'' and ''Mary Poppins''.
Mintz threatened to start his own studio and produce the series himself if Disney refused to accept the reductions.
Mickey Mouse first appeared in May 1928 as a single test screening of the short ''Plane Crazy'', but it, and the second feature, ''The Gallopin' Gaucho'', failed to find a distributor.
The reviewer opined that Disney "has slaughtered good Barrie and has only second-rate Disney to put in its place".
They're good this year, they're good next year, and they're good the year after.&nbsp;... You have to relax and give them time to market their product."
Disney provided four exhibits for the 1964 New York World's Fair, for which he obtained funding from selected corporate sponsors.
He also received four Emmy Award nominations, winning once, for Best Producer for the ''Disneyland'' television series.
I do a lot of things Walt Disney would not do.
Before long, he was spending more time at the Pfeiffers' house than at home.
In 1933, Disney produced ''The Three Little Pigs'', a film described by the media historian Adrian Danks as "the most successful short animation of all time".
Mark Langer, in the ''American Dictionary of National Biography'', writes that "Earlier evaluations of Disney hailed him as a patriot, folk artist, and popularizer of culture.
Disney also began to develop an ability to work with watercolors and crayons.
Disney won another Honorary Academy Award, which consisted of one full-sized and seven miniature Oscar statuettes.
The miniature working steam locomotive was built by Disney Studios engineer Roger E. Broggie, and Disney named it ''Lilly Belle'' after his wife; after three years Disney ordered it into storage due to a series of accidents involving his guests.
He attended Saturday courses at the Kansas City Art Institute and also took a correspondence course in cartooning.
In November 1966, he was diagnosed with lung cancer and treated with cobalt therapy.
Disney and his brother Roy formed the Disney Brothers Studiowhich later became The Walt Disney Companyto produce the films; they persuaded Davis and her family to relocate to Hollywood to continue production, with Davis on contract at $100 a month.
With the help of his friends Ward and Betty Kimball, who already had their own backyard railroad, Disney developed blueprints and immediately set to work on creating a miniature live steam railroad for his backyard.
From the early to mid-1950s, Disney began to devote less attention to the animation department, entrusting most of its operations to his key animators, the Nine Old Men, although he was always present at story meetings.
Disney's public persona was very different from his actual personality.
In 1930, Disney tried to trim costs from the process by urging Iwerks to abandon the practice of animating every separate cel in favor of the more efficient technique of drawing key poses and letting lower-paid assistants sketch the in-between poses.
The film became the most successful motion picture of 1938 and by May 1939 its total gross of $6.5&nbsp;million made it the most successful sound film made to that date.
The park was designed as a series of themed lands, linked by the central Main Street, U.S.A.a replica of the main street in his hometown of Marceline.
As well as the construction of Disneyland, Disney worked on other projects away from the studio.
After the animation was complete, Disney signed a contract with the former executive of Universal Pictures, Pat Powers, to use the "Powers Cinephone" recording system; Cinephone became the new distributor for Disney's early sound cartoons, which soon became popular.
Disney donated regularly to Jewish charities, he was named "1955 Man of the Year" by the B'nai B'rith chapter in Beverly Hills, and his studio employed a number of Jews, some of whom were in influential positions.
Disney's efforts to sell ''Alice's Wonderland'' were in vain until he heard from New York film distributor Margaret J. Winkler.
Shortly after the release of ''Dumbo'' in October 1941, the U.S. entered World War&nbsp;II.
He left 45 percent of his estate to his wife and childrenmuch in a family trustand 10 percent to his sister, nieces and nephews.
To distance the project from the studiowhich might attract the criticism of shareholdersDisney formed WED Enterprises (now Walt Disney Imagineering) and used his own money to fund a group of designers and animators to work on the plans; those involved became known as "Imagineers".
In the 1950s, Disney expanded into the amusement park industry, and in 1955 he opened Disneyland.
Disney was a shy, self-deprecating and insecure man in private but adopted a warm and outgoing public persona.
Playwright Robert E. Sherwood described him as "almost painfully shy&nbsp;... diffident" and self-deprecating.
In 1954, after the Disneyland funding had been agreed, ABC broadcast ''Walt Disney's Disneyland'', an anthology consisting of animated cartoons, live-action features and other material from the studio's library.
A Democratic Party supporter until the 1940 presidential election, when he switched allegiance to the Republicans, he became a generous donor to Thomas&nbsp;E.&nbsp;Dewey's 1944 bid for the presidency.
The studio made a loss on both pictures and was deeply in debt by the end of February 1941.
Despite the demands wrought by non-studio projects, Disney continued to work on film and television projects.
Watts argues that many of Disney's post World War II films "legislated a kind of cultural Marshall Plan.
Powers refused and signed Iwerks to work for him; Stalling resigned shortly afterwards, thinking that without Iwerks, the Disney Studio would close.
As the studio grew, Disney became more adventurous, introducing synchronized sound, full-color three-strip Technicolor, feature-length cartoons and technical developments in cameras.
The name of the railroad, Carolwood Pacific Railroad, came from his home's location on Carolwood Drive.
At the inauguration in 1971, Roy dedicated Walt Disney World to his brother.
Disney has been accused of anti-semitisim, although none of his employeesincluding the animator Art Babbitt, who disliked Disney intenselyever accused him of making anti-semitic slurs or taunts.
During 1966, Disney cultivated businesses willing to sponsor EPCOT.
Disney World was to include the "Magic Kingdom"a larger and more elaborate version of Disneylandplus golf courses and resort hotels.
The film's success led to a further increase in the studio's staff, which numbered nearly 200 by the end of the year.
Disney became interested in animation, although he preferred drawn cartoons such as ''Mutt and Jeff'' and ''Koko the Clown''.
They started their own business, the short-lived Iwerks-Disney Commercial Artists.
On Disney's death, journalism professor Ralph S. Izard comments that the values in Disney's films are those "considered valuable in American Christian society", which include "individualism, decency,&nbsp;... love for our fellow man, fair play and toleration".
In 2001, the German author Peter Stephan Jungk published  (trans: ''The King of America''), a fictional work of Disney's later years that re-images him as a power-hungry racist.
John Tomlinson, in his study ''Cultural Imperialism'', examines the work of Ariel Dorfman and Armand Mattelart, whose 1971 book '''' (trans: ''How to Read Donald Duck'') identifies that there are "imperialist&nbsp;... values 'concealed' behind the innocent, wholesome façade of the world of Walt Disney"; this, they argue, is a powerful tool as "it presents itself as harmless fun for consumption by children."
Disney was portrayed by Len Cariou in the 1995 made-for-TV film ''A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes: The Annette Funicello Story'', and by Tom Hanks in the 2013 film ''Saving Mr. Banks''.
Many of those with whom Disney worked commented that he gave his staff little encouragement due to his exceptionally high expectations.
In October they signed a contract for six ''Alice'' comedies, with an option for two further series of six episodes each.
Both films were released in 1940, and neither performed well at the box officepartly because revenues from Europe had dropped following the start of World War II in 1939.
He was nominated for three Golden Globe Awards, but did not win, but he was presented with two Special Achievement Awardsfor ''Bambi'' (1942) and ''The Living Desert'' (1953)and the Cecil B. DeMille Award.
Floyd Norman, the studio's first black animator who worked closely with Disney during the 1950s and 1960s, said, "Not once did I observe a hint of the racist behavior Walt Disney was often accused of after his death.
The show was successful in terms of ratings and profits, earning an audience share of over 50%.
Although ''Snow White'' had been largely finished by the time the multiplane camera had been completed, Disney ordered some scenes be re-drawn to use the new effects.
He never, either publicly or privately, made disparaging remarks about blacks or asserted white superiority.
For several years Disney had been considering building a theme park.
Norman recalls that when Disney said "That'll work", it was an indication of high praise.
On top of the low earnings from ''Pinocchio'' and ''Fantasia'', the company had debts of $4&nbsp;million with the Bank of America in 1944.
''Snow White'' premiered in December 1937 to high praise from critics and audiences.
Disney's obituary in ''The Times'' calls the films "wholesome, warm-hearted and entertaining&nbsp;... of incomparable artistry and of touching beauty".
The program was accompanied by merchandising through various companies (Western Printing, for example, had been producing coloring books and comics for over 20 years, and produced several items connected to the show).
Views of Disney and his work have changed over the decades, and there have been polarized opinions.
Disney's companies continue to produce successful film, television and stage entertainment.
Disney has been portrayed numerous times in fictional works.
Construction work started in July 1954, and Disneyland opened in July 1955; the opening ceremony was broadcast on ABC, which reached 70&nbsp;million viewers.
In March 1952 he received zoning permission to build a theme park in Burbank, near the Disney studios.
In 1947, during the Second Red Scare, Disney testified before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), where he branded Herbert Sorrell, David Hilberman and William Pomerance, former animators and labor union organizers, as Communist agitators; Disney stated that the 1941 strike led by them was part of an organized Communist effort to gain influence in Hollywood.
Disney declined Mintz's ultimatum and lost most of his animation staff, except Iwerks, who chose to remain with him.
At a meeting with Bank of America executives to discuss the future of the company, the bank's chairman and founder, Amadeo Giannini, told his executives, "I've been watching the Disneys' pictures quite closely because I knew we were lending them money far above the financial risk.&nbsp;...
He visited the Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen, Denmark, and was heavily influenced by the cleanliness and layout of the park.
In July 1924 Disney also hired Iwerks, persuading him to relocate to Hollywood from Kansas City.
Gabler argues that "Walt Disney was no racist.
In 1955 he was involved in "Man in Space", an episode of the ''Disneyland'' series, which was made in collaboration with NASA rocket designer Wernher von Braun.
When news leaked out about the project, many in the film industry predicted it would bankrupt the company; industry insiders nicknamed it "Disney's Folly".
As a result of the strikeand the financial state of the companyseveral animators left the studio, and Disney's relationship with other members of staff was permanently strained as a result.
According to his biographer Richard Schickel, Disney hid his shy and insecure personality behind his public identity.
Instead, he started concentrating on other ventures.
Disney has also been accused of racism because some of his productions released between the 1930s and 1950s contain racially insensitive material.
While a federal mediator from the National Labor Relations Board negotiated with the two sides, Disney accepted an offer from the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs to make a goodwill trip to South America, ensuring he was absent during a resolution he knew would be unfavorable to the studio.
an experimental prototype community of tomorrow that will take its cue from the new ideas and new technologies that are now emerging from the creative centers of American industry.
Failing to attract many customers, Disney and Iwerks agreed that Disney should leave temporarily to earn money at the Kansas City Film Ad Company, run by A.&nbsp;V. Cauger; the following month Iwerks, who was not able to run their business alone, also joined.
A pioneer of the American animation industry, he introduced several developments in the production of cartoons.
It became the most successful Disney film of the 1960s, although Travers disliked the film intensely and regretted having sold the rights.
In 1906, when Disney was four, the family moved to a farm in Marceline, Missouri, where his uncle Robert had just purchased land.
On November 30 he felt unwell and was taken to St. Joseph Hospital where, on December 15, ten days after his 65th birthday, he died of circulatory collapse caused by lung cancer.
Robin Allen, writing for ''The Times'', notes that ''Fantasia'' (1940) was "condemned for its vulgarity and lurches into bathos", while Lejeune, reviewing ''Alice in Wonderland'' (1951), feels the film "may drive lovers of Lewis Carroll to frenzy".
Both the Mickey Mouse and ''Silly Symphonies'' series were successful, but Disney and his brother felt they were not receiving their rightful share of profits from Powers.
The feature film ''Song of the South'' was criticized by contemporary film critics, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and others for its perpetuation of black stereotypes, but Disney later campaigned successfully for an Honorary Academy Award for its star, James Baskett, the first black actor so honored.
