In his 1996 memoirs labor lawyer Victor Rabinowitz recalled:
Scott's fame grew as his explorations and interpretations of Scottish history and society captured popular imagination.
At the time Scott wrote, Scotland was poised to move away from an era of socially divisive clan warfare to a modern world of literacy and industrial capitalism.
After George's accession to the throne, the city council of Edinburgh invited Scott, at the King's behest, to stage-manage the 1822 visit of King George IV to Scotland.
In October 1779 he began at the Royal High School of Edinburgh.
"This is my own, my native land"?
In 1951, science-fiction author Isaac Asimov wrote ''Breeds There a Man...?
To cure his lameness he was sent in 1773 to live in the rural Scottish Borders at his paternal grandparents' farm at Sandyknowe, adjacent to the ruin of Smailholm Tower, the earlier family home.
Whose heart hath n’er within him burned
There were nominal residency requirements for his position of Sheriff-Depute, and at first he stayed at a local inn during the circuit.
He escapes retribution, however, after saving the life of a Whig colonel during the battle.
This was the first sign from a literary standpoint of his interest in Scottish history.
The wretch, concentrated all in self,
After three weeks of courtship, Scott proposed and they were married on Christmas Eve 1797 in St Mary's Church, Carlisle (a church set up in the now destroyed nave of Carlisle Cathedral).
Twain also targeted Scott in ''Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'', where he names a sinking boat the "Walter Scott" (1884); and, in ''A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court'' (1889), the main character repeatedly utters "great Scott" as an oath; by the end of the book, however, he has become absorbed in the world of knights in armor, reflecting Twain's ambivalence on the topic.
Breathes there the man with soul so dead,
For example, in his classic study  ''Aspects of the Novel'' (1927), E. M. Forster harshly criticized Scott's clumsy and slapdash writing style, "flat" characters, and thin plots.
In January 1775 he returned to Edinburgh, and that summer went with his aunt Jenny to take spa treatment at Bath in England, where they lived at 6 South Parade.
He continued to expand the estate, and built Abbotsford House in a series of extensions.
He kept up his prodigious output of fiction, as well as producing a biography of Napoleon Bonaparte, until 1831.
Panelling of oak and cedar and carved ceilings relieved by coats of arms in their correct colours added to the beauty of the house.
The Covenanters were presbyterians who had supported the Restoration of Charles II on promises of a Presbyterian settlement, but he had instead reintroduced Episcopalian church government with draconian penalties for Presbyterian worship.
Scott's advocacy of objectivity and moderation and his strong repudiation of political violence on either side also had a strong, though unspoken, contemporary resonance in an era when many conservative English speakers lived in mortal fear of a revolution in the French style on British soil.
The relentless persecution of these conventicles and attempts to break them up by military force had led to open revolt.
Scott's lawyer from at least 1814 was Hay Donaldson WS (died 1822), who was also agent to the Duke of Buccleuch.
The story is told from the point of view of Henry Morton, a moderate Presbyterian, who is unwittingly drawn into the conflict and barely escapes summary execution.
In Edinburgh, the 61.1-metre-tall Victorian Gothic spire of the Scott Monument was designed by George Meikle Kemp.
In 1778, Scott returned to Edinburgh for private education to prepare him for school, and joined his family in their new house built as one of the first in George Square.
In the winter of 1776 he went back to Sandyknowe, with another attempt at a water cure at Prestonpans during the following summer.
Scott met the blind poet Thomas Blacklock, who lent him books and introduced him to James Macpherson's Ossian cycle of poems.
His own contribution to the reinvention of Scottish culture was enormous, even though his re-creations of the customs of the Highlands were fanciful at times, despite his extensive travels around his native country.
Unwept, unhonor’d, and unsung.
When it was decided that he would become a lawyer, he returned to the university to study law, first taking classes in Moral Philosophy and Universal History in 1789–90.
The son of a Writer to the Signet (solicitor), Scott was born in 1771 in his Presbyterian family's third-floor flat on College Wynd in the Old Town of Edinburgh, a narrow alleyway leading from the Grassmarket to the gates of the old University of Edinburgh.
In his 1883 ''Life on the Mississippi'', Mark Twain satirized the impact of Scott's writings, declaring (with humorous hyperbole) that Scott "had so large a hand in making Southern character, as it existed before the American Civil War| American Civil war", that he is "in great measure responsible for the war".
There followed a succession of novels over the next five years, each with a Scottish historical setting.
When I was nine or ten years old, the assigned reading in the class was “The Man without a Country", a short story by Edward Everett Hale.
He, along with his "production team", mounted what in modern days could be termed a PR event, in which the King was dressed in tartan, and was greeted by his people, many of whom were also dressed in similar tartan ceremonial dress.
Scott was buried in Dryburgh Abbey, where his wife had earlier been interred.
In 1805, ''The Lay of the Last Minstrel'' captured wide public imagination, and his career as a writer was established in spectacular fashion.
It was a tale of the Jacobite rising of 1745.
As a political conservative, Scott helped to found the Tory ''Quarterly Review'', a review journal to which he made several anonymous contributions.
When the lease of Ashestiel expired in 1811 Scott bought Cartley Hole Farm, on the south bank of the River Tweed nearer Melrose.
One of these songs, "Ellens dritter Gesang", is popularly labelled as "Schubert's ''Ave Maria''".
Postmodern tastes favoured discontinuous narratives and the introduction of the "first person", yet they were more favourable to Scott's work than Modernist tastes.
Scott was ordained as an elder in the Presbyterian Church of Duddington and sat in the General Assembly for a time as representative elder of the burgh of Selkirk.
He was now well able to walk and explore the city and the surrounding countryside.
He was given private tuition by James Mitchell in arithmetic and writing, and learned from him the history of the Church of Scotland with emphasis on the Covenanters.
Scott is now seen as an important innovator and a key figure in the development of Scottish and world literature, and particularly as the inventor of the historical novel.
He married Jane Jobson, only daughter of William Jobson of Lochore (died 1822) and his wife Rachel Stuart (died 1863) on 3 February 1825.
Impressed by this, the Prince Regent (the future George IV) gave Scott permission to conduct a search for the Crown Jewels ("Honours of Scotland").
While F. R. Leavis had disdained Scott, seeing him as a thoroughly bad novelist and a thoroughly bad influence (''The Great Tradition'' 1948), György Lukács (''The Historical Novel'' 1937, trans.
Scott was also a contributor to the ''Edinburgh Review'', which espoused Whig views.
But the Ravenswoods and the wealthy Ashtons, who now own the former Ravenswood lands, are enemies, and Lucie's mother forces her daughter to break her engagement to Edgar and marry the wealthy Sir Arthur Bucklaw.
Scott wrote a series of letters to the ''Edinburgh Weekly Journal'' under the pseudonym "''Malachi Malagrowther''" for retaining the right of Scottish banks to issue their own banknotes.
During the years of the Protectorate under Cromwell the Crown Jewels had been hidden away, but had subsequently been used to crown Charles II.
This campaign is commemorated by his continued appearance on the front of all notes issued by the Bank of Scotland.
Lucie falls into a depression and on their wedding night stabs the bridegroom, succumbs to insanity, and dies.
With only three weeks for planning and execution, Scott created a spectacular and comprehensive pageant, designed not only to impress the King, but also in some way to heal the rifts that had destabilised Scots society.
At its climax there appeared a poem by Sir Walter Scott, which we were obliged to memorize.
Through Flora, Waverley meets Bonnie Prince Charlie, and under her influence goes over to the Jacobite side and takes part in the Battle of Prestonpans.
This poem troubled me a great deal.
I didn’t know exactly what a “dead soul” was, but...I was sure my father didn’t have one.
In 1826, there was outrage in Scotland at the attempt of Parliament to prevent the production of banknotes of less than five pounds.
This form of dress, proscribed after the 1745 rebellion against the English, became one of the seminal, potent and ubiquitous symbols of Scottish identity.
In March 1786 he began an apprenticeship in his father's office to become a Writer to the Signet.
And why should I have to memorize such a nasty verse.
''Tales of my Landlord ''includes the now highly regarded novel ''Old Mortality'', set in 1679–89 against the backdrop of the ferocious anti-Covenanting campaign of the Tory Graham of Claverhouse, subsequently made Viscount Dundee (called "Bluidy Clavers" by his opponents but later dubbed "Bonnie Dundee" by Scott).
After Scott's work had been essentially unstudied for many decades, a revival of critical interest began from the 1960s.
After finishing school he was sent to stay for six months with his aunt Jenny in Kelso, attending the local grammar school where he met James and John Ballantyne, who later became his business partners and printed his books.
So I pondered at the age of ten.
Scott's father, also Walter (1729–1799), was a Freemason, being a member of Lodge St David, No.36 (Edinburgh), and Scott also became a Freemason in his father's Lodge in 1801, albeit only after the death of his father.
In writing ''Old Mortality'' Scott drew upon the knowledge he had acquired from his researches into ballads on the subject for ''The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border''.
A recent critic, who is a legal as well as a literary scholar, argues that ''Old Mortality'' not only reflects the dispute between Stuart's absolute monarchy and the jurisdiction of the courts, but also invokes a foundational moment in British sovereignty, namely, the Habeas Corpus Act (also known as the Great Writ), passed by the English Parliament in 1679.
My father never intended to return to his native land of Lithuania.
The farm had the nickname of "Clarty Hole", and when Scott built a family cottage there in 1812 he named it "Abbotsford".
In ''To Kill a Mockingbird'' (1960), the protagonist's brother is made to read Walter Scott's book ''Ivanhoe'' to the ailing Mrs. Henry Lafayette Dubose, and he refers to the author as "Sir Walter Scout", in reference to his own sister's nickname.
While at the university Scott had become a friend of Adam Ferguson, the son of Professor Adam Ferguson who hosted literary salons.
The institution of the Magna Carta, which happens outside the time frame of the story, is portrayed as a progressive (incremental) reform, but also as a step towards the recovery of a lost golden age of liberty endemic to England and the English system.
Scott served as chairman of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and was also a member of the Royal Celtic Society.
The youthful Waverley obtains a commission in the Whig army and is posted in Dundee.
He used the event to contribute to the drawing of a line under an old world that pitched his homeland into regular bouts of bloody strife.
Although on the surface an entertaining escapist romance, alert contemporary readers would have quickly recognised the political subtext of ''Ivanhoe'', which appeared immediately after the English Parliament, fearful of French-style revolution in the aftermath of Waterloo, had passed the Habeas Corpus Suspension acts of 1817 and 1818 and other extremely repressive measures, and when traditional English Charter rights versus revolutionary human rights was a topic of discussion.
The image on the 2007 series of banknotes is based on the portrait by Henry Raeburn.
He had an unsuccessful love suit with Williamina Belsches of Fettercairn, who married Scott's friend Sir William Forbes, 7th Baronet.
When the protagonists are captured and imprisoned by a Norman baron, Scott interrupts the story to exclaim:
As a lawyer's clerk he made his first visit to the Scottish Highlands directing an eviction.
Designed by David Rhind in 1838, the monument features a large column topped by a statue of Scott.
Unable to consider a military career, Scott enlisted as a volunteer in the 1st Lothian and Border yeomanry.
The annual Walter Scott Prize for Historical Fiction was created in 2010 by the Duke and Duchess of Buccleuch, whose ancestors were closely linked to Sir Walter Scott.
Scott puts a derisive prophecy in the mouth of the jester Wamba:
He published many other poems over the next ten years, including the popular ''The Lady of the Lake'', printed in 1810 and set in the Trossachs.
In 1796, Scott's friend James Ballantyne founded a printing press in Kelso, in the Scottish Borders.
...Doubly dying shall go down
His reading included chivalric romances, poems, history and travel books.
The effect was not always as intended.
A prominent member of the Tory establishment in Edinburgh, Scott was an active member of the Highland Society and served a long term as President of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1820–32).
They were not used to crown subsequent monarchs, but were regularly taken to sittings of Parliament, to represent the absent monarch, until the Act of Union 1707.
This trend accelerated in the 20th century.
Through windows enriched with the insignia of heraldry the sun shone on suits of armour, trophies of the chase, a library of more than 9,000 volumes, fine furniture, and still finer pictures.
Nevertheless, Scott's importance as an innovator continued to be recognized.
Although he continued to be extremely popular and widely read, both at home and abroad, Scott's critical reputation declined in the last half of the 19th century as serious writers turned from romanticism to realism, and Scott began to be regarded as an author suitable for children.
For example: Lodge Sir Walter Scott, No.859, (Perth, Australia) and Lodge Waverly, No.597, (Edinburgh, Scotland).
In 1813 Scott was offered the position of Poet Laureate.
Abbotsford later gave its name to the Abbotsford Club, founded in 1834 in memory of Sir Walter Scott.
A grateful Prince Regent granted Scott the title of baronet, and in March 1820 he received the baronetcy in London, becoming Sir Walter Scott, 1st Baronet.
In contrast, the novels of Scott's contemporary Jane Austen, once appreciated only by the discerning few (including, as it happened, Sir Walter Scott himself) rose steadily in critical esteem, though Austen, as a female writer, was still faulted for her narrow ("feminine") choice of subject matter, which, unlike Scott, avoided the grand historical themes traditionally viewed as masculine.
He included little in the way of punctuation in his drafts, leaving such details to the printers to supply.
Oblique reference to the origin of ''Habeas corpus'' underlies Scott's next novel, ''Ivanhoe'', set during the era of the creation of the Magna Carta, which political conservatives like Walter Scott and Edmund Burke regarded as rooted in immemorial British custom and precedent.
At the age of 25 he began to write professionally, translating works from German, his first publication being rhymed versions of ballads by Gottfried August Bürger in 1796.
Scott began studying classics at the University of Edinburgh in November 1783, at the age of 12, a year or so younger than most of his fellow students.
Numerous Masonic Lodges have been named after him and his novels.
He chooses to marry the beautiful Rose Bradwardine, rather than cast his lot with the sublime Flora MacIvor, who, after the failure of the '45 rising, retires to a French convent.
Although Scott had attained world-wide celebrity through his poetry, he soon tried his hand at documenting his researches into the oral tradition of the Scottish Borders in prose fiction—stories and novels—at the time still considered aesthetically inferior to poetry (above all to such classical genres as the epic or poetic tragedy) as a mimetic vehicle for portraying historical events.
The farmhouse developed into a wonderful home that has been likened to a fairy palace.
He was described in 1820 as tall, well formed (except for one ankle and foot which made him walk lamely), neither fat nor thin, with forehead very high, nose short, upper lip long and face rather fleshy, complexion fresh and clear, eyes very blue, shrewd and penetrating, with hair now silvery white.
Waverley (whose surname name reflects his divided loyalties) eventually decides to lead a peaceful life of establishment respectability under the House of Hanover rather than live as a proscribed rebel.
Scott's novels were certainly influential in the making of the Victorian craze for all things Scottish among British royalty, who were anxious to claim legitimacy through their rather attenuated historical connection with the royal house of Stuart.
Portions of the German translation of this work were set to music by Franz Schubert.
Scott's orchestration of King George IV's visit to Scotland, in 1822, was a pivotal event intended to inspire a view of his home country that, in his view, accentuated the positive aspects of the past while allowing the age of quasi-medieval blood-letting to be put to rest, while envisioning a more useful, peaceful future.
After their third son was born in 1801, they moved to a spacious three-storey house built for Scott at 39 North Castle Street.
There is a statue of Scott in New York City's Central Park.
''Ivanhoe'' was also remarkable in its sympathetic portrayal of Jewish characters: Rebecca, considered by many critics the book's real heroine, does not in the end get to marry Ivanhoe, whom she loves, but Scott allows her to remain faithful to her own religion, rather than having her convert to Christianity.
More land was purchased until Scott owned nearly .
In 1815 he was given the honour of dining with George, Prince Regent, who wanted to meet the "Author of Waverley".
In the cultural sphere, Scott's Waverley novels played a significant part in the movement (begun with James Macpherson's ''Ossian'' cycle) in rehabilitating the public perception of the Scottish Highlands and its culture, which had been formally suppressed as barbaric, and viewed in the southern mind as a breeding ground of hill bandits, religious fanaticism, and Jacobite rebellions.
He continued to expand the estate, and built Abbotsford House in a series of extensions.
At £25,000 it is one of the largest prizes in British literature.
On a trip to the Lake District with old college friends he met Charlotte Genevieve Charpentier (or Carpenter), daughter of Jean Charpentier of Lyon in France, and ward of Lord Downshire in Cumberland, an Episcopalian.
In ''Ivanhoe'', which is one of Scott's Waverley novels, religious and sectarian fanatics are the villains, while the eponymous hero is a bystander who must weigh the evidence and decide where to take a stand.
During this time Scott became known by the nickname "The Wizard of the North".
He was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in 1792.
''Marmion'', published in 1808, produced lines that have become proverbial.
This led to the destitution of around 270 ministers who had refused to take an oath of allegiance and submit themselves to bishops, and who continued to conduct worship among a remnant of their flock in caves and other remote country spots.
Scott's ''Ivanhoe'' continued to be required reading for many American high school students until the end of the 1950s.
Nearby is a large statue of William Wallace, one of Scotland's many romanticised historical figures.
In 1818, Scott and a small team of military men opened the box, and "unearthed" the honours from the Crown Room in the depths of Edinburgh Castle.
Here he was taught to read by his aunt Jenny, and learned from her the speech patterns and many of the tales and legends that characterised much of his work.
''Ivanhoe'' (1819), set in 12th-century England, marked a move away from Scott's focus on the local history of Scotland.
In 1825 a UK-wide banking crisis resulted in the collapse of the Ballantyne printing business, of which Scott was the only partner with a financial interest; the company's debts of £130,000 () caused his very public ruin.
After completing his studies in law, he became a lawyer in Edinburgh.
Scott was Donaldson's proposer when he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Through Ballantyne, Scott was able to publish his first works, including "Glenfinlas" and "The Eve of St. John", and his poetry then began to bring him to public attention.
On leave, he meets his uncle's friend, the Jacobite Baron Bradwardine and is attracted to the Baron's daughter Rose.
The fact that Scott was a Lowland Presbyterian, rather than a Gaelic-speaking Catholic Highlander, made him more acceptable to a conservative English reading public.
During the winter of 1786–87 the 15-year-old Scott saw Robert Burns at one of these salons, for what was to be their only meeting.
1962 and David Daiches (''Scott's Achievement as a Novelist'' 1951, offered a Marxian political reading of Scott's fiction that generated a great deal of genuine interest in his work.
''Ivanhoe'' depicts the cruel tyranny of the Norman overlords (Norman Yoke)  over the impoverished Saxon populace of England, with two of the main characters, Rowena and Locksley (Robin Hood), representing the dispossessed Saxon aristocracy.
Who never to himself hath said,
Scott has been credited with rescuing the Scottish banknote.
In an innovative and astute action, he wrote and published his first novel, ''Waverley'', anonymously in 1814.
It is estimated that the building cost Scott more than £25,000 ().
Much of Scott's autograph work shows an almost stream-of-consciousness approach to writing.
I can still recite it:
As a boy, youth and young man, Scott was fascinated by the oral traditions of the Scottish Borders.
Scott's eldest son Lt Walter Scott, inherited his father's estate and possessions.
During his lifetime, Scott's portrait was painted by Sir Edwin Landseer and fellow-Scots Sir Henry Raeburn and James Eckford Lauder.
In ''Mother Night'' (1961) by Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., memoirist and playwright Howard W. Campbell, Jr., prefaces his text with the six lines beginning "Breathes there the man..."
He sought advice from the Duke of Buccleuch, who counseled him to retain his literary independence, and the position went to Scott's friend, Robert Southey.
Scott's background as a lawyer also informed his perspective, for at the time of the novel, which takes place before the Act of Union of 1707, English law did not apply in Scotland, and afterwards Scotland has continued to have its own Scots law as a hybrid legal system.
He survived a childhood bout of polio in 1773 that left him lame,  a condition that was to have a significant effect on his life and writing.
They had five children, of whom four survived by the time of Scott's death, most baptized by an Episcopalian clergyman.
It is a testament to Scott's contribution in creating a unified identity for Scotland that Edinburgh's central railway station, opened in 1854 by the North British Railway, is called Waverley.
Mindful of his reputation as a poet, Scott maintained the anonymity he had begun with ''Waverley'',  publishing the novels under the name "Author of Waverley" or as "Tales of..." with no author.
The idyllic Cape Cod retreat of suffragists Verena Tarrant  and Olive Chancellor in Henry James' ''The Bostonians'' (1886) is called Marmion, evoking what James considered the Quixotic idealism of these social reformers.
During the summers from 1804, Scott made his home at the large house of Ashestiel, on the south bank of the River Tweed  north of Selkirk.
He was an obsessive collector of stories, and developed an innovative method of recording what he heard at the feet of local story-tellers using carvings on twigs, to avoid the disapproval of those who believed that such stories were neither for writing down nor for printing.
In Glasgow, Walter Scott's Monument dominates the centre of George Square, the main public square in the city.
Among those familiar with his poetry, his identity became an open secret, but Scott persisted in maintaining the façade, perhaps because he thought his old-fashioned father would disapprove of his engaging in such a trivial pursuit as novel writing.
He declined, due to concerns that "such an appointment would be a poisoned chalice", as the Laureateship had fallen into disrepute, due to the decline in quality of work suffered by previous title holders, ", as a succession of poetasters had churned out conventional and obsequious odes on royal occasions."
There is a tower dedicated to his memory on Corstorphine Hill in the west of the city and, as mentioned, Edinburgh's Waverley railway station takes its name from one of his novels.
Among the best known is ''The Bride of Lammermoor'', a fictionalized version of an actual incident in the history of the Dalrymple family that took place in the Lammermuir Hills in 1669.
The last two lines...stated that my father was to go down into the vile dust from which he sprung...The poem never caused me to think less of my father, whom I loved and respected, but I quickly grew to despise and, in a sense, fear the thought advanced by the poetry.
Thereafter, the honours were stored in Edinburgh Castle, but the large locked box in which they were stored was not opened for more than 100 years, and stories circulated that they had been "lost" or removed.
During and immediately after World War I there was a movement spearheaded by President Wilson and other eminent people to inculcate patriotism in American school children, especially immigrants, and to stress the American connection with the literature and institutions of the "mother country" of Great Britain, using selected readings in middle school textbooks.
What was all this nonsense about a “native land”?
—"The Lay of the Last Minstrel" (1805)
This provoked such a response that the Government was forced to relent and allow the Scottish banks to continue printing pound notes.
On a visit to the Highlands, Edward overstays his leave and is arrested and charged with desertion but is rescued by the Highland chieftain Fergus MacIvor and his mesmerizing sister Flora, whose devotion to the Stuart cause, "as it exceeded her brother's in fanaticism, excelled it also in purity".
Scott was a pioneer of the Scottish Baronial style of architecture, therefore Abbotsford is festooned with turrets and stepped gabling.
Scott's 1819 series ''Tales of my Landlord'' is sometimes considered a subset of the ''Waverley'' novels and was intended to illustrate aspects of Scottish regional life.
In his novel ''Kenilworth'', Elizabeth I is welcomed to the castle of that name by means of an elaborate pageant, the details of which Scott was well qualified to itemize.
Two Presbyterian ministers and one Episcopalian officiated at his funeral.
Rather than declare himself bankrupt, or to accept any kind of financial support from his many supporters and admirers (including the king himself), he placed his house and income in a trust belonging to his creditors, and determined to write his way out of debt.
He was acclaimed as the inventor of the genre of the modern historical novel (which others trace to Jane Porter, whose work in the genre predates Scott's) and the inspiration for enormous numbers of imitators and genre writers both in Britain and on the European continent.
When Burns noticed a print illustrating the poem "The Justice of the Peace" and asked who had written the poem, only Scott knew that it was by John Langhorne, and was thanked by Burns.
He became a partner in their business.
Why was it better than any other land?
A Roman road with a ford near Melrose used in olden days by the abbots of Melrose suggested the name of Abbotsford.
Based partly on Hume's ''History of England'' and the ballad cycle of Robin Hood, ''Ivanhoe'' was quickly translated into many languages and inspired countless imitations and theatrical adaptations.
As a result of his early polio infection, Scott had a pronounced limp.
The prolonged, climactic coloratura mad scene for Lucia in Donizetti's 1835 bel canto opera ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' is based on what in the novel were just a few bland sentences.
He goes on to coin the term "Sir Walter Scott disease", which he blames for the South's lack of advancement.
Through the medium of Scott's novels, the violent religious and political conflicts of the country's recent past could be seen as belonging to history—which Scott defined, as the subtitle of ''Waverley'' ("'Tis Sixty Years Since") indicates, as something that happened at least 60 years ago.
Its English protagonist, Edward Waverley, like Don Quixote a great reader of romances, has been brought up by his Tory uncle, who is sympathetic to Jacobitism, although Edward's own father is a Whig.
'', a short story with a title alluding vividly to Scott's ''The Lay of the Last Minstrel'' (1805).
Beethoven's opus 108 "Twenty-Five Scottish Songs" includes 3 folk songs whose words are by Walter Scott.
In 1799 he was appointed Sheriff-Depute of the County of Selkirk, based in the Royal Burgh of Selkirk.
Scott's positive portrayal of Judaism, which reflects his humanity and concern for religious toleration, also coincided with a contemporary movement for the Emancipation of the Jews in England.
It was completed in 1844, 12 years after Scott's death, and dominates the south side of Princes Street.
