The power vector of the combustion stage goes through the center of the offset lobe.
The boundary layer shields and the oil film act as thermal insulation, leading to a low temperature of the lubricating film (maximum ~200&nbsp;°C/400&nbsp;°F) on a water-cooled Wankel engine.
To overcome the differences in temperatures between different regions of housing and side and intermediary plates, and the associated thermal dilatation inequities, the use of a heat pipe, transporting heat from the hot to the cold parts of engine, has been shown to reduce, in a small displacement, charge cooled rotor, air-cooled housing wankel engine, the maximal engine temperature from 231&nbsp;°C to 129&nbsp;°C, and the maximum difference from a hotter to a colder region of engine, from 159&nbsp;°C to 18&nbsp;°C.
In addition, miniature engines suffer from an adverse surface to volume ratio causing excess heat losses; the relatively large surface area of the combustion chamber walls transfers away what little heat is generated in the small combustion volume resulting in quenching and low efficiency.
Ford tested a rotary engine with the plugs placed in the side plates, instead of the usual placement in the housing working surface (, 1978).
The engine, based on an earlier unmanned aerial vehicle Wankel diesel concept called "Endurocore".
Even before Suzuki produced the RE5, in Birmingham BSA's research engineer David Garside, was developing a twin-rotor Wankel motorcycle.
This is due to the smoothness inherent in circular motion, and the absence of highly stressed parts such as crankshafts, camshafts or connecting rods.
The force of gas pressure on the rotor (to a first approximation) goes directly to the center of the eccentric, part of the output shaft...
Most are Mazda 12A and 13B automobile engines, converted to aviation use.
Since 1991, the professionally organized Star Mazda Series has been the most popular format for sponsors, spectators, and upward bound drivers.
A calculation of this form dictates that a two-rotor Wankel displacing 654&nbsp;cc per face will have a displacement of 1.3 liters per every rotation of the eccentric shaft (only two total faces, one face per rotor going through a full power stroke) and 2.6 liters after two revolutions (four total faces, two faces per rotor going through a full power stroke).
The maximum revolutions of a rotary engine is limited by tooth load on the synchronizing gears.
In 2010 FEV Inc revealed that in their prototype electric version of the Fiat 500 a Wankel engine would also be used as a range extender.
Kawasaki proposed a triangular tail extension of the plug hole, pointing to the combustion chamber trailing side to solve this.
When compared by specific output, however, the convention results in large imbalances in favor of the Wankel motor, an early approach was rating displacement of each rotor as two times the chamber.
Homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) is where the fuel/air intake is a pre-mixed lean air-fuel mixture then compressed to the point of auto-ignition.
In the early 1980s, using earlier work at BSA, Norton produced the air-cooled twin-rotor Classic, followed by the liquid-cooled Commander and the Interpol2 (a police version).
NSU were to concentrate on low- and medium-powered Wankel engine development and Curtiss-Wright developing high-powered engines, including aircraft engines of which Curtiss-Wright had decades of experience designing and producing.
They are in a relatively mild state of racing tune, so that they are extremely reliable and can go years between motor rebuilds.
However, Mazda chose a method to comply with hydrocarbon emission standards that, while less expensive to produce, increased fuel consumption.
These innovations promise to improve fuel consumption and emissions.
The Renesis engine solved the problem by using a keystone scraper side seal, and approached the thermal distortion difficulties by adding some parts made of ceramics.
Valmet Automotive of Finland in 2013 revealed a prototype car incorporating a Wankel powered series-hybrid powertrain car named the EVA, utilizing an engine manufactured by the German company Wankel SuperTec.
However, the engine needed to be stripped to change the spark plugs and contained more parts.
A Wankel engine used only in a generator setup has packaging and weight distribution advantages, maximizing interior passenger and luggage space when used in a vehicle.
With a number of these engines mounted on aircraft, as of 10 December 2006 the National Transportation Safety Board has only seven reports of incidents involving aircraft with Mazda engines, and none of these were a failure due to design or manufacturing flaws.
Several approaches involving solid lubricants were tested, and even the addition of MoS2, one cc per liter of fuel is advised (LiquiMoly).
The oil for Apex seals and crankcase lubrication is separate.
The shape of the Wankel combustion chamber is more resistant to preignition operating on lower-octane rating gasoline than a comparable piston engine.
As the rotor moves the fuel charge, the second two fire a fraction of second behind the first pair of plugs igniting near the rear of the rotor at the back of the fuel charge.
The Malibu Grand Prix chain, similar in concept to commercial recreational kart racing tracks, operates several venues in the United States where a customer can purchase several laps around a track in a vehicle very similar to open wheel racing vehicles, but powered by a small Curtiss-Wright rotary engine.
However, as gas pressure participates in seal efficiency, racing a Wankel engine at high rpm under no load conditions can destroy the engine.
The engines was developed by the TARDEC US Army lab.
While this approach does increase the complexity of the eccentric shaft design, it has been used successfully in the Mazda's production three-rotor 20B-REW engine, as well as many low volume production race engines.
As of June 2010, G-300 rotary engine development ceased, with the company citing a need for cash flow to complete development.
Electronic spark ignition is eliminated.
If the shaft is spinning at 7,500 rpm, the rotors are turning at a much slower 2,500 rpm.
The rotors both rotate around the eccentrics and make orbital revolutions around the eccentric shaft.
The first engines had the oil supply calculated with consideration of gasoline's lubricating qualities.
The aircraft is expected to deliver 100 kts cruise speed from a 30&nbsp;hp Wankel engine, with a fuel economy of 75 mpg using standard motor gasoline (MOGAS), developing 22&nbsp;kW (30&nbsp;hp).
Since the rotor rides directly on a large bearing on the output shaft, there are no connecting rods and no crankshaft.
Most of the production went to the security services.
Automobile Wankel rotary engines are capable of high-speed operation.
Piston-engine cars required expensive catalytic converters to deal with both unburned hydrocarbons and NOx emissions.
GM tested an Iron Rotor and Iron Housing in their prototype Wankel engines, that worked at higher temperatures with lower specific fuel consumption.
However, General Motors' engines had not reached production when the Pacer was launched onto the market.
Lead is a solid lubricant with leaded gasoline linked to a reduced wear of seals and housings.
This concept had a precedent in the Glow Plug used by Toyota (SAE paper 790435), and the SAE paper 930680, by D Hixon et al, on 'Catalytic Glow Plugs in the JDTI Stratified Charge Rotary Engine'.
The sealing at the Wankel apexes is less critical, as leakage is between adjacent chambers on adjacent strokes of the cycle, rather than to the crankcase.
They discovered that the origin was in the apex seals reaching a resonating vibration, and solved the problem by reducing the thickness and weight of apex seals.
Mazda announced the introduction of the series-hybrid Mazda2 EV car using a Wankel engine as a range extender, however no date of introduction has been announced.
With circumferential or axial flow cooling, the temperature difference remains tolerable.
Additionally, both sides of the seals are being exposed to fuel, and the design does not allow for a dedicated lubrication system, as in two-stroke engines.
Research by T Kohno proved that installing a glow-plug in the combustion chamber improved 7% part load and low revolutions per minute fuel economy.
Mercedes-Benz used split bearings.
In 1967, NSU began production of a Wankel-engined luxury car, the Ro 80.
As well as the rotor apex seals evident in the conceptual diagram, the rotor must also seal against the chamber ends.
HCCI engines achieve low levels of nitrogen oxide emissions (NO x) without a catalytic converter.
The surface-to-volume-ratio in the moving combustion chamber is so complex that a direct comparison cannot be made between a reciprocating piston engine and a Wankel engine.
Wankel engines generally can sustain much higher engine revolutions than reciprocating engines of similar power output.
Hence, comparing power outputs is a realistic metric.
For this reason, Wankel engines are very well suited to snowmobiles, which often take users into remote places where a failure could result in frostbite or death, and aircraft, where abrupt failure is likely to lead to a crash or forced landing in a remote place.
In 2010 Audi revealed a prototype series-hybrid electric car, the A1 e-tron, that incorporated a small 250&nbsp;cc Wankel engine running at 5,000&nbsp;rpm recharging the car's batteries as needed, and providing electricity directly to the electric driving motor.
Mazda and NSU signed a study contract to develop the Wankel engine in 1961 and competed to bring the first Wankel-powered automobile to market.
Although it was said to handle well, The result was that the Suzuki was heavy, overcomplicated, expensive to manufacture, and (at 62&nbsp;bhp) a little short on power.
Wankel engines run very hot on the ignition and exhaust side of the engine's trochoid chamber, whereas the intake and compression parts are cooler.
This solved the problem of the earlier ash buildup in the engine, and thermal distortion problems of side intake and exhaust ports.
Although Mazda produced an experimental Wankel that year, NSU was first with a Wankel automobile for sale, the sporty NSU Spider in 1964; Mazda countered with a display of two- and four-rotor Wankel engines at that year's Tokyo Motor Show.
Another problem concerns the hydrogenate attack on the lubricating film in reciprocating engines.
To improve fuel efficiency further, Mazda is looking at using the Wankel as a range extender in series-hybrid cars announcing a prototype, the Mazda2 EV, for press evaluation in November 2013.
In roughly the same timeframe as the first experiments with full-scale aircraft powered with Wankel engines, model aircraft-sized versions were pioneered by a combine of the well-known Japanese O.S.
HCCI engines achieve gasoline engine-like emissions with compression ignition engine-like efficiency.
Many engineers agree that the addition of oil to gasoline as in old two-stroke engines is a safer approach for engine reliability than an oil pump injecting into the intake system or directly to the parts requiring lubrication.
Many companies and hobbyists adapt Mazda rotary engines (taken from automobiles) to aircraft use; others, including Wankel GmbH itself, manufacture Wankel rotary engines dedicated for this purpose.
The KKM 57 (the Wankel rotary engine, ''Kreiskolbenmotor'') was constructed by NSU engineer Hanns Dieter Paschke in 1957 without the knowledge of Felix Wankel, who later remarked "you have turned my race horse into a plow mare".
The company is continuing development of the next generation of Wankel engines, the SkyActiv-R with a new rear wheel drive sports car model announced in October 2015 although with no launch date given.
The theoretical shape of the rotor between the fixed corners is the result of a minimization of the volume of the geometric combustion chamber and a maximization of the compression ratio, respectively.
American Motors (AMC) was so convinced "... that the rotary engine will play an important role as a powerplant for cars and trucks of the future....", that the chairman, Roy D. Chapin Jr., of the smallest U.S. automaker signed an agreement in February 1973, after a year's negotiations, to build Wankels for both passenger cars and Jeeps, as well as the right to sell any rotary engines it produced to other companies.
This configuration improves fuel efficiency and emissions.
A peripheral intake port gives the highest mean effective pressure, however, side intake porting produces a more steady idle, as it helps to prevent blow-back of burned gases into the intake ducts which cause "misfirings": alternating cycles where the mixture ignites and fails to ignite; peripheral porting (PP) gives the best mean effective pressure throughout the rpm range, but PP was linked also to worse idle stability and part-load performance.
The shape and positioning of the recess in the rotor, which forms most of the combustion chamber, influences emissions and fuel economy.
As General Motors managers were cancelling the Wankel project, the R&D team released only partly the results of their most recent research, which claimed to have solved the fuel economy problem, and building reliable engines with a lifespan above 530,000 miles.
The first working prototype, DKM 54, produced 21 horsepower and ran on February 1, 1957, at the NSU research and development department ''Versuchsabteilung TX''.
one power stroke per rotor orbital revolution and three power strokes per rotor rotation.
Piston rings are not perfect seals: each has a gap to allow for expansion.
The fuel is pre-heated to 98 degrees Celsius before injection into the combustion chamber.
Owners must periodically add small amounts of oil, thereby increasing running costs.
Elasticity is also improved with a greater rotor eccentricity, analogous to a longer stroke in a reciprocating engine.
A side-port exhaust, as is used in the Mazda Renesis, avoids one of the causes of this because the unburned mixture cannot escape.
Aixro of Germany produces and sells a 294 cc per chamber charge-cooled rotor and liquid-cooled housings kart engines, other makers are: Wankel AG, Cubewano, Rotron, Precision Technology USA.
Leaded gasoline was phased out, with Wankel engines needing an increased mix of oil in the gasoline to provide lubrication to critical engine parts.
The Wankel, therefore, has higher volumetric efficiency and lower pumping losses through the absence of choking valves.
This premature release of the new Wankel engine gave a poor reputation for all makes and even when these issues were solved in the last engines produced by NSU in the second half of the '70s, sales did not recover.
Engines firm and the then-extant German Graupner aeromodeling products firm, under license from NSU/Auto-Union.
Many engines do not require oil changes, as the oil is not contaminated by the combustion process.
Wankel engines operate better with a low pressure exhaust system, higher exhaust back pressure reducing mean effective pressure, more severely in peripheral intake port engines.
In 1974 Hercules produced W-2000 Wankel motorcycles, but low production numbers meant the project was unprofitable, and production ceased in 1977.
Curtiss-Wright showed also that the rotor can be widened, keeping the rest of engine's architecture unchanged, thus reducing friction losses and increasing displacement and power output.
The basic design parameters of Wankel preclude obtaining a Compression Ratio higher than 15:1 or 17:1 in a practical engine, but attempts are continuously made to produce a compression ignition Wankel.
All engines exhibit oil loss, however the rotary engine is engineered with a sealed motor, unlike a piston engine that has a film of oil that splashes on the walls of the cylinder to lubricate them, hence an oil "control" ring.
Direct fuel injection of which the Wankel engine is suited, combined with laser ignition in single or multiple laser plugs, has shown to enhance the motor even further reducing the disadvantages.
However, NSU had not produced reliable apex seals on the rotor, unlike Mazda and Curtiss-Wright.
The KKM engine is simpler, having a fixed housing.
In the early 1970s Johnson and other brands sold Snowmobiles powered by 35 or 45 HP Wankel engines designed and built by OMC.
Due to the compact size and the high power to weight ratio of a Wankel engine, a number have been proposed for electric vehicles as range extenders to supplement when electric battery levels are low, with a number of concept cars incorporating a series hybrid powertrain arrangement.
Two spark plugs ignite the fuel charge at the front of the rotor as it moves into the combustion section of the housing.
At the price of increased complication for a high pressure diesel type injection system, fuel consumption in the same range as small pre-chamber automotive and industrial diesels has been demonstrated with Curtiss-Wright's stratified charge multi-fuel engines, while preserving the aforementioned Wankel rotary advantages Unlike a piston and overhead valve engine, there are no valves which can float at higher rpm causing loss of performance.
Mazda have undertaken research on HCCI ignition for its SkyActiv-R rotary engine project using research from its SkyActiv Generation 2 program.
This leads to greater suitability for direct fuel injection and stratified charge operation.
The  CREEV system (Compound Rotary Engine for Electric Vehicles) uses a secondary rotor to extract energy from the exhaust, consuming unburnt exhaust products while expansion occurs in the secondary rotor stage, thus reducing overall emissions and fuel costs by recouping exhaust energy that would otherwise be lost.
A later alternative solution to spark plug boss cooling was provided with a variable coolant velocity scheme for water-cooled rotaries, which has had widespread use, being patented by Curtiss-Wright, with the last-listed for better air-cooled engine spark plug boss cooling.
7/2/62), and slightly "crowned" apex seals (different height in the center and in the extremes of seal).
Despite much research and development throughout the world, only Mazda has produced Wankel engines in large quantities.
In 1972 Kawasaki presented its two-rotor Kawasaki X99 rotary engine prototype (US patents N 3848574 &3991722).
Amongst them were Alfa Romeo, American Motors, Citroen, Ford, General Motors, Mazda, Mercedes-Benz, Nissan, Porsche, Rolls-Royce, Suzuki, and Toyota.
An October 28, 2010 patent from Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne, describes a Wankel engine superficially similar to Rolls-Royce's earlier prototype that required an external air compressor to achieve high enough compression for compression ignition -cycle combustion.
Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne have been commissioned by DARPA to develop a diesel Wankel engine for use in a prototype VTOL flying car called the "Transformer".
Mazda of Japan ceased production of direct drive Wankel engines in their model range in 2012, leaving the motor industry world-wide with no production cars using the engine.
The series-hybrid powertrain using the Wankel engine reduces the weight of the plane by 100 kilograms from its predecessor.
All competitors had the same amount of fuel available due to the Le Mans limited fuel quantity rule.)
* Bad fuel economy.
Suzuki chose a single rotor that was fairly smooth, however with rough patches at 4,000&nbsp;rpm; Garside opted for a turbine-smooth twin-rotor motor.
The electric motor uses electricity stored in batteries, with the generator engine off, to take off and climb reducing sound emissions.
Valves or complex valve trains are eliminated by using simple ports cut into the walls of the rotor housing.
The four Otto cycles last 1080° for a Wankel engine (three revolutions of the output shaft) versus 720° for a four-stroke reciprocating piston engine, but the four strokes are still the same proportion of the total.
It was a complex design, with both liquid cooling and oil cooling, and multiple lubrication and carburetor systems.
The Japanese regulations for calculating displacements for engine ratings use the volume displacement of one rotor face only, and the auto industry commonly accepts this method as the standard for calculating the displacement of a rotary.
NSU subsequently licensed the design to companies around the world, who have continually added improvements.
Liquid cooled engines require a mineral multigrade oil for cold starts, and wankel engines need a warm-up time before full load operation as reciprocating engines do.
The design differs from Rolls-Royce's compression ignition rotary mainly by proposing an injector both in the exhaust passage between the combustor rotor and expansion rotor stages, and an injector in the expansion rotor's expansion chamber, for 'afterburning'.
While this places high demands on the materials used, the simplicity of the Wankel makes it easier to use alternative materials, such as exotic alloys and ceramics.
Fuel injection in which fuel is injected towards the leading edge of the combustion chamber can minimize the amount of unburnt fuel in the exhaust.
Small Wankel engines are being found increasingly in other applications, such as go-karts, personal water craft and auxiliary power units for aircraft.
While a four-stroke piston engine completes one combustion stroke per cylinder for every two rotations of the crankshaft (that is, one-half power stroke per crankshaft rotation per cylinder), each combustion chamber in the Wankel generates one combustion stroke per driveshaft rotation, i.e.
The basis of the DKM type of motor is that both the rotor and the housing spin around on separate axes.
Acceleration and deceleration as in direct drive average driving conditions also affect fuel economy.
The combination between housing plating and apex and side seals materials was determined experimentally, to obtain the best duration of both seals and housing cover.
Mazda Wankel engines in auto racing are operated above 10,000&nbsp;rpm.
This ensures that even a severely overheated Wankel engine cannot seize, as would be likely to occur in an overheated piston engine.
The Wankel engine design used today was not designed by Felix Wankel.
Subsequent Norton Wankel bikes included the Norton F1, F1 Sports, RC588, Norton RCW588, and NRS588.
This substantially increases the lubricating oil consumption in a four-stroke hydrogen engine.
This leads to a greater rotor eccentricity, equating to a longer stroke in a reciprocating engine, for better elasticity and low revolutions per minute torque.
The UK Aixro dealer offers a Range Extender based in the 294 cc per chamber Kart engine.
Peter Garrison, contributing editor for ''Flying'' magazine, has said that "In my opinion, however, the most promising engine for aviation use is the Mazda rotary."
In addition to the removal of internal reciprocating stresses by virtue of the complete removal of reciprocating internal parts typically found in a piston engine, the Wankel engine is constructed with an iron rotor within a housing made of aluminium, which has a greater coefficient of thermal expansion.
Peripheral ported rotary engines have a better mean effective pressure, especially at high rpm and with a rectangular shaped intake port.
Mazdas have indeed worked well when converted for use in homebuilt aircraft.
In each rotor of the Wankel engine, the oval-like epitrochoid-shaped housing surrounds a rotor which is triangular with bow-shaped flanks (often confused with a Reuleaux triangle, a three-pointed curve of constant width, but with the bulge in the middle of each side a bit more flattened).
Suzuki had three lube systems, whilst Garside had a single total-loss oil injection system which was fed to both the main bearings and the intake manifolds.
In contrast to the more common reciprocating piston designs, the Wankel engine delivers advantages of simplicity, smoothness, compactness, high revolutions per minute, and a high power-to-weight ratio.
* On some Wankel engines the sump oil remains uncontaminated by the combustion process requiring no oil changes.
Piston engines under the same circumstances are prone to seizing or breaking parts that almost certainly results in catastrophic failure of the engine and instant full loss of power.
However, in November 2013 Mazda announced a series-hybrid prototype car to the motoring press, the Mazda2 EV using a Wankel engine as a range extender.
The rotational shaft speed of a Wankel engine is high compared to reciprocating piston designs.
The aim is to reduce fuel consumption and emissions by up to 25 percent.
The rotation of each rotor on its own axis is caused and controlled by a pair of synchronizing gears A fixed gear mounted on one side of the rotor housing engages a ring gear attached to the rotor and ensures the rotor moves exactly 1/3 turn for each turn of the eccentric shaft.
The Wankel engine has the advantages of compact design and low weight over the most commonly used internal combustion engine employing reciprocating pistons.
It was common for very early Mazda engines to require rebuilding after .
For a while, engineers were faced with what they called "chatter marks" and "devil's scratch" in the inner epitrochoid surface.
When comparing the power-to-weight ratio, physical size or physical weight to a similar power output piston engine, the Wankel is superior.
Diamond Aircraft state that the technology using Wankel engines is scalable to a 100-seat aircraft.
Running the engine at a constant speed and load eliminates excess fuel consumption.
Gaps can develop between the apex seal and troichoid housing in light-load operation when imbalances in centrifugal force and gas pressure occur.
The point of power to weight has been reached of under one pound weight per horsepower output.
Since Wankel engines operate at a relatively high rotational speed, at 6'000 rpm of output shaft, the Rotor makes only 2'000 turns, with relatively low torque, propeller driven aircraft must use a propeller speed reduction unit to maintain propellers within the designed speed range.
plans to utilize Wankel rotors of varying sizes on a shared eccentric shaft to increase efficiency.
This poor combustion in the trailing side of chamber is one of the reasons why there is more carbon monoxide and unburnt hydrocarbons in a Wankel's exhaust stream.
In contrast, reciprocating engines perform these four strokes in one chamber, so that extremes of "freezing" intake and "flaming" exhaust are averaged and shielded by a boundary layer from overheating working parts.
The cancellation of General Motors' Wankel project required AMC to reconfigure the Pacer to house its venerable AMC straight-6 engine driving the rear-wheels.
The oil in the mainshaft is totally sealed from the combustion process.
Mercedes-Benz fitted a Wankel engine in their C111 concept car.
The surface-to-volume ratio of a reciprocating piston diesel engine is much poorer than a reciprocating piston gasoline engine, however diesel engines have a higher efficiency factor.
Yanmar Diesel of Japan produced some small, charge-cooled rotor rotary engines for uses such as chainsaws and outboard engines, some of their contributions are the LDR (rotor recess in the leading edge of combustion chamber) engines having better exhaust emissions profiles, and that reed-valve controlled intake ports improved part-load and low rpm performance.
Diesel engines combine stratified charge (SC) with compression ignition (CI), abbreviated as SCCI.
Four-stroke reciprocating engines are less suitable for use with hydrogen fuel.
The first sale was 2016.
Aircraft Wankels have been taken up with the advantages over other engines being exploited.
Soviet automobile manufacturer AvtoVAZ also experimented in Wankel engine design without a license, introducing a limited number of engines in some cars.
The central drive shaft, called the "eccentric shaft" or "E-shaft", passes through the center of the rotor and is supported by fixed bearings.
Compression ignition engine research is being undertaken by Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne who were commissioned by DARPA to develop a compression ignition Wankel engine for use in a prototype VTOL flying car called the "Transformer".
Suzuki opted for complicated multi-stage carburation, whilst Garside choose simple carburetors.
The limiting factor for this widening being mechanical considerations, especially shaft deflection at high rotative speeds.
Mazda, however, claimed to have solved the apex seal problem, and operated test engines at high speed for 300 hours without failure.
After years of development, Mazda's first Wankel engine car was the 1967 Cosmo 110S.
Because of the quasi-overlap of the power strokes that cause the smoothness of the engine and the avoidance of the four-stroke cycle as in a reciprocating engine, the Wankel engine is very quick to react to power increase changes giving a quick delivery of power when the demand arises, especially at higher rpm's.
Early work from Toyota led to the addition of a fresh air supply to the exhaust port and proved also that a Reed-valve in the intake port or ducts improved the low rpm and partial load performance of wankel engines, by preventing blow-back of exhaust gas into the intake port and ducts, and reducing the misfiring-inducing high EGR, at the cost of a small loss of power at top rpm; this is according to David W. Garside, the developer of the Norton rotary engine, who proposed that an earlier opening of the intake port before top dead center (TDC) and longer intake ducts improved low rpm torque and elasticity of wankel engines, also described in Kenichi Yamamoto's books.
The two different design approaches, taken by Suzuki and BSA may usefully be compared.
Mazda's RX-8 car with the Renesis engine, fuel economy met California State requirements, including California's low emissions vehicle (LEV) standards.
In piston engines the crankcase oil is contaminated by combustion blow-by through the piston rings.
With water cooling in a radial or axial flow direction, with the hot water from the hot bow heating the cold bow, the thermal expansion remains tolerable; top engine temperature has been reduced to 129&nbsp;°C, with a maximum temperature difference between engine parts of 18&nbsp;°C by the use of heat pipes around the housing and in side plates as a cooling means.
The Mazda Renesis engine, with both intake and exhaust side ports, suppressed the loss of unburned mix to exhaust formerly induced by port overlap.
The hydrogen can misfire on hot parts like the exhaust valve and spark plugs.
As the rotor's apex seals pass over the spark plug hole, a small amount of compressed charge can be lost from the charge chamber to the exhaust chamber, entailing fuel in the exhaust, reducing efficiency, and giving high emissions.
Suzuki opted for a complicated oil-cooling and water cooling system, with Garside reasoning that provided the power did not exceed 80&nbsp;bhp, air-cooling would suffice.
* Apex seal lifting.
Toyota found that substituting a glow-plug for the leading site spark plug improved low rpm, part load, specific fuel consumption by 7% and also emissions and idle.
The goal of such research was to eventually develop an internal combustion engine with the ability to deliver 100 milliwatts of electrical power; with the engine itself serving as the rotor of the generator, with magnets built into the engine rotor itself.
Keeping to a near constant, or narrow band, of revolutions eliminates, or vastly reduces, many of the disadvantages of the Wankel engine.
