The first British assault came in July 1814, when Sir Thomas Masterman Hardy took Moose Island (Eastport, Maine) without a shot, with the entire American garrison of Fort Sullivan—which became the British Fort Sherbrooke—surrendering.
The Royal Navy went after them by intercepting and searching U.S. merchant ships for deserters.
Commodore Isaac Chauncey took charge of the large number of sailors and shipwrights sent there from New York; they completed the second warship built there in a mere 45 days.
The British failed to press the issue, and did not take up the Indian cause as an infringement of an international treaty.
These figures do not include deaths among Canadian militia forces or losses among native tribes.
At the end of 1814, the British launched a double offensive in the South weeks before the Treaty of Ghent was signed.
By British government order they were treated as free persons when reaching British hands.
The American strategy of using small gunboats to defend ports was a fiasco, as the British raided the coast at will.
The senior British officer in Upper Canada, Major General Isaac Brock, felt that he should take bold measures to calm the settler population in Canada, and to convince the aboriginals who were needed to defend the region that Britain was strong.
Hampton was delayed by bad roads and supply problems and also had an intense dislike of Wilkinson, which limited his desire to support his plan.
Prévost died suddenly, just before his own court-martial was to convene.
The Americans were more successful in ship-to-ship actions.
The Red Sticks, as well as many southern Muscogeean people like the Seminole, had a long history of alliance with the Spanish and British Empires.
Americans then believed that many men in Upper Canada would rise up and greet an American invading army as liberators.
In contrast to the American militia, the Canadian militia performed well.
Jackson invaded Florida in 1818, demonstrating to Spain that it could no longer control that territory with a small force.
In May 1815, a band of British-allied Sauk, unaware that the war had ended months before, attacked a small band of U.S. soldiers northwest of St. Louis.
After Madison's message, the House of Representatives deliberated for four days behind closed doors before voting 79 to 49 (61% in favor) the first declaration of war, and the Senate agreed by 19 to 13 (59% in favour).
By contrast, they say, the Americans suffered a defeat when their armies failed to achieve their war goal of seizing part or all of Canada.
It remains in effect to this day.
They did not call for secession but word of the angry anti-war resolutions appeared at the same time that peace was announced and the victory at New Orleans was known.
Large numbers of American merchant ships were returning to the United States with the outbreak of war, and if the Royal Navy was concentrated, it could not watch all the ports on the American seaboard.
The military garrison was built up to protect the naval establishment, heavily fortifying the archipelago that came to be described as the "Gibraltar of the West".
(Some gained freedom on appeal).
This Engagement on Lake Huron left Mackinac under British control.
At the Battle of Ogdensburg, the Americans were forced to retire.
American leaders assumed that Canada could be easily overrun.
They set fire to the village of Newark (now Niagara-on-the-Lake) on December 15, 1813, incensing the Canadians and politicians in control.
The U.S. Army had done poorly, on the whole, in several attempts to invade Canada, and the Canadians had shown that they would fight bravely to defend their territory.
He also threatened to kill any British prisoner caught fighting alongside a native.
The militia objected to serving outside their home states, were not open to discipline, and performed poorly against British forces when outside their home states.
Southern Republicans largely opposed this, fearing an imbalance of free and slave states if Canada was annexed, while anti-Catholicism also caused many to oppose annexing mainly Catholic Lower Canada, believing its French-speaking inhabitants "unfit&nbsp;... for republican citizenship".
These writers often add that the war could have been avoided in the first place by better diplomacy.
Nothing was known of the fate of the third large invasion force aimed at capturing New Orleans and southwest.
Although cutting the St. Lawrence River through the capture of Montreal and Quebec would have made Britain's hold in North America unsustainable, the United States began operations first in the western frontier because of the general popularity there of a war with the British, who had sold arms to the Native Americans opposing the settlers.
These battles destroyed the Indian confederacy which had been the main ally of the British in that region, weakening its negotiating position.
This money, called the "Castine Fund", was used to establish Dalhousie University, in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Britain did not recognize the right of a British subject to relinquish his status as a British subject, emigrate and transfer his national allegiance as a naturalized citizen to any other country.
# The Southern states and southwestern territories
The British garrison at Prairie du Chien also fought off another attack by Major Zachary Taylor.
Hull, fearing that the British possessed superior numbers and that the Indians attached to Brock's force would commit massacres if fighting began, surrendered Detroit without a fight on August 16.
However privateering remained popular in British colonies.
The British had the long-standing goal of creating a large "neutral" Indian state that would cover much of Ohio, Indiana, and Michigan.
British businesses, some affected by rising insurance costs, were demanding peace so that trade could resume with the U.S.
They operated throughout the Atlantic and continued until the close of the war, most notably from ports such as Baltimore.
Except for occasional border disputes and the circumstances of the American Civil War, relations between the U.S. and Britain remained generally peaceful for the rest of the 19th century, and the two countries became close allies in the 20th century.
On August 9, 1814, the Upper Creek chiefs and Jackson's army signed the "Treaty of Fort Jackson".
American anger at impressment grew when British frigates were stationed just outside U.S. harbours in view of U.S. shores and searched ships for contraband and impressed men while in U.S. territorial waters.
Despite this, the U.S. was able to inflict serious defeats on Britain's Native American allies, ending the prospect of an independent Indian confederacy in the Midwest under British sponsorship.
British forces could rely upon supply ships except for the winter months.
Britain was heavily engaged in the Napoleonic Wars, most of the British Army was deployed in the Peninsular War (in Portugal and Spain), and the Royal Navy was compelled to blockade most of the coast of Europe.
A further dispute about the line of the border through the island in the Strait of Juan de Fuca resulted in another almost bloodless standoff in the Pig War of 1859.
In July 1814, General Andrew Jackson complained to the Governor of Pensacola, Mateo Gonzalez Manrique, that combatants from the Creek War were being harboured in Spanish territory, and made reference to the British presence on Spanish soil.
Southern Congressman Felix Grundy considered it essential to acquire Canada to ''preserve'' domestic political balance, arguing that annexing Canada would maintain the free state-slave state balance, which might otherwise be thrown off by the acquisition of Florida and the settlement of the southern areas of the new Louisiana Purchase.
In 26 days, he raided and looted Hampden, Bangor, and Machias, destroying or capturing 17 American ships.
On February 21, Sir George Prévost passed through Prescott on the opposite bank of the river with reinforcements for Upper Canada.
After briefly calling at Boston to replenish water, on August 19, ''Constitution'' engaged the British frigate .
While the British government was largely oblivious to the deteriorating North American situation because of its involvement in a continent-wide European War, the U.S. was in a period of significant political conflict between the Federalist Party (based mainly in the Northeast), which favoured a strong central government and closer ties to Britain, and the Democratic-Republican Party (with its greatest power base in the South and West), which favoured a weak central government, preservation of slavery, expansion into Indian land, and a stronger break with Britain.
Moreover, a great number of British sailors serving as naturalized Americans on U.S. ships were Irish.
Americans on the western frontier demanded that interference be stopped.
In the United States, late victories over invading British armies at the battles of Plattsburgh, Baltimore (inspiring the United States national anthem, "The Star-Spangled Banner") and New Orleans produced a sense of euphoria over a "second war of independence" against Britain.
They agree that ending the war with neither side gaining or losing territory allowed for the peaceful settlement of boundary disputes and for the opening of a permanent era of good will and friendly relations between the U.S. and Canada.
Liverpool wanted a more practical relationship with the United States.
David and Jeanne Heidler argue that "Most historians agree that the War of 1812 was not caused by expansionism but instead reflected a real concern of American patriots to defend United States' neutral rights from the overbearing tyranny of the British Navy.
Thus, "the westerners were convinced that their problems could best be solved by forcing the British out of Canada".
Because of their numerical inferiority, the American strategy was to cause disruption through hit-and-run tactics, such as the capture of prizes and engaging Royal Navy vessels only under favourable circumstances.
Decorated plates and pitchers of Decatur, Hull, Bainbridge, Lawrence, Perry, and Macdonough were made in Staffordshire, England, and found a ready market in the United States.
The United States was able to obtain financing from London-based Barings Bank to cover overseas bond obligations.
On July 9, she anchored off Sandy Hook, and three days later sailed on her return with a copy of the declaration of war, the British ambassador, Mr. Foster and consul, Colonel Barclay.
Although most of these were involved in blockading the French navy and protecting British trade against (usually French) privateers, the Royal Navy still had 85&nbsp;vessels in American waters, counting all British Navy vessels in North American and the Caribbean waters.
The Loyalists were hostile to union with the United States, while the immigrant settlers were generally uninterested in politics and remained neutral or supported the British during the war.
However, many historians believe that a desire to annex Canada was a cause of the war.
Thereafter, Chauncey and Yeo's squadrons fought two indecisive actions, neither commander seeking a fight to the finish.
There was also significant non-Loyalist American immigration to the area due to the offer of land grants to immigrants, and the U.S. assumed the latter would favour the American cause, but they did not.
A force of 2,500 soldiers under General Ross had just arrived in Bermuda aboard ''HMS Royal Oak'', three frigates, three sloops and ten other vessels.
He set out to retake the city, which was now defended by Colonel Henry Procter in conjunction with Tecumseh.
The British commanders ate the supper that had been prepared for the President and his departmental secretaries after returning from hopeful glorious U.S. victory, before they burned the Executive Mansion; American morale was reduced to an all-time low.
At the peace conference the British demanded an independent Indian state in the Midwest, but, although the British and their Indian allies maintained control over the territories in question (i.e.
On June 23, he issued a repeal of the Orders in Council, but the United States was unaware of this, as it took three weeks for the news to cross the Atlantic.
Several historians believe that the capture of Canada was intended only as a means to secure a bargaining chip, which would then be used to force Britain to back down on the maritime issues.
During the war, New England states became increasingly frustrated over how the war was being conducted and how the conflict was affecting them.
On December 29, off Bahia, Brazil, she met the British frigate .
The blockade nevertheless resulted in American exports decreasing from $130&nbsp;million in 1807 to $7&nbsp;million in 1814.
The inexperienced American militia, which had congregated nearby at Bladensburg, Maryland, to protect the capital, were defeated in the Battle of Bladensburg, opening the route to Washington.
After 1814 the natives, who lost most of their fur-gathering territory, became an undesirable burden to British policymakers who now looked to the United States for markets and raw materials.
Hull's army was too weak in artillery and badly supplied to achieve its objectives, and had to fight just to maintain its own lines of communication.
Throughout the war, the British Secretary of State for War and the Colonies was the Earl of Bathurst.
The nation also gained a psychological sense of complete independence as people celebrated their "second war of independence".
To defend the western end of the canal, the British Army also built Fort Henry at Kingston.
Pratt concludes, "the war had given the Northwest what it most desired."
Today, particularly in Ontario, memory of the war retains significance, because the defeat of the invasions ensured that the Canadas would remain part of the British Empire, rather than be annexed by the United States.
His decisive victory at "Put-In-Bay" ensured American military control of the lake, improved American morale after a series of defeats, and compelled the British to fall back from Detroit.
Captain William Percy tried to take the U.S. fort, hoping that would enable the British to move on Mobile and block U.S. trade and encroachment on the Mississippi.
The Captains and Commodores of the U.S. Navy became the heroes of their generation in the U.S.
With the majority of its land and naval forces tied down in Europe fighting the Napoleonic Wars, the British used a defensive strategy until 1814.
Congress authorized the expansion of the army to 35,000 men, but the service was voluntary and unpopular; it offered poor pay, and there were few trained and experienced officers, at least initially.
Launched in April 1814, the squadron was quickly cornered in the Patuxent River, and while successful in harassing the Royal Navy, they were powerless to stop the British campaign that ultimately led to the "Burning of Washington".
The United States contested these restrictions as illegal under international law.
Because of the difficulties of land communications, control of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River corridor was crucial.
The Creek War came to an end, with the Treaty of Fort Jackson being imposed upon the Indians.
Historians have differing and complex interpretations of the war.
Former President Jefferson optimistically referred to the conquest of Canada as "a matter of marching".
Impressment actions such as the ''Leander'' Affair and the ''Chesapeake''–''Leopard'' Affair outraged Americans, because they infringed on national sovereignty and denied America's ability to naturalize foreigners.
The naturally cautious Prévost followed these instructions, concentrating on defending Lower Canada at the expense of Upper Canada (which was more vulnerable to American attacks) and allowing few offensive actions.
British losses in the war were about 1,160 killed in action and 3,679 wounded; 3,321 British died from disease.
Ironically, many were made in England.
The British never rescinding the Orders of Council should not be viewed as a defeat for the Americans, considering the official stance of the US delegates at the meeting understood it to be an irrelevant issue, an unpredictable result of the events which occurred in Europe.
The issue of impressment was made moot when the Royal Navy, no longer needing sailors, stopped impressment after the defeat of Napoleon.
The British brig-rigged sloops tended to suffer fire to their rigging more frequently than the American ship-rigged sloops.
The British suffered high casualties: 291 dead, 1262 wounded, and 484 captured or missing whereas American casualties were 13 dead, 39 wounded, and 19 missing.
The U.S. had embarked on a major shipbuilding program before the war at Sackets Harbor, New York and continued to produce new ships.
Second, land and naval battles were fought on the U.S.–Canadian frontier.
Historian John Sugden notes that in both theatres, the Indians' strength had been broken prior to the arrival of the major British forces in 1814.
Prévost was ordered to neutralize American power on the lakes by burning Sackets Harbor, gain naval control of Lake Erie, Lake Ontario and the Upper Lakes, and defend Lower Canada from attack.
The Prime Minister wanted the Duke of Wellington to command in Canada and take control of the Great Lakes.
Each young country saw its self-perceived victory as an important foundation of its growing nationhood.
Aggravating the situation was the widespread use of forged identity or protection papers by sailors.
In 1814 U.S. troops retreating from the Battle of Credit Island on the upper Mississippi attempted to make a stand at Fort Johnson, but the fort was soon abandoned, along with most of the upper Mississippi valley.
Abandoned by their powerful sponsor, American Great Lakes-area Indians ultimately migrated or reached accommodations with the American authorities and settlers.
American ships were fraudulently transferred to neutral flags.
Castine, Hampden, Bangor, and Machias were taken, and Castine became the main British base till April 15, 1815, when the British left, taking £10,750 in tariff duties, the "Castine Fund" which was used to found Dalhousie University.
The blockading British fleet in Chesapeake Bay received increasing numbers of enslaved black Americans during 1813.
The defence of the fort inspired the American lawyer Francis Scott Key to write "Defence of Fort M'Henry", a poem that was set to music as "The Star-Spangled Banner".
Many of the inhabitants were left without shelter, freezing to death in the snow.
The primary British war goal was to defend their North American colonies; they also hoped to set up a neutral Native American buffer state in the US Midwest that would impede US expansion in the Old Northwest and to minimize American trade with Napoleonic France, which Britain was blockading.
Despite enlistment problems in the winter, the U.S. Army forces and a second draft of Tennessee state militia and Cherokee and Creek allies swelled his army to around 5,000.
To the east, the northern part of Massachusetts, soon to be Maine, was invaded.
The Battle of York was a "pyrrhic" American victory, marred by looting and the burning of the small Provincial Parliament buildings and a library (resulting in a spirit of revenge by the British/Canadians led by Gov.
Britain was the largest trading partner, receiving 80% of U.S. cotton and 50% of other U.S. exports.
The U.S. started a rapidly expanded program of building warships at Sackets Harbor on Lake Ontario, where 3,000 men were recruited, many from New York City, to build 11 warships early in the war.
After initially being granted safe passage, the inhabitants (soldiers and civilians) were attacked by Potowatomis on August 15 after travelling only  in what is known as the Battle of Fort Dearborn.
While the number of Americans who died from disease is not known, it is estimated that about 15,000 died from all causes directly related to the war.
This peculiar trade persisted throughout the war in spite of an abortive attempt by the U.S. government to curtail it.
The Battle of Burnt Corn between Red Stick Creeks and U.S. troops, occurred in the southern parts of Alabama on July 27, 1813 prompted the state of Georgia as well as the Mississippi territory militia to immediately take major action against Creek offensives.
At last in August 1814, peace discussions began in the neutral city of Ghent.
A border dispute along the Maine–New Brunswick border was settled by the 1842 Webster–Ashburton Treaty after the bloodless Aroostook War, and the border in the Oregon Country was settled by splitting the disputed area in half by the 1846 Oregon Treaty.
With the ratification of the peace treaty in February 1815, the war ended before the U.S. new Secretary of War James Monroe could put his new offensive strategy into effect, and before the British could launch renewed attacks.
Downie was killed and his naval force defeated at the naval Battle of Plattsburgh in Plattsburgh Bay on September 11, 1814.
Additionally, they argue the U.S. lost as it failed to stop impressment, which the British refused to repeal until the end of the Napoleonic Wars, arguing that the U.S. actions had no effect on the Orders in Council, which were rescinded before the war started.
The Americans had achieved their goal of ending the Indian threat; furthermore the American armies had scored enough victories (especially at New Orleans) to satisfy honor and the sense of becoming fully independent from Britain.
The Mississippi River valley was the western frontier of the United States in 1812.
Subsequently, the British left Washington, D.C. the following day after the storm subsided.
Americans at the time and historians since often called it the United States' "Second War of Independence".
The number of British regular troops present in Canada in July 1812 was officially stated to be 6,034, supported by Canadian militia.
After a last ditch night feint and barge attack during the heavy rain storm at the time led by Capt.
The British also planned to simultaneously attack Baltimore by water on the following day, September 13, to support their military now arrayed facing the massed, heavily dug-in and fortified American units of approximately 15,000 with about a hundred cannon gathered along the eastern heights of the city named "Loudenschlager's Hill" (later "Hampstead Hill" - now part of Patterson Park).
They complained that the U.S. government was not investing enough in the states' defences militarily and financially, and that the states should have more control over their militias.
At the bombardment of Fort McHenry, the British naval guns, mortars and revolutionary new "Congreve rockets" had a longer range than the American cannon onshore, and the ships mostly stood off out of the Americans' range, bombarding the fort, which returned very little fire and was not too heavily damaged during the onslaught except for a burst over a rear brickwall knocking out some fieldpieces and resulting in a few casualties.
This led to British retaliation following the Capture of Fort Niagara on December 18, 1813.
An investigation by Captain Isaac Chauncey in 1808 found 58% of the sailors based in New York City were either naturalized citizens or recent immigrants, the majority of foreign sailors (134 of 150) being from Britain.
At its peak the Red Stick faction had 4,000 warriors, only a quarter of whom had muskets.
They sent out several hundred privateers to attack British merchant ships; in the first four months of war they captured 219 British merchant ships.
One force burned Washington but failed to capture Baltimore, and sailed away when its commander was killed.
But the Americans thought that the possibility of local support suggested an easy conquest, as former President Thomas Jefferson believed: "The acquisition of Canada this year, as far as the neighborhood of Quebec, will be a mere matter of marching, and will give us the experience for the attack on Halifax, the next and final expulsion of England from the American continent".
The Lower Creek lived along the Chattahoochee River.
The peace was generally welcomed by the British, though there was disquiet at the rapid growth of the U.S.
Brock was killed during the battle.
Both governments were eager for a return to normality and peace negotiations began in Ghent in August 1814.
American reinforcements arriving during the siege were defeated by the natives, but the fort held out.
Lawrence was mortally wounded and famously cried out, "Don't give up the ship!
Alexander Cochrane's proclamation of April 2, 1814, invited Americans who wished to emigrate to join the British, and though not explicitly mentioning slaves was taken by all as addressed to them.
During the 19th century the popular image of the war in the United States was of an American victory, and in Canada, of a Canadian victory.
Days after the formal declaration of war, however, it put out two small squadrons, including the frigate ''President'' and the sloop  under Commodore John Rodgers, and the frigates ''United States'' and , with the brig  under Captain Stephen Decatur.
In British North America (which would become the Dominion of Canada in 1867), the War of 1812 was seen by Loyalists as a victory, as they had claimed they had successfully defended their country from an American takeover.
In response to Prévost's request, they decided to employ this force, together with the naval and military units already on the station, to strike at the "Federal City" of Washington, D.C.
Early victories over poorly-led U.S. armies demonstrated that the conquest of the Canadas would prove more difficult than anticipated.
The Native Americans allied to the British lost their cause.
Congressman Richard Mentor Johnson told Congress that the constant Indian atrocities along the Wabash River in Indiana were enabled by supplies from Canada and were proof that "the war has already commenced.&nbsp;...
Defence infrastructure would remain the central leg of Bermuda's economy until after World War II.
But, the Royal Navy's North American squadron based in Halifax, Nova Scotia, which bore the brunt of the war, numbered one small ship of the line, seven frigates, nine smaller sloops and brigs along with five schooners.
To do so would result in the same tragedy as the first war against them, and with the same result."
This section summarizes several contributing factors which resulted in the declaration of war by the United States.
From November 1813 to January 1814, Georgia's militia and auxiliary Federal troops - from the Creek and Cherokee Indian nations and the states of North Carolina and South Carolina – organized the fortification of defences along the Chattahoochee River and expeditions into Upper Creek territory in present-day Alabama.
To redress the situation, the Americans established a Navy yard at Sackett's Harbor in northwestern New York.
It is notable in that the Tuscaroras defended the Americans against their own Iroquois brothers, the Mohawks, who sided with the British.
The United States had great difficulty financing its war.
U.S. forces took control of Lake Erie in 1813, and seized western parts of Upper Canada, but further American offensives aimed at Montreal failed, and the war also degenerated into a stalemate in Upper Canada by 1814.
Fighting between Americans, the Sauk, and other indigenous tribes continued through 1817, well after the war ended in the east.
The outnumbered Americans withdrew but withstood a prolonged Siege of Fort Erie.
Prévost's reputation sank to a new low, as Canadians claimed that their militia under Brock did the job and he failed.
These overall Baltimore defences had been planned in advance and foreseen by the state militia commander, Maj. Gen. Samuel Smith, who had been set in charge of the Baltimore defences instead of the discredited U.S. Army commander for the Mid-Atlantic's 10th Military District (following the debacle the previous month at Bladensburg), William H. Winder.
Military and civilian leadership remained a critical American weakness until 1814.
Horsman argued expansionism played a role as a secondary cause after maritime issues, noting that many historians have mistakenly rejected expansionism as a cause for the war.
The United States combined forces were large.
British landowners grew weary of high taxes, and colonial interests and merchants called on the government to reopen trade with the U.S. by ending the war.
The withdrawal of British protection gave the Americans a free hand, which resulted in the removal of most of the tribes to Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma).
By the war's end in early 1815 the key issues had been resolved and peace returned with no boundary changes.
However, it was not until January 27, 1815, that the army had completely rejoined the fleet, allowing for their departure.
In the Southeast, Indian resistance had been crushed by General Andrew Jackson during the Creek War; as President (1829–37), Jackson systematically expelled the major tribes to reservations west of the Mississippi, part of which was the forced expulsion of American-allied Cherokee in the Trail of Tears.
Although article IX of the treaty included provisions to restore to Natives "all possessions, rights and privileges which they may have enjoyed, or been entitled to in 1811", the provisions were unenforceable.
The plan eventually agreed upon was for Major General Wade Hampton to march north from Lake Champlain and join a force under General James Wilkinson that would embark in boats and sail from Sackett's Harbor on Lake Ontario and descend the St. Lawrence.
By 1813 Americans had killed Tecumseh and broken his coalition of tribes.
Knowing of British-instigated indigenous attacks on other locations, Hull ordered the evacuation of the inhabitants of Fort Dearborn (Chicago) to Fort Wayne.
In 1807, Britain introduced a series of trade restrictions via a series of Orders in Council to impede neutral trade with France, with which Britain was at war.
The survey states that 77% of Canadians believe that War of 1812 Bicentennial is an important commemoration.
Britain's blockade of French trade had been entirely successful and the Royal Navy was the world's dominant nautical power (and would remain so for another century).
In recent decades the view of the majority of historians has been that the war ended in stalemate, with the Treaty of Ghent closing a war that had become militarily inconclusive.
He did defend Lower Canada but otherwise failed to achieve his objectives.
The planters' complacency about slave contentment was shocked by their seeing slaves who would risk so much to be free.
In March 1814 they moved south to attack the Creek.
