Because of this surprise attack, the combined army was able to take possession of the town of Velletri.
On 10 April, Frederick's army caught the Austrians on the snow-covered fields near Mollwitz.
The last year of the war saw two significant actions in the Caribbean.
The Bavarians, under the command of Count Minuzzi, suffered a severe reverse at the town of Simbach near Braunau on 9 May 1743 at the hands of Prince Charles.
Spain, which had been at war with Britain over colonies and trade ever since 1739, entered the war on the Continent to re-establish its influence in northern Italy, further reversing an Austrian dominance over the Italian peninsula that had been achieved at Spain's expense as a consequence of Spain's war of succession earlier in the 18th century.
Villefranche and Montalbán had been stormed by Conti on 20 April 1744.
Scarcely had Prague surrendered to Frederick II than he was off marching southwards, leaving 5,000 soldiers under General Baron Gottfried Emanual von Einsiedel to garrison Prague.
At this point the French had an excellent chance to strike at Prince Charles while he was in a vulnerable position—crossing the Rhine.
But the French force was ill-equipped, the admiral was nervous, his mind dwelt on all the misfortunes which might possibly happen, and the weather was bad.
With the knowledge that a larger French fleet was sailing to the rescue the British ships broke off combat and retreated to the northeast.
However, the next six months were wasted in inaction and Georg Christian, Fürst von Lobkowitz, joining Traun with reinforcements from Germany, drove back the Spanish to Rimini.
When the blockading squadron was forced off by want of provisions, the Spanish admiral Don Juan José Navarro put to sea.
Count de Gages followed the Austrians north with a weak force.
This disaster convinced the French government of its helplessness at sea, and it made no further effort.
Before he left Silesia, Austrian General Neipperg had made a curious agreement with Frederick, the so-called Klein-Schnellendorf agreement (9 October 1741).
It was watched by the British admiral Nicholas Haddock.
In February 1744, a French fleet of twenty sail of the line entered the English Channel under Jacques Aymar, comte de Roquefeuil, before the British force under Admiral John Norris was ready to oppose him.
King Frederick William I and "the guiding genius of the Prussian Army" Leopold I, Prince of Anhalt-Dessau or "Old Dessauer" had drilled the Prussian Army to a perfection previously unknown in Europe.
Nobody in the court of the Holy Roman Empire trusted the motives of the new rising power of Prussia and, therefore, the Holy Roman Emperor did not call on the Prussians, who were vassals of the Holy Roman Empire, for military support of the Empire.
By November 1745, his army consisted of 5,000 infantry men and 300 cavalry.
Charles reached Perth on 18 September 1745 and Edinburgh surrendered to him on 27 September 1745.
Accordingly, a separate peace between Prussia and Austria was signed at Breslau on 11 June 1742, which drew the '''First Silesian War''' to a close.
The war ended with the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, by which Maria Theresa was confirmed as Archduchess of Austria and Queen of Hungary, but Prussia retained control of Silesia.
Added to this was the personal ascendancy of Frederick, as opposed to generals who were responsible for their men to their individual sovereigns.
By this agreement, the fortress at Neisse was surrendered after a mock siege, and the Prussians agreed to let the Austrians leave unmolested releasing Neipperg's army for service elsewhere.
In September the British launched a raid on Lorient (in southern Brittany) in an attempt to divert French forces away from the Netherlands.
Austrian Marshal Traun was successful, and, as a result, Francis, the husband/consort of Maria Theresa was elected Holy Roman Emperor on 13 September 1745.
By comparison, the Austrian Empire had 16 million citizens but had an army only half its authorised size because of financial restraints.
The Spanish force under Montemar was now too weak to advance in the Po Valley and a second Spanish army was sent to Italy via France.
A second British assault on Santiago de Cuba which also ended in failure and a naval action which arose from an accidental encounter between two convoys.
At the end of the war, France gave back its European conquests, and recovered such lost overseas possessions as Louisbourg, largely restoring the ''status quo ante'' as far as France was concerned.
The Prussian infantry soldier was so well-trained and well-equipped that he could fire 5 shots a minute to an Austrian's 3 shots per minute; and while Prussian cavalry and artillery were comparatively less efficient, they were still of better quality than average.
But then the Austrian commander, Prince Lobkowitz took the offensive and drove the Spanish army of the Count de Gages further southward towards the Neapolitan frontier near the small town of Velletri.
Thus, Frederick knew that Prince Charles would not be able to present any immediate problem to him in the east.
Spain, in one way or another, managed to achieve some of her war aims, which mostly centred on an effort to reinstate Spanish influence in the Italian peninsula.
The cavalry's conduct gave an earnest prospect of its future glory, not only by its charges on the battlefield, but by its vigorous pursuit of the defeated Austrians.
The remaining fortresses in Silesia were taken by the Prussians.
The training of the Prussian cavalry had been neglected by Frederick's father—King Frederick William I.
The complicated politics of Italy, however, is reflected in the fact that Count Maillebois was ultimately unable to turn his victory to account.
Probably because he himself was an infantryman to his core, the training of the cavalry had also been overlooked by the "Old Dessauer" who was the true genius behind the Prussian Army.
There was also a slight war of manoeuvre on the middle Rhine.
At first in a position of great peril, but his army changed front in the face of the advancing enemy and by its boldness and tenacity won a remarkable victory on 30 September 1745 at Soor.
The Elector of Bavaria, who now styled himself Archduke of Austria, was crowned King of Bohemia (9 December 1741) and elected to the imperial throne as Charles VII (24 January 1742), but no active measures were undertaken.
The victory that Frederick attained at the Battle of Mollwitz was a learning experience for the young King.
Thus, the British blockade of the French coast was relieved and the Spanish fleet apparently controlled the Mediterranean Sea.
A squadron was fitted out at Cádiz to convey troops to Italy.
Indeed, on 31 March 1745, before Frederick ever took the field in the spring of 1745, Louis XV and the Marshal of France Maurice de Saxe, commanding an army of 95,000 men, the largest force in the war, marched down the Scheldt River valley and had besieged Tournay.
The French put four armies into the field.
Frederick's march was made towards Iglau in the first place.
Although it was the main British settlement in the Carnatic, Madras was weakly fortified and had only a small garrison, reflecting the thoroughly commercial nature of the European presence in India hitherto.
Strong places of Bavaria were surrendered one after the other to Prince Charles.
However, in implementing this plan, the Gallispan generals at the front were hampered by the orders of their respective governments.
In May 1745, The main Prussian army was stationed at Frankenstein.
The Prussian army had massed quietly along the Oder river during early December, and on 16 December 1740, without declaration of war, Frederick moved his Army across the frontier into Silesia.
Still, because of the heavy losses inflicted on the French, the Battle of Dettingen and the follow up is justly reckoned as a notable victory of Anglo-Austrian-Hanoverian arms.
File:Prise et pillage de Bergen op Zoom 1747.jpg|Taking and looting of the fortress of Bergen-op-Zoom in 1747
No move was made by the French, and Frederick, thus, found himself isolated and exposed to the combined attack of the Austrians and Saxons.
No help was to be expected from France, whose efforts this year were centred on the Flanders campaign.
Thus the Prussians were able to go into winter quarters, holding all Silesia and investing the strongholds of Glogau, Brieg and Neisse.
Munich itself surrendered to the Austrians on the coronation day of Charles VII.
At this point, France also planned a diversion which they hope would cause Britain to leave the war.
At Chotusitz, it was Frederick's newly reorganised and trained cavalry that really won the victory and compensated for their previous failings.
As these French forces, invaded the Austrian Netherlands they outnumbered the allied armies by about a four to three ratio.
A large British fleet under the command of Admiral Thomas Mathews with Rear Admiral Richard Lestock, second in command was blockading the French coast.
Mathews fought with spirit but in a disorderly way, breaking the formation of his fleet, and showing no power of direction, while Navarro's smaller fleet retained cohesion and fought off the energetic but confused attacks of its larger enemy until the arrival of the French fleet forced the heavily damaged British fleet to withdraw.
Broglie on the Vltava, weakened by the departure of the Bavarians to oppose Khevenhüller, and of the Saxons to join forces with Frederick, was in no condition to take the offensive, and large forces under Prince Charles of Lorraine lay in his front from Budweis to Jihlava (Iglau).
The French obtained so little of what they had fought for that they adopted the expressions ''Bête comme la paix'' ("Stupid as the peace") and ''Travailler pour le roi de Prusse'' ("To work for the king of Prussia", i.e.
While the Austrian Habsburg Monarchy was distracted by the succession, Frederick, upon coming to the throne, rejected the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 and opportunistically invaded Silesia on 16 December 1740.
This formality had been preceded by French preparations for the invasion of England, and by the Battle of Toulon between the British and a Franco-Spanish fleet.
By noon, Cumberland's troops had ground to a halt and discipline had begun to dissolve.
The goal was to start a revolt in Scotland which would divert British attention away from the war on the mainland in Europe, and may even require Britain to leave the war altogether.
Accordingly, the Prussian Army had an uninspiring reputation and was counted as one of the many minor armies of the Holy Roman Empire.
After a severe struggle Frederick won a major Prussian victory.
Frederick had been disappointed by the performance of his cavalry at the Battle of Mollwitz.
In the East Indies, attacks on French commerce by a British squadron under Curtis Barnett in 1745 led to the despatch of a French squadron commanded by Mahé de la Bourdonnais.
A final attempt in June 1748 avoided the fort and attacked the weakly fortified town of Cuddalore itself, but was routed by the British garrison.
The war recommenced.
It was a victory for the French that captured the attention of Europe because it overturned the mystique of British military superiority and it pointed out the importance of artillery.
This created tension between Broglie and the Bavarian commanders.
Finally on 12 July 1744, Frederick II of Prussia received confirmation that Prince Charles had taken his army beyond the Rhine and into France.
They also increased the number of ports they visited and reduced the predictability of their voyages.
Despite the appearance of another French squadron, the arrival of large-scale British reinforcements under Edward Boscawen (who considered but did not make an attack on Île de France on the way) gave the British overwhelming dominance on land and sea, but the ensuing siege of Pondichéry organised by Boscawen was unsuccessful.
Thus the Prussian Army was disproportionate to the size of the state it protected.
With 1744 began the Second Silesian War.
Thus, the Gallispan army never did combine with the Spanish army under Prince Lobkowitz in the south and now the Austro-Sardinian army lay between them.
However, the Austrians gained no foothold in Silesia itself.
This battle is sometimes called the "Battle of Nemi" after the small town of Nemi located nearby.
However, this concession was opposed by Dupleix, the governor general of the Indian possessions of the Compagnie des Indes.
In marked contrast to France, Britain strove to actively prosecute the war in the colonies once it became involved in the war, taking full advantage of its naval power.
Tournay was defended by a Dutch garrison of 7,000 soldiers.
The Bavarian Army under the command of Count Törring was divided and paralyzed.
In North America the conflict was known in the British colonies as King George's War, and did not begin until after formal war declarations of France and Britain reached the colonies in May 1744.
Count Traun, summoned from the Rhine, held the king in check in Bohemia with a united force of Austrians and Saxons.
However, neither Maria Theresa nor her advisers had expected the Prussians to march as quickly as they did.
The attention and resources of Austria had been fully occupied for some time on a renewal of the war in Silesia.
In this way, Prussia could attack the Austrians in the east while France would attack Austria from the west.
However, the French military command was distracted and could not take any action at all and Prince Charles was able to cross the Rhine once again unmolested by the French.
The British pursued a dual strategy of naval blockade and bombardment of enemy ports, and also utilized their ability to move troops by sea to the utmost.
A series of minor actions thus completely destroyed the great concentration of Gallispan troops and the Austrians reconquered the duchy of Milan and took possession of much of northern Italy.
The mismanagement of the British fleet in the battle, by arousing deep anger among the people, led to a drastic reform of the British navy.
The danger was very great.
Thus there was very little time to waste.
They were attempting to abduct the King of Naples during his stay in the town.
On 11 February, a most confused battle was fought, in which the van and centre of the British fleet was engaged with the Spanish rear and centre of the allies.
Maria Theresa and Austria survived nearly ''status quo ante bellum'', sacrificing only the territory of Silesia, which Austria conceded to Prussia,and a few minor territorial losses to Spain in northern Italy.
The year 1745 saw three of the greatest battles of the war: Hohenfriedberg, Kesselsdorf and Fontenoy.
This army had been formed on the lower Rhine upon the withdrawal of the French (Westphalian) Army under the command of Count Maillebois.
When Bourdonnais was forced to leave India in October after the devastation of his squadron by a cyclone Dupleix reneged on the agreement.
Marshal Noailles made plans to lay a trap for the Pragmatic Army and destroy it.
The Prussians were able to capture the fortress at Ohlau almost immediately and use it as winter quarters.
The expedition under Anson sailed late, was very ill-provided, and less strong than had been intended.
A combined plan of operations was made by the French, Saxons and Prussians for the rescue of Linz.
However, the conflict between the two companies continued by proxy during the interval before the outbreak of the Seven Years' War, with British and French forces fighting on behalf of rival claimants to the thrones of Hyderabad and the Carnatic.
Early in 1747 a second expedition laid siege to Fort St David but withdrew on the arrival of a British naval squadron in March.
But Linz soon fell.
However, the situation in the Austrian Netherlands was changed abruptly by the successful crossing of the Rhine on 30 June 1744 by Prince Charles and his 70,000-man allied army.
The total number of captures by French and Spanish corsairs was in all probability larger than the list of British – as the French wit Voltaire drolly put it upon hearing his government's boast, namely, that more British merchants were taken because there were many more British merchant ships to take; but partly also because the British government had not yet begun to enforce the use of convoy so strictly as it did in later times.
In Bohemia the month of December was occupied in mere skirmishes.
While the Prince of Conti stayed in the north, Count Gages followed this road to the south.
Marshal Noailles was driven almost to the Rhine by King George.
Of these fortresses in Silesia, only Glogau, Breslau and Brieg remained in Austrian hands following Frederick's initial campaign.
In December 1741, therefore, the Prussian general field marshal Kurt Christoph Graf von Schwerin crossed the border and captured Olmutz.
But Anson had harried the coast of Chile and Peru and had captured a Spanish galleon of immense value near the Philippines.
The British retaliated with vigour.
Moreover, the Prussian army was better trained than other armies in Europe.
Now an Anglo–Allied army commanded by King George II retreated down the Main River to the village of Hanau.
Marshal Coigny, caught far in advance of the other French forces, cut his way back through the enemy at Weissenburg and withdrew towards Strasbourg.
The withdrawal of most of the British forces to aid in suppressing the Jacobite rising of 1745 at home left their allies in a helpless position.
Accordingly, he secretly concluded another fresh alliance with Louis XV of France.
The Austrians were routed from three important hills around the town of Velletri during the attack.
A picked corps of the French army under the Chevalier de Belle-Isle (the younger brother of Marshal Belle-Isle) was ordered to storm the fortified pass of Exilles on 10 July 1747.
Britain managed to get out of the war with a favorable settlement and on its own terms, which angered the Austrians; Britain's power was increasing and its interests becoming even more complex.
On 31 August 1745, Cope marched north with about 2,000 British soldiers.
Lestock was acquitted (unjustly according to some) while Mathews was found guilty (also regarded as an injustice by some commentators).
On 1 February 1742, Schulenburg and Ormea signed the Convention of Turin which resolved (or postponed resolution) many differences and formed an alliance between the two countries.
On 25 July 1745, Charles set sail again for the mainland.
For example, the commander of the Spanish army in the field, the Prince of Conti, could not get along with, or even reason with, the Marquis de La Mina, the Supreme commander of all Spanish forces.
France, Spain and Bavaria actively continued the struggle against Maria Theresa.
Less was to be expected when the armies were composed of allied contingents, sent to the war each for a different object.
Finally, Pope Clement XI offered James and his family the use of Palazzo Muti and a lifetime annuity of 8,000 Roman scudi.
A second Prussian army under the Old Dessauer advanced up the Elbe from Magdeburg to meet Rutowsky.
For much of the eighteenth century, France approached its wars in the same way.
However, as a result of Frederick's training of the cavalry, over the summer of 1741, the Prussian cavalry would soon acquit themselves much better in the coming battles of the First Silesian War.
This fear of diplomatic isolation had caused the Genoese Republic to abandon its neutrality in the war and join the Bourbon cause.
Sardinia had allied herself with Austria in the Convention of Turin and at the same time neither state was at war with France and this led to curious complications, combats being fought in the Isère valley between the troops of Sardinia and of Spain, in which the French took no part.
Marshal Broglie, worn out by age and exertions, was soon replaced by Marshal Coigny.
This British army became known as the "Pragmatic Army," because it was a confederation of states that supported the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 agreements to recognize Maria Theresa as sovereign of the Habsburg Empire.
It was carried on by the Spaniards in the West Indies with great success, and actively at home.
The war was remarkable for the prominence of privateering on both sides.
Empress Maria Theresa, was frustrated with the failure of Lobkowitz to stop the advance of Gage.
All Bavarian garrisons fled to the east.
When Cope brought his army up to the town of Prestonpans, Scotland on 1 October 1745, he chose a stubble field that he felt was well protected, on which to encamp his troops.
This reputation misrepresented the fact of a standing army of 80,000 soldiers representing 4% of the 2.2 million population of Prussia.
Indeed, in 1715, France had sponsored an uprising in Scotland, which the pretender James had joined, but it was defeated.
Then the Austrian army made good its retreat back to Genoa.
Prince Frederick had been only 28 years of age on 31 May 1740 when his father, Frederick William I died and Prince Frederick ascended to the throne.
Charles had much more charisma than his father, and now Louis XV was favourably disposed toward helping him create another uprising in Scotland.
Finally on 6 December 1745, at Derby in northern England, Charles was reluctantly persuaded by his senior officers to turn back to Scotland.
Marshal Noailles's French and Bavarian army was suddenly outnumbered by the Pragmatic Army 35,000 soldiers to 26,000 soldiers.
He was facing Prince Charles with an army of 41,000 troops.
A fresh army of over 30,000 soldiers under the Prince de Conti was located between the Meuse and Moselle Rivers, which would later assist the Spaniards in Piedmont and Lombardy.
In mid-November 1745 it crossed the border from Scotland and invaded England.
Their execution, under the conditions of time and space, invariably fell short of expectations, and the history of the war proves, as that of the Seven Years' War was to prove, that the small standing army of the 18th century could conquer by degrees, but could not deliver a decisive blow.
The French in the area under Count Ségur marched to save the day.
The Elector marched on Budweis, and the Saxons (who had now joined the allies against Austria) invaded Bohemia by the Elbe valley.
The French admiral announced that he would support the Spaniards if they were attacked and Haddock retired.
During naval operations that were possible preparations for the return of Charles Edward Stuart to England and a coordinated French invasion of England, there occurred, on 22 February 1744, the largest sea battle of the war.
Although technically the Battle of Toulon was regarded as a victory for Britain, in Britain it was feared by the public that the combined French and Spanish ships were making for the Straits of Gibraltar and for a gathering of ships at Brest for a planned invasion of England.
No connected resistance was offered to the converging march of Prince Charles's army along the Danube, Khevenhüller from Salzburg towards southern Bavaria, and Prince Lobkowitz from Bohemia towards the Naab.
Although Prussia and Austria had been allies in the War of the Polish Succession (1733–1738), concluded only two years before, the interests of the two countries diverged when the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles VI, died on 20 October 1740.
Her father had been Holy Roman Emperor, but Maria Theresa was not a candidate for that title, which had never been held by a woman; the plan was for her to succeed to the hereditary domains, and her husband, Francis Stephen, to be elected Holy Roman Emperor.
Given these military necessities, the French government, unsurprisingly, based its strategy overwhelmingly on the army in Europe: it would keep most of its army on the European continent, hoping that such a force would be victorious closer to home.
With the British defeat at Prestonpans, it appeared that all Scotland belonged to Charles.
At the same time the Hungarians, moved to enthusiasm by the personal appeal, in September 1741, of Maria Theresia, had put into the field a ''levée en masse,'' or "insurrection," which furnished the regular army with an invaluable force of 60,000 more light troops.
Desultory campaigns continued between the Worms allies and the French until the conclusion of peace at Aix-la-Chapelle.
This was the Army of Flanders.
Before he reached Reichenbach, Frederick learned that Prince Charles was crossing the mountains from the west to the east side and that Prince Charles planned to occupy the town of Hohenfriedberg.
The War of Austrian Succession concluded with the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748).
Prince Charles was thereby forced to abandon his plans to attack Silesia and hurry back to defend Saxony.
On 17 January 1746, at the Battle of Falkirk Muir, 8,000 Scots, the largest amount of troops gathered by the Jacobite cause during the uprising defeated 7,000 of British troops.
At the end of 1742, the Duke of Montemar was replaced as head of the Spanish forces in Italy by Count Gages.
Frederick learned that a combined Austrian-Saxon army of about 70,000 troops under the command of Prince Charles, was on the march to the northeast towards Landeshut.
The convoy was intercepted by Anson on 3 May, and in the first Battle of Cape Finisterre, British admiral George Anson's fourteen ships of the line wiped out the French escort of six ships of the line and three armed Indiamen, although in the meantime the merchant ships escaped.
That the army escaped at all was in the highest degree creditable to Maillebois and to his son and chief of staff.
King Louis XIV of France had shown great support for Stuart cause.
The Spanish fleet then sailed to Italy where it delivered a fresh army and supplies that had a decisive impact upon the war.
The military expedition prepared at Dunkirk to cross under cover of De Roquefeuil's fleet naturally did not start.
The defeated Austrians were ordered north where they could be used in the Piedmont of northern Italy to assist the King of Savoy against the Prince of Conti.
For the War of the Austrian Succession, the British were allied with Austria; by the time of the Seven Years' War, they were allied with its enemy, Prussia.
Meanwhile, Austrian diplomats won over Saxony to the Austrian side.
The Jacobites felt they could more securely fight the British in a defensive battle on Scottish soil rather than fighting the British in England.
This plan worked better in North America than in Europe, but set the stage for the Seven Years' War.
The advantage lay with the British when one Spanish warship ran aground and another was captured but the British commander failed to capitalise and the Spanish fleet took shelter in Havana.
Spain, which could do nothing of an offensive character, was almost neglected.
Prior to the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1714) Spain and Austria had been ruled by the same (Habsburg) royal house.
The action unfolded in a confused way with each side at once anxious to cover its own trade and to intercept that of the other.
De Roquefeuil came up almost as far as The Downs, where he learnt that Sir John Norris was at hand with twenty-five sail of the line, and thereupon precipitately retreated.
Frederick hurried up his forces from Silesia and marched as rapidly as possible on Dresden, in Saxony.
With this army it might not have been surprising that Frederick was able to overrun Silesia.
It would let its colonies defend themselves, or would offer only minimal help (sending them only limited numbers of troops or inexperienced soldiers), anticipating that fights for the colonies would likely be lost anyway.
