The regional rail and light rail is operated by Polish State Railways (PKP).
The Saxon Garden, covering the area of 15.5 ha, was formally a royal garden.
The overall number of students of all grades of education in Warsaw is almost 500,000 (29.2% of the city population; 2002).
File:Warsaw_Spire_February_2016.jpg|Warsaw Spire
File:Złota 44 (06.2013).jpg|Złota 44
In 1700, the Great Northern War broke out.
File:Belweder (2).JPG|Belweder Palace
When he was elected on the President of Polish Republic (December 2005) he resigned as mayor on the day before taking office.
The first Warsaw President was Jan Andrzej Menich (1695–1696).
One of the most famous people born in Warsaw was Maria Skłodowska-Curie, who achieved international recognition for her research on radioactivity and was the first female recipient of the Nobel Prize.
Between 1975 and 1990 the Warsaw Presidents was simultaneously the Warsaw Voivode.
The first remedial measure was the Warsaw area enlargement (1951)&nbsp;– but the city authorities were still forced to introduce residency registration limitations: only the spouses and children of the permanent residents as well as some persons of public importance (like renowned specialists) were allowed to get the registration, hence halving the population growth in the following years.
The Sejm is made up of 460 deputies, or Poseł in Polish (literally 'Envoy').
In 1939, c. 1,300,000 people lived in Warsaw, but in 1945&nbsp;– only 420,000.
As the university garden it is open to the public every day.
These are mainly forested areas (pine forest).
File:45WE-004 (2), Warszawa Stadion, 2015-06-14.jpg|Koleje Mazowieckie train, Stadium station
The city also possesses some oddities such as the Museum of Caricature, the Museum of John Paul II and Primate Wyszyński, and a Motorisation Museum in Otrębusy.
The opening fixture of UEFA Euro 2012 took place in Warsaw, a game in which Poland drew 1–1 with Greece.
The city also ranked 8th out of 65 cities on MasterCard's Emerging Markets Index (2008).
According to legend, Sawa was a mermaid living in the Vistula River with whom Wars fell in love.
They consist of still quite natural streams and lakes as well as the pattern of drainage ditches.
Another important monument, the statue of Little Insurrectionist located at the ramparts of the Old Town, commemorates the children who served as messengers and frontline troops in the Warsaw Uprising, while the impressive Warsaw Uprising Monument by Wincenty Kućma was erected in memory of the largest insurrection of World War II.
Most of the historical buildings were thoroughly reconstructed.
Public transport in Warsaw includes buses, trams (streetcars), Metro, light rail Warszawska Kolej Dojazdowa line, urban railway Szybka Kolej Miejska, regional rail Koleje Mazowieckie (Mazovian Railways), and bicycle sharing systems (Veturilo).
The infrastructure has developed a lot over the past years.
File:Warszawa PAST 2009.jpg|PAST, the oldest skyscraper in Warsaw.
The contemporary flooded terrace still has visible valleys and ground depressions with water systems coming from the Vistula old&nbsp;– riverbed.
such cities, which have over 100,000 people or these, where already was president before 1990.
Warsaw gained the title of the '''"Phoenix City"''' because it has survived many wars, conflicts and invasions throughout its long history.
The plain moraine plateau has only a few natural and artificial ponds and also groups of clay pits.
During Warsaw's reconstruction after World War II, the communist authorities decided that the city would become a major industrial centre.
The building was designed by architects Marek Budzyński and Zbigniew Badowski and opened on 15 December 1999.
The historic city-centre of Warsaw with its picturesque Old Town in 1980 was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Better than anyone else she represented the Art Deco style in painting and art.
Warsaw's biggest public park is the Łazienki Park, established in the 17th century and given its current classical shape in the late 18th century.
The Warsaw ring road has been planned to consist of three express roads: S2, S8 and S17.
Among the movie companies are TOR, Czołówka, Zebra and Kadr who is behind several international movie productions.
Among the most notable landmarks of the Old Town are the Royal Castle, King Sigismund's Column, Market Square, and the Barbican.
The city is home to the Children's Memorial Health Institute (CMHI), the highest-reference hospital in all of Poland, as well as an active research and education center.
Nearby is the Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery, one of the largest Jewish cemeteries in Europe.
The unique character and history of the park is reflected in its landscape architecture (pavilions, sculptures, bridges, cascades, ponds) and vegetation (domestic and foreign species of trees and bushes).
Their duties are focused on aiding the President and the City Council, as well as supervising various municipal companies, city-owned property and schools.
In the Polish parliament the city and the area are represented by 31 MPs (out of 460).
There are also some suburban bus lines run by private operators.
The Warsaw Uprising Museum also operates a rare preserved and operating historic stereoscopic theatre, the Warsaw Fotoplastikon.
The Centre currently realizes about 500 projects a year.
However, the Polish-Russian war of 1831 ended in the uprising's defeat and in the curtailment of the Kingdom's autonomy.
A second line was opened in March 2015.
Today Warsaw is considered an "Alpha–" global city, a major international tourist destination and a significant cultural, political and economic hub.
Another important library – the University Library, founded in 1816, is home to over two million items.
There are lot of small lakes in the parks, but only a few are permanent&nbsp;– the majority are emptied before winter to clean them of plants and sediments.
Casimir Pulaski, a Polish general and hero of the American Revolutionary War, was born here in 1745.
File:Intraco I - radek kołakowski.jpg|Intraco I
Central Poland, including Warsaw, came under the rule of the General Government, a German Nazi colonial administration.
The heart of Polish-born composer is sealed inside Warsaw's Holy Cross Church.
There are many sports centres in the city as well.
Building activity occurred in numerous noble palaces and churches during the later decades of the 17th century.
From among Warsaw's 60 museums, the most prestigious ones are National Museum with a collection of works whose origin ranges in time from antiquity till the present epoch as well as one of the best collections of paintings in the country including some paintings from Adolf Hitler's private collection, and Museum of the Polish Army whose set portrays the history of arms.
In 1529, Warsaw for the first time became the seat of the General Sejm, permanent from 1569.
The mean year temperature is .
File:Pałac Krasińskich Warszawa BK1.JPG|Krasiński Palace
A city is also a commune&nbsp;– but with the city charter.
Between 1994 and 2002, there were 11 districts: Centrum, Białołęka, Targówek, Rembertów, Wawer, Wilanów, Ursynów, Włochy, Ursus, Bemowo, Bielany.
With its benches, flower carpets, a pond with ducks on and a playground for kids, the Krasiński Palace Garden is a popular strolling destination for the Varsovians.
There are also five other major railway stations and a number of smaller suburban stations.
An example of such entitlement is a car registration: a ''gmina'' cannot register cars, this is a ''powiat's'' task (i.e.
The main railway station is Warszawa Centralna serving both domestic traffic to almost every major city in Poland, and international connections.
Within the forest there are three cycling and walking trails.
Its population is estimated at 1.740 million residents within a greater metropolitan area of 2.666 million residents, which makes Warsaw the 9th most-populous capital city in the European Union.
This earned Warsaw the name of the ''Paris of the east''.
Among them the most notable are the Jewish theater, the Nożyk Synagogue, Janusz Korczak's Orphanage and the picturesque Próżna Street.
After the German Invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 began the Second World War, Warsaw was defended until September 27.
Warsaw has two historic neighbourhoods, called Old Town (''Stare Miasto'') and New Town (''Nowe Miasto''), in the borough of Śródmieście.
Nathan Alterman, the Israeli poet, was born in Warsaw, as was Moshe Vilenski, the Israeli composer, lyricist, and pianist, who studied music at the Warsaw Conservatory.
Each of the 18 separate city districts has its own council (''Rada dzielnicy'').
File:Mur1DSC 1189.jpg|Tram car
Warsaw's oldest public park, the Saxon Garden, is located within 10 minutes' walk from the old town.
File:TPSA tower warsaw.JPG|Spektrum Tower
Warsaw also attracts many young and off-stream directors and performers who add to the city's theatrical culture.
Other big forest area is Kabaty Forest by the southern city border.
It also has one of the fastest growing economies, with GDP growth at 6.5 percent in 2007 and 6.1 percent in the first quarter of 2008.
Following the repeated violations of the Polish constitution by the Russians, the 1830 November Uprising broke out.
Krzyża 2010.jpg|Holy Cross Church
Warsaw hosts the International Theatrical Meetings.
Buildings represent examples of nearly every European architectural style and historical period.
The official city name in full is  ().
It is located in the heartland of the Masovian Plain, and its average elevation is  above sea level.
Over 100 films are shown throughout the festival, and awards are given to the best and most popular films.
Warsaw's mixture of architectural styles reflects the turbulent history of the city and country.
For example, the district Wola has its own evidence and the district Ursynów&nbsp;– its own (and the cars from Wola have another type of registration number than these from Ursynów).
Some 19th-century buildings in the Praga district (the Vistula’s right bank) have been restored although many have been poorly maintained.
In 1980, Warsaw's historic Old Town was inscribed onto UNESCO's World Heritage list.
It was also ranked as one of the most liveable cities in Central Europe.
The Powązki Cemetery is one of the oldest cemeteries in Europe, full of sculptures, some of them by the most renowned Polish artists of the 19th and 20th centuries.
Such cities are for example Lublin, Kraków, Gdańsk, Poznań.
All higher education institutions were immediately closed and Warsaw's entire Jewish populationseveral hundred thousand, some 30% of the cityherded into the Warsaw Ghetto.
The average temperature ranges between  in January and  in July.
Currently the company is defunct.
However, some of the buildings from the 19th century that had been preserved in reasonably reconstructible form were nonetheless eradicated in the 1950s and 1960s (e.g.
above Vistula level).
File:Warszawa foto br6.jpg|Warsaw Financial Center
A fine tribute to the fall of Warsaw and history of Poland can be found in the Warsaw Uprising Museum and in the Katyń Museum which preserves the memory of the crime.
File:C12 Nowy Świat-Uniwersytet - peron, Otwarcie M2, 2015-03-08.jpg|Metro Line 2, Nowy Świat-Uniwersytet station
Formed in 1928 sees itself as a successor to the Załuski Library, the biggest in Poland and one of the first and biggest libraries in the world.
File:Wa-wa Lotnisko Chopina 1.JPG| Fast City Rail trains, Chopin Airport station
The significant element of the relief, in this part of Warsaw, is the edge of moraine plateau called Warsaw Escarpment.
Warsaw was the host city for the 2013 United Nations Climate Change Conference.
Holding Poland's largest private collection of art, the Carroll Porczyński Collection Museum displays works from such varied artists as Paris Bordone, Cornelis van Haarlem, José de Ribera, William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Vincent van Gogh along with some copies of masterpieces of European painting.
A number of vehicles have been assembled there over the decades, including the Warszawa, Syrena, Fiat 125p (under license from Fiat, later renamed FSO 125p when the license expired) and the Polonez.
Initially, all of the trains were Russian built.
The municipal government existed in Warsaw until World War II and was restored in 1990 (during the communist times, the National City Council&nbsp;– ''Miejska Rada Narodowa''&nbsp;– governed in Warsaw).
While the Maria Skłodowska-Curie Institute of Oncology it is one of the largest and most modern oncological institutions in Europe.
The city council organize concerts and other events.
According to Russian census of 1897, out of the total population of 638,000, Jews constituted 219,000 (around 34% percent).
Another is located on the bank of the Vistula River near Świętokrzyski Bridge and another on Karowa Street.
It has been said that Warsaw, together with Frankfurt, London, Paris and Barcelona is one of the cities with the highest number of skyscrapers in the European Union.
The city is a significant centre of research and development, BPO, ITO, as well as of the Polish media industry.
The city straddles the Vistula River.
Warsaw, especially its city centre (''Śródmieście''), is home not only to many national institutions and government agencies, but also to many domestic and international companies.
Warsaw remained the capital of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth until 1796, when it was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia to become the capital of the province of South Prussia.
The Allied Armistice terms required in Article 12 that Germany withdraw from areas controlled by Russia in 1914, which included Warsaw.
The second line running east-west will be about .
The most impressive examples of rococo architecture are Czapski Palace (1712–1721), Palace of the Four Winds (1730s) and Visitationist Church (façade 1728–1761).
See also the Vršovci family which had escaped to Poland.
In particular, the city's metro, roads, sidewalks, health care facilities and sanitation facilities have improved markedly.
Notable examples of post-war architecture include the Palace of Culture and Science (1952–1955), a Soc-realist skyscraper located in the city centre, and the Constitution Square with its monumental Socialist realism architecture (MDM estate).
A greedy merchant also heard her songs; he followed the fishermen and captured the mermaid.
The central section is  long with seven stations., opened on 8 March 2015.
On 9 November 1940, the city was awarded Poland's highest military decoration for heroism, the Virtuti Militari, during the Siege of Warsaw (1939).
Warsaw Uprising Hill (), Szczęśliwice hill (&nbsp;– the highest point of Warsaw in general).
World War II changed the demographics of the city, and to this day there is much less ethnic diversity than in the previous 300 years of Warsaw's history.
Warsaw lies in east-central Poland about  from the Carpathian Mountains and about  from the Baltic Sea,  east of Berlin, Germany.
The park has lanes running on a few levels deep into the ravines on both sides of the palace.
Further south is the so-called Royal Route, with many classicist palaces, the Presidential Palace and the University of Warsaw campus.
Other institutions for higher education include the Medical University of Warsaw, the largest medical school in Poland and one of the most prestigious, the National Defence University, highest military academic institution in Poland, the Fryderyk Chopin University of Music the oldest and largest music school in Poland, and one of the largest in Europe, the Warsaw School of Economics, the oldest and most renowned economic university in the country, and the Warsaw University of Life Sciences the largest agricultural university founded in 1818.
They also won the country’s championship in 1946, and won the cup twice as well.
In 2002, the town Wesoła was incorporated and the territorial division of Warsaw was established as follows:
Total nominal GDP of the city in 2010 amounted to 191.766 billion PLN, 111696 PLN per capita, which was 301,1 % of Polish average.
Frontex, the European Union agency for external border security, has its headquarters in Warsaw.
The city was besieged several times and was obliged to pay heavy contributions.
The mayor of Warsaw is called President.
File:POL Warszawa Cosmopolitan 01.jpg|Cosmopolitan Twarda 2/4
As the communist economy deteriorated, these factories lost significance and most went bankrupt after 1989.
The neoclassical architecture in Warsaw can be described by the simplicity of the geometrical forms teamed with a great inspiration from the Roman period.
Like most legislative bodies, the City Council divides itself into committees which have the oversight of various functions of the city government.
MasterCard Emerging Market Index has noted Warsaw's economic strength and commercial center.
File:Sąd Najwyższy pl Krasińskich pegazy BK.JPG|Supreme Court of Poland
In 1979, less than a year after becoming pope, John Paul celebrated Mass in Victory Square in Warsaw and ended his sermon with a call to "renew the face" of Poland: ''Let Thy Spirit descend!
The largest were the ''Huta Warszawa'' Steel Works, the car factory FSO and the tractor factory "Ursus".
After Jazdów was raided by nearby clans and dukes, a new similar settlement was established on the site of a small fishing village called Warszowa.
According to the 1901 census, out of 711,988 inhabitants 56.2% were Catholics, 35.7% Jews, 5% Greek orthodox Christians and 2.8% Protestants.
Warsaw's first stock exchange was established in 1817 and continued trading until World War II.
Polish civilian deaths are estimated at between 150,000 and 200,000.
It is located further south, on the Royal Route, about  from the Warsaw Old Town.
In 2011, Warsaw was ranked the world's 46th most expensive city to live in.
The Russian Empire Census of 1897 recorded 626,000 people living in Warsaw, making it the third-largest city of the Empire after St. Petersburg and Moscow.
File:Sejm RP.jpg| Poland's bicameral parliament, the Sejm and the Senate.
File:Grób Nieznanego Żołnierza w Warszawa warta.JPG|Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is an important central Warsaw landmark.
Despite being heavily outgunned and outnumbered, the Ghetto held out for almost a month.
Warsaw's prewar Jewish population of more than 350,000 constituted about 30 percent of the city's total population.
Germany did so, and underground leader Piłsudski returned to Warsaw on 11 November and set up what became the Second Polish Republic, with Warsaw the capital.
The most notable examples of Renaissance architecture in the city are the house of Baryczko merchant family (1562), building called "The Negro" (early 17th century) and Salwator tenement (1632).
Thus losses were heavy.
The city is also the printing capital of Poland with a wide variety of domestic and foreign periodicals expressing diverse views, and domestic newspapers are extremely competitive.
Its central French-styled area corresponds to the ancient, baroque forms of the palace.
File:Pałac Króla Jana III Sobieskiego w Wilanowie 9.JPG|Wilanów Palace
The FSO Car Factory was established in 1951.
There are about 5,000 animals representing nearly 500 species.
Their productions may be viewed mostly in smaller theatres and ''Houses of Culture'' (''Domy Kultury''), mostly outside ''Śródmieście'' (Central Warsaw).
Upon the extinction of the local ducal line, the duchy was reincorporated into the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland in 1526.
It is  high in the Old Town and Central district and about  in the north and south of Warsaw.
Films are usually screened in their original language with Polish subtitles and participating cinemas include Kinoteka (Palace of Science and Culture), Multikino at Golden Terraces and Kultura.
The Monument of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising is also situated here.
The first projects filmed in the new Film City will be two films about the Warsaw Uprising.
Since it serves the religious communities of Warsaw, be it Catholics, Orthodox, Jews, Muslims or Protestants, it is often called a necropolis.
File:Pałac Mostowskich w Warszawie.jpg|Mostowski Palace, the seat of Warsaw's police headquarters.
The pattern of the Vistula terraces is asymmetrical.
The mermaid (''syrenka'') is Warsaw's symbol and can be found on statues throughout the city and on the city's coat of arms.
Legislative power in Warsaw is vested in a unicameral Warsaw City Council (''Rada Miasta''), which comprises 60 members.
File:Miodowa 15 budynek bramy.JPG|The main gate of Ministry of Health
The main building housed the Great Theatre from 1833 to 1834, the Rozmaitości Theatre from 1836 to 1924 and then the National Theatre, the Reduta Theatre from 1919 to 1924, and from 1928 to 1939the Nowy Theatre, which staged productions of contemporary poetical drama, including those directed by Leon Schiller.
File:6 Warszawa 110.jpg|Castle Square and Sigismund's Column
The festival traces its roots to a peaceful pagan ritual where maidens would float their wreaths of herbs on the water to predict when they would be married, and to whom.
Council members are elected directly every four years.
Since World War II, Warsaw has been the most important centre of film production in Poland.
In 1995 the factory was purchased by the South Korean car manufacturer Daewoo, which assembled the Tico, Espero, Nubia, Tacuma, Leganza, Lanos and Matiz there for the European market.
The mermaid, wishing to avenge his death, took the position of defender of Warsaw, becoming the symbol of the city.
Due to its central location between the Commonwealth's capitals of Kraków and Vilnius, Warsaw became the capital of the Commonwealth and the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland when King Sigismund III Vasa moved his court from Kraków to Warsaw in 1596.
It is to be the largest high-tech film studio in Europe.
The GDP per capita in Warsaw amounted to PLN 94 000 in 2008 (c. EUR 23 800, USD 33 000).
Three times between 1655–1658 the city was under siege and three times it was taken and pillaged by the Swedish, Brandenburgian and Transylvanian forces.
Warsaw was the beloved city of Isaac Bashevis Singer, which he described in many of his novels: ''Warsaw has just now been destroyed.
Warsaw has the biggest concentration of electronics and high-tech industry in Poland, while the growing consumer market perfectly fosters the development of the food-processing industry.
Dating back to 1936 Warsaw Historical Museum contains 60 rooms which host a permanent exhibition of the history of Warsaw from its origins until today.
Warsaw is located on two main geomorphologic formations: the plain moraine plateau and the Vistula Valley with its asymmetrical pattern of different terraces.
Bills passed by a simple majority are sent to the mayor (the President of Warsaw), who may sign them into law.
These words were very meaningful for the Polish citizens who understood them as the incentive for the democratic changes.
About  from Warsaw, the Vistula river's environment changes strikingly and features a perfectly preserved ecosystem, with a habitat of animals that includes the otter, beaver and hundreds of bird species.
Most notably, the city required painstaking rebuilding after the extensive damage it suffered in World War II, which destroyed 85% of its buildings.
