The most ambitious nobles died and by the later period of the wars, fewer nobles were prepared to risk their lives and titles in an uncertain struggle.
Under Henry VI, all the land in France won by Henry V and even the provinces of Guienne and Gascony, which had been held since the reign of Henry II three centuries previously, were lost.
Edward claimed Henry had forfeited his right to the crown by allowing his queen to take up arms against his rightful heirs under the Act of Accord.
Edward of March, having joined with Warwick's surviving forces, advanced towards London from the west at the same time that the queen retreated northwards to Dunstable; as a result, Edward and Warwick were able to enter London with their army.
From the testimony of the captured leaders, he declared that Warwick and George, Duke of Clarence, had instigated them.
Few of the nobles were prepared to support Warwick's seizure of power.
The Duke of York, who had succeeded Bedford as Lieutenant in France, meanwhile represented those who wished to prosecute the war more vigorously, and criticised the court, and Somerset in particular, for starving him of funds and men during his campaigns in France.
Thomas Bourchier, the Archbishop of Canterbury, then persuaded Elizabeth Woodville to allow her younger son, the 9-year-old Richard, Duke of York, to join Edward in the Tower.
The revolt was put down by Warwick's brother, John Neville.
Confident that many magnates and even many of Richard's officers would join him, Henry set sail from Harfleur on 1 August 1485, with a force of exiles and French mercenaries.
The revenue from the York and March estates also made him the wealthiest magnate in the land.
Henry shored up his position by executing all other possible claimants whenever any excuse was offered, a policy his son Henry VIII continued.
He was convinced of the need for an alliance with France and had been negotiating a match between Edward and a French bride.
After assuming the throne as Henry VII, he married Elizabeth of York, the eldest daughter and heiress of Edward IV, thereby uniting the two claims.
He gathered the Yorkist armies and won a crushing victory at the Battle of Towton in March 1461.
Shortly afterwards the combined Yorkist armies confronted the much larger Lancastrian force at the Battle of Ludford Bridge.
Several castles under Lancastrian commanders held out for years: Dunstanburgh, Alnwick (the Percy family seat), and Bamburgh were some of the last to fall.
About the same time, once England under Edward IV and Scotland had come to terms, Margaret and her son were forced to leave Scotland and sail to France, where they maintained an impoverished court in exile for several years.
The country was in turmoil, with nobles once again settling scores with private armies (in episodes such as the Battle of Nibley Green), and Lancastrians being encouraged to rebel.
The Burgundian observer Philippe de Commines, who met Edward IV in 1470, reported:
Both sides agreed beforehand that the issue would be settled that day, with no quarter asked or given.
York's eldest son, Edward, Earl of March, was proclaimed King Edward IV.
A factor in these feuds was the presence of large numbers of soldiers discharged from the English armies that had been defeated in France.
Richard, the son of Cambridge and Anne Mortimer, was four years old at the time of his father's execution.
It was customary for the heavy cavalry to fight entirely on foot.
Richard the Duke of York led a small force toward London and was met by Henry's forces at St Albans, north of London, on 22 May 1455.
Service to a lord in return for title to lands and the gift of offices remained important, but the service was given in support of a faction rather than as part of a strict hierarchical system in which all ultimately owed their loyalty to the monarch.
Even those who escaped execution might be declared ''attainted,'' and therefore possessing no property, and of no value to a captor.
Buckingham's rebellion failed.
scouting and foraging parties.
Then, on Lady Day (25 March), the King led a "love day" procession to St. Paul's Cathedral, with Lancastrian and Yorkist nobles following him, hand in hand.
York accepted this compromise as the best offer.
Henry gathered supporters on his march through Wales and the Welsh Marches, and defeated Richard at the Battle of Bosworth Field.
York and his supporters were forced to flee the country, but one of his most prominent supporters, the Earl of Warwick, invaded England from Calais and captured Henry at the Battle of Northampton.
A compromise was struck in October 1460 with the Act of Accord, which recognised York as Henry's successor, disinheriting Henry's six-year-old son, Edward.
He occupied London in October and paraded Henry VI through the streets as the restored king.
For the second time in the war, King Henry was found by the Yorkists in a tent, abandoned by his retinue, having apparently suffered another breakdown.
He was seen as a weak, ineffectual king.
Henry, having been acclaimed King Henry VII, then strengthened his position by marrying Elizabeth of York, daughter of Edward IV and the best surviving Yorkist claimant.
There was also some fighting in Ireland.
Having been crowned in a lavish ceremony on 6 July, Richard then proceeded on a tour of the Midlands and the north of England, dispensing generous bounties and charters and naming his own son as the Prince of Wales.
He and Richard, Duke of Gloucester, fled from Doncaster to the coast and thence to Holland and exile in Burgundy.
Her brother Edmund, Earl of March, who had loyally supported Henry, died childless in 1425 and the title and extensive estates of the Earldom of March and the Mortimer claim to the throne thus passed to Anne's descendants.
During the reign of Henry VII's son Henry VIII, the possibility of Yorkist challenges to the throne remained until as late as 1525, in the persons of Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham; Edmund de la Pole, 3rd Duke of Suffolk; and his brother Richard de la Pole, all of whom had blood ties to the Yorkist dynasty but were excluded by the pro-Woodville Tudor settlement.
Many of the surviving Lancastrian nobles switched allegiance to King Edward, and those who did not were driven back to the northern border areas and a few castles in Wales.
Nobles engaged many of these to mount raids, or to pack courts of justice with their supporters, intimidating suitors, witnesses and judges.
Lincoln died in the battle.
As Henry's initial popularity waned, the Mortimer family's claim to the throne was a pretext for the major rebellion of Owain Glyndŵr in Wales, and other, less successful, revolts in Cheshire and Northumberland.
Simnel was pardoned for his part in the rebellion and was sent to work in the royal kitchens.
In any case, a marriage was arranged between Warwick's daughter Anne and Margaret's son Edward of Westminster, and Warwick invaded England in the autumn of 1470.
The '''Wars of the Roses''' were a series of wars for control of the throne of England.
He was imprisoned for much of 1452 and 1453 but was released after swearing not to take arms against the court.
When Edward III died in 1377, he was succeeded on the throne by his grandson Richard II, who was then a child.
However, with severe reverses in France, Suffolk was stripped of office and was murdered on his way to exile.
At this stage, few of the nobles supported such drastic action, and York was forced to submit to superior force at Blackheath.
From his childhood, he was surrounded by quarrelsome councillors and advisors.
(He had also been slightly wounded in the neck by an arrow.)
Richard II's reign was marked by increasing dissension between the King and several of the most powerful nobles.
Badges were not always distinct; at the Battle of Barnet, Edward's 'sun' was very similar to the Earl of Oxford's Vere star, which caused fateful confusion.
Hastings was executed without trial later in the day.
Landing in north Wales, he and his wife Cecily entered London with all the ceremony usually reserved for a monarch.
The Act of Accord and the events of Wakefield left the 18-year-old Edward, Earl of March, York's eldest son, as Duke of York and heir to his claim to the throne.
He was summoned to London to face enquiries, but he claimed that attempts had been made on his life, and returned to Calais.
Rather than return to France, Margaret sought to join the Lancastrian supporters in Wales and marched to cross the Severn but was thwarted when the city of Gloucester refused her passage across the river.
On 23 September 1459, at the Battle of Blore Heath in Staffordshire, a Lancastrian army failed to prevent Salisbury from marching from Middleham Castle in Yorkshire to Ludlow.
In the light of this military success, Richard of York moved to press his claim to the throne based on the illegitimacy of the Lancastrian line.
Some authorities date the start of the War of the Roses from the death of Humphrey.
Richard's aim was ostensibly to remove "poor advisors" from King Henry's side.
These included a weakening of the feudal power of the nobles and an increase in the power of the merchant classes, and the growth of a centralised monarchy under the Tudors.
They were fought in several sporadic episodes between 1455 and 1487, although there was related fighting before and after this period.
When further rebellions broke out in Lincolnshire, Edward easily suppressed them at the Battle of Losecoat Field.
Many of Queen Elizabeth's relatives were married into noble families and others were granted peerages or royal offices.
This plan was on very shaky ground, because the young earl was still alive and in King Henry's custody and was paraded through London to expose the impersonation.
Only two years after the Battle of Bosworth, Yorkists rebelled, led by John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln, who had been named by Richard III as his heir but had been reconciled with Henry after Bosworth.
The Archbishop negotiated complex settlements to resolve the blood-feuds that had persisted since the Battle of St. Albans.
In the case of London, the city was able to avoid being devastated by convincing the York and Lancaster armies to stay out after the inability to recreate the defensive city walls.
Then on 15 May, he routed Somerset's army at the Battle of Hexham.
A small Lancastrian army was destroyed at the Battle of Hedgeley Moor on 25 April, but because Neville was escorting Scottish commissioners for a treaty to York, he could not immediately follow up this victory.
Following defeat in the Hundred Years' War, English landowners complained vociferously about the financial losses resulting from the loss of their continental holdings; this is often considered a contributory cause of the Wars of the Roses.
His youngest brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and Edward's lifelong companion and supporter, William Hastings, were generously rewarded for their loyalty, becoming effectively governors of the north and midlands respectively.
The hinge point in the succession dispute is the forced abdication of Richard II and whether it was lawful or not.
Although there were some lengthy sieges, such as those of Harlech Castle and Bamburgh Castle, these were in comparatively remote and less populous regions.
Cambridge's wife, Anne Mortimer, who had died in 1411, was the daughter of Roger Mortimer and thus a descendant of Lionel of Antwerp, Edward III's second son.
Henry IV's son and successor, Henry V, inherited a temporarily pacified nation, and his military success against France in the Hundred Years' War bolstered his popularity, enabling him to strengthen the Lancastrian hold on the throne.
By then, the new Duke of Somerset was emerging as a favourite of the royal court.
The rebels occupied parts of London, but were driven out by the citizens after some of them fell to looting.
Backed by a papal emissary who had taken their side, they marched north.
Her army, commanded by the fourth successive Duke of Somerset, was brought to battle and destroyed at the Battle of Tewkesbury.
Many of the nobles still resented the influence of the queen's Woodville relatives (her brother, Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers and her son by her first marriage, Thomas Grey, 1st Marquess of Dorset), and regarded them as power-hungry upstarts ('''parvenus''').
York soon asserted his power with ever-greater boldness (although there is no proof that he had aspirations to the throne at this early stage).
There were also sometimes contingents of foreign mercenaries, armed with cannon or handguns.
A period of comparative peace followed, but King Edward died unexpectedly in 1483.
He was crowned Henry VII, and married Elizabeth of York, daughter of Edward IV, to unite and reconcile the two houses.
Warbeck made repeated attempts to incite revolts, with support at various times from the court of Burgundy and James IV of Scotland.
Historians debate the extent of impact the wars had on medieval English life.
Edward entered London in the custody of Richard on 4 May, and was lodged in the Tower of London.
Henry VI's right to the crown was challenged by Richard, Duke of York, who could claim descent from Edward's second surviving son Lionel (through a woman) and fourth surviving son Edmund (agnatically).
The effect of the wars on the merchant and labouring classes was far less than in the long drawn-out wars of siege and pillage in Europe, which were carried out by mercenaries who profited from long wars.
Edward IV had already marched north to suppress another uprising in Yorkshire.
York, Salisbury and Warwick were summoned to a royal council at Coventry, but they refused, fearing arrest when they were isolated from their own supporters.
York summoned the Nevilles to join him at his stronghold at Ludlow Castle in the Welsh Marches.
The result was a Lancastrian defeat.
Margaret and the remaining Lancastrian nobles gathered their army in the north of England, and when York moved north to engage them, he and his second son Edmund were killed at the Battle of Wakefield in December 1460.
The lords had gathered in London for a Grand Council and the city was full of armed retainers.
Edward was captured at Olney, Buckinghamshire, and imprisoned at Middleham Castle in Yorkshire.
Richard II's government had become highly unpopular beyond his strongholds in Cheshire and Wales.
Although peace was temporarily restored, the Lancastrians were inspired by Margaret of Anjou to contest York's influence, and a deadly feud between the two branches of the royal family ensued.
Peace was restored for the remainder of Edward's reign.
York and his supporters were attainted at the Parliament of Devils as traitors.
The next day, York produced detailed genealogies to support his claim based on his descent from Lionel of Antwerp, Duke of Clarence and was met with more understanding.
Warwick travelled to Ireland to concert plans with York, evading the royal ships commanded by the Duke of Exeter.
He also held many of the offices of state.
With fair winds, he landed in Pembrokeshire six days later.
The two nobles were prepared to settle the matter by personal combat but Richard banished them both from the realm.
Having secured the boys, Robert Stillington, Bishop of Bath and Wells then alleged that Edward IV's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville had been illegal and that the two boys were therefore illegitimate.
Revisionists, such as the Oxford historian K. B. McFarlane, suggest that the effects of the conflicts have been greatly exaggerated and that there were no wars of the roses.
Richard and Buckingham overtook Earl Rivers, who was escorting the young Edward V to London, at Stony Stratford in Buckinghamshire on 28 April.
Warwick, with help from a fleet under his nephew, the Bastard of Fauconberg, landed at Dartmouth and rapidly secured support from the southern counties and ports.
Margaret persuaded Henry to revoke the appointments York had made as Protector, while York was made to return to his post as lieutenant in Ireland.
Edward was escorted to London by Warwick's brother George Neville, the Archbishop of York, where he and Warwick were reconciled, to outward appearances.
At the Battle of Northampton on 10 July, the Yorkist army under Warwick defeated the Lancastrians, aided by treachery in the king's ranks.
On his deathbed, Edward had named his surviving brother Richard of Gloucester as Protector of England.
However, he made no immediate move to have Edward declared illegitimate and place George on the throne.
Thomas Kempe, the Bishop of London, asked the people of London their opinion and they replied with shouts of "King Edward".
Margaret refused to accept any solution that would disinherit her son, and it became clear that she would only tolerate the situation for as long as the Duke of York and his allies retained the military ascendancy.
The failure of Buckingham's revolt was clearly not the end of the plots against Richard, who could never again feel secure, and who also suffered the loss of his wife and eleven-year-old son, putting the future of the Yorkist dynasty in doubt.
The king's court was set up at Coventry.
Henry knighted thirty Lancastrian soldiers immediately after the battle.
The quarrel between the Percys—long the Earls of Northumberland—and the comparatively upstart Nevilles was the best-known of these private wars and followed this pattern, as did the feud between the Courtenays and Bonvilles in Cornwall and Devon.
After 1471, Edward IV had preferred to belittle Henry's pretensions to the crown, and made only sporadic attempts to secure him.
In many cases feuds were fought between old-established families, and formerly minor nobility raised in power and influence by Henry IV in the aftermath of the rebellions against him.
Suffolk eventually succeeded in having Humphrey of Gloucester arrested for treason.
Few noble houses were extinguished during the wars; in the period from 1425 to 1449, before the outbreak of the wars, there were as many extinctions of noble lines (25) as occurred during the fighting (24) from 1450 to 1474.
Warwick had the queen's father, Richard Woodville, 1st Earl Rivers, and her brother John executed.
John Beaufort had been illegitimate at birth, though later legitimised by the marriage of his parents.
Until the accession of the infant Henry VI, this claim to the throne had never been made by the House of York, but Richard of York (who had held several important offices of state under his Lancastarian cousins) now quarrelled with prominent Lancastrians at court and with Henry VI's queen, Margaret of Anjou.
It gave him much of what he wanted, particularly since he was also made Protector of the Realm and was able to govern in Henry's name.
Edward landed with a small force at Ravenspur on the Yorkshire coast.
Humphrey died while awaiting trial in prison at Bury St Edmunds in 1447.
They later travelled by sea to Scotland to negotiate for Scottish assistance.
It had supposedly been a condition of the legitimation that the Beaufort descendants forfeited their rights to the crown.
Henry's father, Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond, had been a half-brother of Henry VI, but Henry's claim to royalty was through his mother, Margaret Beaufort.
The unofficial system of ''livery and maintenance'', by which powerful nobles would offer protection to followers who would sport their colours and badges (''livery''), and controlled large numbers of paid men-at-arms (''maintenance'') was one of the effects of the breakdown of royal authority which preceded and partly caused the wars.
He later announced the news of his marriage as ''fait accompli'', to Warwick's considerable embarrassment.
The Butlers suffered more than 400 casualties.
Buckingham's starving forces deserted and he was betrayed and executed.
The Lancastrian army advanced south and released Henry at the Second Battle of St Albans, but failed to occupy London, and subsequently retreated to the north.
Fighting resumed more violently in 1459.
Richard and the Yorkist faction, who tended to be physically placed further away from the seat of power, found their power slowly being stripped away.
Many areas did little or nothing to change their city defences, perhaps an indication that they were left untouched by the wars.
George of Clarence became increasingly estranged from Edward, and was executed in 1478 for association with convicted traitors.
Parliament was assembled, and when York entered he made straight for the throne, which he may have been expecting the Lords to encourage him to take for himself as they had acclaimed Henry IV in 1399.
In 1450, there was a violent popular revolt in Kent, Jack Cade's rebellion.
There was never a trial or judicial inquest on the matter.
The deposed King Henry was later captured for the third time at Clitheroe in Lancashire in 1465.
Another example: Henry Tudor's forces at Bosworth fought under the banner of a red dragon, while the Yorkist army used Richard III's personal device of a white boar.
This led Edward's brother-in-law, Charles of Burgundy, to provide funds and troops to Edward to enable him to launch an invasion of England in 1471.
They were proclaimed traitors, and many exiled Lancastrians returned to reclaim their estates.
They were fought between supporters of two rival branches of the royal House of Plantagenet, those of Lancaster and York.
The battle was fought in thick fog, and some of Warwick's men attacked each other by mistake.
Several prominent Lancastrian leaders, including Somerset and Northumberland, were killed.
The ensuing Battle of Wakefield was a complete Lancastrian victory.
Some of his supporters in the south rose up prematurely, thus allowing Richard's Lieutenant in the South, the Duke of Norfolk, to prevent many rebels from joining forces.
She was descended from John Beaufort, who was a son of John of Gaunt and thus a grandson of Edward III.
Henry V died unexpectedly in 1422 and his son, King Henry VI of England, ascended the throne as an infant only nine months old.
He was prevented from crossing the River Severn to join other rebels in the south of England by storms and floods, which also prevented Henry Tudor landing in the West Country.
An increasingly thwarted Richard (who feared arrest for treason) finally resorted to armed hostilities in 1455.
Henry Tudor, a distant relative of the Lancastrian kings who had inherited their claim, defeated Richard III at Bosworth in 1485.
His brother George turned traitor again, abandoning Warwick.
The final victory went to a claimant of the Lancastrian party, Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond, who defeated the last Yorkist king, Richard III, at the Battle of Bosworth Field.
With the king so easily manipulated, power rested with those closest to him at court, in other words, Somerset and the Lancastrian faction.
The increasing discord at court was mirrored in the country as a whole, where noble families engaged in private feuds and showed increasing disrespect for the royal authority and for the courts of law.
Edward was unprepared for this event and had to order his army to scatter.
York announced his claim to the throne, but the Lords, even Warwick and Salisbury, were shocked by his presumption; they had no desire at this stage to overthrow King Henry.
The name ''Wars of the Roses'' refers to the heraldic badges associated with the two royal houses, the White Rose of York and the Red Rose of Lancaster.
Perkin Warbeck claimed he was the younger of the Princes from 1490 and was recognised as such in international diplomacy outside England.
In the populated areas, both factions had much to lose by the ruin of the country and sought quick resolution of the conflict by pitched battle.
Her son Prince Edward, the Lancastrian heir to the throne, was killed.
The Lancastrian claim to the throne had descended to Henry Tudor on the death of Henry VI and his son in 1471.
With an army from the pro-Yorkist Marches (the border area between England and Wales), he met Jasper Tudor's Lancastrian army arriving from Wales, and he defeated them soundly at the Battle of Mortimer's Cross in Herefordshire.
This resulted in two years of rapid changes of fortune, before Edward IV once again won complete victories at Barnet (April 1471), where Warwick was killed, and Tewkesbury (May 1471) where the Lancastrian heir, Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales was executed after the battle.
Warwick was cut down trying to reach his horse.
The Battle of Towton, near York, was the biggest battle of the Wars of the Roses.
Initially claiming to support Henry and to be seeking only to have his title of Duke of York restored, he soon gained the city of York and rallied several supporters.
Parliament agreed to consider the matter and accepted that York's claim was better, but by a majority of five, they voted that Henry VI should remain as king.
At the Battle of Stoke Field, Henry defeated Lincoln's army.
''Wars of the Roses'' came into common use in the nineteenth century, after the publication in 1829 of ''Anne of Geierstein'' by Sir Walter Scott.
With the king in their possession, the Yorkists returned to London.
Parliament had already accepted that Edward's victory was simply a restoration of the rightful heir to the throne.
The conspirators produced a pretender to the throne, a boy named Lambert Simnel, who bore a close physical resemblance to the young Edward, Earl of Warwick (son of George of Clarence), the best surviving male claimant of the House of York.
After the Battle of Towton, Henry VI and Margaret had fled to Scotland, where they stayed with the court of James III and followed through on their promise to cede Berwick to Scotland.
At the Battle of Piltown in 1462, the Yorkish supporter Thomas FitzGerald, 7th Earl of Desmond, defeated the Lancastrian Butlers of Kilkenny.
The classical view is that the many casualties among the nobility continued the changes in feudal English society caused by the effects of the Black Death.
Though most surviving descendants of Richard of York were imprisoned, sporadic rebellions continued until 1497, when Perkin Warbeck, who claimed he was the younger brother of Edward V, one of the two disappeared Princes in the Tower, was imprisoned and later executed.
Cambridge was executed in 1415, for treason, at the start of the campaign that led to the Battle of Agincourt.
There were Lancastrian revolts in the north of England in 1464.
This embarrassment turned to bitterness when the Woodvilles came to be favoured over the Nevilles at court.
In late June 1460, Warwick, Salisbury and Edward of March crossed the Channel and rapidly established themselves in Kent and London, where they enjoyed wide support.
Louis XI of France, who wished to forestall a hostile alliance between Edward and Edward's brother-in-law Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, suggested the idea of an alliance between Warwick and Margaret.
In 1398, he intervened in a dispute, involving mutual accusations of treason, between Henry Bolingbroke, the son of Edward III's third son John of Gaunt, and Thomas de Mowbray, 1st Duke of Norfolk.
