A stone at the 240-foot level of the monument is inscribed in  (Our language, our country, our birthplace, Wales forever).
A  airspace will exist between the inner and outer glass walls to help insulate the facility.
As early as 1783, the Continental Congress had resolved "That an equestrian statue of George Washington be erected at the place where the residence of Congress shall be established."
The stone, imported from Wales, was donated by Welsh citizens of New York.
The slope of the walls of the pyramidion is 17°24' from the vertical.
The original steam powered elevator, which took 10 to 12 minutes to ascend to the observation floor, was replaced by an electric elevator powered by an on-site dynamo in 1901 which took five minutes to ascend.
In 1876, the Centennial of the Declaration of Independence, Congress agreed to appropriate another $200,000 to resume construction.
In 1931, four red aircraft warning lights were installed, one per face in one of its observation windows.
In 1974–76, they were glazed with bulletproof glass and the shutters removed.
The monument was damaged during the 2011 Virginia earthquake and Hurricane Irene in the same year and remained closed to the public while the structure was assessed and repaired.
The weight of the above ground portion of the monument is ,  whereas its total weight, including the foundation below ground and any earth above it that is within its outer perimeter is .
The main stairs spiral up the interior walls from the entry lobby floor to the elevator reboarding floor at the 490-foot level.
The latter was replaced in 1958 and again in 1998 by 70-second elevators.
All stairs are on the north and south walls except for the aforementioned west stair between the 10- and 20-foot levels, and the two spiral stairs.
Mills also knew the capital well, having just been chosen Architect of Public Buildings for Washington.
The stairs and elevator are supported by four wrought iron columns each.
It is covered by a stone slab which is internally removable.
In early 1848, workers started to build the Washington Monument's foundation.
In 1958 the observation windows were glazed with shatterproof glass.
The latter quarry is located on the Beaver Dam Road near its intersection with McCormick Road.
Spectral analysis in 1934 showed that it was composed of 97.87% aluminum with the rest impurities.
The request had just reached the floor of the House of Representatives when the Know-Nothing Party seized control of the Society on .
The ceremony ended with fireworks that evening.
Architect Mills was reputed to have said omitting the colonnade would make the monument look like "a stalk of asparagus"; another critic said it offered "little&nbsp;... to be proud of."
A temporary interactive visitors center, dubbed the "Discovery Channel Center" was also constructed during the project.
The batter or slope of the outer surface is 0.247 inches per foot (2.06 cm/m, 1°11').
The society considered five new designs, concluding that the one by William Wetmore Story seemed "vastly superior in artistic taste and beauty."
It weighs , is  high from its base to its top, and is  square at its base.
The monument underwent an extensive restoration project between 1998 and 2001.
The National Park Service hired construction management firm Hill International in conjunction with joint-venture partner Louis Berger Group to provide coordination between the designer, Wiss, Janney, and Elstner Associates, the general contractor Perini, and numerous stakeholders.
A continuous sloping unreinforced concrete buttress encircles what remains.
Casey redesigned the foundation, strengthening it so it could support a structure that ultimately weighed more than 40,000 tons.
Its slope (lower external angle from the vertical) is 49°.
The festivities concluded that evening with fireworks, both aerial and ground displays.
The citizens of Baltimore had chosen him to build a monument to Washington, and he had designed a tall Greek column surmounted by a statue of the President.
The Washington Monument attracted enormous crowds before it officially opened.
The stone in publicly accessible interior spaces was encased in glass to prevent vandalism, while new windows with narrower frames were installed (to increase the viewing space).
After exiting the monument, they passed through a turnstile to prevent them from re-entering.
The monument reopened April 1, 2005, while the surrounding grounds remained closed until the landscape was finished later that summer.
The original net included a gold-plated copper band attached to the aluminum apex by four large set screws which supported eight closely spaced vertical points that did not protrude above the apex.
The ceremony began with a parade of dignitaries in carriages, marching troops, fire companies, and benevolent societies.
If the cornerstone was not moved during the strengthening of the foundation in 1879–80, its upper surface would now be  below the pavement just outside the northeast corner of the shaft.
In 1958, eight  diameter holes for new red aircraft warning lights were bored, one above each window near the top edge of the fourth course of slabs (516-foot level) in the pyramidion.
He was also identified with the Federalist Party, which lost control of the national government in 1800 to the Jeffersonian Republicans, who were reluctant to celebrate the hero of the opposition party.
HABS showed both height stones, but did not show one stone not yet installed in 1994.
The observation floor (nominally the 500-foot level) is   above the entry lobby floor or lowest landing level.
The bottom third of the monument is a slightly lighter shade than the rest of the construction because the marble was obtained from different quarries.
Even though the inscriptions are no longer covered, no attempt was made to repair them when the apex was accessible in 2013.
With the Know-Nothing Party disintegrating and its inability to secure contributions toward building the monument, it surrendered its possession of the monument to the original Society on .
The four center ribs terminate eight courses above the shaft at a marble cruciform (cross shaped) keystone, forming two main arches that cross each other.
One is the year "1884" on the underside of the cruciform keystone; the other is at the same level as that keystone on the north face of the west center rib containing the names and titles of the four highest ranked builders.
A difference in shading of the marble, visible approximately  or 27% up, shows where construction was halted and later resumed with marble from a different source.
The National Park Service rectified the omission by creating a new display.
The center provided a simulated ride to the top of the monument, and shared information with visitors during phases in which the monument was closed.
As initially constructed, the interior was relatively open with two-rail handrails, but a couple of suicides and an accidental fall prompted the addition of tall wire screening ( high with a large diamond mesh) on the inside edge of the stairs and landings in 1929.
Of 194 stones, 95 are marble, 41 are granite, 30 are limestone, 9 are sandstone, with 19 miscellaneous types, including combinations of the aforesaid and those whose materials are not identified.
Each such arch supports a pair of square corner stones, one above the other totaling one course in height.
Olszewski did not include three stones not yet installed in 1971.
Originally, visitors entered and exited the west side of the elevator on the observation floor, causing congestion.
Additionally, the internal inscription does not use cursive writing and all letters in all names are capitals.
It has a shallow depression in its base to match a slightly raised area atop the small upper surface of the marble capstone, which aligns the sides of the apex with those of the capstone, and the downward protruding lip around that area prevents water from entering the joint.
Park Service inspectors also discovered that the elevator system had been damaged, and was operating only to the  level, but was soon repaired.
The annual visitor count peaked between 1979–97, where an average of 1.1 million visitors visited annually; however, from 2005–10, the Washington Monument has had an average of only 631,000 visitors each year.
Therefore, the cornerstone was laid below the 1848 ground level.
As a landmark of the U.S. capital, the Washington Monument has been featured in film and television depictions.
At the center of the foundation a brick-lined  square well was dug to a depth of  below the bed of the foundation to keep it dry and to supply water during construction.
The cornerstone was laid with great ceremony at the northeast corner of the lowest course or step of the old foundation on .
The two lightning rods present since 2013 are connected to the iron columns with two large braided aluminum cables leading down the surface of the pyramidion near its southeast and northwest corners.
Their joints were so thin that some stones pressed on bare stone below them, breaking off many pieces since it was constructed.
Criticism of Mills' design and its estimated price tag of more than $1 million ($ in ) caused the society to hesitate.
During the second phase the quarry was operated by Hugh Sisson, but is now flooded, is called Beaverdam Pond, and is the home of the Beaver Dam Swimming Club.
The exterior walls (which will be slightly frosted to prevent viewing of the security screening process) will consist of an outer sheet of bulletproof glass or polycarbonate, a metal mesh insert, and another sheet of bulletproof glass.
The reason for the inspection was the park agency's suspicion that there were more cracks on the monument's upper section not visible from the inside.
U.S. Park Police shot and killed Mayer.
The National Park Service said that it would soon begin sealing the exterior cracks on the monument to protect it from rain and snow.
Since , 50 American flags have flown 24 hours a day.
The slab was constructed by digging pairs of  wide drifts on opposite sides of the monument's center line to keep the monument properly balanced.
The second phase walls at the 160-foot level were  thick, which, combined with the larger shaft well, yields an outer dimension of  square at that level.
The "height stones" refer to two stones that indicate height: during the first phase of construction a stone with an inscription that includes the phrase "from the foundation to this height 100 feet" was installed just below the 80–90-foot stairway and high above the 60–70-foot stairway; during the second phase of construction a stone with a horizontal line and the phrase "top of statue on Capitol" was installed on the 330-foot level.
To properly distribute the load from the shaft to slab, about half by volume of the outer periphery of the old rubble foundation below its top step was removed.
Jacob (2005) described in detail and pictured 193 "commemorative stones", including the 100-foot stone but not the Capitol stone.
It officially opened .
The rest of the foundation was then constructed of bluestone gneiss rubble and spalls, with every crevice filled with lime mortar.
President Arthur proclaimed: I do now .... in behalf of the people, receive this monument .... and declare it dedicated from this time forth to the immortal name and memory of George Washington.
Despite many proposals to embellish the obelisk, only its original flat top was altered to a pointed marble pyramidion, in 1884.
In attendance were President James K. Polk and other federal, state and local government officials, Elizabeth Schuyler Hamilton, Mrs. Dolley Madison, Mrs. John Quincy Adams, and George Washington Parke Custis, among 15,000 to 20,000 others, including a bald eagle.
Forty eight American flags (one for each state then in existence) were flown on wooden flag poles on Washington's birthday since 1920 and later on Independence Day, Memorial Day, and other special occasions until early 1958.
The symbolic meaning of the shape is referenced in the novel ''The Lost Symbol'' by Dan Brown.
The buttress is  square at its base,  square at its top, and  high.
All flags were removed and stored overnight.
After 32 months of repairs, the National Park Service and the Trust for the National Mall reopened the Washington Monument to visitors on .
On September 23, 1835, the board of managers of the society described their expectations:
For ten hours in December 1982, the Washington Monument and eight tourists were held hostage by a nuclear arms protester, Norman Mayer, claiming to have explosives in a van he drove to the monument's base.
A final speech was given by John W. Daniel of Virginia.
The structure is designed so that it may be removed without damaging the monument.
One part of Mills' elaborate design that was built was the doorway surmounted by an Egyptian-style winged sun.
Washington was the unchallenged public icon of American military and civic patriotism.
When 48 and 49 flags were flown, only 48 and 49 flag poles of the available 50 were placed into base receptacles.
In July 2013, lighting was added to the scaffolding.
Wiss, Janney, Elstner climber Dave Megerle took three hours to set up the rappelling equipment and set up a barrier around the monument's lightning rod system atop the pyramidion; it was the first time the hatch in the pyramidion had been open since 2000.
According to Joseph R. Chandler:
Three stairs with small landings rise from the entry lobby floor to the 30-foot level successively along the north, west and south interior walls.
The external inspection of the monument was completed October 5, 2011.
The rappellers used radios to report what they found to engineering experts on the ground.
The second phase interior walls have rounded ( radii) corners.
File:Cherry blossoms at the Tidal Basin and Washington Monument.jpg|Cherry blossoms at the Tidal Basin and Washington Monument, March 2016
During its tenure, the Know-Nothing Society added only two courses of masonry, or four feet, to the monument using rejected masonry it found on site, increasing the height of the shaft to 156 feet.
Though many people ridiculed them, Casey managed to install most of the stones in the interior walls&nbsp;— one stone was found at the bottom of the elevator shaft in 1951.
Six months later on  lightning damaged the marble blocks of the pyramidion, so a net of gold-plated copper rods supporting 200  gold-plated, platinum-tipped copper points spaced every  was installed over the entire pyramidion.
The first phase of the walls was constructed under the direction of William Dougherty.
He surrounded the obelisk with a circular colonnade, the top of which would feature Washington standing in a chariot.
In 1880, the ground level was raised  to the base of the shaft by the addition of a  wide earthen embankment encircling the reinforced foundation, widened another 30 feet in 1881, and then the knoll was constructed in 1887–88.
The proposal called for engraving on the statue which explained it had been erected "in honor of George Washington, the illustrious Commander-in-Chief of the Armies of the United States of America during the war which vindicated and secured their liberty, sovereignty, and independence."
The stairs had 898 steps until 1958, consisting of 18 risers in each of the 49 main stairs plus 16 risers in the spiral stair.
The aluminum apex replaces its truncated top.
The weight of the ironwork is .
At that originally intended site, which is  WNW from the current monument, there now stands a small monolith called the Jefferson Pier.
Twelve such courses, the internal ribs, the marble capstone, and the aluminum apex comprise the pyramidion.
The United States Commission of Fine Arts approved the aesthetic design of the screening facility in June 2013.
Both the flags and flag poles were removed and stored between these days.
A long oration was delivered by the Speaker of the House of Representatives Robert C. Winthrop.
Although each course contains both stretchers (stones parallel to the wall) and headers (stones projecting into the wall), about two to three times as many stretchers as headers were used.
They believed that if they used the $87,000 they had already collected to start work, the appearance of the monument would spur further donations that would allow them to complete the project.
The project included cleaning, repairing and repointing the monument's exterior and interior stonework.
As the lower section of the monument was exposed to cold and hot and damp and dry weather conditions, the material dissolved and worked its way through the cracks between the stones of the outer wall, solidifying as it dripped down their outer surface.
The National Park Service reopened the Washington Monument to visitors on May 12, 2014, eight days ahead of schedule.
Then, in the House Chamber, the president, his Cabinet, diplomats and others listened to Representative John Davis Long read a speech written a few months earlier by Robert C. Winthrop, formerly the Speaker of the House of Representatives when the cornerstone was laid 37 years earlier, but now too ill to personally deliver his speech.
The slab was  thick, with an outer perimeter  square, an inner perimeter  square, with undisturbed loam inside the inner perimeter, except for the water well.
Progress toward a memorial finally began in 1832.
Four pairs of  wide observation windows are provided, all just above the lowest course of slabs (504-foot level).
By that time, Washington had the image of a national hero who could be celebrated by both North and South, and memorials to him were no longer controversial.
The next three courses of white marble () came from Sheffield, Massachusetts, while all courses above them came from the Beaver Dam quarry near Cockeysville, Maryland.
Many people thought a simple obelisk, one without the colonnade, would be too bare.
In 1958 fifty   tall aluminum flag poles (anticipating Alaska and Hawaii) were installed, evenly spaced around a  diameter circle.
The ''Historic Structure Report'' (HSR, 2004) named 194 "memorial stones" by level, including both height stones.
Its base is  square.
Pilots complained that they could not be easily seen, so the monument was floodlit on all sides as well.
For six months after its dedication, 10,041 people climbed the 898 steps and 50 landings to the top.
The monument temporarily closed again on December 4, 2000 to allow a new elevator cab to be installed, completing the final phase of the restoration project.
Ten days after Washington's death, a Congressional committee recommended a different type of monument.
The inside upper edges of the topmost slabs on the four faces of the pyramidion rest on the keystone and in the groove.
The one-story facility was designed to reduce the ability of a terrorist attack on the interior of the monument, or an attempt to seize and hold it.
The interior well is  square and has square corners.
At the reopening Interior Secretary Sally Jewell, ''Today'' show weatherman Al Roker, and ''American Idol'' Season 12 winner Candice Glover were present.
Inside the colonnade would be statues of 30 prominent Revolutionary War heroes.
In 1934 these eight short points were lengthened to extend them above the apex by .
The two small spiral stairs installed in 1958 are aluminum.
Robert Mills, the architect of the monument, stated in September 1848, "The foundations are now brought up nearly to the surface of the ground; the second step being nearly completed, which covers up the corner stone."
A block in the pyramidion also was partially dislodged, and pieces of stone, stone chips, mortar, and paint chips came free of the monument and "littered" the interior stairs and observation deck.
It would now be sandwiched between the concrete slab under the old foundation and the concrete buttress completely encircling what remains of the old foundation.
The cornerstone was a  marble block  high and  square with a large hole for a zinc case filled with memorabilia.
So the large landing at the 490-foot level was expanded to a full floor and the original spiral stair in the northeast corner between the 490- and 500-foot levels was replaced by two spiral stairs in the northeast and southeast corners.
The final cost of the restoration project was $10.5 million.
Congress deliberated over those five as well as Mills' original.
The monument opened to the public on October 9, 1888.
The eight corner ribs terminate six courses above the shaft, each corner rib resting on its neighboring corner rib via a miter joint, forming four corner arches.
The four faces of the external aluminum apex all bear inscriptions in cursive writing (Snell Round hand), which are incised into the aluminum.
The building of the monument proceeded quickly after Congress had provided sufficient funding.
The renovations were due partly to security concerns following the September 11 attacks and the start of the War on Terror.
The following table shows legible inscriptions in  and illegible inscriptions in .
The Heights of Buildings Act of 1910 restricts new building heights to no more than  greater than the width of the adjacent street.
Casey reported that nowhere did the load exceed  and did not exceed  near the outer perimeter.
The original Society refused to recognize the illegal takeover, so two Societies existed side by side until 1858.
The winner was architect Robert Mills.
Two years later, the Hall–Héroult process made aluminum easier to produce and the price of aluminum plummeted, making the once-valuable apex more ordinary, though it still provided a lustrous, non-rusting apex that served as the original lightning rod.
The sources disagree on the number of stones for two reasons: whether one or both "height stones" are included, and stones not yet on display at the time of a source's publication cannot be included.
During the second phase (1879–84), the walls were constructed of smoothly dressed (ashlar) large marble and granite blocks (rectangular cuboids) laid down in an orderly manner (Flemish bond) with thick joints.
On September 27, 2011, Denali National Park ranger Brandon Latham arrived to assist four climbers belonging to a "difficult access" team from Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates.
Engineers studied the foundation several times to determine if it was strong enough.
The installation received the 2005 Park/Landscape Award of Merit from the American Society of Landscape Architects.
This monument is vastly taller than the obelisks around the capitals of Europe and in Egypt and Ethiopia, but ordinary antique obelisks were quarried as a monolithic block of stone, and were therefore seldom taller than approximately .
Congress immediately tabled its expected contribution of $200,000 to the Society, effectively halting the appropriation.
The strengthened foundation (old foundation and concrete slab) has a total depth of  below the bottom of the lowest course of marble blocks (now below ground), and  below the entry lobby floor.
In addition to the  long west crack, the inspection found several corner cracks and surface spalls (pieces of stone broken loose) at or near the top of the monument, and more loss of joint mortar lower down the monument.
During the second phase, after determining that the proposed weight of the monument was too great for the old foundation to safely bear, the thickness of the walls atop the unfinished stump was reduced and the foundation was strengthened by adding a large unreinforced concrete slab below the perimeter of the old foundation to increase the monument's load bearing area two and one half times.
An additional step existed in the entry passage until it was replaced by a ramp in 1975.
The pyramidion, the pointed top  of the monument, was originally designed with an  tall inscribed aluminum apex which served as a single lightning rod, installed .
Even though the aluminum apex is still connected to the columns with large copper rods, it is no longer part of the lightning protection system because it is now disconnected from the present lightning rods which shield it.
The aluminum apex, at the time a rare metal as valuable as silver, was cast by William Frishmuth of Philadelphia.
Henderson Suter, William Wilson Corcoran (of the Washington National Monument Society) read by Dr. James C. Welling because Corcoran was unable to attend, Freemason Myron M. Parker, Col. Thomas Lincoln Casey of the Army Corps of Engineers, and President Chester A. Arthur.
They also blocked his image on coins or the celebration of his birthday.
Interest in the monument grew after the Civil War.
To prevent future takeovers, Congress incorporated the Society on .
The base of the first phase walls has an outer dimension of  square and a thickness of .
Its inscription ("Chief Engineer ...") is almost identical to the inscription on the south face of the aluminum apex except for "U.S.", which is part of the phrase "14th U.S. Infantry" in the inscription inside the pyramidion, but the apex has only "14th Infantry".
Unusual materials include native copper (Michigan), pipestone (Minnesota), petrified wood (Arizona), and jadeite (Alaska).
During this time it was completely covered in scaffolding designed by the American architect Michael Graves (who was also responsible for the interior changes).
The total cost of the monument from 1848 to 1888 was $1,409,500.
"It's structurally sound and not going anywhere", he told the national media at a press conference on September 26, 2011.
A photo can be seen in ''The Egyptian Revival'' by Richard G. Carrot.
The marble capstone of the pyramidion is a truncated pyramid with a cubical keystone projecting from its base and a deep groove surrounding the keystone.
The weight of the second phase walls (from 150 feet to 500 feet) are .
Then, the cornerstone was pronounced sound after a Masonic ceremony using George Washington's Masonic gavel, apron and sash, as well as other Masonic symbols.
New bulletproof glass was installed during 1997–2000.
The weight of the foundation is , including earth and gneiss rubble above the concrete foundation that is within its outer perimeter.
It weighed  before lightning strikes removed a small amount of aluminum from its tip and sides.
This was caused by the weathering of the cement and rubble filler between the outer and inner walls.
They enter the pyramidion at its base, where they are tied together (electrically shorted) via large braided aluminum cables encircling the pyramidion  above its base.
As with all historic areas administered by the National Park Service, the national memorial was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 1966.
At the time of its completion, it was the tallest building in the world, a title it retained until the Eiffel Tower was completed in 1889; however, the Washington Monument is still the tallest stone structure in the world.
