Yellow is a typically terrestrial colour, whose violence can be painful and aggressive.
Kandinsky then formed a new group, the Blue Rider (Der Blaue Reiter) with like-minded artists such as August Macke, Franz Marc, Albert Bloch, and Gabriele Münter.
Kandinsky's legendary stage design for a performance of Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition" illustrates his synaesthetic concept of a universal correspondence of forms, colors and musical sounds.
Kandinsky was aware of recent scientific developments and the advances of modern artists who had contributed to radically new ways of seeing and experiencing the world.
''Composition IX'' has highly contrasted, powerful diagonals whose central form gives the impression of an embryo in the womb.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1927 - Molle rudesse.jpg|''Soft Hard'', 1927
Every form is the delimitation of a surface by another one; it possesses an inner content, the effect it produces on one who looks at it attentively.
While he was out, Gabriele Münter tidied his studio and inadvertently turned his canvas on its side.
These theories are explained in ''Point and Line to Plane'' (see below).
As when he first viewed Monet's ''Haystacks'', the experience would change his life.
He spent years creating abstract, sensorially rich paintings, working with form and colour, tirelessly observing his own paintings and those of other artists, noting their effects on his sense of colour.
The subjective effect produced by a line depends on its orientation: a ''horizontal'' line corresponds with the ground on which man rests and moves; it possesses a dark and cold affective tonality similar to black or blue.
''Riding Couple'' (1907) depicts a man on horseback, holding a woman with tenderness and care as they ride past a Russian town with luminous walls across a river.
He did not analyze them objectively, but from the point of view of their inner effect on the observer.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1909 - Murnau train et château.jpg|''Murnau, train & castle'', 1909
Fascinated by Christian eschatology and the perception of a coming New Age, a common theme among Kandinsky's first seven ''Compositions'' is the apocalypse (the end of the world as we know it).
This book contains many photographic examples and drawing from Kandinsky’s works which offer the demonstration of its theoretical observations, and which allow the reader to reproduce in him the inner obviousness provided that he takes the time to look at those pictures with care, that he let them acting on its own sensibility and that he let vibrating the sensible and spiritual strings of his soul.
Warmth is a tendency towards yellow, and coldness a tendency towards blue; yellow and blue form the first great, dynamic contrast.
This painting is not exceptional in that regard when compared with contemporary painters, but it shows the direction Kandinsky would take only a few years later.
The group released an almanac (''The Blue Rider Almanac'') and held two exhibits.
More of each were planned, but the outbreak of World War I in 1914 ended these plans and sent Kandinsky back to Russia via Switzerland and Sweden.
This experience, and his study of the region's folk art (particularly the use of bright colours on a dark background), was reflected in much of his early work.
Hearing tones and chords as he painted, Kandinsky theorized that (for example), yellow is the colour of middle C on a brassy trumpet; black is the colour of closure, and the end of things; and that combinations of colours produce vibrational frequencies, akin to chords played on a piano.
Wassily Kandinsky, Aquarell 6, Kunstdrucke auf japanpapier.jpg|''Aquarell 6''
That same year, before leaving Moscow, he saw an exhibit of paintings by Monet.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1913 - 293.jpg|1913
This freedom is characterised in his works by the treatment of planes rich in colours and gradations—as in ''Yellow – red – blue'' (1925), where Kandinsky illustrates his distance from the constructivism and suprematism movements influential at the time.
This progressing pyramid is penetrating and proceeding into the future.
His writing in ''The Blue Rider Almanac'' and the treatise "On the Spiritual In Art" (which was released in 1910) were both a defence and promotion of abstract art and an affirmation that all forms of art were equally capable of reaching a level of spirituality.
Biomorphic forms with supple, non-geometric outlines appear in his paintings—forms which suggest microscopic organisms but express the artist's inner life.
Any other colour resonates strongly on its neighbors.
In another episode with Münter during the Bavarian abstract expressionist years, Kandinsky was working on his ''Composition VI''.
Kandinsky also developed a theory of geometric figures and their relationships—claiming, for example, that the circle is the most peaceful shape and represents the human soul.
Kandinsky's book ''Concerning the Spiritual In Art'' (1910) and ''Point and Line to Plane'' (1926) echoed this theosophical tenet.
Successful in his profession—he was offered a professorship (chair of Roman Law) at the University of Dorpat—Kandinsky began painting studies (life-drawing, sketching and anatomy) at the age of&nbsp;30.
However, the group could not integrate the radical approach of Kandinsky (and others) with conventional artistic concepts and the group dissolved in late 1911.
The faces, clothing, and saddles of the riders are each a single colour, and neither they nor the walking figures display any real detail.
Kandinsky sometimes used musical terms to identify his works; he called his most spontaneous paintings "improvisations" and described more elaborate works as "compositions."
"Inner necessity" is, for Kandinsky, the principle of art and the foundation of forms and the harmony of colours.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1908, Murnau, Dorfstrasse.jpg|''Murnau, Dorfstrasse (Street in Murnau, A Village Street)'', 1908
A procession, with three riders and several others, crosses at the bottom.
This simple visual identification of forms and the main coloured masses present on the canvas is only a first approach to the inner reality of the work, whose appreciation necessitates deeper observation—not only of forms and colours involved in the painting but their relationship, their absolute and relative positions on the canvas and their harmony.
The horse is muted while the leaves in the trees, the town, and the reflections in the river glisten with spots of colour and brightness.
This resulted in his work being singled out for praise in a review of that show by the artist Spencer Frederick Gore in ''The Art News''.
Kandinsky taught the basic design class for beginners and the course on advanced theory at the Bauhaus; he also conducted painting classes and a workshop in which he augmented his colour theory with new elements of form psychology.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1901 - Akhtyrka.jpg|''Akhtyrka'', 1901
In ''The Blue Rider'', Kandinsky shows the rider more as a series of colours than in specific detail.
This form can be a square, a triangle, a circle, a star or something more complex.
In 1936 and 1939 he painted his two last major compositions, the type of elaborate canvases he had not produced for many years.
Due to right-wing hostility, the Bauhaus left Weimar and settled in Dessau in 1925.
They were displayed in the State-sponsored exhibit "Degenerate Art", and then destroyed (along with works by Paul Klee, Franz Marc and other modern artists).
therefore, it is composed of horizontal and vertical lines which delimit it and define it as an autonomous entity which supports the painting, communicating its affective tonality.
In 2015 the original designs of the stage elements were animated with modern video technology and synchronized with the music according to the preparatory notes of Kandinsky and the director's script of Felix Klee.
The rider's cloak is medium blue, which casts a darker-blue shadow.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1910 - The Cow.jpg|''The Cow'', 1910
Vassily Kandinsky, 1906 - Rotterdam sun.jpg|Rotterdam sun, 1906
He called the physical support and the material surface on which the artist draws or paints the ''basic plane'', or BP.
Upon returning and seeing the canvas (but not yet recognizing it) Kandinsky fell to his knees and wept, saying it was the most beautiful painting he had ever seen.
Kandinsky's paintings from this period are large, expressive coloured masses evaluated independently from forms and lines; these serve no longer to delimit them, but overlap freely to form paintings of extraordinary force.
White and black form the second great contrast, which is static.
For the most part, however, Kandinsky's paintings did not feature any human figures; an exception is ''Sunday, Old Russia'' (1904), in which Kandinsky recreates a highly colourful (and fanciful) view of peasants and nobles in front of the walls of a town.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1908 - Houses in Munich.jpg|''Houses in Munich'', 1908
Gray corresponds to immobility without hope; it tends to despair when it becomes dark, regaining little hope when it lightens.
Never attempting to picture any one of these stories as a narrative, he used their veiled imagery as symbols of the archetypes of death–rebirth and destruction–creation he felt were imminent in the pre-World War I world.
It can be isolated or resonate with other points or lines.
A ''diagonal'' possesses a more-or-less warm (or cold) tonality, according to its inclination toward the horizontal or the vertical.
The artist is the hand which plays, touching one key or another, to cause vibrations in the soul".
A picture-book biography entitled ''The Noisy Paint Box: The Colors and Sounds of Kandinsky's Abstract Art'' was published in 2014.
In Kandinsky’s work some characteristics are obvious, while certain touches are more discreet and veiled; they reveal themselves only progressively to those who deepen their connection with his work.
Red and green form the third great contrast, and orange and purple the fourth.
In the foreground are more amorphous blue shadows, the counterparts of the fall trees in the background.
This subjective experience is something that anyone can do—not scientific, objective observations but inner, subjective ones, what French philosopher Michel Henry calls  "absolute subjectivity" or the "absolute phenomenological life".
Music was important to the birth of abstract art, since music is abstract by nature—it does not try to represent the exterior world, but expresses in an immediate way the inner feelings of the soul.
Living in an apartment in Paris, Kandinsky created his work in a living-room studio.
Some art historians believe  that a second figure (perhaps a child) is being held by the rider, although this may be another shadow from the solitary rider.
Clarity is a tendency towards white, and obscurity is a tendency towards black.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1898 - Odessa Port.jpg|''Odessa Port'', 1898
Blue is a celestial colour, evoking a deep calm.
Geometrical elements took on increasing importance in both his teaching and painting—particularly the circle, half-circle, the angle, straight lines and curves.
In 1916 he met Nina Andreievskaya (she died in 1980), whom he married the following year.
The point of the pyramid is those few, great artists.
Its illustrations by Mary GrandPre earned it a 2015 Caldecott Honor.
He also occasionally mixed sand with paint to give a granular, rustic texture to his paintings.
This period was intensely productive.
The ''angle'' formed by the angular line also has an inner sonority which is warm and close to yellow for an acute angle (a triangle), cold and similar to blue for an obtuse angle (a circle), and similar to red for a right angle (a square).
Vassily Kandinsky, 1926 - Several Circles, Gugg 0910 25.jpg|''Several Circles'', 1926
In his writings, Kandinsky analyzed the geometrical elements which make up every painting—the ''point'' and the ''line.''
In 1921, Kandinsky was invited to go to Germany to attend the Bauhaus of Weimar by its founder, architect Walter Gropius.
The broad use of colour in ''The Blue Mountain'' illustrates Kandinsky's inclination toward an art in which colour is presented independently of form, and which each colour is given equal attention.
He returned to Moscow in 1914, after the outbreak of World War I. Kandinsky was unsympathetic to the official theories on art in Communist Moscow, and returned to Germany in 1921.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1936 - Composition IX.jpg|''Composition IX'', 1936
Vassily Kandinsky, 1913 - Composition 6.jpg|''Composition 6'', 1913
As early as 1912, ''On the Spiritual In Art'' was reviewed by Michael Sadleir in the London-based ''Art News.''
While impressions are based on an external reality that serves as a starting point, improvisations and compositions depict images emergent from the unconscious, though ''composition'' is developed from a more formal point of view.
Mixed with black it becomes brown, a hard colour.
Kandinsky Study for Improvisation V MIA 67342.jpg|''Study for Improvisation V '', 1910
In ''Looks on the Past'', he relates that the houses and churches were decorated with such shimmering colours that upon entering them, he felt that he was moving into a painting.
From 1906 to 1908 Kandinsky spent a great deal of time travelling across Europe (he was an associate of the Blue Rose symbolist group of Moscow), until he settled in the small Bavarian town of Murnau.
In 2012, Christie's auctioned Kandinsky's ''Studie für Improvisation 8 (Study for Improvisation 8)'', a 1909 view of a man wielding a broadsword in a rainbow-hued village, for $23 million.
The blue rider in the painting is prominent (but not clearly defined), and the horse has an unnatural gait (which Kandinsky must have known).
Sadleir's interest in Kandinsky also led to Kandinsky's first works entering a British art collection; Sadleir's father, Michael Sadler, acquired several woodprints and the abstract painting ''Fragment for Composition VII'' in 1913 following a visit by father and son to meet Kandinsky in Munich that year.
Wassily Kandinsky, 1911, Reiter (Lyrishes), oil on canvas, 94 x 130 cm, Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen.jpg|''The Rider'', 1911
As in his painting of the apocalypse by water (''Composition VI''), Kandinsky puts the viewer in the situation of experiencing these epic myths by translating them into contemporary terms (with a sense of desperation, flurry, urgency, and confusion).
His fascination with colour symbolism and psychology continued as he grew.
He died at Neuilly-sur-Seine in 1944.
A force which deploys itself, without obstacle, as the one which produces a straight line corresponds with ''lyricism''; several forces which confront (or annoy) each other form a ''drama''.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1922 - Kleine Welten I.jpg|''Small worlds I'', 1922
Later, he would write about this experience:
Yellow has an ''eccentric'' movement and blue a ''concentric'' movement; a yellow surface seems to move closer to us, while a blue surface seems to move away.
White is a deep, absolute silence, full of possibility.
He was also spiritually influenced by Madame Blavatsky (1831–1891), the best-known exponent of theosophy.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1935 - Brown with supplement.jpg|''Brown with supplement'', 1935
Repeating this word like a mantra, Kandinsky painted and completed the monumental work in a three-day span.
This work demonstrates the influence of pointillism in the way the depth of field is collapsed into a flat, luminescent surface.
Kandinsky was similarly influenced during this period by Richard Wagner's ''Lohengrin'' which, he felt, pushed the limits of music and melody beyond standard lyricism.
As he stated in ''Concerning the Spiritual In Art'' (see below), Kandinsky felt that an authentic artist creating art from "an internal necessity" inhabits the tip of an upward-moving pyramid.
In 1896 Kandinsky settled in Munich, studying first at Anton Ažbe's private school and then at the Academy of Fine Arts.
Münter told him that he was trapped in his intellect and not reaching the true subject of the picture.
Kandinsky compares the spiritual life of humanity to a pyramid—the artist has a mission to lead others to the pinnacle with his work.
Vassily Kandinsky, 1923 - On White II.jpg|''On White II'', 1923
The first three survive only in black-and-white photographs taken by fellow artist and friend Gabriele Münter.
A few years later he first likened painting to composing music in the manner for which he would become noted, writing, "Colour is the keyboard, the eyes are the hammers, the soul is the piano with many strings.
'''Wassily Wassilyevich Kandinsky''' (; , ''Vasiliy Vasil’yevich Kandinskiy'', ; &nbsp;– 13 December 1944) was an influential Russian painter and art theorist.
This inner necessity is the right of the artist to unlimited freedom, but this freedom becomes licence if it is not founded on such a necessity.
This spiritual communion of viewer-painting-artist/prophet may be described within the limits of words and images.
The point is the most concise form but, according to its placement on the basic plane, it will take a different tonality.
Colours are used to express Kandinsky's experience of subject matter, not to describe objective nature.
Published in 1912, Kandinsky's text, ''Du Spirituel dans l’art'', defines three types of painting; ''impressions'', ''improvisations'' and ''compositions''.
While studies, sketches, and improvisations exist (particularly of ''Composition II''), a Nazi raid on the Bauhaus in the 1930s resulted in the confiscation of Kandinsky's first three ''Compositions.''
Vassily Kandinsky, 1939 - Composition 10.jpg|''Composition X'', 1939
These ideas had an almost-immediate international impact, particularly in the English-speaking world.
He helped found the Neue Künstlervereinigung München (Munich New Artists' Association), becoming its president in 1909.
Writing that "music is the ultimate teacher," Kandinsky embarked upon the first seven of his ten ''Compositions''.
He had been liberated from attachment to an object.
Small squares of colours and coloured bands stand out against the black background of ''Composition X'' as star fragments (or filaments), while enigmatic hieroglyphs with pastel tones cover a large maroon mass which seems to float in the upper-left corner of the canvas.
After outlining the work on a mural-sized wood panel, he became blocked and could not go on.
He believed that colour could be used in a painting as something autonomous, apart from the visual description of an object or other form.
Mixed with yellow, it gains in warmth and becomes orange, which imparts an irradiating movement on its surroundings.
This intentional disjunction, allowing viewers to participate in the creation of the artwork, became an increasingly conscious technique used by Kandinsky in subsequent years; it culminated in the abstract works of the 1911–1914 period.
He called this devotion to inner beauty, fervor of spirit, and spiritual desire ''inner necessity''; it was a central aspect of his art.
The combination of blue and yellow yields total immobility and calm, which is green.
Before this sale, the artist's last record was set in 1990 when Sotheby's sold his ''Fugue'' (1914) for $20.9 million.
Perhaps the most important of his paintings from the first decade of the 1900s was ''The Blue Rider'' (1903), which shows a small cloaked figure on a speeding horse rushing through a rocky meadow.
This tonality is determined by the relative importance of horizontal and vertical lines: the horizontals giving a calm, cold tonality to the basic plane while the verticals impart a calm, warm tonality.
He then moved to France, where he lived for the rest of his life, becoming a French citizen in 1939 and producing some of his most prominent art.
Following a Nazi smear campaign the Bauhaus left Dessau in 1932 for Berlin, until its dissolution in July 1933.
Vassilly Kandinsky, 1912 - Landscape With Two Poplars.jpg|''Landscape With Two Poplars'' 1912
Kandinsky learned from a variety of sources while in Moscow.
In addition to painting, Kandinsky was an art theorist; his influence on the history of Western art stems perhaps more from his theoretical works than from his paintings.
Kandinsky had received some notice earlier in Britain, however; in 1910, he participated in the Allied Artists' Exhibition (organised by Frank Rutter) at London's Royal Albert Hall.
The mixing of white with black leads to gray, which possesses no active force and whose tonality is near that of green.
Writing of the "artist as prophet" in his book, ''Concerning the Spiritual In Art'', Kandinsky created paintings in the years immediately preceding World War I showing a coming cataclysm which would alter individual and social reality.
Black is nothingness without possibility, an eternal silence without hope, and corresponds with death.
Extracts from the book were published that year in Percy Wyndham Lewis's periodical ''Blast,'' and Alfred Orage's weekly cultural newspaper ''The New Age''.
He painted little during this period, but devoted his time to artistic teaching, with a program based on form and colour analysis; he also helped organize the Institute of Artistic Culture in Moscow.
From 1918 to 1921, Kandinsky dealt with the cultural politics of Russia and collaborated in art education and museum reform.
The modern artist–prophet stands alone at the apex of the pyramid, making new discoveries and ushering in tomorrow's reality.
Theosophical theory postulates that creation is a geometrical progression, beginning with a single point.
A mountain of blue is flanked by two broad trees, one yellow and one red.
During decadent periods, the soul sinks to the bottom of the pyramid; humanity searches only for external success, ignoring spiritual forces.
Born in Moscow, Kandinsky spent his childhood in Odessa, where he graduated at Grekov Odessa Art school.
Kandinsky was born in Moscow, the son of Lidia Ticheeva and Vasily Silvestrovich Kandinsky, a tea merchant.
Kandinsky was one of Die Blaue Vier (Blue Four), formed in 1923 with Klee, Feininger and von Jawlensky, which lectured and exhibited in the United States in 1924.
Illustrations by John Varley in ''Thought Forms'' (1901) influenced him visually.
The obvious properties we can see when we look at an isolated colour and let it act alone; on one side is the warmth or coldness of the colour tone, and on the other side is the clarity or obscurity of that tone.
He was particularly taken with the impressionistic style of ''Haystacks''; this, to him, had a powerful sense of colour almost independent of the objects themselves.
As the ''Der Blaue Reiter Almanac'' essays and theorizing with composer Arnold Schoenberg indicate, Kandinsky also expressed the communion between artist and viewer as being available to both the senses and the mind (synesthesia).
A ''plane'' may be obtained by condensation (from a line rotated around one of its ends).
The composition is more planar; the painting is divided into four sections: the sky, the red tree, the yellow tree and the blue mountain with the three riders.
His grandson was musicology professor and writer Aleksey Ivanovich Kandinsky (1918&nbsp;– 2000), whose career was both focused on and centered in Russia.
It was during this time that he began to emerge as an art theorist as well as a painter.
The artist intuits the inner effect of the canvas format and dimensions, which he chooses according to the tonality he wants to give to his work.
This effect can be much deeper, however, causing a vibration of the soul or an "inner resonance"—a spiritual effect in which the colour touches the soul itself.
The basic plane is, in general, rectangular or square.
The produced linear forms may be of several types: a ''straight'' line, which results from a unique force applied in a single direction; an ''angular'' line, resulting from the alternation of two forces in different directions, or a ''curved'' (or ''wave-like'') line, produced by the effect of two forces acting simultaneously.
The development of his works on forms study, particularly on points and line forms, led to the publication of his second theoretical book (''Point and Line to Plane'') in 1926.
His examinations of the effects of forces on straight lines, leading to the contrasting tones of curved and angled lines, coincided with the research of Gestalt psychologists, whose work was also discussed at the Bauhaus.
Kandinsky considered the basic plane a living being, which the artist "fertilizes" and feels "breathing".
Having a fervent belief in Orthodox Christianity, Kandinsky drew upon the biblical stories of Noah's Ark, Jonah and the whale, Christ's resurrection, the four horsemen of the Apocalypse in the book of Revelation, Russian folktales and the common mythological experiences of death and rebirth.
He was not immediately granted admission, and began learning art on his own.
In 1908 he bought a copy of ''Thought-Forms'' by Annie Besant and Charles Webster Leadbeater.
This period corresponds to a synthesis of Kandinsky's previous work in which he used all elements, enriching them.
Kandinsky's analyses on forms and colours result not from simple, arbitrary idea-associations but from the painter's inner experience.
''Composition IV'' and later paintings are primarily concerned with evoking a spiritual resonance in viewer and artist.
The painting had been on loan to the Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland, since 1960 and was sold to a European collector by the Volkart Foundation, the charitable arm of the Swiss commodities trading firm Volkart Brothers.
When red is mixed with blue it moves away from man to become purple, which is a cool red.
He defines it as the principle of efficient contact of the form with the human soul.
In 1889, he was part of an ethnographic research group which travelled to the Vologda region north of Moscow.
Kandinsky then left Germany, settling in Paris.
Kandinsky's creation of abstract work followed a long period of development and maturation of intense thought based on his artistic experiences.
His spiritual, expressionistic view of art was ultimately rejected by the radical members of the Institute as too individualistic and bourgeois.
He is credited with painting one of the first purely abstract works.
In 1896, at the age of 30, Kandinsky gave up a promising career teaching law and economics to enroll in the Munich Academy where his teachers would eventually include Franz von Stuck.
These works were displayed in Leeds, either in the University or the premises of the Leeds Arts Club, between 1913 and 1923.
The painter's job is to listen and know these effects to produce paintings which are not just the effect of a random process, but the fruit of authentic work and the result of an effort towards inner beauty.
During the studies Kandinsky made in preparation for ''Composition IV,'' he became exhausted while working on a painting and went for a walk.
A line is the product of a force which has been applied in a given direction: the force exerted on the pencil or paintbrush by the artist.
Red is a warm colour, lively and agitated; it is forceful, a movement in itself.
The ''above'' of the basic plane corresponds with looseness and to lightness, while the ''below'' evokes condensation and heaviness.
There, he taught at the Bauhaus school of art and architecture from 1922 until the Nazis closed it in 1933.
