The surface temperature of Earth has been relatively constant through geologic time despite varying levels of incoming solar radiation (insolation), indicating that a dynamic process governs Earth's temperature via a combination of greenhouse gases and surface or atmospheric albedo.
Thus, water expands 9% in volume as it freezes, which accounts for the fact that ice floats on liquid water.
Some keep fish and other life in aquariums or ponds for show, fun, and companionship.
To function properly, the body requires between one and seven liters of water per day to avoid dehydration; the precise amount depends on the level of activity, temperature, humidity, and other factors.
Scientists believe liquid water is present in the Saturnian moons of Enceladus, as a 10-kilometre thick ocean approximately 30–40 kilometres below Enceladus' south polar surface, and Titan, as a subsurface layer, possibly mixed with ammonia.
The water observed is quickly produced in this warm dense gas.
This trend is projected to continue.
Water in the mantle is responsible for the melt that produces volcanoes at subduction zones.
They required a third of the volume of water we presently take from rivers.
Many inorganic subtances are insoluble too, including most metal oxides, sulfides, and silicates.
(''See'' Surface runoff#Mitigation and treatment.)
This goal is projected to be reached.
A flood occurs when an area of land, usually low-lying, is covered with water.
Invertebrates exhibit a wide range of modifications to survive in poorly oxygenated waters including breathing tubes (see insect and mollusc siphons) and gills (''Carcinus'').
Nevertheless, these properties are sometimes desirable.
In almost all thermal power stations, water is used as the working fluid (used in a closed loop between boiler, steam turbine and condenser), and the coolant (used to exchange the waste heat to a water body or carry it away by evaporation in a cooling tower).
Sound travels long distances in water with little attenuation, especially at low frequencies (roughly 0.03 dB/km for 1 kHz), a property that is exploited by cetaceans and humans for communication and environment sensing (sonar).
In anabolism, water is removed from molecules (through energy requiring enzymatic chemical reactions) in order to grow larger molecules (e.g.
Distillation does all three functions.
Fishing in salt and fresh water bodies is a major source of food for many parts of the world.
This occurs when a region receives consistently below average precipitation.
Some amphibians are able to absorb oxygen through their skin.
Discharge of untreated water from industrial uses is pollution.
Greywater composes 50–80% of residential wastewater generated by a household's sanitation equipment (sinks, showers and kitchen runoff, but not toilets, which generate blackwater.)
Good water governance is primarily about knowing what processes work best in a particular physical and socioeconomic context.
''Guanzi'' in "Shui di" 水地 chapter further elaborates on symbolism of water, proclaiming that "man is water" and attributing natural qualities of the people of different Chinese regions to the character of local water resources.
It is vital for all known forms of life.
Faiths that incorporate ritual washing (ablution) include Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, the Rastafari movement, Shinto, Taoism, and Wicca.
Most countries accepted the goal of halving by 2015 the number of people worldwide who do not have access to safe water and sanitation during the 2003 G8 Evian summit.
Natural water consists mainly of the isotopes hydrogen-1 and oxygen-16, but there is also a small quantity of heavier isotopes such as hydrogen-2 (deuterium).
Water is used in power generation.
Water, however, is not a finite resource, but rather re-circulated as potable water in precipitation in quantities many degrees of magnitude higher than human consumption.
Hydroelectric power comes from water driving a water turbine connected to a generator.
A greater quantity of water is found in the earth's interior.
Much of the universe's water is produced as a byproduct of star formation.
Liquid water is found in bodies of water, such as an ocean, sea, lake, river, stream, canal, pond, or puddle.
Water and other volatiles probably comprise much of the internal structures of Uranus and Neptune and the water in the deeper layers may be in the form of ionic water in which the molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions, and deeper still as superionic water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions float about freely within the oxygen lattice.
Since the water molecule is not linear and the oxygen atom has a higher electronegativity than hydrogen atoms, it is a polar molecule, with an electrical dipole moment: the oxygen atom carries a slight negative charge, whereas the hydrogen atoms are slightly positive.
Many substances in living organisms, such as proteins, DNA and polysaccharides, are dissolved in water.
A steam explosion occurred when the extreme overheating of the core caused water to flash into steam.
Currently, there are two planets known to have flowing liquid water on their surfaces: Earth and Mars.
Acids have pH values less than 7 while bases have values greater than 7.
To avoid a global water crisis, farmers will have to strive to increase productivity to meet growing demands for food, while industry and cities find ways to use water more efficiently.
In some cities such as Hong Kong, sea water is extensively used for flushing toilets citywide in order to conserve fresh water resources.
skiing, sledding, snowmobiling or snowboarding, which require the water to be frozen.
Safe drinking water is essential to humans and other lifeforms even though it provides no calories or organic nutrients.
The energy is supplied by the motion of water.
Humans require water with few impurities.
Tides cause changes in the depth of the marine and estuarine water bodies and produce oscillating currents known as tidal streams.
The collective mass of water found on, under, and over the surface of a planet is called the hydrosphere.
Specifically, pregnant and breastfeeding women need additional fluids to stay hydrated.
Hydrogen is combined with CO2 (absorbed from air or water) to form glucose and release oxygen.
According to the researchers, the "discovery shows that water has been prevalent in the universe for nearly its entire existence".
Some water is diverted to irrigation for agriculture.
Water from rivers and lakes tends to contain less deuterium than seawater.
Plankton is generally the foundation of the ocean food chain.
In addition, some sports, like ice hockey and ice skating, are played on ice.
Hydroelectricity is electricity obtained from hydropower.
Much of long-distance trade of commodities (such as oil and natural gas) and manufactured products is transported by boats through seas, rivers, lakes, and canals.
Pressurized water is used in water blasting and water jet cutters.
Governments in many countries have programs to distribute water to the needy at no charge.
Therefore, it is the relatively small quantity of water in reserve in the earth (about 1% of our drinking water supply, which is replenished in aquifers around every 1 to 10 years), that is a non-renewable resource, and it is, rather, the distribution of potable and irrigation water which is scarce, rather than the actual amount of it that exists on the earth.
It is also used in the cooling of machinery to prevent overheating, or prevent saw blades from overheating.
The distribution of drinking water is done through municipal water systems, tanker delivery or as bottled water.
It is not clear how much water intake is needed by healthy people, though most specialists agree that approximately 2 liters (6 to 7 glasses) of water daily is the minimum to maintain proper hydration.
Water plays an important role in the world economy.
On 22 July 2011 a report described the discovery of a gigantic cloud of water vapor containing "140 trillion times more water than all of Earth's oceans combined" around a quasar located 12 billion light years from Earth.
Most of this is ingested through foods or beverages other than drinking straight water.
This natural resource is becoming scarcer in certain places, and its availability is a major social and economic concern.
Water has been detected in interstellar clouds within our galaxy, the Milky Way.
Water flowing out of the lake is forced through turbines that turn generators.
These properties make water more effective at moderating Earth's climate, by storing heat and transporting it between the oceans and the atmosphere.
People can drink far more water than necessary while exercising, however, putting them at risk of water intoxication (hyperhydration), which can be fatal.
It freezes at a lower temperature (about −1.9&nbsp;°C) and its density increases with decreasing temperature to the freezing point, instead of reaching maximum density at a temperature above freezing.
In Islam, the five daily prayers can be done in most cases after completing washing certain parts of the body using clean water (''wudu''), unless water is unavailable (see ''Tayammum'').
Ecological processes with hydrology are in focus of ecohydrology.
Sea water contains about 3.5% salt on average, plus smaller amounts of other substances.
Water is also taken as a role model in some parts of traditional and popular Asian philosophy.
Its use is highly technical and is usually monitored by government regulations (typically 1 part per million (ppm) for drinking water, and 1–2 ppm of chlorine not yet reacted with impurities for bathing water).
Chlorine is a skin and mucous membrane irritant that is used to make water safe for bathing or drinking.
Tides are the cyclic rising and falling of local sea levels caused by the tidal forces of the Moon and the Sun acting on the oceans.
Water is also used in many industrial processes and machines, such as the steam turbine and heat exchanger, in addition to its use as a chemical solvent.
Large amounts of water are also chemically combined or adsorbed in hydrated minerals.
Oxygen-saturated supercritical water combusts organic pollutants efficiently.
Some solutes are acceptable and even desirable for taste enhancement and to provide needed electrolytes.
Elements which are more electropositive than hydrogen such as lithium, sodium, calcium, potassium and caesium displace hydrogen from water, forming hydroxides and releasing hydrogen.
Fish have gills instead of lungs, although some species of fish, such as the lungfish, have both.
Water activity can be described as a ratio of the vapor pressure of water in a solution to the vapor pressure of pure water.
Like other types of pollution, this does not enter standard accounting of market costs, being conceived as externalities for which the market cannot account.
Water is also present in the atmosphere in solid, liquid, and vapor states.
Infrared and ultraviolet light, on the other hand, is strongly absorbed by water.
Civilization has historically flourished around rivers and major waterways; Mesopotamia, the so-called cradle of civilization, was situated between the major rivers Tigris and Euphrates; the ancient society of the Egyptians depended entirely upon the Nile.
According to a report published by the Water Footprint organization in 2010, a single kilogram of beef requires 15 thousand litres of water; however, the authors also make clear that this is a global average and circumstantial factors determine the amount of water used in beef production.
Also, very high pressure water guns are used for precise cutting.
World Day for Water takes place on 22 March and World Ocean Day on 8 June.
Lakesides, beaches and water parks are popular places for people to go to relax and enjoy recreation.
Pollution includes discharged solutes (chemical pollution) and discharged coolant water (thermal pollution).
Liquid water can be split into the elements hydrogen and oxygen by passing an electric current through it — a process called electrolysis.
One mole of sucrose (sugar) per kilogram of water raises the boiling point of water by 0.51&nbsp;°C (0.918&nbsp;°F), and one mole of salt per kg raises the boiling point by 1.02&nbsp;°C (1.836&nbsp;°F); similarly, increasing the number of dissolved particles lowers water's freezing point.
It works very well, is relatively safe, and is not harmful to the environment.
James Legge's 1891 translation of the Dao De Jing states "The highest excellence is like (that of) water.
Water boils at lower temperatures with the lower air pressure that occurs at higher elevations.
Islands with safe water ports, like Singapore, have flourished for the same reason.
In inorganic reactions, water is a common solvent, dissolving many ionic compounds.
The study of the distribution of water is hydrography.
In places such as North Africa and the Middle East, where water is more scarce, access to clean drinking water was and is a major factor in human development.
The refraction index of liquid water (1.333 at 20 °C) is much higher than that of air (1.0), similar to those of alkanes and ethanol, but lower than those of glycerol (1.473), benzene (1.501), carbon disulfide (1.627), and common types of glass (1.4 to 1.6).
Drinking water is often collected at springs, extracted from artificial borings (wells) in the ground, or pumped from lakes and rivers.
Organizations concerned with water protection include the International Water Association (IWA), WaterAid, Water 1st, and the American Water Resources Association.
Common impurities include metal salts and oxides, including copper, iron, calcium and lead, and/or harmful bacteria, such as ''Vibrio''.
These bonds are the cause of  water's high surface tension and capillary forces.
Water hardness is classified based on concentration of calcium carbonate the water contains.
Water is important in many geological processes.
Today, the competition for the fixed amount of water resources is much more intense, giving rise to the concept of peak water.
Solutes in water lower water activity—this is important to know because most bacterial growth ceases at low levels of water activity.
Some 50 countries, with roughly a third of the world's population, also suffer from medium or high water stress, and 17 of these extract more water annually than is recharged through their natural water cycles.
Water may require purification for human consumption.
Water is excreted from the body in multiple forms; through urine and feces, through sweating, and by exhalation of water vapor in the breath.
Because of its polarity, a molecule of water in the liquid or solid state can form up to four hydrogen bonds with neighboring molecules.
Rome was also founded on the banks of the Italian river Tiber.
Work was therefore commissioned to determine precisely the mass of one liter of water.
(Practically no sunlight reaches the parts of the oceans below 1000 meters of depth.)
Large quantities of water, ice, and steam are used for cooling and heating, in industry and homes.
Typically a dam is constructed on a river, creating an artificial lake behind it.
Thales, a monist, believed further that all things are made from water.
Reducing usage by using drinking (potable) water only for human consumption is another option.
At very high pressures (above 221 atm), the liquid and gas states are no longer distinguishable, a state called supercritical steam.
Earth surface waters are filled with life.
Even if this difficult goal is met, it will still leave more than an estimated half a billion people without access to safe drinking water and over a billion without access to adequate sanitation.
Rivers and seas offer opportunity for travel and commerce.
They also explain its exceptionally high specific heat capacity (about 4.2 J/g/K), heat of fusion (about 333 J/g), heat of vaporization (), and thermal conductivity (between 0.561 and 0.679 W/m/K).
Earth's approximate water volume (the total water supply of the world) is 1,338,000,000&nbsp;km3 (321,000,000&nbsp;mi3).
This water storage is important, since clean, fresh water is essential to human and other land-based life.
Water and steam are a common fluid used for heat exchange, due to its availability and high heat capacity, both for cooling and heating.
Water, and to a lesser but still significant extent, ice, are also responsible for a large amount of sediment transport that occurs on the surface of the earth.
Water politics is politics affected by water and water resources.
There is a clear correlation between access to safe water and gross domestic product per capita.
The evaporation of water carries heat away from the fire.
Popular methods are filtering with sand which only removes undissolved material, while chlorination and boiling kill harmful microbes.
The UN World Water Development Report (WWDR, 2003) from the World Water Assessment Program indicates that, in the next 20 years, the quantity of water available to everyone is predicted to decrease by 30%.
In Shinto, water is used in almost all rituals to cleanse a person or an area (e.g., in the ritual of ''misogi'').
Humans, and other animals, have developed senses that enable them to evaluate the potability of water by avoiding water that is too salty or putrid.
Water supply facilities include water wells, cisterns for rainwater harvesting, water supply networks, and water purification facilities, water tanks, water towers, water pipes including old aqueducts.
Light in the visible electromagnetic spectrum can traverse a couple meters of pure water (or ice) without significant absorption, so that it looks transparent and colorless.
On 7 April 1795, the gram was defined in France to be equal to "the absolute weight of a volume of pure water equal to a cube of one hundredth of a meter, and at the temperature of melting ice."
The earliest life forms appeared in water; nearly all fish live exclusively in water, and there are many types of marine mammals, such as dolphins and whales.
Fifty years ago, the common perception was that water was an infinite resource.
These terms may have different meanings in other countries and cultures.
(At pressures higher than 2100 atm the melting point rapidly increases again, and ice takes several exotic forms that do not exist at lower pressures.)
It found that a fifth of the world's people, more than 1.2 billion, live in areas of physical water scarcity, where there is not enough water to meet all demands.
In spite of the fact that the decreed definition of the gram specified water at 0&nbsp;°C&nbsp;— a highly reproducible ''temperature''&nbsp;— the scientists chose to redefine the standard and to perform their measurements at the temperature of highest water ''density'', which was measured at the time as .
The physical properties of sea water differ from fresh water in some important respects.
On the surface of the Earth, water is important in both chemical and physical weathering processes.
Less than 0.3% of all freshwater is in rivers, lakes, and the atmosphere, and an even smaller amount of the Earth's freshwater (0.003%) is contained within biological bodies and manufactured products.
Water is a liquid at the temperatures and pressures that are most adequate for life.
It can dramatically affect the quality of a product, as well as playing a role in sanitation.
It is when a river overflows its banks or flood comes from the sea.
1.6 billion people have gained access to a safe water source since 1990.
Most acids dissolve in water to yield the corresponding anions.
Atmospheric water generators are in development.
The majority of water on Earth is sea water.
If Earth were smaller, a thinner atmosphere would allow temperature extremes, thus preventing the accumulation of water except in polar ice caps (as on Mars).
Groundwater is also extracted artificially in wells.
Humans use water for many recreational purposes, as well as for exercising and for sports.
Some of these include swimming, waterskiing, boating, surfing and diving.
Use of water in fire fighting should also take into account the hazards of a steam explosion, which may occur when water is used on very hot fires in confined spaces, and of a hydrogen explosion, when substances which react with water, such as certain metals or hot carbon such as coal, charcoal, or coke graphite, decompose the water, producing water gas.
In future, even more water will be needed to produce food because the Earth's population is forecast to rise to 9 billion by 2050.
Immersion (or aspersion or affusion) of a person in water is a central sacrament of Christianity (where it is called baptism); it is also a part of the practice of other religions, including Islam (''Ghusl''), Judaism (''mikvah'') and Sikhism (''Amrit Sanskar'').
Water that is not fit for drinking but is not harmful for humans when used for swimming or bathing is called by various names other than potable or drinking water, and is sometimes called safe water, or "safe for bathing".
The viscosity of water is about 10−3 Pa·s or 0.01 poise at 20 °C, and the speed of sound in liquid water ranges between 1400 and 1540 m/s depending on temperature.
It is important for a food scientist to understand the roles that water plays within food processing to ensure the success of their products.
Large metropolises like Rotterdam, London, Montreal, Paris, New York City, Buenos Aires, Shanghai, Tokyo, Chicago, and Hong Kong owe their success in part to their easy accessibility via water and the resultant expansion of trade.
Deposition of transported sediment forms many types of sedimentary rocks, which make up the geologic record of Earth history.
The study of the distribution and movement of groundwater is hydrogeology, of glaciers is glaciology, of inland waters is limnology and distribution of oceans is oceanography.
In the USA, non-potable forms of wastewater generated by humans may be referred to as greywater, which is treatable and thus easily able to be made potable again, and blackwater, which generally contains sewage and other forms of waste which require further treatment in order to be made reusable.
For those who have healthy kidneys, it is rather difficult to drink too much water, but (especially in warm humid weather and while exercising) it is dangerous to drink too little.
Many industrial processes rely on reactions using chemicals dissolved in water, suspension of solids in water slurries or using water to dissolve and extract substances.
It also exists as groundwater in aquifers.
The Ancient Greek philosopher Empedocles held that water is one of the four classical elements along with fire, earth and air, and was regarded as the ylem, or basic substance of the universe.
In addition, global initiatives to improve the efficiency of aid delivery, such as the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, have not been taken up by water sector donors as effectively as they have in education and health, potentially leaving multiple donors working on overlapping projects and recipient governments without empowerment to act.
and frogs are known to be able to smell it    However, water from ordinary sources (including bottled mineral water) usually has many dissolved substances, that may give it varying tastes and odors.
It's especially effective to transport heat through vaporization and condensation of water because of its large latent heat of vaporization.
Washing is also an important component of several aspects of personal body hygiene.
Hydroelectricity is a low-cost, non-polluting, renewable energy source.
It carries out this role by allowing organic compounds to react in ways that ultimately allow replication.
The changing tide produced at a given location is the result of the changing positions of the Moon and Sun relative to the Earth coupled with the effects of Earth rotation and the local bathymetry.
The amount of deuterium oxides or heavy water is very small, but it still affects the properties of water.
This proposal is known as the ''Gaia hypothesis''.
If a planet is sufficiently massive, the water on it may be solid even at high temperatures, because of the high pressure caused by gravity, as it was observed on exoplanets Gliese 436 b and GJ 1214 b.
Water also infiltrates the ground and goes into aquifers.
In the nuclear power industry, water can also be used as a neutron moderator.
Plants such as kelp and algae grow in the water and are the basis for some underwater ecosystems.
The report found that it would be possible to produce the food required in future, but that continuation of today's food production and environmental trends would lead to crises in many parts of the world.
To halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water is one of the Millennium Development Goals.
Water probably exists in abundance in other galaxies, too, because its components, hydrogen and oxygen, are among the most abundant elements in the universe.
The hydrogen bonds are also the reason why the melting and boiling points of water are much higher than those of other analogous compounds like hydrogen sulfide ().
Thus aquatic plants, algae, and other photosynthetic organisms can live in water up to hundreds of meters deep, because sunlight can reach them.
This property is relied upon by all vascular plants, such as trees.
This effect is relevant, for example, to ice skating, to the buried lakes of Antartica, and to the movement of glaciers.
When this outflow of material eventually impacts the surrounding gas, the shock waves that are created compress and heat the gas.
