Served 15 months in prison.
Disgust with the revelations about Watergate, the Republican Party, and Nixon strongly affected results of the November 1974 Senate and House elections, which took place three months after Nixon's resignation.
Vice President Gerald Ford said, "While it may be easy to delete characterization from the printed page, we cannot delete characterization from people's minds with a wave of the hand."
Even so, Heath privately was outraged over being taped without his prior knowledge.
On August 20, 1974, the House authorized the printing of the Committee report H. Rept.
They haven't been isolationist in practice."
It was during this meeting that Dean felt that he was being recorded.
First, the ABA decided that its existing Model Code of Professional Responsibility (promulgated 1969) was a failure.
The contents of this tape persuaded Nixon's own lawyers, Fred Buzhardt and James St. Clair, that, "The tape proved that the President had lied to the nation, to his closest aides, and to his own lawyersfor more than two years."
He cited the June 23, 1972 conversation when Nixon asked Haldeman, "Who was the asshole that did it?"
Butterfield said he was reluctant to answer, but finally stated there was a new system in the White House that automatically recorded everything in the Oval Office, the Cabinet Room and others, as well as Nixon's private office in the Old Executive Office Building.
Examination of their funds showed a link to the finance committee of CRP.
Instead, Nichter sided with late journalist J. Anthony Lukas of the ''New York Times'', who had concluded that the committee was seeking to find evidence linking the Democrats to prostitution, as Oliver's office had frequently been used to arrange such meetings.
Writing from prison for ''New West'' and ''New York'' magazines in 1977, Ehrlichman claimed Nixon had offered him a large sum of money, which he declined.
The Watergate Scandal was one of a string of events that undermined the nation's trust in the presidency.
The media noted that most of the reporting turned out to be accurate; the competitive nature of the media guaranteed widespread coverage of the far-reaching political scandal.
President Nixon approved the plan, and after he was given more information about the involvement of his campaign in the break-in, he told Haldeman: "All right, fine, I understand it all.
Barker's use of foreign banks in April and May 1972, to deposit checks and withdraw the funds via cashier's checks and money orders, resulted in the banks keeping the entire transaction records until October and November 1972.
Felt met secretly with Woodward several times, telling him of Howard Hunt's involvement with the Watergate break-in, and that the White House staff regarded the stakes in Watergate extremely high.
As a private organization, the Committee followed normal business practice in allowing only duly authorized individual(s) to accept and endorse checks on behalf of the Committee.
During this early period, most of the media failed to grasp the full implications of the scandal, and concentrated reporting on other topics related to the 1972 presidential election.
This information became the bombshell that helped force Richard Nixon to resign rather than be impeached.
To defuse public demand for direct federal regulation of lawyers (as opposed to leaving it in the hands of state bar associations or courts), the American Bar Association (ABA) launched two major reforms.
According to author Donald M. Bartlett, Richard Nixon would do whatever was necessary to prevent another family embarrassment.
Haig was explaining what he and Nixon's staff thought were Nixon's only options.
The scandal also resulted in the indictment of 69 people, with trials or pleas resulting in 25 being found guilty and incarcerated, many of whom were Nixon's top administration officials.
He asked for the resignation of Attorney General Kleindienst, to ensure no one could claim that his innocent friendship with Haldeman and Ehrlichman could be construed as a conflict.
Bork carried out the presidential order and dismissed the special prosecutor.
#John N. Mitchell, Attorney General of the United States who resigned to become Director of Committee to Re-elect the President, convicted of perjury about his involvment in the Watergate break-in.
#Frederick C. LaRue, Advisor to John Mitchell, convicted of obstruction of justice.
It would be completely indecent for me to refer to it.
All five Watergate burglars were directly or indirectly tied to the 1972 CRP, thus causing Judge Sirica to suspect a conspiracy involving higher-echelon government officials.
The allegations of abuses of power by the Nixon administration, articles of impeachment, led to the resignation of Nixon as President of the United States on August 9, 1974.
Nixon's conversation with Haldeman on August 1, 1972, is one of several that establishes he did.
#James W. McCord Jr., convicted of six charges of burglary, conspiracy and wiretapping.
He served four and a half months.
Though Bork claims to believe Nixon's order was valid and appropriate, he considered resigning to avoid being "perceived as a man who did the President's bidding to save my job."
In 1983 it replaced it with the Model Rules of Professional Conduct.
However, Nichter acknowledged that Woodward and Bernstein's theory of O'Brien as the target could not be debunked unless information was released about what Baldwin heard in his bugging of conversations.
But Nixon subsequently ordered Haldeman to have the CIA block the FBI's investigation into the source of the funding for the burglary.
The name "Watergate" and the suffix "-gate" have since become synonymous with political scandals in the United States and elsewhere.
The requirement remains in effect.
Ehrlichman subsequently denied that.
Butterfield's revelation of the taping system transformed the Watergate investigation.
The Watergate scandal left such an impression on the national and international consciousness that many scandals since then have been labeled with the suffix "-gate".
The MRPC have been adopted in part or in whole by 49 states (and is being considered by the last one, California).
Based on a previous interview in 1968, he believed that Frost would be an easy interviewer and was taken aback by Frost's incisive questions.
In January 1975, publisher of ''The Sacramento Union'' John P. McGoff said that the media overemphasized the scandal, although "an important issue," overshadowing more serious topics, like declining economy and the energy crisis.
They were Virgilio González, Bernard Barker, James McCord, Eugenio Martínez, and Frank Sturgis, who were charged with attempted burglary and attempted interception of telephone and other communications.
His legal team favored releasing the tapes unedited, while Press Secretary Ron Ziegler preferred using an edited version where "expletive deleted" would replace the raw material.
Based on these revelations, Texas A&M history professor Luke Nichter, who had successfully petitioned for the release of the information, argued that Woodward and Bernstein were incorrect in concluding, based largely on Watergate burglar James McCord's word, that the purpose of the break-in was to bug O'Brien's phone to gather political and financial intelligence on the Democrats.
In 1956, Donald Nixon had borrowed $205,000 from Howard Hughes and had never repaid the loan.
In his official response to the pardon, he said that he "...was wrong in not acting more decisively and more forthrightly in dealing with Watergate, particularly when it reached the stage of judicial proceedings and grew from a political scandal into a national tragedy."
Served 18 months in prison.
During the critical meeting with Dean and Nixon on April 15, 1973, Dean was totally unaware of the president's depth of knowledge and involvement in the Watergate cover-up.
After the reporting that one of the convicted burglars wrote to Judge Sirica alleging a high-level cover-up, the media shifted its focus.
On June 19, 1972, the press reported that one of the Watergate burglars was a Republican Party security aide.
Presidents before him who had been involved in the Vietnam War should also be held accountable for their dishonesty and political 'tricks' that significantly threatened national security.
Nixon administration officials were concerned because Hunt and Liddy were also involved in a separate secret activity known as the White House Plumbers, which was set up to stop security "leaks" and to investigate other sensitive security matters.
– Then-Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew said in August 1973, "As one surprising revelation follows another at the Senate hearings on Watergate, it becomes increasingly clear that Washington, D.C., today is in no position to offer the moral or strong political and economic leadership for which its friends and allies are yearning."
Other types of disclosures, such as releasing recent income tax forms, became expected albeit not legally required.
Rose Mary Woods, Nixon's longtime personal secretary, said she had accidentally erased the tape by pushing the wrong pedal on her tape player when answering the phone.
Prior to resigning from the FBI on June 22, 1973, Felt also anonymously planted leaks about Watergate to ''Time'' magazine, the ''Washington Daily News'' and other publications.
Nixon created a new conspiracy—to effect a cover-up of the cover-up—which began in late March 1973 and became fully formed in May and June 1973, operating until his presidency ended on August 9, 1974.
Though his actions and those of his advisors were criminal and unacceptable, Nixon alone cannot be accused for being dishonest and responsible for shattering the people's hopes in the presidency.
Nixon noted that any audio pertinent to national security information could be redacted from the released tapes.
What could I do now?"
On February 7, 1973, the United States Senate voted 77–0 to approve Senate Resolution  and establish a select committee to investigate Watergate, with Sam Ervin named chairman the next day.
His loyalty is minimal."
The hearings held by the Senate committee, in which Dean and other former administration officials testified, were broadcast from May 17 to August 7, 1973.
In May 1973, Richardson named Archibald Cox to the position.
Congress passed legislation that changed campaign financing, to amend the Freedom of Information Act, as well as to require financial disclosures by key government officials (via the Ethics in Government Act).
Served 33 months in prison.
Watergate prosecutor James Neal was sure Nixon had not known in advance of the break-in.
The House Republican Leader John Jacob Rhodes agreed with Scott, and Rhodes recommended that if Nixon's position continued to deteriorate, he "ought to consider resigning as a possible option."
As people read the transcripts over the next couple of weeks, however, former supporters among the public, media and political community called for Nixon's resignation or impeachment.
#Eugenio Martinez, convicted of burglary, original sentence of up to 40 years in prison.
On March 23, 1973, Judge Sirica read the court a letter from Watergate burglar James McCord, who alleged that perjury had been committed in the Watergate trial, and defendants had been pressured to remain silent.
Returning to the use of the CIA to obstruct the FBI, he instructed Haldeman: "You call them in.
Despite the enormous impact of the Watergate scandal, the purpose of the break-in of the DNC offices has never been conclusively established.
In late 1971, the president's brother, Donald Nixon, was collecting intelligence for his brother at the time and asked John H. Meier, an adviser to Howard Hughes, about O'Brien.
Nixon's own reaction to the break-in, at least initially, was one of skepticism.
Felt warned Woodward that the FBI wanted to know where he and other reporters were getting their information, as they were uncovering a wider web of crimes than the FBI first disclosed.
Nixon urged the FBI to press forward with the investigation when they expressed concern about interference.
The House recommended the second article, abuse of power, on July 29, 1974.
#Herbert L. Porter, aide to the Committee to Re-elect the President.
They were later both indicted, convicted, and ultimately sentenced to prison.
The editors of ''The Chicago Tribune'', a newspaper that had supported Nixon, wrote, "He is humorless to the point of being inhumane.
All of the secret meetings between Woodward and "Deep Throat" (W. Mark Felt) took place at an underground parking garage somewhere in Rosslyn over a period from June 1972 to January 1973.
Nixon states: "Well…they have to be paid.
Texas A&M University–Central Texas professor Luke Nichter wrote the chief judge of the federal court in Washington to release hundreds of pages of sealed records of the Watergate Seven.
The issue of access to the tapes went to the US Supreme Court.
Barker tried to disguise the funds by depositing them into accounts in banks outside of the United States.
On December 7, 1973, investigators found that an 18½ minute portion of one recorded tape had been erased.
The loan's existence surfaced during the 1960 presidential election campaign, embarrassing Richard Nixon and becoming a political liability.
The Administration and its supporters accused the media of making "wild accusations," putting too much emphasis on the story, and of having a liberal bias against the Administration.
Rather than ending with the conviction and sentencing to prison of the five Watergate burglars on January 30, 1973, the investigation into the break-in and the Nixon Administration's involvement grew broader.
Applications to journalism schools reached an all-time high in 1974.
He is suspicious of his staff.
Nixon denied that this constituted an obstruction of justice, as his instructions ultimately resulted in the CIA truthfully reporting to the FBI that there were no national security issues.
Initially, Nixon gained a positive reaction for his speech.
Nixon and top administration officials discussed using government agencies to "get" (or retaliate against) those they perceived as hostile media organizations.
Ford's pardon of Nixon played a major role in his defeat in the 1976 presidential election against Jimmy Carter.
The Watergate scandal resulted in 69 government officials being charged and 48 being found guilty, including:
– An unnamed senior official of Foreign Affairs Ministry accused President Nixon of lacking interest in Africa and its politics and then said, "American President is so enmeshed in domestic problems created by Watergate that foreign policy seems suddenly to have taken a ."
#G. Gordon Liddy, Special Investigations Group, convicted of masterminding the burglary, original sentence of up to 20 years in prison.
#E. Howard Hunt, Security consultant, convicted of masterminding and overseeing the burglary, original sentence of up to 35 years in prison.
The three major networks of the time agreed to take turns covering the hearings live, each network thus maintaining coverage of the hearings every third day, starting with ABC on May 17 and ending with NBC on August 7.
On August 29, at a news conference, President Nixon stated Dean had conducted a thorough investigation of the matter, when in fact Dean had not conducted any investigation at all.
Hughes wanted Donald Nixon and Meier involved but Nixon opposed this.
The conduct of the Presidents and the administrations throughout the course of the Vietnam War that had lasted throughout the 1960s and into the 1970s, as well as the release of the Pentagon Papers had already weakened a failing public trust in the presidency.
When Congress investigated the scope of the president's legal powers, it belatedly found that consecutive presidential administrations had declared the United States to be in a continuous open-ended state of emergency since 1950.
Nixon said in a May 1974 interview with supporter Baruch Korff that if he had followed the liberal policies that he thought the media preferred, "Watergate would have been a blip."
The special prosecutor dissuaded them from an indictment of Nixon, arguing that a President can only be indicted after he leaves office.
The phrase was never used in the 1974 book ''All The President's Men'' and did not become associated with it until the movie of the same name was released in 1976.
Two phones inside the offices of the DNC headquarters were said to have been wiretapped.
– In August 1973, then-Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka said that the scandal had "no cancelling influence on U.S. leadership in the world."
They planned a second "burglary" in order to take care of this.
Presidents since Franklin D. Roosevelt had recorded many of their conversations but the practice purportedly ended after Watergate.
Moreover, Lee said that the scandal may have led the United States to lessen its interests and commitments in world affairs, to weaken its ability to enforce the Paris Peace Accords on Vietnam, and to not react to violations of the Accords.
Tapping into the DNC quarters at Watergate was the option that Nixon decided to take in his frustration.
And that's an obstruction of justice."
He displays dismaying gaps in knowledge.
Cox immediately subpoenaed the tapes, as did the Senate, but Nixon refused to release them, citing his executive privilege as president, and ordered Cox to drop his subpoena.
On February 6, 1974, the House of Representatives approved  giving the Judiciary Committee authority to investigate impeachment of the President.
What Barker, Liddy, and Sloan did not know was that the complete record of all such transactions were held for roughly six months.
Nixon also said, "I can say categorically that... no one in the White House staff, no one in this Administration, presently employed, was involved in this very bizarre incident."
Rhodes told Nixon that he would face certain impeachment when the articles came up for vote in the full House.
On July 29, 2011, U.S. District Judge Royce Lamberth granted Kutler's request, saying historical interests trumped privacy, especially considering that Nixon and other key figures were deceased, and most of the surviving figures had testified under oath, have been written about, or were interviewed.
#Virgilio Gonzalez, convicted of burglary, original sentence of up to 40 years in prison.
These included former CIA officers E. Howard Hunt and James McCord, then-CRP Security Coordinator (John Mitchell had by then resigned as Attorney General to become chairman of the CRP).
Trying to make them talk, Sirica gave Hunt and two burglars provisional sentences of up to 40 years.
That's the way they play it and that's the way we are going to play it."
The room 419 was booked in the name of McCord’s company.
#John W. Dean III, counsel to Nixon, convicted of obstruction of justice, later reduced to felony offenses and sentenced to time already served, which totaled 4 months.
The discussions had precedent.
The investigation by the FBI, which cleared Barker's bank of fiduciary malfeasance, led to the direct implication of members of the CRP, to whom the checks had been delivered.
Former Attorney General John Mitchell, who at the time was the head of the Nixon re-election campaign (CRP), denied any involvement with the Watergate break-in or knowledge of the five burglars.
The President announced the resignations in an address to the American people:
Then he said further that he had respected Nixon because of Nixon's "realistic and constructive approach to Soviet Union–United States relations ... passing from an era of confrontation to an era of negotiations between nations."
On November 2, 2012, Watergate trial records for G. Gordon Liddy and James McCord were ordered unsealed by Federal Judge Royce Lamberth.
... and the actual Watergate "Burglary" team:
In this conversation, Dean summarized many aspects of the Watergate case, and focused on the subsequent cover-up, describing it as a "cancer on the presidency."
These actions met considerable public criticism.
Nixon and his close aides apparently ordered investigation of activist groups and political figures, using the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
He removed the tape, and thought nothing of it.
– In May 1975, after the fall of Saigon ended the Vietnam War, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger said if the scandal had not caused Nixon to resign, and the Congress did not override Nixon's veto of the War Powers Resolution, North Vietnam would not have captured South Vietnam.
The connection between the break-in and the re-election committee was highlighted by media coverage—in particular, investigative coverage by ''The Washington Post'', ''Time'', and ''The New York Times''.
However, it was determined that an effective listening device had been installed in Oliver's phone.
#Charles W. Colson, special counsel to Nixon, convicted of obstruction of justice.
The checks deposited into Barker's bank account were endorsed by Committee treasurer Hugh Sloan, who was authorized by the Finance Committee.
Later forensic analysis in 2003 determined that the tape had been erased in several segments – at least five, and perhaps as many as nine.
According to ''Time'' magazine, the Republican Party leaders in the Western United States felt that while there remained a significant number of Nixon loyalists in the party, the majority believed that Nixon should step down as quickly as possible.
Served 7 months in Federal Maxwell Prison.
The banks that had originated the checks were keen to ensure the depository institution used by Barker had acted properly in ensuring the checks had been received and endorsed by the check's payee, before its acceptance for deposit in Bernard Barker's account.
It is conjecture that Donald told his brother that Meier had given the Democrats all the damaging Hughes information and that O'Brien had the proof.
From 1968 to 1970, Hughes withdrew nearly half a million dollars from the Texas National Bank of Commerce for contributions to both Democrats and Republicans, including presidential candidates Humphrey and Nixon.
In June 2012 the U.S. Department of Justice wrote the court that it would not object to their release with some exceptions.
According to Fred Emery, O'Brien had been a lobbyist for Hughes in a Democrat-controlled Congress, and the possibility of his finding out about Hughes' illegal contributions to the Nixon campaign was too much of a danger for Nixon to ignore.
The affair began with the arrest of five men for breaking and entering into the DNC headquarters at the Watergate complex on Saturday, June 17, 1972.
They were released in their entirety on November 10, 2011, although the names of people still alive were redacted.
On April 5, 1974, Dwight Chapin, the former Nixon appointments secretary, was convicted of lying to the grand jury.
John Dean believed that he, Mitchell, Ehrlichman and Haldeman could go to the prosecutors, tell the truth, and save the presidency.
Meier told Donald that he was sure the Democrats would win the election because they had considerable information on Richard Nixon's illicit dealings with Hughes that had never been released, and that it resided with Larry O'Brien.
#Herbert W. Kalmbach, personal attorney to Nixon, convicted of illegal campaigning.
Records from the ''United States v. Liddy'' trial, made public in 2013, showed that four of the five burglars testified that they were told the campaign operation hoped to find evidence that linked Cuban funding to Democratic campaigns.
Nixon was struggling in a state where the public opinion could not be so easily manipulated and where the people were less likely to take the President's word at face-value.
They were disturbed by the bad language and the coarse, vindictive tone of the conversations in the transcripts.
Relying heavily upon anonymous sources, ''Post'' reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein uncovered information suggesting that knowledge of the break-in, and attempts to cover it up, led deeply into the upper reaches of the Justice Department, FBI, CIA, and the White House.
The Nixon administration struggled to decide what materials to release.
Despite these revelations, Nixon's campaign was never seriously jeopardized; on November 7, the President was re-elected in one of the biggest landslides in American political history.
In a televised broadcast to the nation, Ford explained that he felt the pardon was in the best interest of the country.
O'Brien was elected national chairman of the DNC in 1968 and 1970.
Dean wanted to protect the presidency and have his four closest men take the fall for telling the truth.
Liddy was nominally in charge of the operation, but has since insisted that he was duped by Dean and at least two of his subordinates.
However, O'Brien's name was not on Alfred C. Baldwin III's list of targets that was released in 2013.
#Egil Krogh, aide to John Ehrlichman, sentenced to six months.
Dean would later testify he was ordered by top Nixon aide John Ehrlichman to "deep six" the contents of Howard Hunt's White House safe.
An estimated 85% of Americans with television sets tuned into at least one portion of the hearings.
On March 28, on Nixon's orders, aide John Ehrlichman told Attorney General Richard Kleindienst that nobody in the White House had prior knowledge of the burglary.
On Monday, July 16, 1973, in front of a live, televised audience, chief minority counsel Fred Thompson asked Butterfield whether he was "aware of the installation of any listening devices in the Oval Office of the President."
On July 30, 1974, President Nixon complied with the order and released the subpoenaed tapes for the public.
The FBI found no evidence that O'Brien's phone was bugged.
He fired White House Counsel John Dean, who went on to testify before the Senate Watergate Committee and said that he believed and suspected the conversations in the Oval Office were being taped.
The Democrats gained five seats in the Senate and forty-nine in the House (the newcomers were nicknamed "Watergate Babies").
… you've got to keep the cap on the bottle that much, in order to have any options."
All parties involved agreed that all pertinent information should be released.
Allegations of a secret deal made with Ford, promising a pardon in return for Nixon's resignation, led Ford to testify before the House Judiciary Committee on October 17, 1974.
Despite the success in installing the listening devices, the Committee agents soon determined that they needed to be repaired.
– In June 1973, when Brezhnev arrived in the United States to have a one-week meeting with President Nixon, Brezhnev told the press, "I do not intent to refer to that matter—the Watergate.
Whether to release unedited profanity and vulgarity divided his advisers.
They have to be paid."
Martha did not like Baldwin and described him as the "gauchest character I've ever met."
In May, McCord assigned former FBI agent Alfred C. Baldwin III to carry out the wiretapping and monitor the telephone conversations afterward.
With President Nixon's resignation, Congress dropped its impeachment proceedings.
These audio recordings implicated the president, revealing he had attempted to cover up activities that took place after the break-in and to use federal officials to deflect the investigation.
On the same day, Nixon appointed a new attorney general, Elliot Richardson, and gave him authority to designate a special counsel for the Watergate investigation who would be independent of the regular Justice Department hierarchy.
Richardson and Ruckelshaus both refused to fire Cox and resigned in protest.
On October 10, the FBI reported the Watergate break-in was part of a massive campaign of political spying and sabotage on behalf of the Nixon re-election committee.
#Jeb Stuart Magruder, Deputy Director of Committee to Re-elect the President, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to the burglary, and was sentenced to 10 months to four years in prison, of which he served 7 months before being paroled.
