It is powerful, but precise targeting is needed.
A labral tear can result from activities such as falling wrong, lifting heavy objects, or any other strong force running through the shoulder.
The main drawback is this constant motion can be very tiring as well as somewhat predictable as to where the next pass is going to go.
Some of the most injured players on the field are the goalies.
Double hole is most often used in "man up" situations, or when the defense has only one skilled hole D, or  to draw in a defender and then pass out to a perimeter player for a shot ("kick out").
It is also seen much more often in women's water polo where teams may lack a player of sufficient size or strength to set up in the center.
The center sets up in front of the opposing team's goalie and scores the most individually (especially during lower level play where flats do not have the required strength to effectively shoot from outside or to penetrate and then pass to teammates like the point guard in basketball).
It also allows the player to quickly catch a pass.
This can be very risky in some situations, for example when a team has gained an advantage by swimming a counterattack.
"Wet shots" are shot from water level by players who are currently in control of the ball.
If a driver gets free from a defender, the player calls for the pass from the hole set and attempts a shot at the goal.
'''Baulking''' (also known as '''hezie''' or '''hesitation shot''' or "'pump fake'" or '''dummying''' in the UK) is a feinting tactic for outside water shots where the player gets in position to shoot but stops halfway through.
One of the earliest recorded antecedents of the modern game of Water Polo was a game of water ‘hand-ball’ played at Bournemouth on 13 July 1876.
The player propels his body out of the water and uses this to help him shoot the ball into the goal.
The player throws the ball at an angle directly into the water.
The '''wet pass''' is a deliberate pass into the water (thus not caught in the hand).
Yet another option for offensive set is called a 4–2 or double hole; there are two center forward offensive players in front of the goal.
Beginning with the offensive wing to the opposing goalies right side is called one.
The player should be faced away from his or her opponent, as it is very easy to knock the ball out of the hand of a player who is holding the ball.
Also occasionally, the defensive player will sometimes pull the arm to foul the offensive player.
Polo combines paddling and ball handling skills with a contact team game, where tactics and positional play are as important as the speed and fitness of the individual athletes.
The labrum is the cartilage that extends the glenohumeral joint of the shoulder which helps in stabilizing the shoulder.
The five defending players try to pressure the attackers, block shots and prevent a goal being scored for the 20 seconds while they are a player down.
Moving along in the same direction the point player is three, the next flat is four, the final wing is five, and the hole set is called six.
The weak side wing and flat then control the tempo of play and try to make passes into the player driving towards the center who can then either shoot or pass.
If that happens, the player must look for an open player or pass the ball closer to the hole set to avoid a turnover.
It is not unusual for a goalie to make the assisting pass to a goal on a break away.
All throwing and catching must be done using a single hand except the goalkeeper.
If the shot is not in the corners, the ball can be more easily blocked by the goalie.
Alternately, the ball can be thrown '''sidearm'''.
In order for the player to catch the ball above their head, they must egg beater harder which brings their body higher out of the water.
"Field sense" is a major advantage in scoring, even if a player lacks the speed of an opponent.
This is the method most often used for shooting, as it allows the player to be briefly lifted out of the water, but other players may put the ball under, giving their team a free throw.
with the LEN Euroleague tournament played amongst the best teams.
A fluid motion between catching and throwing is the goal.
The team with the most goals at the end of the game wins the match.
A failed shot in such a situation turns the advantage into a severe disadvantage, as the opponents left behind find themselves in numerical superiority and are thus presented with an excellent opportunity to score.
On defense, the players work to regain possession of the ball and to prevent a goal in their own net.
This is usually done when making a pass into the hole set.
This shot is timed with a player's swimming stroke, and should flow comfortably from the dribble.
The first is the '''power shot'''.
An expert thrower's hand creates back spin, making the ball easier to catch.
The best advantage to this system is it makes man-coverage much more difficult for the defender and allows the offense to control the game tempo better once the players are "set up".
However, this places a massive strain on the goalie's legs, which are working in a rapid eggbeater motion.
Minor fouls occur frequently and exclusion fouls (in which a player is suspended from the game for 20 seconds) are common.
The arm stroke used is also shorter and quicker and is used primarily to protect the ball.
The present-day game involves teams of seven players (plus up to six substitutes), with a water polo ball similar in size to a soccer ball but constructed of waterproof nylon.
Wet shots are performed when the player has open water between him and the goal because the defender is behind him or her.
Also there is the '''bounce shot''' or '''skip shot'''.
The history of water polo as a team sport began as a demonstration of strength and swimming skill in late 19th century England and Scotland, where water sports and racing exhibitions were a feature of county fairs and festivals.
Players will often neglect applying sunscreen as this will impair the player's ability to grip the ball and rapidly deteriorate the ball's physical grip due to the oily nature of sunscreen.
The defensive team cannot hinder the hole set until the free throw has been taken, but the hole set cannot shoot a goal once the foul has been awarded until the ball has been played by at least one other player.
This puts the defense on edge, causes the defenders to stand lower and lower in the water as their legs fatigue, and partially immobilizes the goalie by wasting his blocking lunge.
Such forces exist in water polo from the continuous stresses of swimming as well as the forces caused from throwing the ball and/or having the pass or shot blocked.
A team consists of 6 field players and one goalkeeper in the water at any one time.
Utility players tend to come off of the bench, though this is not absolute.
* The ability to punch the ball with a clenched fist.
Shots usually succeed when the goalkeeper is out of position.
Any field player may throw the hole set a "wet pass".
The primary aims of the fielders are to score goals and to prevent the other team scoring against their own team's goalkeeper.
Close-range shots tend to be harder to come by (since players close to the goalpost are usually under very great pressure), but in these situations usually a soft tap-in, with or without a feign, is enough to beat the goalkeeper.
This shot is a hard one to make; their arm and elbow have to be in a perfect position in order for the ball to go towards the net, as the shot is taken "blindly".
First played on the beaches of Waikiki in Hawaii in the 1930s and 1940s, it is credited to Louis Kahanamoku, Duke Kahanamoku's brother.
This is a very effective offensive strategy if a team has a strong hole set.
Water polo is a team water activity requiring swimming skills including treading water or wrestling before turning back for the opposing team's possession.
The key to the offense is to accurately pass (or "set") the ball into the center forward or hole set, positioned directly in front of the goal ("the hole").
If an attacker advances inside the 2-meter line without the ball or before the ball is inside the 2-meter area, (s)he is ruled offside and the ball is turned over to the defense.
This is known as the ''Advantage Rule''.
This allows casual players to enjoy water polo without undertaking the intense conditioning required for conventional water polo.
Depending on the ball carrier's location, the goalie is positioned along that semicircle roughly a meter out of the goal to reduce the attacker's shooting angle.
In this defense, the two wing defenders split the area furthest from the goal, allowing them a clearer lane for the counter-attack if their team recovers the ball.
Even with good backup from the rest of the defenders, stopping attacks can prove very difficult if the goalkeeper remains in the middle of the goal.
Also inside the five meter mark, the goalie can swing at the ball with a closed fist without being penalized.
Another popular shot is the back hand.
(SP), but closer ones are very difficult.
Defensive positions are often the same positionally, but just switched from offense to defense.
Also, if a goalkeeper pushes the ball under water, the action will not be punished with a turnover like with field players, but with a penalty shot.
Fouls are very common, and these affect the game play, since the victim of a minor or a major foul will have the advantage of a free throw or a 6 on 5 advantage where one player is excluded for 20 seconds and the other team gets an advantage, while the victim of a penalty foul will have the opportunity of a one-on-one shot against the opposing team's goalkeeper.
Horizontal egg-beater is used to resist forward motion of an attacking player.
Another common injury would be in the shoulder.
There are six players that play out and one goalkeeper.
Swimming with the ball might be the easiest way of advancing the ball down the pool when no other teammates are open for a pass.
This pass is much more difficult because if the pass is not properly caught, the officials will be likely to call an offensive foul resulting in a change of ball possession.
The game thus developed with the formation of the London Water Polo League and has since expanded, becoming widely popular in various places around the world, including Europe, the United States, Brazil, China, Canada and Australia.
'''Water polo''' is a team water sport.
Among the most common serious injuries are those affecting the head and shoulders.
* The ability to touch the ball with two hands.
It can also be played as a combination of the two in what is known as an "M drop" defense, in which the point defender moves away ("sloughs off") his man into a zone in order to better defend the center position.
* Reflexes and Awareness: At higher levels of the sport the pace of play rapidly increases, so that anticipation and mental preparation is important.
Backstroke is used by defending players to look for advancing opponents and by the goalie to track the ball after passing.
Water polo is now popular in many countries around the world, notably Europe (particularly in Hungary, Serbia, Croatia, Montenegro, Russia, Italy, Greece and Spain), the United States, Canada and Australia.
The most basic positional set up is known as a "3–3", so called because there are two lines in front of the opponent's goal.
A dry pass may also be used.
Another, albeit less common offense, is the "motion offense", sometimes nicknamed "washing machine offense", in which two "weak-side" (to the right of the goal for right-handed players) perimeter players set up as a wing and a flat.
The size of the ball can overwhelm a small child's hand, making the sport more suitable for older children.
In addition to this, teams may have substitute field players and substitute goalkeepers who are not in the water.
The continued weakening or injury of the labrum can ultimately cause the joint to become so weak that subluxation or dislocation of the shoulder can occur.
By kicking faster for a brief period, the player can get high out of the water (as high as their suit—below their waistline) for a block, pass, or shot.
This "water rugby" came to be called "water polo" based on the English pronunciation of the Balti word for ball, ''pulu''.
By floating in an inner tube players expend less energy than traditional water polo players, not having to tread water.
The defender attempts to stay between the attacker and the goal, a position known as ''inside water''.
He or she has to be able to jump out of the water, using little more than one's core and legs, and hold the vertical position without sinking into the water, all while tracking and anticipating a shot.
The pop shot is a quick shot executed by cupping the ball with the dominant hand from underneath the ball and releasing it, usually into a corner of the goal.
*Treading water: The most common form of water treading is generally referred to as "egg-beater", named because the circular movement of the legs resembles the motion of an egg-beater.
A second tournament series, the FINA Water Polo World Cup, has been held every other year since 1979.
At long range from the goal, shots are easy for goalkeepers to stop.
The most defensible position is along a semicircular line connecting the goalposts and extending out in the center.
The bounce shot usually takes the goalie by surprise, or can be difficult to track thus presenting an advantage.
Some of these methods can be combined to form even more advanced shots.
Other formations include a 3–3 (two lines of three attackers each) or arc (attackers make an arc in front of the goal and one offensive player sits in the 'hole' or 'pit' in front of the goal).
The goalkeeper's primary role is to stop shots from the opposing team going into his or her own goal.
When picking up the ball, it is essential that the fingers and thumb are distributed over the mass of the ball to get a grip.
When the ball is set the hole keeps it in front of them until they reach for it and shooting it behind them while looking away from the goal.
Picking up the ball is an essential part to any water polo player.
The game consists of four quarters in which the two teams attempt to score goals by throwing the ball into their opponent's goal.
The goalkeeper also has one limitation that other players do not have: he or she cannot cross the half-distance line.
The front crawl stroke used in water polo differs from the usual swimming style: water polo players swim with the head out of water at all times, in order to observe the play.
When swimming with the ball, it is important that the player keeps their elbows high in order to stop opposing players from gaining possession of the ball as well as keeping their head out of the water to see the rest of the pool and make the appropriate play.
When the offense takes possession of the ball, the strategy is to advance the ball down the field of play and to score a goal.
Except for the goalkeeper, players participate in both offensive and defensive roles.
This form of offense is used when no dominate hole set is available, or the hole defense is too strong.
The rules of water polo were originally developed in the late nineteenth century in Great Britain by William Wilson.
Those induced to the head are usually caused by elbows or the ball itself.
This is where the hole set receives the ball directly in his hand and then attempts a shot at the cage.
The goalkeeper is given several privileges above those of the other players, but only if he or she is within the five meter area in front of his or her goal:
The attacking team typically positions 4 players on the 2 meter line, and 2 players on 5 meter line (4–2), passing the ball around until an open player attempts a shot.
Early play allowed brute strength, wrestling and holding opposing players underwater to recover the ball.
The rules of water polo cover the play, procedure, equipment and officiating of water polo.
It is what is needed for almost all shots and passing the ball.
When passing or shooting, the hips of the player should line up in the direction in which the ball is thrown.
Water polo players can generate ball speeds between 50–90&nbsp;km/h (30–56&nbsp;mph).
Water polo backstroke differs from swimming backstroke; the player sits up a bit in the water, using eggbeater leg like motions with short arm strokes to the side instead of long arm strokes.
Canoe polo or kayak polo is one of the eight disciplines of canoeing pursued in the UK, known simply as "polo" by its aficionados.
Water polo is typically played in an all-deep pool 7 feet deep and players require stamina and endurance to play the game.
The wings, drivers and point are often called the perimeter players; while the hole-set directs play.
The center defender is neutralized in this shot, and the goalie is usually too close to the action and has no time to respond.
The defensive player is allowed to return immediately if the offense scores, or if the defense recovers the ball before the twenty seconds expires.
The wing moves to the flat and the flat to the point.
Vertical egg-beater is used to maintain a position higher than the opponent.
There are two basic passes in water polo: the "dry" pass and the "wet" pass.
The hole set then has a "reasonable amount of time" (typically about three seconds) to re-commence play by making a free pass to one of the other players.
This is a shot with much backspin.
The '''lob shot''' is a high arching shot intended to pass over the goalie's hands and into the goal.
Other injuries take place underwater as many things can not be seen from above the surface and not much padding is used to protect the players.
The other defenders can only block the ball with one hand to help the goalie.
It can be effective if taken from an angle on either side of the goal post; this provides a large area behind the goalie into which the lob can drop on its downward arc.
There are also smaller balls that can be used by younger children when playing.
The goalkeeper has the main role in blocking shots against the goal.
Women's water polo was added in 1986.
The Hungarians defeated the Soviets 4–0 before the game was called off in the final minute to prevent angry Hungarians in the crowd reacting to Valentin Prokopov punching Ervin Zador.
If executed correctly, the ball will take a curved path to the goal in a high arc similar to a lob shot, usually avoiding the goalie who has incorrectly committed to blocking a typical power shot.
Tearing the labrum will result in the weakness of the arm.
Egg-beater is used for most of the match as the players cannot touch the bottom of the pool.
In 2002, FINA organized the sport's first international league, the FINA Water Polo World League.
If a defender interferes with a free throw, holds or sinks an attacker who is not in possession or splashes water into the face of an opponent, the defensive player is excluded from the game for twenty seconds, known as a 'kick out' or an ejection.
With the arm, fingers are also usually harmed, due to not catching the ball right or blocking the ball.
This causes the keeper to tire quicker as it is assumed a shot is imminent, thereby making them easier to beat.
This technique, called sloughing, allows the defense an opportunity to double-team the hole set and possibly steal the inbound pass.
Water polo is a contact sport.
If the defender cannot achieve these aims, he may commit a foul intentionally.
One example is the '''spin lob''' where an attacker will appear to be shooting a typical power shot, but at the last minute allow their hand to twist and instead put the majority of their power into rotating or spinning the ball.
The goalkeeper is particularly vulnerable to baulking as he must extend both his arms wide out of the water, which is intended to make him/her appear bigger and more imposing, thus, more difficult to beat.
The irritation of the sunburn can be restrictive because of the sheer amount of movement involved in the sport.
They have to endure the ball thrown at them at a fast speed and are expected to "throw it down" to prevent the ball from going into the goal and scoring.
A good baulk takes a great amount of hand/arm and leg strength to maintain a high position in the water and the ball aloft in the shooting stance.
This shot can confuse the goalie and can force the goalie to eggbeater up too early and miss.
The game is thought to have originated in Scotland in the late 19th century as a sort of "water rugby".
The offensive positions include: one center forward (also called a "set," "setter," "hole," or "2-meter man," located on or near the 2-meter, roughly in the center of the goal), two wings (located on or near the 2-meter, just outside of the goal goal posts, respectively), two drivers (also called "flats", located on or near the 5-meter, roughly at the goal posts, respectively), and one "point" (usually just behind the 5 meter, roughly in the center of the goal, respectively), positioned farthest from the goal.
Every 2 to 4 years since 1973, a men's Water Polo World Championship is organized within the FINA World Aquatics Championships.
Other inside water shots include the screw shot, which can likewise be executed directly from the stroke, and a spring shot where the player pushes the ball slightly into the water (but avoiding a "ball under" foul) and then allows a sudden release.
Players who are skilled in all positions of offense or defense are called utility players.
For extra accuracy and speed when releasing the ball, a player uses body momentum to follow through at the end of the throw.
If an offensive player, such as the center forward, has possession of the ball in front of the goal, the defensive player tries to steal the ball or to keep the center from shooting or passing.
William Wilson is thought to have developed the game during a similar period.
Players may perform an inside water shot, also known as a "wet shot".
Surf polo, another variation of water polo, is played on surfboards.
The most famous water polo match in history is probably the ''Blood in the Water match'', a 1956 Summer Olympics semi-final match between Hungary and the Soviet Union.
Another key job that the goalkeeper is responsible for is guiding and informing his or her defense of imposing threats and gaps in the defense, and making helpful observations to identify a gap in the defense that the defenders may or can not see.
While playing one major injury that can occur is a labrum tear in the shoulder.
There is also a European Water Polo Championship that is held every other year.
The remaining four players swim in square pattern in which a player swims from the point to the hole and then out to the strong side wing.
The center's position nearest to the goal allows explosive shots from close-range ("step-out" or "roll-out", "sweep", or backhand shots).
Having large amounts of sunscreen on during an official match is banned by FINA and most other state/national governing bodies.
The hole set then is given a free throw but must pass off the ball to another offensive player, rather than making a direct shot at the goal.
The advantage of egg-beater is that it allows the player to maintain a constant position to the water level, and uses less energy than other forms of treading water such as the scissor kick, which result in the player bobbing up and down.
The goalkeeper can also be ejected for twenty seconds if a major foul is committed.
The goalkeeper is also the "quarterback", as he or she usually begins the offensive play.
The only thing the passer must look out for is a possible double-team on the hole set.
It can be used vertically or horizontally.
This is evident as labral tears are commonly found in people who participate in throwing sports.
While beginning players will have difficulty integrating these shots into their stroke, resulting in weaker shots as compared to outside water shots, inside water shots by experienced players have sufficient force to skip past the goalkeeper.
However these shots lose power when hitting the water, and typically are harder to direct at the corners outside the goalies reach.
The goalie stood outside the playing area and defended the goal by jumping in on any opponent attempting to score by placing the ball on the deck.
The  passing to a field position player, a '''dry pass''' (meaning the ball does not touch the water) is thrown a few inches above the head of the catching player and to the left or right side depending on the receiver's dominant hand.
This allows the player to see the play and quickly switch positions.
As is the case with other defensive players, a goalkeeper who aggressively fouls an attacker in position to score can be charged with a penalty shot for the other team.
The goal is 2.8&nbsp;m2 in face area; the goalkeeper should also be a master of fast, effective lateral movement in the water as well as lightning fast lunges out of the water to block a shot.
It is usually used by the 2-meter offense player.
Defense can be played man-to-man or in zones, such as a 2–4 (four defenders along the goal line).
This is often overlooked if the attacker is well to the side of the pool or when the ball is at the other side of the pool.
