At the time of the trade, the Blues and New York Rangers emerged as front-runners, but the Blues met his salary demands.
Wayne Gretzky's uncle, Al Gretzky, ran as a Conservative candidate in London West in the 2006 federal election and for the libertarian Freedom Party of Ontario in the 2013 provincial by-election for the Legislative Assembly of Ontario.
On November 2, Gretzky, goaltender Eddie Mio and forward Peter Driscoll were put on a private plane, not knowing where they would land and what team they would be joining.
In 2006, Moyes became majority owner of the team.
During the 2015 Canadian federal election campaign, Gretzky endorsed the Conservative Party and Prime Minister Stephen Harper, and was featured at a campaign rally praising Harper by calling him "wonderful to the country."
But now, if players without the puck skated just as hard, but faster, dodged and darted to open ice just as determinedly, but more effectively, as those with the puck, how do you shut them down?"
Five years later, the tournament was revived and renamed the World Cup in 1996.
Gretzky debuted with the Team Canada's men's team at the 1981 Canada Cup.
Leading up to the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, it was announced that NHL players would be eligible to play for the first time.
My Dad was very smart."
The Kings got off to their best start ever, winning four straight on their way to qualifying for the playoffs.
On the advice of his agent, Gretzky picked the Oilers, but the move was not that simple.
The arena was sold out, and the attendance of 17,503 was the Oilers' biggest crowd ever to that date.
Gretzky's final head coaching record was 143–161–24.
The following seasons saw Gretzky break his own assists record three more times (125 in 1982–83, 135 in 1984–85, and 163 in 1985–86); he also bettered that mark (120&nbsp;assists) in 1986–87 with 121 and 1990–91 with 122, and his point record one more time (215, in 1985–86).
Although another IOC rule states that the cauldron should be witnessed outside by the entire residents of the entire host city, this was not possible since the ceremony took place indoors.
His first coach, Dick Martin, remarked that he handled the puck better than the ten-year-olds.
Gretzky did not win his first international competition until the 1984 Canada Cup, when Canada defeated Sweden in a best-of-three finals.
His coach at the Edmonton Oilers, Glen Sather, said, "He was so much more intelligent.
In 1978, Gretzky signed with the Indianapolis Racers of the World Hockey Association (WHA), where he briefly played before being traded to the Edmonton Oilers.
Then he'd shoot a puck along the boards and into the corner and then go chasing after it.
The effect of calling offsetting penalties was felt immediately in the NHL, because during the early 1980s, when the Gretzky-era Oilers entered a four-on-four or three-on-three situation with an opponent, they frequently used the space on the ice to score one or more goals.
Ty played hockey at Shattuck-Saint Mary's, but quit the sport, and now attends Arizona State University.
Me: "Away from the guy, not towards him."
He also had a way of never hitting the puck with the same rhythm twice, making his shots harder to time and block.
On February 18, he lashed out at the media at a press conference, frustrated with media and fan comments regarding his team's uninspiring 1–1–1 start.
Him: "Where's the last place a guy looks before he passes it?"
He agreed to become head coach on August 8, 2005.
By the time he finished playing in Edmonton, he held or shared 49&nbsp;NHL records, which in itself was a record.
Me: "To where the puck is going, not where it's been."
Much has been written about Gretzky's highly developed hockey instincts, but he once explained that what appeared to be instinct was, in large part, the effect of his relentless study and practice of the game, in cooperation with his coaches.
"Gretzky reversed that.
His hometown of Brantford, Ontario, renamed Park Road North to "Wayne Gretzky Parkway" as well as renaming the North Park Recreation Centre to The Wayne Gretzky Sports Centre.
Gretzky was named to the club on November 29, 1997.
The following year, as a 15-year-old, he had 72&nbsp;points in 32&nbsp;games with the same team, then known as the Seneca Nationals.
… He distorts time, and not only by slowing it down.
Between 1982 and 1985, the Edmonton Oilers averaged 423 goals a season, when no previous team had scored 400, and Gretzky on his own had averaged 207 points, when no player before had scored more than 152 in one year.
The Oshawa Generals picked Tom McCarthy, and the Niagara Falls Flyers picked Steve Peters second overall.
On May 5, 2009, the Coyotes' holding company, Dewey Ranch Hockey LLC, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Growing up, he was a competitive runner and also batted .492 for the Junior Intercounty Baseball League's Brantford CKCP Braves in the summer of 1980.
"They're loving us not doing well", he said, referring to American hockey fans.
It's not God-given, it's Wally-given.
The 1998–99 season was his last as a professional player.
As a non-resident, Gretzky came under some criticism for this endorsement.
Gretzky convinced his long-time agent Michael Barnett to join the team as its General Manager.
In 2000, he became part owner of the Phoenix Coyotes, and following the 2004–05 NHL lockout he became the team's head coach.
Defensemen found Gretzky a most elusive target.
"The Soviets and Gretzky changed the NHL game", says Dryden.
Bidders for the club had indicated that Gretzky would no longer be associated with the team after it emerged from bankruptcy, and on September 24, 2009, Gretzky stepped down as head coach and head of hockey operations of the Coyotes.
His play attracted considerable negative attention from other players' parents, including those of his teammates, and he was often booed.
Gretzky captured the Lou Kaplan Trophy as rookie of the year, and helped the Oilers to first overall in the league.
Skalbania sold Gretzky, Mio and Driscoll to his former partner, and then-owner of the Edmonton Oilers, Peter Pocklington.
"Gretzky, the kid from Brantford with the Belarusian name, was the acceptable face of Soviet hockey.
The line did not score in the final game, but the WHA won by a score of 4–3.
… By the time I was ten, I had eight years on skates instead of four, and a few seasons' worth of ice time against ten-year-olds.
He led the tournament in scoring with 12 points en route to a second-place finish to the Soviet Union, losing 8–1 in the final.
The Coyotes' record at the end of the 2005–06 season was 38–39–5, a 16-win improvement over 2004–05; they were 36–36–5 in games Gretzky coached.
He was asked to manage Canada's team at the 2005 Ice Hockey World Championships, but declined due to his mother's poor health.
He played 20 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL) for four teams from 1979 to 1999.
He had a fast and accurate shot.
In 2005, rumors began regarding Gretzky becoming the head coach of the team, but were denied by Gretzky and the Coyotes.
"A lot of times, I can turn and pass without even looking."
The final game of Gretzky's career was a 2–1&nbsp;overtime loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins on April 18, 1999, in Madison Square Garden.
I moved because I was traded and that's where my job is.
Every time he took the ice, there was some spontaneous decision he would make.
The Racers were losing $40,000 per game.
See, kids usually don't start playing hockey until they're six or seven.
For the first time in his NHL career, Gretzky was not named captain, although he briefly wore the captain's 'C' in 1998 when captain Brian Leetch was injured and out of the lineup.
Walter Gretzky had known for months after having been tipped off by Skalbania, but kept the news from Wayne so as not to upset him.
He also had strong general athletic skills.
After the financially troubled McNall was forced to sell the Kings in 1994, Gretzky's relationship with the Kings' new owners grew strained.
Skalbania opted to have Gretzky sign a personal-services contract rather than a standard player contract in part because he knew a deal to take some WHA teams into the NHL was in the works.
The Kings named Gretzky their alternate captain.
He ended the 1981–82 season with records of 92&nbsp;goals, 120&nbsp;assists, and 212&nbsp;points in 80&nbsp;games, becoming the only player in NHL history to break the two hundred-point mark.
You saw him but when you reached out to grab him your hands felt nothing, maybe just a chill."
… Slowly, as game after game went by and the concern continued to rise, Wayne Gretzky began climbing through the lineup.
Gretzky made his first international appearance as a member of the Canadian national junior team at the 1978 World Junior Championships in Montreal, Quebec.
One of the highlights of Gretzky's season was his appearance in the 1979 WHA All-Star Game.
Almost immediately after retirement, several NHL teams approached him about an ownership role.
That year, Gretzky became the first hockey player and first Canadian to be named Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year.
When Gretzky was 14, his family arranged for him to move to and play hockey in Toronto, partly to further his career, and partly to remove him from the uncomfortable pressure he faced in his hometown.
"Gretzky uses this room to insert an extra beat into his actions.
"He was improvising all the time.
On Gretzky's 18th birthday, January 26, 1979, Pocklington signed him to a 10-year personal services contract (the longest in hockey history at the time) worth C$3&nbsp;million, with options for 10 more years.
According to Walter, the "capper" was being booed on "Brantford Day" at Toronto's Maple Leaf Gardens in February 1975.
In his first two seasons in the NHL, his deft passing skills helped earn him a reputation as an ace playmaker, and so opposing defensemen focused their efforts on foiling his attempts to pass the puck to other scorers.
"He'd score six or seven points on him.
Him: "Where do you skate?"
An ownership dispute involving Research in Motion's Jim Balsillie (with the intention of relocating the team) and the NHL itself arose, which eventually ended up in Court.
Commentators have noted Gretzky's uncanny ability to judge the position of the other players on the ice—so much so that many suspected he enjoyed some kind of extrasensory perception.
Team Canada then lost the bronze medal game 3–2 to Finland to finish without a medal.
Broadcast live throughout Canada from Edmonton's St. Joseph's Basilica, members of the Fire Department acted as ceremonial guards.
Sometimes he will release the puck before he appears to be ready, threading the pass through a maze of players precisely to the blade of a teammate's stick, or finding a chink in a goaltender's armour and slipping the puck into it … before the goaltender is ready to react."
He weighed "about 170 pounds" for the better part of his career.
His reading of the game and his ability to improvise on the fly  were unrivaled, and he could consistently anticipate where the puck was going to be and execute the right move at the right time.
Gretzky again acted as Executive Director of Canada's men's hockey team at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy, though not with the success of 2002; the team was eliminated in the quarterfinals and failed to win a medal.
He scored 37&nbsp;points in 31&nbsp;games for the team in the regular season and the playoffs, and the Blues came within one game of the Conference Finals.
Later that season, Gretzky broke Esposito's record for most goals in a season (76) on February 24, 1982, scoring three goals to help beat the Buffalo Sabres 6–3.
Gretzky held a press conference one day after being awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy, criticizing the NHL for punishing teams and players who previously benefited.
As of 2014, he still holds 60 NHL records.
Walter's drills were his own invention, but were ahead of their time in Canada.
The family would regularly visit the farm of Wayne's grandparents, Tony and Mary, and watch ''Hockey Night in Canada'' together.
He won his second straight Hart Trophy.
At first, Wayne did not want to leave Edmonton, but he later received a call while on his honeymoon from Los Angeles Kings owner Bruce McNall asking permission to meet and discuss the deal.
After the details of the trade were finalized by the two owners, one final condition had to be met: Gretzky had to call Pocklington and request a trade.
In 1990, the Associated Press named him Male Athlete of the Decade.
According to Wayne, Janet does not recall him being on the show.
Gretzky's size and strength were unimpressive—in fact, far below average for the NHL—but he is widely considered the smartest player in the history of the game.
Gretzky made his coaching debut on October 5, and won his first game on October 8 against the Minnesota Wild.
The same success was not immediate when they joined the NHL, but within four seasons, the Oilers were competing for the Stanley Cup.
Gretzky only played eight games for Indianapolis.
Trevor signed a letter of intent in 2010 to play baseball for San Diego State University, but decided to turn pro after he was drafted by the Chicago Cubs in the 2011 MLB draft; his $375,000 signing bonus was negotiated by then-Cubs GM Jim Hendry and Wayne himself.
Walter taught Wayne, Keith, Brent, Glen and their friends hockey on a rink he made in the back yard of the family home, nicknamed the "Wally Coliseum".
He consistently scored last in strength tests among the Edmonton Oilers, bench pressing only 140 pounds (64&nbsp;kg).
Mark Messier, who attended the game along with other representatives of the Edmonton dynasty, was the last.
It marked the first time Gretzky did not finish as the tournament's leading scorer with seven points in eight games for fourth overall.
He has endorsed and launched a wide variety of products, from pillow cases to insurance.
Nine out of ten people think it's instinct, and it isn't.
He was one of six players voted to the International Ice Hockey Federation's (IIHF) Centennial All-Star Team.
In his second season, Gretzky won the Art Ross (the first of seven consecutive) with a then-record 164&nbsp;points, breaking both Bobby Orr's record for assists in a season (102) and Phil Esposito's record for points in a season (152).
However, he had remarkable physical stamina.
However, he performed very well in the playoffs, notably when he scored a hat trick in game&nbsp;seven of the Campbell Conference Finals against the Toronto Maple Leafs.
Gretzky also excelled at box lacrosse, which he played during the summer.
Me: "The guy he's passing to."
After his retirement in 1999, Gretzky was immediately inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame, making him the most recent player to have the waiting period waived.
The Heritage Classic, held at Commonwealth Stadium in Edmonton, was the first regular season NHL game to be played outdoors.
At coach Muzz MacPherson's suggestion, Gretzky settled on 99.
The experts voted Gretzky number one.
So I had a long head start on everyone else.
Gretzky's ability to improvise came into the spotlight at the 1998 Olympics in Japan.
After winning the first game of the series by a score of 4–1, the team lost the next three games in overtime, and then fell 4–1 in the deciding fifth game where Gretzky failed to get a shot on net.
Gretzky's first season in Los Angeles saw a marked increase in attendance and fan interest in a city not previously known for following hockey.
The Hall of Fame then announced that he would be the last player to do so.
He scored more assists than any other player scored total points, and is the only NHL player to total over 200&nbsp;points in one season – a feat he accomplished four times.
He was traded to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim on March 20, 2014 for Matt Scioscia, son of Angels' manager Mike Scioscia.
Gretzky adroitly applied this technique as a professional player, avoiding checks with such skill that a rumour circulated that there was an unwritten rule not to hit him.
Gretzky was having difficulty scoring this season and finished with only nine goals, contributing to this being the only season in which he failed to average at least a point per game, but his last goal brought his scoring total for his combined NHL/WHA career to 1,072, one more than Howe.
Upon returning to New York, Gretzky announced he would retire after the Rangers' last game of the season.
He led the tournament in scoring for the second consecutive time and was named to the All-Star Team.
The couple had married in 1960, and lived in an apartment in Brantford, Ontario, where Walter worked for Bell Telephone Canada.
Gretzky finished third in the league in scoring at 110&nbsp;points, behind Robbie Ftorek and Réal Cloutier.
He was one of four who lit the cauldron at BC Place Stadium during the opening ceremony (although one did not due to technical difficulties with one of the cauldron's "arms" which failed to raise) and then jogged out of the stadium, where he was then driven by police escorts through the streets of downtown Vancouver to light a second, outdoor cauldron near the Vancouver Convention Centre located in the city's downtown waterfront district.
When he entered the league in 1979, critics opined that Gretzky was "too small, too wiry, and too slow to be a force in the NHL".
He was adept at dodging checks from opposing players, and consistently anticipated where the puck was going to be and executed the right move at the right time.
Gretzky eventually sold the team in 1992 for $550,000&nbsp;CA.
The rule was changed back for the 1992–93 season.
Gretzky also served as an ambassador and contributor in Vancouver winning the bidding process to host the 2010 Winter Olympics.
Fellow Hockey Hall of Famer Denis Potvin compared attempting to hit Gretzky to "wrapping your arms around fog.
For the first season that Gretzky played in Los Angeles, the Kings had their training camp at the Olympiques' arena.
He was the youngest player to compete in the tournament at the age of 16.
But I'm Canadian to the core.
The Canadians had trouble with the big ice.
His last NHL game in Canada was on April 15, 1999, a 2–2&nbsp;tie with the Ottawa Senators and the Rangers' second-to-last game of the season.
He earned Rookie of the Year honours in the Metro Junior B Hockey League in 1975–76, with 60&nbsp;points in 28&nbsp;games.
I saw him do it night after night."
Trevor signed with the Cubs the next month. )
In his second year in the league, weighing just 165 pounds, he broke the previous single-season scoring record, racking up 164 points.
While Gretzky is a dual Canadian-American citizen, he is currently unable to vote in Canadian elections as he has not lived in the country since 1988.
"I get a feeling about where a teammate is going to be", he said.
This was a single game playoff record.
"The Trade", as it came to be known, upset Canadians to the extent that New Democratic Party House Leader Nelson Riis demanded that the government block it, and Pocklington was burned in effigy outside the Northlands Coliseum.
After the game, Gretzky took the opportunity to confirm his patriotism: "I'm still proud to be a Canadian.
Gretzky became known for setting up behind his opponent's net, an area that was nicknamed "Gretzky's office".
Him: "Which means..."
However, it was Racers owner Nelson Skalbania who, on June 12, 1978, signed 17-year-old Gretzky to a seven-year personal services contract worth $1.75&nbsp;million US.
The Wayne Gretzky 99 Award is awarded annually to the Most Valuable Player in the Ontario Hockey League playoffs; the Wayne Gretzky Trophy is awarded annually to the playoff champion of the OHL's Western Conference; and the Wayne Gretzky Award is awarded annually to youth hockey players.
The club won the Grey Cup championship in the first year of the partnership but struggled in the two following seasons, and the partnership sold the team before the 1994 season.
It was with the Greyhounds that Wayne first wore the number&nbsp;99 on his jersey.
He scored his all-time record of 92 goals with just 369 shots.
The 1991 Canada Cup marked the last time the tournament was played under the "Canada Cup" moniker.
"The Star-Spangled Banner", as sung by John Amirante, was altered to include the words "in the land of Wayne Gretzky".
At the time of his retirement in 1999, he held 61 NHL records: 40 regular-season records, 15 playoff records, and six All-Star records.
Gretzky hosted the ''Saturday Night Live'' comedy program in 1989.
But as the series continued, his unique skills made him a team leader.
"He was, I think, the first Canadian forward to play a true team game", said hockey writer and former NHL goalie Ken Dryden.
He won the Lady Byng Trophy for sportsmanship and performance five times, and often spoke out against fighting in hockey.
Since the Order ceremonies are always held during the hockey season, it took 13&nbsp;years and 7&nbsp;months—and two Governors General—before he could accept the honour.
Under IOC rules, the lighting of the Olympic cauldron must be witnessed by those attending the opening ceremony, implying that it must be lit at the location where the ceremony is taking place.
When the WHA folded, the Oilers joined the NHL, where he established many scoring records and led his team to four Stanley Cup championships.
Following the contest, in a departure from the usual three stars announcement, Gretzky was awarded all three stars.
Sports commentators said that he played like he had "eyes in the back of his head."
Gretzky told journalist Scott Morrison that the final game of his career was his greatest day.
Gretzky said that he would have voted Bobby Orr or Gordie Howe as the best of all time.
On May 10, 2010, he was awarded The Ambassador Award of Excellence by the LA Sports & Entertainment Commission.
The Canadian Press also named Gretzky Newsmaker of the Year in 1982.
He retired from international play holding the records for most goals (20), most assists (28), and most overall points (48) in best-on-best hockey.
Finally, in early 1996, Gretzky requested a trade.
The Oilers reached the Avco World Trophy finals, where they lost to the Winnipeg Jets in six games.
Statistics support the contention: Whereas Phil Esposito, who had set the previous goal-scoring record, needed 550 shots to score 76 goals, Gretzky netted his 76th after only 287 shots—about half as many.
As a result, he developed a deep understanding of its shifting patterns and dynamics.
The sweaters for ten-year-olds were far too large for Gretzky, who coped by tucking the sweater into his pants on the right side.
Skalbania told Gretzky he would be moved, offering him a choice between the Edmonton Oilers and the Winnipeg Jets.
The Gretzkys made an arrangement with a local family they knew and Wayne played a season in the Ontario Hockey League at the age of 16 with the Greyhounds.
The next year (1981–82), at 170 pounds—still "a wisp compared to the average NHL player"—he set the all-time goal-scoring record, putting 92 pucks in the net.
Although Gretzky had previously stated he would not participate in any "old-timers exhibition games", on November 22, 2003, he took to the ice one last time to help celebrate the Edmonton Oilers' 25th anniversary as an NHL team.
I hope Canadians understand that."
He cultivated a love of hockey in his sons and provided them with a backyard rink and drills to enhance their skills.
Gretzky has made over 60 movie, network television and video appearances as himself, according to IMDB, as of February 2012.
Gretzky ended his professional playing career with the New York Rangers, where he played his final three seasons and helped the team reach the Eastern Conference Finals in 1997.
I've just learned to guess what's going to happen next.
