The biggest companies with production in Weimar are Bayer (pharmaceutical factory), Coca Cola (beverages) and Hydrema (dump truck factory).
In 1860 the Weimar Saxon-Grand Ducal Art School, the precursor of today's Bauhaus University, was founded.
Together with the neighbour-cities Erfurt and Jena it forms the central metropolitan area of Thuringia with approximately 500,000 inhabitants, whereas the city itself counts a population of 65,000.
Nevertheless, Weimar did not become industrialised, and remained a city of clerks, artists and rentiers.
Nevertheless, most of the destroyed buildings were restored soon after the war because of their importance in German cultural history.
In 1240, the count founded the dynasty's monastery in Oberweimar, which ran under Cistercian nuns.
Some academies were combined into the new Bauhaus University, founded in 1996 with approximately 4,200 students and focus on architecture, design and media.
Several of his encores for works such as  ''Don Juan'' and ''Macbeth'' were performed by the Staatskapelle Weimar.
It has been a site of pilgrimage for the German intelligentsia since Goethe first moved to Weimar in 1775.
The most important sector is tourism with 3,500 hotel beds, 350,000 visitors and 650,000 overnight stays in hotels in 2012 and a large number of German one-day visitors.
Soon after, the counts of Weimar founded the town, which was an independent parish since 1249 and called ''civitas'' in 1254.
File:Beethovenhaus & Bachhaus des Schloss Belvedere (Weimar).jpg|Schloss Belvedere, side buildings
The city's topography creates a microclimate caused through the basin position with sometimes inversion in winter (quite cold nights under ).
In the 19th century, famous composers like Franz Liszt made a music centre of Weimar and later, artists and architects like Henry van de Velde, Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Lyonel Feininger and Walter Gropius came to the city and founded the Bauhaus movement, the most important German design school of the interwar period.
During the German Revolution of 1918–19 the last reigning grand duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, William Ernest, had to abdicate and went in exile to Heinrichau in Silesia.
To the north, the terrain rises to Ettersberg, the city's 482 m high backyard mountain.
Peter and Paul's Church
The first Ernestine territorial partition in 1572 was followed by various ones, nevertheless Weimar stayed the capital of different Saxe-Weimar states.
The institution created its own painting style, the "Weimar School" of painting with representatives such as Max Liebermann and Arnold Böcklin.
As it was the capital of Thuringia, the Nazis built a new Roman-fascist-style administrative centre between the city centre and the main station.
Due to its function as a ducal residence, Weimar is rich in early-modern castles and palaces.
One famous person serving as a soldier in Weimar was Wolfgang Borchert, later a well known poet and playwright.
They are marked by their beautiful parks and gardens.
Summers are warm and sometimes humid with average high temperatures of  and lows of .
Another theory derives the first element from OHG ''win'' (meadow, pasture).
The range of hills in the south of Weimar rises up to 370 m and is part of the Ilm Saale Plate Muschelkalk formation.
The camp slogan remained .
The 11 suburban districts are villages which got incorporated during the 20th century; however, they have mostly stayed rural to date:
The catholic parish church of Weimar is devoted to Sacred Heart and was built between 1888 and 1891 in historicist forms imitating Florence Cathedral.
It was rebuilt in late-Gothic style after a fire around 1500.
Other services like retail, trade fairs and specialized hospitals are more brought by the near neighbour cities Erfurt and Jena with their infrastructure.
Furthermore, creative branches like media, advertising, architecture and design are important for Weimar's economy.
*Legefeld/Holzdorf (1994)
Until 1948, Weimar was the capital of Thuringia.
In comparison to many major German states, the dukes' policy was liberal and tolerant in this period.
The Erfurt-Weimar Airport lies approximately  west of Weimar.
Due to its tradition as a capital, Weimar is a centre of governmental services to date.
Weimar first celebrated the Onion Market in 1653.
Because of its function as an "officials' city", the houses in this areas are more extensive than in many comparable Gründerzeit quarters in Germany.
File:GelmerodaKirche1.JPG|Gelmeroda Parish Church
The tombs of Goethe and Schiller, as well as their archives, may be found in the city.
Light snowfall mainly occurs from December through February, but snow cover does not usually remain for long.
During the GDR period, two new Plattenbau settlements were developed in the west and the north of the city.
File:Kirche Oberweimar.jpg|Oberweimar Parish Church
There are four cinemas including a 3-D cinema, and a Bowling Alley in the Weimar Atrium, the local mall.
The ''Wittumspalais'' is a smaller widow mansion near Theaterplatz, established in 1768.
For tourism serve the ''Ilm track'' and the ''Thuringian city string track (Radweg Thüringer Städtekette)''.
File:Schloss Ettersburg.JPG|Schloss Ettersburg
'''Weimar''' () (Latin: Vimaria) is a city in the federal state of Thuringia, Germany.
After German Reunification in 1990, Weimar experienced significant economic hardship, but funding restored much that had deteriorated, and it was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1996 (Bauhaus) and 1998 (Classical Weimar).
On 6 January 1950, the Soviets handed over Buchenwald to the East German Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Today's four-wing building was started after a great fire in 1774.
The city walls were demolished in 1757 and during the following decades, Weimar expanded in all directions.
Today, many places in the city centre have been designated as UNESCO World Heritage sites (either as part of the Weimar Classicism complex or as part of the Bauhaus complex) and tourism is one of the leading economic sectors of Weimar.
Johann Gottfried Herder was the dean of the church between 1766 and 1803.
Between 1726 and 1735, the interior got a Baroque renewal by Johann Adolf Richter.
Its name changed over the centuries from ''Wimares'' through ''Wimari'' to ''Wimar'' and finally Weimar; it is derived from Old High German ''wīh-'' (holy) and ''-mari'' (standing water, swamp).
Goethe was also active in civic duties while living there.
When the new Erfurt–Leipzig/Halle high-speed railway will open (in 2015), Weimar will be disconnected from the German long-distance train network.
Over the centuries, Weimar remained a small town of less than 5,000 inhabitants.
The slogan ''Jedem das Seine'' ("to each his own") was placed over the camp's main entrance gate.
The city itself is divided into 10 inner urban and 11 suburban districts.
File:Die Jakobskirche in Weimar.jpg|St.
In 1930, Wilhelm Frick became minister for internal affairs and education in Thuringia, the first NSDAP minister in Germany.
Suburbanization played only a small role in Weimar.
File:Weimar Stadtkirche Peter Pa.jpg|St.
In 1933, the first Concentration Camps were established around Weimar in Nohra (the first one in Germany) and Bad Sulza.
During the interwar period, the new capital of Thuringia saw a population boom, which led to 65,000 inhabitants in 1940.
Winters are relatively cold with average high temperatures of  and lows of .
The Protestant Reformation was introduced in Weimar in 1525; Martin Luther stayed several times in the city.
The European Council of Ministers selected the city as European Capital of Culture for 1999.
The period from the start of the regencies of Anna Amalia (1758–1775) and her son Carl August (1775–1828) through to Goethe's death in 1832 is denoted as the "golden" or the "classical" age because of the high level of cultural activity in Weimar.
During the 1930s, the barracks in Weimar was greatly extended.
The Bauhaus in Weimar lasted from 1919 to 1925, when it moved to Dessau, after the newly elected right-wing Thuringian council put pressure on the School by withdrawing funding and forcing its teachers to quit.
The court and its staff brought some wealth to the city, so that it saw a first construction boom in the 16th century.
From 1945 to 1950, the Soviet Union used the occupied Buchenwald concentration camp as a NKVD special camp to imprison defeated Nazis and other Germans.
Both connect points of tourist interest, the first along the Ilm valley from Thuringian Forest to Saale river and second near to medieval Via Regia from Eisenach via Gotha, Erfurt, Weimar and Jena to Altenburg.
Today, there are many small and medium-sized companies in Weimar with electro-technics and engineering in focus.
Furthermore, there are three regular Gymnasiums, the ''Musikgymnasium Schloss Belvedere'', an elite boarding school with focus on music, and the Thuringia International School with an international (and foreign language) curriculum.
It is located between Erfurt in the west and Jena in the east, approximately  southwest of Leipzig,  north of Nuremberg and  west of Dresden.
Bike renting is offered in city centre.
Outbildings of the ducal residence are the ''Husarenstall'' (1770), the later residence of Charlotte von Stein at Ackerwand street, the ''Marstall'' (1870s) at Kegelplatz, today used as Thuringian State Archive and the ''Reithaus'' (1710s) within the ''Park an der Ilm''.
This Gauforum, designed by Hermann Giesler, was the only Nazi governmental building completed outside Berlin (though there were plans for all German state capitals).
Nevertheless, settlement of new factories isn't much in focus of the local government, because it concentrates itself on developing tourism and services.
File:Schloss Tiefurt.JPG|Schloss Tiefurt
The city's main church is the evangelical St. Peter and Paul at Herderplatz (also known as ''Herderkirche'').
Nevertheless, the regional influence of the Weimar counts was declining as the influence of the Wettins in Thuringia increased.
As early as the 19th century, the curation of Weimar and its heritage started.
The period in German history from 1919 to 1933 is commonly referred to as the Weimar Republic, as the Republic's constitution was drafted here.
Due to the official atheism in former GDR, most of the population is non-religious.
After the reunification, the educational system was realigned.
The ''Green Castle'' next to the Fürstenhaus was built in the 1560s in Renaissance style and hosts today the Duchess Anna Amalia Library.
After 1990, suburbanization occurred for a short time and the rural districts of Weimar saw significant growth.
File:Herz-Jesu-Kirche Weimar2.JPG|Sacred Heart Church
Over one million volumes were housed in the library, of which forty to fifty thousand were damaged beyond repair.
It was built in 1862 as the funerary chapel of Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna and was one of the first Russian-styled buildings in Germany.
In 1948, the East German government declared Erfurt as Thuringia's new capital and Weimar lost its influence on German contemporary culture and politics.
On the other hand, the federal government started early in the 1990s to subsidize the foundation of new companies, but it took long time before the economic situation got stabilized around 2006.
When it became the capital of Saxe-Weimar in 1572, population growth was stimulated and population increased from 3,000 in 1650 to 6,000 in 1750.
A bypass road around Weimar was built in the 2000s in the north and west; the eastern and southern continuation are in discussion, but not in definite planning because of some difficulties in routing.
In freight transport exists an intermodal terminal in Vieselbach ''(Güterverkehrszentrum/GVZ)'' with connection to rail and Autobahn,  west of Weimar.
Interesting churches in the suburban districts are the Lutheran parish church of Gelmeroda, which was the inspiration for many paintings of Lyonel Feininger, and the Lutheran parish church of Oberweimar, which was a former monastery, and is a good example of Gothic architecture in Weimar.
File:Museum für Ur- und Frühgeschichte Thüringens (Westansicht).jpg|Museum für Ur- und Frühgeschichte Thüringens
File:Weimar, castello 06.JPG|Court of the Stadtschloss
There are several clubs with live music once or twice a week.
The city ended up in the Soviet zone of occupation, so US troops were soon replaced by Soviet forces.
Differing from the national average, the biggest groups of migrants in Weimar are Vietnamese people, Russians and Ukrainians.
The birth surplus was +3 in 2012, this is +0.0 per 1,000 inhabitants (Thuringian average: −4.5; national average: −2.4).
In 1842, Franz Liszt moved to Weimar to become the Grand Ducal court conductor.
Since that time, the population levels have stagnated.
The Buchenwald concentration camp provided slave labour for local industry (arms manufacturer ''Wilhelm-Gustloff-Werk'').
During the late 19th and early 20th century, Weimar grew in all directions.
Berlin as the capital was considered too dangerous for the National Assembly to use as a meeting place, because of its street rioting after the 1918 German Revolution.
The oldest records regarding Weimar date to 899.
The ''Yellow Castle'' at Grüner Markt was built in 1703 and is the municipal library today.
This was the beginning of academic arts education in Weimar.
Other flights are carried out via Frankfurt Airport, which can be reached in 3 hours, and prospective via Berlin Brandenburg Airport, which is scheduled to open in 2017 and is accessible within 3 hours.
*Oberweimar/Ehringsdorf (1922)
As the ruler returned from captivity, Weimar became his residence in 1552 and remained as such until the end of the monarchy in 1918.
Weimar is located at the Bundesautobahn 4 (Frankfurt–Dresden).
The castle and the walls were finished in the 16th century, making Weimar into a full city.
File:Weimar Grünes Schloss (HAAB).jpg|Green Castle
Many buildings in Weimar today have influences from the Bauhaus period.
As the Ernestines lost the Schmalkaldic War in 1547, their capital Wittenberg went also to the Albertines, so that they needed a new residence.
The second old evangelical church of Weimar is St. James at Rollplatz, rebuilt in 1712 in Baroque style.
The municipal terrain is hilly; the height of the city centre in Ilm valley is approximately 200 m of elevation.
Annual precipitation is only  with moderate rainfall throughout the year.
After becoming part of the Wettin's territory in 1346, urban development improved.
Goethe's ''Elective Affinities'' (1809) is set around the city of Weimar.
Industry has never been dominant in Weimar, nevertheless there were several big factories from different sectors until 1990.
The tower and the Bastille building at its south-western edge are relics of older castles in this place.
The most important archives in Weimar are the ''Goethe- und Schiller-Archiv'' (member of UNESCO Memory of the World Programme) with focus on German literary history and the Thuringia Main State Archive with governmental documents from last 500 years.
For a small city, Weimar is well served by city bus routes, which also serve all of the annex towns and villages.
However, only one original Bauhaus building was constructed during 1919–1925, the Haus am Horn, now used for exhibitions and events on Bauhaus culture.
It was a foundation against Prussia's restrictive arts policy favouring Historicism instead of international Arts and Crafts and Art Nouveau.
Around the year 1800, Weimar had 7,000 inhabitants.
Weimar has a humid continental climate (Dfb) or an oceanic climate (''Cfb'') according to the Köppen climate classification system.
In 2004, a fire broke out at the Duchess Anna Amalia Library.
The liberal Saxe-Weimar constitution was brought into effect in 1816.
It occurred after the reunification for a short time in the 1990s, but most of the suburban areas were situated within the administrative city borders.
The most important regions of origin of Weimar migrants are rural areas of Thuringia, Saxony-Anhalt and Saxony as well as foreign countries like Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Hungary, Serbia, Romania and Bulgaria.
The Weimar settlement emerged around the count's wooden castle and two small churches dedicated to St Peter (which became later the main church), and to St James.
The eastern, central and western parts of the municipal territory are in agricultural use, whereas the Ettersberg and some southern areas are wooded.
However the regional train service will be augmented to connect Weimar with ICE-stops in Erfurt, Halle and Leipzig.
The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Weimar in April 1945, and the city surrendered to the US 80th Infantry Division on April 12, 1945.
Despite its medieval origin, there are only a few medieval buildings, many being destroyed by frequent fires throughout the city's history.
The most uptown areas are those right and left of the ''Park an der Ilm'' in the southeast, whereas the western and northern quarters are more basic and mixed with industrial areas in their outer parts.
The ''Fürstenhaus'' at Platz der Demokratie was the first parliament building in Weimar, established in the 1770s.
In 1846, Weimar was connected by the Thuringian Railway.
Between 1708 and 1717 Johann Sebastian Bach worked as the court's organist in Weimar.
Hence, the new small town was relatively marginal in a regional context, also due to the fact that it was situated far away from relevant trade routes like the Via Regia.
Liszt organized the premiere of Richard Wagner's Lohengrin (1850) in the city.
There is also a student club in the city centre which also features disco and live music events on Friday- and Saturday nights (Kasseturm).
The residents of Weimar were ordered to walk through Buchenwald, to see what had been happening so close to the city, as documented in Billy Wilder's film ''Death Mills''.
The city was the headquarters of the Soviet Union's 8th Guards Army as part of the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany.
Additionally, there are some theme routes like the Goethe cycle track and the Feininger cycle track.
Their number grew constantly over the years to 13,000 in 1850, 28,000 in 1900 and 35,000 at the beginning of World War I.
Richard Strauss worked in Weimar between 1889 and 1894 as second conductor in the acclaimed Staatskapelle Weimar (the court orchestra founded in 1491).
Like other eastern German cities, Weimar has only a small amount of foreign population: circa 4.0% are non-Germans by citizenship and overall 7.3% are migrants (according to 2011 EU census).
File:Belvedere weimar1.jpg|Schloss Belvedere, main building
Biking is getting more and more popular since the construction of quality cycle tracks began in the 1990s.
For inner city every-day traffic exist some cycle lanes along several main streets.
Weimar is situated within the valley of Ilm river, a tributary of Saale river on the southern border of the Thuringian Basin, a fertile agricultural area between the Harz mountains  in the north and the Thuringian Forest  in the southwest.
The biggest building constructed in this period was the ''Schloss'' as the residence of the dukes (north and east wing: 1789–1803, west wing 1832–1835, south wing: 1913–1914).
An hourly bus route serves the Buchenwald Memorial and oldtimer buses go in city's historical centre.
File:Weimar Fürstenhaus 2012.jpg|Fürstenhaus
Archaeological finds dating back to the Thuringii epoch (3rd to 6th centuries) show that the Weimar part of the Ilm valley was settled early, with a tight network of settlements where the city is today.
The Weimar Republic era was marked by a constant conflict between "progressive" forces and right wing forces, the former represented by Harry Graf Kessler and the latter Adolf Bartels in Weimar.
Other Giesler buildings are the "Villa Sauckel", the Governor's palace and the "Hotel Elephant" in the city centre.
Trolleybus service started in 1948 and was ceased in 1993.
The historic city centre of Weimar is situated between the Ilm river in the east, Grabenstraße in the north, Goetheplatz and Theaterplatz in the west and Schillerstraße in the south.
After reunification, nearly all factories got closed, either because they failed the adoption of free market economy or because the German government sold them to west German businessmen who closed them to avoid competition to their own enterprises.
The Weimar Synagogue was destroyed in 1938.
The city centre was partially damaged by US Air Force bombing in 1945 with some 1,800 people killed and many historic buildings destroyed.
Finally, there are the Plattenbau settlements, constructed during the GDR period, ''Weststadt'' and ''Nordstadt'' as well as two industrial areas in the north and west.
The neighbouring ''Red Castle'' is also part of the library and was built in the 1570s.
The majority of buildings in these areas are also of 17th- and 18th-century origin.
In 1919, Walter Gropius founded the Bauhaus School by a merger of the Weimar Saxon-Grand Ducal Art School with the Kunstgewerbeschule Weimar.
File:Rotes Schloss in Weimar.jpg|Red Castle
A number of books were shock-frozen in Leipzig to save them from rotting.
File:Russ orthodoxe kirche we2.JPG|Russian-Orthodox Chapel
However, the political history of 20th-century Weimar was inconsistent: it was the place where Germany's first democratic constitution was signed after the First World War, giving its name to the Weimar Republic period in German politics (1918–33), as well as one of the cities mythologized by the National Socialist propaganda.
Its two central squares are the Marktplatz in the south (with the town hall) and the Herderplatz in the north (with the main church).
20.3% are members of the Evangelical Church in Central Germany and 6.1% are Catholics (according to 2011 EU census).
Besides, the territorial partitions led to the loss of political importance of the dukes of Saxe-Weimar and their finances shrunk.
The time after Goethe's death is denoted as the "silver" age because Weimar remained an influential cultural centre.
The Duchess Anna Amalia Library hosts books and documents of German literary and cultural history.
In 1897, Friedrich Nietzsche moved to Weimar and died here in 1900.
In 1932, the NSDAP came to power in Thuringia under Fritz Sauckel.
During recent years, the economic situation of the city improved: the unemployment rate declined from 20% in 2005 to 8% in 2013.
Stalls typically offer onion plaits, themed arts and crafts and numerous onion-based foods, including onion cakes, onion soups and onion breads.
The Wettins fostered Weimar by abolishing socage and granting privileges to the citizens.
Today, there are long-distance trains to Frankfurt via Erfurt and Fulda and to Dresden via Leipzig and regional trains to Göttingen and Eisenach via Erfurt, to Halle via Naumburg, to Altenburg, Glauchau, Zwickau and Greiz via Jena and Gera and to Kranichfeld.
The biggest one is the ''Stadtschloss'' at Burgplatz in the city centre.
Weimar is well known because of its large cultural heritage and its importance in German history.
Due to that fact, the city experienced another period of growth.
The net migration rate was +4.5 per 1,000 inhabitants in 2012 (Thuringian average: -0.8; national average: +4.6).
The settlement around St James Church developed into a suburb during the 13th century.
The library is one of the oldest in Europe, dating back to 1691, and is listed as a UNESCO world heritage site.
Most prisoners at this time were communists and social democrats.
