Ludendorf and Hindenburg soon proclaimed that it was the defeatism of the civilian population that had made defeat inevitable.
A Soviet republic was declared in Munich, but was quickly put down by ''Freikorps'' and remnants of the regular army.
In 1924, a modern public assistance programme was introduced, and in 1925 the accident insurance programme was reformed, allowing diseases that were linked to certain kinds of work to become insurable risks.
Hitler learned from Papen that the general had not received from Hindenburg the authority to abolish the ''Reichstag'' parliament, whereas any majority of seats did.
''Gleichschaltung'' is usually translated as "coordination", but sometimes as "forcible coordination".
Meanwhile, Hitler's promised written guarantee to Monsignor Kaas was being typed up, it was asserted to Kaas, and thereby Kaas was persuaded to silently deliver the Centre bloc's votes for the Enabling Act anyway.
The Nazi party then supplanted the Social Democrats as the largest party in the ''Reichstag'', although it did not gain a majority.
This made him dependent on the ''Reichspräsident'', Hindenburg.
In 1929, the onset of the depression in the United States of America produced a severe shock wave in Germany.
Von Papen as Vice Chancellor was intended to be the "''éminence grise''" who would keep Hitler under control, using his close personal connection to Hindenburg.
The major weakness in constitutional terms was the inherent instability of the coalitions.
At the same time, in 1920, the districts of Eupen and Malmedy were transferred to Belgium (see German-Speaking Community of Belgium).
The 1949 Constitution of East Germany (officially, the German Democratic Republic) contained many passages that were originally part of the 1919 constitution.
Stinnes made sure that he was paid in dollars, which meant that by mid-1923, his industrial empire was worth more than the entire German economy.
He explained that a deflation causes a decline of profits, asset prices and a still greater decline in the net worth of businesses.
The economic stagnation led to increased demands on Germany to repay the debts owed to the United States.
In eastern provinces, forces loyal to Germany's fallen Monarchy fought the republic, while militias of Polish nationalists fought for independence: Great Poland Uprising in Provinz Posen and three Silesian Uprisings in Upper Silesia.
It was dissolved by the Allies on 23 May.
They wanted a renewed Germany and a new organisation of German society.
Although the new government was confirmed by the Berlin worker and soldier council, it was opposed by the Spartacist League.
On 11 November, an armistice was signed at Compiègne by German representatives.
The immediate question was what part the now large Nazi Party would play in the Government of the country.
The first German Confederal Navy (''Reichsflotte'') (1848–1852) had proudly deployed a naval ensign based on Schwarz-Rot-Gold, the Weimar republic navy, or ''Reichsmarine'' (1918–1933) insisted on using the pre-1918 colours of the previous Kaiserliche Marine (1871–1918), which were Black-White-Red, as did the German merchant marine.
The Reichstag fire on 27 February was blamed by Hitler's government on the Communists.
The Council issued a large number of decrees that radically shifted German policies.
Germany was particularly affected because it depended heavily on American loans.
Stresemann's reforms did not relieve the underlying weaknesses of Weimar but gave the appearance of a stable democracy.
This Act would, and did, lead Hitler and the NSDAP toward his goal of unfettered dictatorial powers.
The fall of the Munich Soviet Republic to these units, many of which were situated on the extreme right, resulted in the growth of far-right movements and organisations in Bavaria, including Organisation Consul, the Nazi Party, and societies of exiled Russian Monarchists.
The passage of the Enabling Act of 1933 is widely considered to mark the end of the Weimar Republic and the beginning of the Nazi era.
The Republic was soon under attack from both left- and right-wing sources.
Other foreign achievements were the evacuation of the Ruhr in 1925 and the 1925 Treaty of Berlin, which reinforced the Treaty of Rapallo in 1922 and improved relations between the Soviet Union and Germany.
On 7 November, the revolution had reached Munich, resulting in King Ludwig III of Bavaria fleeing.
Most German capitalists and landowners originally supported the conservative experiment more from the belief that conservatives would best serve their interests rather than any particular liking for Brüning.
From November 1918 to January 1919, Germany was governed by the "Council of the People's Deputies", under the leadership of Ebert and Haase.
Otto Wels, the leader of the Social Democrats, whose seats were similarly depleted from 120 to below 100, was the only speaker to defend democracy and in a futile but brave effort to deny Hitler the ⅔ majority, he made a speech critical of the abandonment of democracy to dictatorship.
Various improvements were also made in unemployment benefits, although in June 1920 the maximum amount of unemployment benefit that a family of four could receive in Berlin, 90 marks, was well below the minimum cost of subsistence of 304 marks.
The Great Depression, exacerbated by Brüning's policy of deflation, led to a surge in unemployment.
In April 1932, Brüning had actively supported Hindenburg's successful campaign against Hitler for re-election as ''Reichspräsident''; five weeks later, on 20 May 1932, he had lost Hindenburg's support and duly resigned as ''Reichskanzler''.
However, as right wing as the army was, it hesitated to assist the Nazis, whom they mostly viewed as thugs.
Even those who supported Hitler's appointment often did not support all of Nazism and considered Hitler a temporary solution in their efforts to abolish the Republic.
In the next five years, the central government, assured of the support of the Reichswehr, dealt severely with the occasional outbreaks of violence in Germany's large cities.
Meanwhile, the currency depreciated.
Like the Nazis the Consul was founded by the Freikorps.
Paul von Hindenburg became ''Reichspräsident'' in 1925.
Friedrich Ebert initially declared the official German coat of arms to be a design by Emil Doepler (shown in the infobox above) as of 12 November 1919, following a decision of the German government.
The left claimed that the Social Democrats had betrayed the ideals of the revolution, while the army and the government-financed ''Freikorps'' committed hundreds of acts of gratuitous violence against striking workers.
The Communist, Social Democrat and Catholic Centre votes stood firm.
The 6 November 1932 elections yielded 33.1% for the Nazis, two million voters fewer than in the previous election.
Shortly after the Locarno Treaties were signed.
On 13 March 1920, 12,000 ''Freikorps'' soldiers occupied Berlin and installed Wolfgang Kapp (a right-wing journalist) as chancellor (Kapp Putsch).
A national assembly was convened in Weimar, where a new constitution for the ''Deutsches Reich'' was written, and adopted on 11 August 1919.
Two hours later, a "Free Socialist Republic" was proclaimed,  away, at the ''Berliner Stadtschloss''.
Under the Locarno Treaties, Germany accepted the western borders of the republic, but continued to dispute the Eastern border.
This was intended to forestall any action against the government by the Communists.
As Brüning had no majority support in the ''Reichstag'', he became, through the use of the emergency powers granted to the ''Reichspräsident'' (Article 48) by the constitution, the first Weimar chancellor to operate independently of parliament.
He now blamed Germany's problems on the Communists, even threatening their lives on March 3.
While the official reparations were considerable, Germany ended up paying only a fraction of them.
At the time, the Socialist movement which represented mostly laborers was split among two major left-wing parties: the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD), which called for immediate peace negotiations and favored a soviet-style command economy, and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) also known as "Majority" Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD), which supported the war effort and favoured a parliamentary system.
In response, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr region, Germany's most productive industrial region at the time, taking control of most mining and manufacturing companies in January 1923.
No aircraft of any kind was allowed.
During the debates in Weimar, fighting continued.
In 1919, one loaf of bread cost 1 mark; by 1923, the same loaf of bread cost 100 billion marks.
Most Germans thought the Treaty of Versailles was a punishing and degrading document because it forced them to surrender resource-rich areas and pay massive amounts of compensation.
After a bill to reform the Reich's finances was opposed by the ''Reichstag'', it was made an emergency decree by Hindenburg.
The first challenge to the Weimar Republic came when a group of communists and anarchists took over the Bavarian government in Munich and declared the creation of the Bavarian Soviet Republic.
The powers of the Länder (states) were transferred to the central government, rendering the ''Reichsrat'' obsolete.
In October 1918, the constitution of the German Empire was reformed to introduce a parliamentary system similar to the British, but this soon became obsolete.
In the early post-war years, inflation was growing at an alarming rate, but the government simply printed more currency to pay debts.
This policy did not prove successful either.
His friend and socialist liberal Democrat Party colleague Walther Rathenau was assassinated, just like Matthias Erzberger before him, by right-wing assassin squads Organization Consul.
A code of January 1919 bestowed upon land-labourers the same legal rights that industrial workers enjoyed, while a bill ratified that same year obliged the States to set up agricultural settlement associations which, as noted by Volker Berghahn, "were endowed with the priority right of purchase of farms beyond a specified size."
The decisive blow came with the entry of the United States into the conflict, which made its vast industrial resources available to the beleaguered Allies.
It caused many Germans to identify the Republic with cuts in social spending and extremely liberal economics.
Debate continues as to whether this policy was without alternative: some argue that the Allies would not in any circumstances have allowed a devaluation of the ''Reichsmark'', while others point to the Hoover Moratorium as a sign that the Allies understood that the situation had changed fundamentally and further German reparation payments were impossible.
The people of Germany blamed the Weimar Republic rather than their wartime leaders for the country's defeat and for the humiliating terms of the Treaty of Versailles.
Gustav Noske, a self-appointed military expert in the MSPD, was sent to Kiel to prevent any further unrest and took on the task of controlling the mutinous sailors and their supporters in the Kiel barracks.
During the Kapp Putsch for example, the army refused to fire upon the rebels.
Conservatives and reactionaries feared that Germany was betraying her traditional values by adopting popular styles from abroad, particularly those Hollywood was popularizing in American films, while New York became the global capital of fashion.
Eyeing the Catholic Centre Party's 70 (plus 20 BVP) seats, Hitler refused their leader's demands for constitutional "concessions" (amounting to protection) and planned for dissolution of the ''Reichstag''.
The Catholic Centre party, Zentrum favoured the term "Deutscher Volksstaat" (''"German People's State"'') while on the moderate left the Chancellor's SPD preferred "Deutsche Republik" (''"German Republic"'').
The provisions of Articles 136, 137, 138, 139 and 141 of the German Constitution of 11 August 1919 shall be an integral part of this Basic Law.
Likewise, American progressive architects were admired.
...&nbsp;many organisations showed themselves only too willing to anticipate the ''Gleichschaltung'' process and to "coordinate" themselves in accordance with the expectations of the new era.
This led to further criticism of the Republic.
Although some saw Hitler as a means to abolish the latter, the Republic was already unstable before any industry leaders were supporting Hitler.
The party's membership had increased to 2.5 million, from about 900,000 at the end of January.
Because the production costs in Germany were falling almost hourly, the prices for German products were unbeatable.
Kaas is also reported as voicing the Holy See's desire for Hitler as bulwark against atheistic Russian nihilism previously as early as May 1932.
On 20 March, negotiation began between Hitler and Frick on one side and the Catholic Centre Party (''Zentrum'') leaders—Kaas, Stegerwald and Hackelsburger on the other.
According to the cliché, modern young women were Americanised, wearing makeup, short hair, smoking and breaking with traditional mores.
Before the March 1933 elections, Hitler had persuaded Hindenburg to promulgate the Reichstag Fire Decree using Article 48, which empowered the government to restrict "the rights of habeas corpus ... freedom of the press, the freedom to organise and assemble, the privacy of postal, telegraphic and telephonic communications" and legalised search warrants and confiscation "beyond legal limits otherwise prescribed".
In 1933, the American economist Irving Fisher developed the theory of debt deflation.
In 1926, Germany was admitted to the League of Nations as a permanent member, improving her international standing and giving her the ability to vote League of Nations legislation.
However, the Weimar Republic government successfully reformed the currency, unified tax policies, and organized the railway system.
His primary goal was to remove Germany's reparation payments by convincing the Allies that they could no longer be paid.
Benefits for the sick, invalid and pensioners were also reduced sharply.
It is a compound word, consisting of ''gleich'', meaning ''alike'', and ''schaltung'', which means ''switching''.
The actual total payout from 1920 to 1931 (when payments were suspended indefinitely) was 20 billion German gold marks, worth about $5 billion US dollars or £1 billion British pounds.
With the affirmation of Ebert, those responsible were not tried before a court martial, leading to lenient sentences, which made Ebert unpopular among radical leftists.
Hitler promised that the Act did not threaten the existence of either the ''Reichstag'' or the ''Reichsrat'', that the authority of the President remained untouched and that the ''Länder'' would not be abolished.
In January, the Spartacist League and others in the streets of Berlin made more armed attempts to establish communism, known as the Spartacist uprising.
At this, Hitler could no longer restrain his wrath.
'''Weimar Republic''' ( ) is an unofficial designation for the German state between 1919 and 1933.
Princeton historian Harold James argues that there was a clear link between economic decline and people turning to extremist politics.
Even so, German Foreign Office official Harry Graf Kessler had predicted as early as February 1919 that the Republic was doomed.
The power takeover was achieved everywhere without loss of life.
Many prominent intellectuals allied themselves with the new government: the country's most famous philosopher, Martin Heidegger and its most prominent constitutional scholar, Carl Schmitt, spoke in favour of it, and Heidegger became the sponsor of a manifesto of German professors pledging allegiance to "Adolf Hitler and the National Socialist State".
Measures with an appearance of legality suppressed the Communist Party in mid-February and included the plainly illegal arrests of ''Reichstag'' deputies.
The SA was the ''Reichswehr's'' main opponent throughout its existence, as they saw them as a threat to their existence, and the army fired at them during the Beerhall Putsch.
The Republic's first ''Reichspräsident'' ("Reich President"), Friedrich Ebert of the SPD, signed the new German constitution into law on 11 August 1919.
Hitler served less than eight months in a comfortable cell, receiving a daily stream of visitors before his release on 20 December 1924.
In addition, a supplementary directive of December 1918 specified that female (and child) workers were entitled to a fifteen-minute break if they worked between four and six hours, thirty minutes for workdays lasting six to eight hours, and one hour for longer days.
On 5 June, the Allied Berlin Declaration stated in its preamble that the Allies assumed supreme authority with respect to Germany, including all the powers possessed by the German Government... and any state, municipal, or local government or authority.
In his retort to Wels, Hitler abandoned earlier pretence at calm statesmanship and delivered a characteristic screaming diatribe, promising to exterminate all Communists in Germany and threatening Wels' Social Democrats as well.
The Imperial Youth Welfare Act of 1922 obliged all municipalities and states to set up youth offices in charge of child protection, and also codified a right to education for all children, while laws were passed to regulate rents and increase protection for tenants in 1922 and 1923.
The Nazi efforts to "co-ordinate" the Christian churches (both Roman Catholic and Protestant) were mostly unsuccessful, and were largely abandoned.
Military-industrial activity had almost ceased, although controlled demobilisation kept unemployment at around one million.
Kaas, the party's chairman since 1928, had strong connections to the Vatican Secretary of State, later Pope Pius XII.
On 15 March, the first cabinet meeting was attended by the two coalition parties, representing a minority in the ''Reichstag'': The Nazis and the DNVP led by Alfred Hugenberg (288 + 52 seats).
On 30 December, the split deepened when the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) was formed out of a number of radical left-wing groups, including the left wing of the USPD and the "Spartacist League" group.
In return for pledging his support for the act, Kaas would use his connections with the Vatican to set in train and draft the Holy See's long desired ''Reichskonkordat'' with Germany (only possible with the co-operation of the Nazis).
Most historians agree that many industrial leaders identified the Weimar Republic with labour unions and the Social Democrats, who had established the Versailles concessions.
As the Weimar Republic was very fragile in all its existence, the depression was devastating, and played a major role in the NSDAP's takeover.
By late summer 1918 the German reserves were exhausted while fresh American troops arrived in France at the rate of 10,000 a day.
At the ''Reichstag'' elections, which took place on 5 March 1933, the NSDAP obtained 17 million votes.
It amounted to German capitulation, without any concessions by the Allies; the naval blockade would continue until complete peace terms were agreed.
By the end of the year, over two hundred factories were working full-time to produce paper for the spiralling bank note production.
From the 28th of June 1919, health insurance committees became elected by workers themselves.
Whether there were alternatives to this policy during the Great Depression is an open question.
Retreat and defeat were at hand, and the Army told the Kaiser to abdicate for it could no longer support him.
The rest was goods like coal and chemicals, or from assets like railway equipment.
On 29 January, Hitler and Papen thwarted a last-minute threat of an officially sanctioned ''Reichswehr'' takeover, and on 30 January 1933 Hindenburg accepted the new Papen-Nationalist-Hitler coalition, with the Nazis holding only three of eleven Cabinet seats: Hitler as Chancellor, Wilhelm Frick as Minister of the Interior and Hermann Göring as Minister Without Portfolio.
Many of the new buildings built during this era followed a straight-lined, geometrical style.
In mid-1931, the United Kingdom abandoned the gold standard and about 30 countries (the sterling bloc) devalued their currencies, making their goods around 20% cheaper than those produced by Germany.
Prior to World War I, the constituent states of the German Empire were 22 smaller monarchies, three republican city-states and the Imperial territory of Alsace-Lorraine.
The administrations of Chancellors Brüning, Papen, Schleicher and, from 30 January to 23 March 1933, Hitler governed through presidential decree rather than through parliamentary consultation.
The hitherto Presidential Dictatorship hereby was to give itself a new legal form.
The consequent general election on 14 September resulted in an enormous political shift within the ''Reichstag'': 18.3% of the vote went to the NSDAP, five times the percentage won in 1928.
Because most parties opposed the new government, Papen had the ''Reichstag'' dissolved and called for new elections.
The sailors and soldiers, inexperienced in matters of revolutionary combat, welcomed him as an experienced politician and allowed him to negotiate a settlement, thus defusing the initial anger of the revolutionaries in uniform.
Bloody street fights culminated in the beating and shooting deaths of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht after their arrests on 15 January.
Only during the 1930s did the term of expression become mainstream, both within and outside Germany.
The radical left accused the ruling Social Democrats of having betrayed the ideals of the workers' movement by preventing a communist revolution and sought to overthrow the Republic and do so themselves.
Housing construction was also greatly accelerated during the Weimar period, with over 2 million new homes constructed between 1924 and 1931 and a further 195,000 modernised.
The rebels were campaigning for an extension of the plans to nationalise major industries and supported the national government, but the SPD leaders did not want to lend support to the growing USPD, who favoured the establishment of a socialist regime.
This government was expected to assure itself of the co-operation of Hitler.
Historian Sally Marks says the 112 billion marks in "C bonds" were entirely chimerical—a device to fool the public into thinking Germany would pay much more.
Although Hindenburg disliked Hugenberg and despised Hitler, he was no less a supporter of the sort of anti-democratic counter-revolution that the DNVP and NSDAP represented.
By 1923, the Republic claimed it could no longer afford the reparations payments required by the Versailles Treaty, and the government defaulted on some payments.
However, this progress was funded by overseas loans, increasing the nation's debts, while overall trade increased and unemployment fell.
The Allies permitted only low import levels of goods that most Germans could not afford.
Meetings of the left-wing parties were banned and even some of the moderate parties found their members threatened and assaulted.
This guarantee was not ultimately given.
The MSPD decided to make use of their support at the grassroots and put themselves at the front of the movement, demanding that Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicate.
That same year, health insurance was extended to wives and daughters without own income, people only partially capable of gainful employment, people employed in private cooperatives, and people employed in public cooperatives.
In the debate prior to the vote on the Enabling Act, Hitler orchestrated the full political menace of his paramilitary forces like the storm division in the streets to intimidate reluctant ''Reichstag'' deputies into approving the Enabling Act.
Although technically in service of the republic, the army was predominantly officered by conservative reactionaries who were sympathetic to right-wing organisations.
Thus, the USPD left the "Council of the People's Deputies" after only seven weeks.
However, the reparations damaged Germany's economy by discouraging market loans, which forced the Weimar government to finance its deficit by printing more currency, causing rampant hyperinflation.
During an adjournment, the other parties (notably the Centre) met to discuss their intentions.
On the evening of 10 May, under the leadership of the German Students' Association and without substantial protest by the university faculties, some 20,000 volumes were burned at Berlin's Opernplatz.
The Reichswehr adopted the new Reichswappen in 1927.
Following the death of Hindenburg in 1934, the constitution was largely forgotten, with some minor exceptions.
After meeting with Centre leader Monsignor Ludwig Kaas and other Centre Trade Union leaders daily and denying them a substantial participation in the government, negotiation succeeded in respect of guarantees towards Catholic civil-servants and education issues.
Hitler is recorded at the Nuremberg Trials as being sure of eventual Centre Party Germany capitulation and thus rejecting of the DNVP's suggestions to "balance" the majority through further arrests, this time of Social Democrats.
As more of the working and middle classes turned against Brüning, however, more of the capitalists and landowners declared themselves in favour of his opponents Hitler and Hugenberg.
The repression of an uprising of SPD supporters by the reactionary forces in the ''Freikorps'' on the instructions of the SPD ministers was to become a major source of conflict within the socialist movement and thus contributed to the weakening of the only group that could have withstood the National Socialist movement.
Privates were mainly recruited from the countryside, as it was believed that young men from cities were prone to socialist behaviour, which would fray the loyalty of the privates to their conservative officers.
Shortly after, France completely occupied the Rhineland, strictly controlling all important industrial areas.
The NSDAP was thought of as the generator, and other civil groups as motors wired to it.
Innovative street theatre brought plays to the public, and the cabaret scene and jazz band became very popular.
Hitler and the Nazis exploited the German state's broadcasting and aviation facilities in a massive attempt to sway the electorate, but this election yielded a scant majority of 16 seats for the coalition.
Weimar Germany eliminated most of the requirements of the Treaty of Versailles; it never completely met its disarmament requirements, and eventually paid only a small portion of the war reparations (by twice restructuring its debt through the Dawes Plan and the Young Plan).
These signs had remained symbols of the Paulskirche movement.
Hindenburg, despite his misgivings about the Nazis' goals and about Hitler as a personality, reluctantly agreed to Papen's theory that, with Nazi popular support on the wane, Hitler could now be controlled as Chancellor.
By early February, a mere week after Hitler's assumption of the chancellorship, the government had begun to clamp down on the opposition.
When stocks on the New York Stock Exchange crashed in October, the inevitable knock-on effects on the German economy brought the "Golden Twenties" to an abrupt end.
The former Ernestine duchies continued briefly as republics before merging to form the state of Thuringia in 1920, except for Saxe-Coburg, which became part of Bavaria.
The Enabling Act did not specify any recourse that could be taken if the chancellor violated Article 2, and no judicial challenge ensued.
The decree invoked Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution and "indefinitely suspended" a number of constitutional protections of civil liberties, allowing the Nazi government to take swift action against political meetings, arresting and killing the Communists.
Former Chancellor Heinrich Brüning proclaimed that his Centre Party would resist any constitutional change and appealed to the President for an investigation of the ''Reichstag'' fire.
The national government fled to Stuttgart and called for a general strike against the putsch.
A rift developed between the MSPD and USPD after Ebert called upon the OHL (supreme army command) for troops to put down a mutiny by a leftist military unit on 23/24 December 1918, in which members of the ''Volksmarinedivision'' had captured the city's garrison commander Otto Wels and occupied the ''Reichskanzlei'' where the "Council of the People's Deputies" was situated.
The Provisional Order of January 1919 concerning agricultural labour conditions fixed 2,900 hours as a maximum per year, distributed as eight, ten, and eleven hours per day in four-monthly periods.
The 3,000 rebels were thwarted by the Bavarian authorities.
On 22 January, Hitler's efforts to persuade Oskar von Hindenburg, the President's son and confidant, included threats to bring criminal charges over estate taxation irregularities at the President's Neudeck estate; although  extra were soon allotted to Hindenburg's property.
The process of ''Gleichschaltung'' was often voluntary, or in any event not mandated by a formal decree.
Sporadic fighting continued to flare up around the country.
The economy was supported by the granting of loans through the Dawes Plan (1924) and the Young Plan (1929).
To ensure his fledgling government maintained control over the country, Ebert made an agreement with the OHL, now led by Ludendorff's successor General Wilhelm Groener.
The republicans took up the idea of the German Coat of Arms established by the Paulskirche movement, using the same charge animal, an eagle, in the same colours (black, red and gold), but modernising its form, including a reduction of the heads from two to one.
The Treaty of Versailles limited the size of the ''Reichswehr'' to 100,000 soldiers (consisting of seven infantry divisions and three cavalry divisions), 10 armoured cars and a navy (the ''Reichsmarine'') restricted to 36 ships in active service.
The euphoria surrounding Josephine Baker in the metropolis of Berlin for instance, where she was declared an "erotic goddess" and in many ways admired and respected, kindled further "ultramodern" sensations in the minds of the German public.
The four great political movements, the SPD, Communists, Centre, and the Nazis were in opposition.
Since the Republicans were not yet ready to take action, the Communists did not want to support the republic, and the Conservatives had shot their political bolt, Hitler and Hugenberg were certain to achieve power.
Because of the Nazis' narrow majority in the ''Reichstag'', Centre's support was necessary to receive the required two-thirds majority vote.
No single reason can explain the failure of the Weimar Republic.
By the time the formal decree banned the creation of new parties, there were none left except the Nazis.
The new ''Reichswehr'' armed forces, limited by the Treaty of Versailles to 100,000 army soldiers and 15,000 sailors, remained fully under the control of the German officer class, despite their nominal re-organisation.
