In May 2009, one windstorm left about 2500 residents without power for several hours.
The Museum of Wellington City & Sea in the Bond Store is in the Second French Empire style, and the Wellington Harbor Board Wharf Office Building is in a late English Classical style.
Wellington is home to Te Papa (the Museum of New Zealand), the National Library of New Zealand, Archives New Zealand, Wellington Museum, the Katherine Mansfield Birthplace Museum, Colonial Cottage, the New Zealand Cricket Museum, the Cable Car Museum, the Reserve Bank Museum, Old St Paul's, and the Wellington City Art Gallery.
It also plays host to the annual World of Wearable Arts, the Wellington Sevens, New Zealand Symphony Orchestra and the Royal New Zealand Ballet.
It is more densely populated than most other cities in New Zealand due to the restricted amount of land that is available between its harbour and the surrounding hills.
Other visual art galleries include the City Gallery.
Wellington City had the largest population of the four cities with 190,956 people, followed by Lower Hutt, Porirua and Upper Hutt.
Two long-distance services leave from Wellington: the Capital Connection, for commuters from Palmerston North, and the Northern Explorer to Auckland.
The city is also home to the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra and the Internationally renowned men's A Cappella chorus Vocal FX.
'''Total four cities'''
Only Matiu/Somes Island is large enough for habitation.
In the middle of 2009 house prices had dropped, interest rates were low, and buy-to-let property investment was again looking attractive, particularly in the Lambton precinct, according to these two reporters.
Wellington is home to groups that perform Improvised Theatre and Improvisational comedy, including Wellington Improvisation Troupe (WIT) an Improvisors and youth group, Joe Improv.
The long-term domestic marketing strategy was a finalist in the 2011 CAANZ Media Awards.
With a latitude of 41° 17' South, Wellington is the southernmost capital city in the world.
During July 2013 there were many earthquakes, mostly in Cook Strait near Seddon.
Statistics New Zealand (2013 Census)
In the year ending March 2011, there were 6495 conference events involving nearly 800,000 delegate days; this injected approximately NZ$100&nbsp;million into the economy.
Combined, these five services carry 11.64&nbsp;million passengers per year.
Wellington has one of the country's highest turn-outs for the annual ''New Zealand International Film Festival''.
Massey University has a Wellington campus known as the "creative campus" and offers courses in communication and business, engineering and technology, health and well-being, and creative arts.
There are some other small generators in the region, but the total peak generation is only 165&nbsp;MW.
Te Papa Tongarewa (the Museum of New Zealand), the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra, the Royal New Zealand Ballet, Museum of Wellington and the biennial New Zealand International Arts Festival are all sited there.
Wellington International Airport is  south-east of the city centre.
It was first measured in 2003, and reappeared in 2008 and 2013.
Premier House, the official residence of the Prime Minister, is in Thorndon on Tinakori Road.
Wellington's status as capital is by constitutional convention rather than statute.
Sacred Heart Cathedral is a Palladian Revival Basilica with the Portico of a Roman or Greek temple.
There are agencies to assist film-makers with tasks such as securing permits and scouting locations.
Across the road is the largest wooden building in the Southern Hemisphere, part of the old Government Buildings which now houses part of Victoria University of Wellington's Law Faculty.
New Zealand visitors spend on average NZ$2.4&nbsp;million a day.
Several hundred minor fault lines have been identified within the urban area.
The maximum electricity demand is forecast to grow on average by 1.4% annually over the next 15 years, from 756&nbsp;MW in 2012 to 934&nbsp;MW by 2027, slightly lower than the national average demand growth of 1.7% per annum.
An increasing number of Wellingtonians profess no religious belief, with the most recent census in 2013 showing 44% in that category.
Wellington contains many iconic sculptures and structures, such as the Bucket Fountain in Cuba Street and ''Invisible City'' by Anton Parsons on Lambton Quay.
The city is home to experimental arts publication ''White Fungus''.
Wellington is home to the New Zealand Academy of Fine Arts and the Arts Foundation of New Zealand.
It is an important centre of the film and theatre industry, and second to Auckland in terms of numbers of screen industry businesses.
The 1996-restored Government Buildings near Parliament is the largest wooden building in the Southern Hemisphere.
Wellington is primarily surrounded by water, but some of near-by locations are listed below.
The city averages 2,059 hours of sunshine per year.
The Parliament of New Zealand had first met in Wellington on 7 July 1862, on a temporary basis; in November 1863, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Alfred Domett, placed a resolution before Parliament in Auckland that "... it has become necessary that the seat of government&nbsp;... should be transferred to some suitable locality in Cook Strait region."
The main airport serving the city and region is Wellington International Airport, which is the third biggest airport in the country and offers domestic flights as well as connections to Australia and the Pacific.
Wellington is also the world's windiest city, with an average windspeed of over 26&nbsp;km/h, and the world's southernmost capital city of a sovereign state.
It was probably the most powerful earthquake in recorded New Zealand history, with an estimated magnitude of at least 8.2 on the Moment magnitude scale.
A diesel-hauled carriage service, the Wairarapa Connection, connects several times daily to Masterton in the Wairarapa via the  long Rimutaka Tunnel.
Of all students, 56% were female and 44% male.
As the nation's centre of government, the New Zealand Parliament, Supreme Court and most of the civil service are all based in the city.
+ Wellington Region population by city and gender
The Learning Connexion provides art classes.
The week-long festival includes music and dance performances and the presentation of visual arts.
Emerging Kiwi film-makers, like Robert Sarkies, Taika Waititi, Costa Botes and Jennifer Bush-Daumec, are extending the Wellington-based lineage and cinematic scope.
The Wellington urban area comprises four cities: Wellington City, on the peninsula between Cook Strait and Wellington Harbour, contains the central business district and about half the population; Porirua on Porirua Harbour to the north is notable for its large Māori and Pacific Island communities; Lower Hutt and Upper Hutt are largely suburban areas to the northeast, together known as the Hutt Valley.
It is serviced by flights from across New Zealand, Fiji and to Australia.
Café culture is prominent.
On a clear day the snowcapped Kaikoura Ranges are visible to the south across the strait.
"For dishes that have a distinctly New Zealand style, there are lamb, pork and cervena (venison), salmon, crayfish (lobster), Bluff oysters, pāua (abalone), mussels, scallops, pipis and tuatua (both New Zealand shellfish); kumara (sweet potato); kiwifruit and tamarillo; and pavlova, the national dessert," recommends one tourism website.
The organisation's council funding comes through the Downtown Levy commercial rate.
The most common overseas birthplace is the United Kingdom, place of origin of 7.1% of the urban area's population.
Sometime Wellington directors Jane Campion and Geoff Murphy have reached the world's screens with their independent spirit.
Bus transport in Wellington is supplied by several different operators under the banner of Metlink.
For further information, see List of universities in New Zealand.
In recent years, tourism, arts and culture, film, and ICT have played a bigger role in the economy.
Old St Paul's is an example of 19th-century Gothic Revival architecture adapted to colonial conditions and materials, as is St Mary of the Angels.
Most (56%) owned their apartment; 42% rented (of renters, 16% paid NZ$351 to NZ$450 per week, 13% paid less and 15% paid more – only 3% paid more than NZ$651 per week).
The climate is temperate marine, (Köppen: ''Cfb '') is generally moderate all year round, and rarely sees temperatures above  or below .
From 1936 to 1992 Wellington was home to the National Art Gallery of New Zealand, when it was amalgamated into Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa.
The Wellington area has numerous primary and secondary schools.
Tourism is a major contributor to the economy, injecting approximately NZ$1.3&nbsp;billion into the region annually and accounting for 9% of total FTE employment.
Wellington's first piped water supply came from a spring in 1867.
It combined with Victoria University to create the New Zealand School of Music.
The narrow entrance to the harbour is to the east of the Miramar Peninsula, and contains the dangerous shallows of Barrett Reef, where many ships have been wrecked (notably the inter-island ferry  in 1968).
When that proved swampy and flood prone they transplanted the plans, which had been drawn without regard for the hilly terrain.
These are separate entities that share the building's facilities.
Restaurants offer cuisines including from Europe, Asia and Polynesia.
The largest international visitor market is Australia, with over 210,000 visitors spending approximately NZ$334&nbsp;million annually.
The city's arts centre, Toi Poneke, is a nexus of creative projects, collaborations, and multi-disciplinary production.
A major upgrade of the HVDC link commissioned in 2013 increased the capacity of the link from 700&nbsp;MW to 1,000&nbsp;MW from 2012, and 1,200&nbsp;MW from 2014.
Popular tourist attractions include Museum of Wellington City & Sea, Wellington Zoo, Zealandia and Wellington Cable Car.
Wellington is the major population centre of the southern North Island and is the administrative centre of the Wellington Region, which also includes the Kapiti Coast and Wairarapa.
The CBD is close to Lambton Harbour, an arm of Wellington Harbour, which lies along an active geological fault, clearly evident on its straight western shore.
Parliament officially met in Wellington for the first time on 26 July 1865.
Restaurants are either licensed to sell alcohol, BYO (bring your own), or unlicensed (no alcohol).
Greater Wellington Regional Council now supplies Lower Hutt, Porirua, Upper Hutt and Wellington with up to 220 million litres a day.
Several Commissioners invited from Australia, chosen for their neutral status, declared that Wellington was a suitable location because of its central location in New Zealand and good harbour.
Wellington is a popular conference tourism destination due to its compact nature, cultural attractions, award-winning restaurants and access to government agencies.
There is a network of bush walks and reserves maintained by the Wellington City Council and local volunteers.
The latter figure represented a significant decline from seven years earlier at the previous census, when over 50% of the population identified as Christian.
Households are primarily one-family, making up 66.9% of households, followed by single-person households (24.7%); there were fewer multiperson households and even fewer households containing two or more families.
Residents place their confidence in good building regulations, which became more stringent in the 20th century.
Wellington is served by State Highway 1 in the west and State Highway 2 in the east, meeting at the Ngauranga Interchange north of the city centre, where SH 1 runs through the city to the airport.
It is a conservation island, providing refuge for endangered species, much like Kapiti Island farther up the coast.
Flights to other international destinations require a transfer at another airport, as larger aircraft cannot use Wellington's short () runway, which has become an issue in recent years in regards to the Wellington region's economic performance.
The city's location close to the mouth of the narrow Cook Strait leads to its vulnerability to strong gales, leading to the city's nickname of "Windy Wellington".
Apparently there had been some concerns that the more populous South Island (where the goldfields were located) would choose to form a separate colony in the British Empire.
The New Zealand School of Music was established in 2005 through a merger of the conservatory and theory programmes at Massey University and Victoria University of Wellington.
The report continued: "The four most important reasons for living in an apartment were given as lifestyle and city living (23%), close to work (20%), close to shops and cafes (11%) and low maintenance (11%) ... City noise and noise from neighbours were the main turnoffs for apartment dwellers (27%), followed by a lack of outdoor space (17%), living close to neighbours (9%) and apartment size and a lack of storage space (8%)."
There are several restored theatre buildings: the St James Theatre, the Opera House and the Embassy Theatre.
The Executive Wing of New Zealand Parliament Buildings, on the corner of Lambton Quay and Molesworth Street, was constructed between 1969 and 1981 and is commonly referred to as the Beehive.
It caused vertical movements of two to three metres over a large area, including raising land out of the harbour and turning it into a tidal swamp.
Wellington has two short motorways, both part of SH 1: the Johnsonville–Porirua Motorway and the Wellington Urban Motorway, which in combination with a small non-motorway section in the Ngauranga Gorge connect Porirua with Wellington city.
At that time, the population of Wellington was just 4,900.
Another major population area is the Kapiti Coast, situated north of Porirua and including the towns of Paraparaumu, Waikanae, Raumati and Otaki.
Cruise tourism is experiencing a major boom in line with nationwide development.
The NZ International Comedy Fest 2010 featured over 250 local and international comedy acts and was a first in incorporating an iPhone application for the Festival.
Jackson's companies include Weta Workshop, Weta Digital, Camperdown Studios, post-production house Park Road Post, and Stone Street Studios near Wellington Airport.
One of the world's most livable cities, the 2014 Mercer Quality of Living Survey ranked Wellington 12th in the world.
Wellington is the North Island port for Cook Strait ferries to Picton in the South Island, provided by state-owned Interislander and private Bluebridge.
The Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa is on the waterfront.
On 21 July 2013 a magnitude 6.5 earthquake hit the city, but no tsunami report was confirmed nor any major damage.
Wellington is the home for the Royal New Zealand Ballet, the New Zealand School of Dance and contemporary dance company Footnote.
It is home to Weta Workshop, associated with Peter Jackson, behind critically acclaimed films like ''The Lord of the Rings'', ''King Kong'', ''Avatar'' and The Hobbit.
In the east is the Miramar Peninsula, connected to the rest of the city by a low-lying isthmus at Rongotai, the site of Wellington International Airport.
For many years after the 1855 earthquake, the majority of buildings were made entirely from wood.
A Wellington City Council survey conducted in March 2009 found the typical central city apartment dweller was a New Zealand native aged 24 to 35 with a professional job in the downtown area, with household income higher than surrounding areas.
The Central Park substation is the largest grid exit point in the region, with a peak demand of over 170&nbsp;MW (forecast to grow to 200&nbsp;MW by 2020).
It has been promoted through a variety of campaigns and taglines, starting with the iconic Absolutely Positively Wellington advertisements.
It is often called the world's windiest city, with an average wind speed of .
Wellington is the location of the highest court, the Supreme Court of New Zealand, and the historic former High Court building has been enlarged and restored for its use.
One of the founders of the settlement, Edward Jerningham Wakefield, reported that the settlers "took up the views of the directors with great cordiality and the new name was at once adopted".
New Zealand Symphony Orchestra, Nevine String Quartet and Chamber music New Zealand are based in Wellington.
Strong winds, advantageous for wind farms, have been known to damage power lines.
Approximately 62,000 people work in the CBD, only 4,000 fewer than work in Auckland's CBD, despite that city having four times the population.
The remaining areas are largely mountainous and sparsely farmed or parkland and are outside the urban area boundary.
Wellington's median income is well above the average in New Zealand, and the highest of all New Zealand cities.
There is access during daylight hours by the Dominion Post Ferry.
The university has 1,930 full-time employees.
It has very few open areas in which to expand, and this has brought about the development of the suburban towns.
Wellington had the 12th best quality of living in the world in 2014, a ranking up from 13th place in 2012, according to a 2014 study by consulting company Mercer.
It is also the most remote capital city, the farthest away from any other capital.
Wellington takes its name from Arthur Wellesley (1769–1852), the first Duke of Wellington and victor of the Battle of Waterloo (1815): his title comes from the town of Wellington in the English county of Somerset.
The urban area stretches across the areas administered by the city councils of Wellington, Lower Hutt, Upper Hutt and Porirua.
The region is also supplied by the North Island terminal of the HVDC link at Haywards substation, on State Highway 58 above the Hutt Valley.
Recent films shot partly or wholly in Wellington include the Lord of The Rings trilogy, King Kong and Avatar.
Wellington hosts shows in the annual New Zealand International Comedy Festival.
It is located at the south-western tip of the North Island, between Cook Strait and the Rimutaka Range.
In 1865, Wellington became the capital city in place of Auckland, which William Hobson had made the capital in 1841.
On 20 January 2014 at 3:52&nbsp;pm a rolling 6.2 magnitude earthquake struck the lower North Island 15&nbsp;km east of Eketahuna and was felt in Wellington, but little damage was reported initially, except at Wellington Airport where one of the two giant eagle sculptures commemorating The Hobbit became detached from the ceiling.
The area has high seismic activity even by New Zealand standards, with a major fault line running through the centre of the city, and several others nearby.
Source: Statistics New Zealand (2013 Census)
In the decade to 2010, the city saw growth of over 60% in commercial guest nights.
Wellington's cafe culture is internationally recognised and the city is known for its large number of coffee shops and roasteries.
Lonely Planet named Wellington 'the coolest little capital in the world' in its 'Best in Travel 2011' guide book.
It has been used as a quarantine station for people and animals, and was an internment camp during World War I and World War II.
Inhabitants, particularly in high-rise buildings, typically notice several earthquakes every year.
Every five years a year-long slow quake occurs beneath Wellington, stretching from Kapiti to the Marlborough Sounds.
Wellington has a large number of independent cinemas, including The Embassy, Paramount,Penthouse, the Roxy and Light House, which participate in film festivals throughout the year.
While masonry and structural steel have subsequently been used in building construction, especially for office buildings, timber framing remains the primary structural component of almost all residential construction.
While the student body was primarily New Zealanders of European descent, 1,713 were Maori, 1,024 were Pacific students, 2,765 were international students.
It is also the centre of New Zealand's film and special effects industries, and increasingly a hub for information technology and innovation.
It is home to the National Archives, the National Art Gallery, the National Library, the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, numerous theatres and two universities.
Frosts are quite common in the hill suburbs and the Hutt Valley between May and September.
European settlement began with the arrival of an advance party of the New Zealand Company on the ship ''Tory'' on 20 September 1839, followed by 150 settlers on the ''Aurora'' on 22 January 1840.
The airport is the base for Wellington Aero Club, a private not-for-profit flight school.
In 2011 Lonely Planet Best in Travel 2011 named Wellington as fourth in its Top 10 Cities to Visit in 2011, referring to it as the "coolest little capital in the world".
It was named in November 1840 by the original settlers of the New Zealand Company on the suggestion of the directors of the same, in recognition of the Duke's strong support for the company's principles of colonisation and his "strenuous and successful defence against its enemies of the measure for colonising South Australia".
The 2010/11 season saw 125,000 passengers and crew visit on 60 liners.
On the east the Rimutaka Range divides Wellington from the broad plains of the Wairarapa, a wine region of national notability.
There are constraints and limitations with this substation, and alternative investment solutions are being developed to improve security of supply.
Despite being much smaller than Auckland, Wellington is often referred to as New Zealand's cultural capital.
Wellington experienced a real estate boom in the early 2000s and the effects of the international property bust at the start of 2007.
Wellington is marketed as the 'coolest little capital in the world' by Positively Wellington Tourism, an award-winning regional tourism organisation set up as a council controlled organisation by Wellington City Council in 1997.
The harbour has three islands: Matiu/Somes Island, Makaro/Ward Island and Mokopuna Island.
Wellington suffered serious damage in a series of earthquakes in 1848 and from another earthquake in 1855.
Because of its location in the Roaring Forties and its exposure to the winds blowing through Cook Strait, Wellington is known as "Windy Wellington".
These include Otari-Wilton's Bush, dedicated to the protection and propagation of native plants.
Buses serve almost every part of Wellington city, with most of them running along the "Golden Mile" from Wellington Railway Station to Courtenay Place.
Te Whaea National Dance & Drama Centre, houses New Zealand's University-level school of Dance and Drama, Toi Whakaari: NZ Drama School & New Zealand School of Dance, and Whitiriea Performing Arts Centre.
These counts are from the 2013 census for the Wellington region (which includes the surrounding area in addition to the four cities).
Leading architects include Frederick Thatcher, Frederick de Jersey Clere, W. Gray Young, Bill Alington, Ian Athfield, Roger Walker and Pynenburg and Collins.
Much of this land was subsequently reclaimed and is now part of the central business district.
Counts from the 2013 census gave totals by area, gender, and age.
Peak demand greatly exceeds local generation, and power supply is highly dependent on the National Grid operated by Transpower.
Local ferries connect Wellington city centre with Eastbourne, Seatoun and Petone.
Wellington lies at the southern end of the North Island Main Trunk Railway (NIMT) and the Wairarapa Line, converging on Wellington Railway Station at the northern end of central Wellington.
The next most-common countries of origin were Samoa (2.0%), India (1.8%), China (1.7%), Australia (1.6%), the Philippines (1.2%), South Africa (1.1%), Fiji (1.0%), the United States (0.8%) and Malaysia (0.6%).
But it's actually a lovely place, where you're pretty much surrounded by water and the bay.
It is a few kilometres west of Wellington's central business district, on Quartz Hill and Terawhiti Station.
The local power distribution network is owned and managed by Wellington Electricity.
Kinetic sculptures have been commissioned, such as the Zephyrometer.
Four 220&nbsp;kV transmission circuits from Bunnythorpe, near Palmerston North, provide the main connections with the national grid.
The large majority (88%) did not have children in their apartments; 39% were couples without children; 32% were single-person households; 15% were groups of people flatting together.
Wellington has many notable buildings including the Government Building - one of the largest wooden buildings in the world - as well as the iconic Beehive.
More expensive properties declined more steeply, sometimes by as much as 20%.
By 2008, property values had declined by about 9.3% over a 12-month period, according to one estimate.
Wellington's transport network includes numerous train and bus lines which reach as far as the Kapiti Coast and Wairarapa, and ferries connect the city to the South Island town of Picton.
New Zealanders make up the largest visitor market, with 3.6&nbsp;million visits each year.
At the 2013 Census, just over 27% of Wellington's population was born overseas.
The Wellington region has  of regional parks and forests.
Filmmakers Sir Peter Jackson, Sir Richard Taylor and a growing team of creative professionals have turned the eastern suburb of Miramar into a film-making, post-production and special effects infrastructure centre, giving rise to the moniker 'Wellywood'.
The city is consistently named as New Zealanders' favourite destination in the quarterly FlyBuys Colmar Brunton Mood of the Traveller survey and it was fourth in Lonely Planet Best in Travel 2011's Top 10 Cities to Visit in 2011.
The city is notorious for its southerly blasts in winter, which may make the temperature feel much colder.
Government House, the official residence of the Governor-General, is in Newtown, opposite the Basin Reserve.
Snow is very rare at low altitudes, although snow fell on the city and many other parts of the Wellington region during separate events in July and August 2011.
To the north stretch the golden beaches of the Kapiti Coast.
For this reason the street named Lambton Quay is 100 to 200 metres (325 to 650&nbsp;ft) from the harbour – plaques set into the footpath mark the shoreline in 1840, indicating the extent of reclamation.
The music scene has produced bands such as The Warratahs, The Mockers, The Phoenix Foundation, Shihad, Beastwars, Fly My Pretties, Rhian Sheehan, Birchville Cat Motel, Black Boned Angel, Fat Freddy's Drop, The Black Seeds, Fur Patrol, Flight of the Conchords, Connan Mockasin, Rhombus and Module, Weta, Demoniac.
It is generally very windy all year round with high rainfall; average annual rainfall is , June and July being the wettest months.
"Foreigners get more bang for their buck in Wellington, which is among the cheapest cities in the world to live", according to a 2009 article, which reported that currency fluctuations make New Zealand cities affordable for multinational firms to do business: "New Zealand cities were now more affordable for expatriates and were competitive places for overseas companies to develop business links and send employees".
Since the Canterbury earthquakes of 2010 and 2011, earthquake readiness has become even more of an issue, with buildings declared by Wellington City Council to be earthquake-prone, and the costs of meeting new standards.
