Nevertheless, in 1946, he reluctantly attended church in El Paso, Texas, and underwent a religious conversion to evangelical Christianity.
He left the following year.
Wernher von Braun initially pushed for a flight engineering concept that called for an Earth orbit rendezvous technique (the approach he had argued for building his space station), but in 1962, he converted to the lunar orbit rendezvous concept that was subsequently realized.
An artillery captain, Walter Dornberger, arranged an Ordnance Department research grant for von Braun, who then worked next to Dornberger's existing solid-fuel rocket test site at Kummersdorf.
Neufeld further wrote:
The first seven technicians arrived in the United States at New Castle Army Air Field, just south of Wilmington, Delaware, on September 20, 1945.
The Soviet Army was about  from Peenemünde in the spring of 1945 when von Braun assembled his planning staff and asked them to decide how and to whom they should surrender.
In the first half of his life, von Braun was a nonpracticing, “perfunctory” Lutheran, whose affiliation was rather nominal and not taken seriously.
The Jupiter-C successfully launched the West's first satellite, Explorer 1, on January 31, 1958.
On April 15, 1955, von Braun became a naturalized citizen of the United States.
After a night launch from a Pacific island, the first three stages would bring the spacecraft (with the two remaining upper stages attached) to terrestrial escape velocity, with each burn creating an acceleration of 8–9 times standard gravity.
This would include a  expedition in pressurized rovers to the crater Harpalus and the Mare Imbrium foothills.
Von Braun's stubbornness was blamed for the inability of the U.S. to launch a manned space mission before the Soviet Union, which ended up putting the first man in space the following month.
Upon arrival, astronauts would establish a permanent lunar base in the Sinus Roris region by using the emptied cargo holds of their craft as shelters, and would explore their surroundings for eight weeks.
Finally, von Braun and his remaining Peenemünde staff (see List of German rocket scientists in the United States) were transferred to their new home at Fort Bliss, a large Army installation just north of El Paso.
Von Braun’s engines used direct combustion and created fire, the Walter devices used hot vapors from a chemical reaction, but both created thrust and provided high speed.
In 1963, von Braun reflected on the history of rocketry, and said of Goddard's work: "His rockets&nbsp;... may have been rather crude by present-day standards, but they blazed the trail and incorporated many features used in our most modern rockets and space vehicles."
While there, they trained military, industrial, and university personnel in the intricacies of rockets and guided missiles.
I would be awarded the rank of an "Untersturmfuehrer" (lieutenant) and it were  a very definite desire of Himmler that I attend his invitation to join.
Von Braun helped establish and promote the National Space Institute, a precursor of the present-day National Space Society, in 1975, and became its first president and chairman.
In 1950, at the start of the Korean War, von Braun and his team were transferred to Huntsville, Alabama, his home for the next 20 years.
His mother, Emmy von Quistorp (1886–1959), could trace her ancestry through both parents to medieval European royalty and was a descendant of Philip III of France, Valdemar I of Denmark, Robert III of Scotland, and Edward III of England.
He also studied at ETH Zürich.
Later (in 1959) von Braun published a short booklet, condensed from episodes that had appeared in ''This Week Magazine'' before—describing his updated concept of the first manned lunar landing.
His father, conservative civil servant Magnus Freiherr von Braun (1878–1972), served as a Minister of Agriculture in the Reich Cabinet during the Weimar Republic.
In the hope that its involvement would bring about greater public interest in the future of the space program, von Braun also began working with Walt Disney and the Disney studios as a technical director, initially for three television films about space exploration.
Frequently, von Braun worked with fellow German-born space advocate and science writer Willy Ley to publish his concepts, which, unsurprisingly, were heavy on the engineering side and anticipated many technical aspects of space flight that later became reality.
Von Braun and a large number of the engineering team subsequently made it to Austria.
Von Braun had been under SD surveillance since October 1943.
The unsuspecting von Braun was detained on March 14 (or March 15), 1944, and was taken to a Gestapo cell in Stettin (now Szczecin, Poland), where he was held for two weeks without knowing the charges against him.
In 1928, his parents moved him to the Hermann-Lietz-Internat (also a residential school) on the East Frisian North Sea island of Spiekeroog.
After hearing the news from London, he said that "the rocket worked perfectly, except for landing on the wrong planet."
He travelled to India and hoped that the program would be helpful for bringing a massive educational television project to help the poorest people in that country.
Thus, my refusal to join the party would have meant that I would have to abandon the work of my life.
Space travel had always fascinated von Braun, and from then on he applied himself to physics and mathematics to pursue his interest in rocket engineering.
In an unnamed religious magazine he stated:
The few pieces of von Braun’s youthful compositions that exist are reminiscent of Hindemith’s style.
Not one single time did Prof. Wernher von Braun protest against this cruelty and bestiality during his frequent stays at Dora.
Piccard is said to have responded with encouraging words.
'''Wernher Magnus Maximilian Freiherr von Braun''' (March 23, 1912 – June 16, 1977) was a German, later American, aerospace engineer and space architect credited with inventing the V-2 rocket for Nazi Germany and the Saturn V for the United States.
He was the second of three sons.
His attitude toward the National Socialist regime in the late 1930s and early 1940s is difficult to understand.
Wernher von Braun was an accomplished amateur pianist who could play Beethoven and Bach from memory.
Combined with Himmler's false charges that von Braun was a communist sympathizer and had attempted to sabotage the V-2 program, and considering that von Braun regularly piloted his government-provided airplane that might allow him to escape to England, this led to his arrest by the Gestapo.
They were then flown to Boston and taken by boat to the Army Intelligence Service post at Fort Strong in Boston Harbor.
Due to this neglect of the injury he had to be hospitalized again a month later where his bones had to be re-broken and re-aligned.
Only military development was allowed and to this end, a larger facility was erected at the village of Peenemünde in northern Germany on the Baltic Sea.
By his own account, he had been so influenced by the early Nazi promise of release from the post–World War I economic effects, that his patriotic feelings had increased.
The technical work carried out there had, in the meantime, attracted more and more attention in higher levels.
His loyal Germans still addressed him as Herr Professor, but Hamill addressed him as Wernher and never bothered to respond to von Braun's request for more materials, and every proposal for new rocket ideas was dismissed.
He therefore recommended that von Braun work more closely with Kammler to solve the problems of the V-2.
He took lessons from the composer Paul Hindemith.
However, these accounts may have been a case of mistaken identity.
On May 2, 1945, upon finding an American private from the U.S. 44th Infantry Division, von Braun's brother and fellow rocket engineer, Magnus, approached the soldier on a bicycle, calling out in broken English: "My name is Magnus von Braun.
He denied ever having visited the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp itself, where 20,000 died from illness, beatings, hangings, and intolerable working conditions.
Despite the work on the Redstone rocket, the 12 years from 1945 to 1957 were probably some of the most frustrating for von Braun and his colleagues.
Because of the difference in the length of one prong, the launch system detected the difference in the power disconnection as a "cut-off signal to the engine".
When shown a picture of himself standing behind Himmler, von Braun claimed to have worn the SS uniform only that one time, but in 2002 a former SS officer at Peenemünde told the BBC that von Braun had regularly worn the SS uniform to official meetings.
He was interviewed by the Assemblies of God pastor C. M. Ward, as stating, “The farther we probe into space, the greater my faith.” In addition, he met privately with evangelist Billy Graham and with the pacifist leader Rev.
Von Braun was mainly interested in management of the scientific effort on Antarctic research stations, logistics, habitation, and life support, and in using the barren Antarctic terrain like the glacial dry valleys to test the equipment that one day would be used to look for signs of life on Mars and other worlds.
During the late 1960s, von Braun was instrumental in the development of the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville.
Von Braun's insistence on further tests after Mercury-Redstone 2 flew higher than planned has been identified as contributing to the Soviet Union's success in launching the first human in space.
Gigantic as this mission plan was, its engineering and astronautical parameters were thoroughly calculated.
This event signaled the birth of America's space program.
In spring 1940, one SS-Standartenfuehrer (SS-colonel) Mueller from Greifswald, a bigger town in the vicinity of Peenemünde, looked me up in my office ... and told me, that Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler had sent him with the order to urge me to join the SS.
The desk from which he guided America's entry in the space race remains on display there.
Although he worked mainly on military rockets in his later years there, space travel remained his primary interest.
During his stay at Fort Bliss, von Braun proposed marriage to Maria Luise von Quistorp (born ), his maternal first cousin, in a letter to his father.
Since they were not permitted to leave Fort Bliss without military escort, von Braun and his colleagues began to refer to themselves only half-jokingly as "PoPs" – "Prisoners of Peace."
We knew that we had created a new means of warfare, and the question as to what nation, to what victorious nation we were willing to entrust this brainchild of ours was a moral decision more than anything else.
After the talk the young student approached the famous pioneer of high-altitude balloon flight, and stated to him: "You know, I plan on traveling to the Moon at some time."
However, his deteriorating health forced him to retire from Fairchild on December 31, 1976.
During the local summer of 1966–67, von Braun participated in a field trip to Antarctica, organized for him and several other members of top NASA management.
His injuries were serious, but he insisted that his arm be set in a cast so he could leave the hospital.
In a face-to-face meeting with Herb York at the Pentagon, von Braun made it clear he would go to NASA only if development of the Saturn was allowed to continue.
My membership in the party did not involve any political activity.
On December 22, 1942, Adolf Hitler signed the order approving the production of the A-4 as a "vengeance weapon" and the group developed it to target London.
Later in 1943, while preparing V-2 launch sites in northeastern France, von Braun had an affair in Paris with a Frenchwoman, who was imprisoned for collaboration after the War and became destitute.
Deciding that Kammler's order was their best bet to defect to the Americans, von Braun fabricated documents and transported 500 of his affiliates to the area around Mittelwerk, where they resumed their work.
Over the course of the program, Saturn V rockets enabled six teams of astronauts to reach the surface of the Moon.
Not only had it become evident by this time that NASA and his visions for future U.S. space flight projects were incompatible, but also it was perhaps even more frustrating for him to see popular support for a continued presence of man in space wane dramatically once the goal to reach the Moon had been accomplished.
Von Braun's interest in rockets was specifically for the application of space travel, not for killing people.
His dream to help mankind set foot on the Moon became a reality on July 16, 1969, when a Marshall-developed Saturn V rocket launched the crew of Apollo 11 on its historic eight-day mission.
Von Braun, like other Peenemünders, was assigned to the local group in Karlshagen; there is no evidence that he did more than send in his monthly dues.
Von Braun was briefly detained at the "Dustbin" interrogation center at Kransberg Castle where the elite of the Third Reich's economy, science and technology were debriefed by U.S. and British intelligence officials.
The conservative approach paid off when a fifth engine was added to the Saturn C-4, producing the Saturn V. The C-4 design had a large crossbeam that could easily absorb the thrust of an additional engine.
However, the manuscript was rejected by no fewer than 18&nbsp;publishers.
Von Braun's early years at NASA were not without some disappointments.
For fear of their documents being destroyed by the SS, von Braun ordered the blueprints to be hidden in an abandoned mine shaft in the Harz mountain range.
The second test flight took place one day after the Mercury-Redstone BD mission.
In a 1952 memoir article he admitted that, at that time, he "fared relatively rather well under totalitarianism".
In 1947, he gave the U.S. War Department this explanation:
He began as an Untersturmführer (Second lieutenant) and was promoted three times by Himmler, the last time in June 1943 to SS-Sturmbannführer (Major).
In each case, the expedition would use minimum-energy Hohmann transfer orbits for its trips to Mars and back to Earth.
At this time I was already Technical Director at the Army Rocket Center at Peenemünde (Baltic Sea).
One day later, the 50th Redstone rocket was successfully launched from Johnston Atoll in the south Pacific as part of Operation Hardtack I.
Requests to improve their living conditions such as laying linoleum over their cracked wood flooring were rejected.
In 1976, he became scientific consultant to Lutz Kayser, the CEO of OTRAG, and a member of the Daimler-Benz board of directors.
Many at NASA headquarters jokingly referred to Marshall as the "Chicago Bridge and Iron Works", but acknowledged that the designs worked.
When asked if von Braun could have protested against the brutal treatment of the slave laborers, von Braun team member Konrad Dannenberg told ''The Huntsville Times'', "If he had done it, in my opinion, he would have been shot on the spot."
After the surrender, Wernher spoke to the press:
They also continued to study the future potential of rockets for military and research applications.
There is evidence, however, that British intelligence and scientists were the first to interview him in depth, eager to gain information that they knew U.S. officials would deny them.
In collaboration with the Luftwaffe, the Peenemünde group developed liquid-fuel rocket engines for aircraft and jet-assisted takeoffs.
I told him I was so busy with my rocket work that I had no time to spare for any political activity.
Through religion he seeks to know the Creator."
Von Braun would later write he found it hard to develop a "genuine emotional attachment" to his new surroundings.
Von Braun had an older brother, Sigismund, and a younger brother, also named Magnus.
Ernst Heinkel enthusiastically supported their efforts, supplying a He-72 and later two He-112s for the experiments.
However, the engagement was broken due to his mother's opposition.
Through the Abwehr in Berlin, Dornberger obtained von Braun's conditional release and Albert Speer, Reichsminister for Munitions and War Production, convinced Hitler to reinstate von Braun so that the V-2 program could continue or turn into a "V-4 program" which in their view would be impossible without von Braun's leadership.
Over the nights of August 17–18, 1943, RAF Bomber Command's Operation Hydra dispatched raids on the Peenemünde camp consisting of 596 aircraft, and dropped 1,800 tons of explosives.
On the motives behind this conversion, Michael J. Neufeld is of the opinion that he turned to religion “to pacify his own conscience”, whereas Soton scholar Kendrick Oliver comments that von Braun was presumably moved "by a desire to find a new direction for his life after the moral chaos of his service for the Third Reich.” Having "concluded one bad bargain with the devil, perhaps now he felt a need to have God securely at his side.”
In 1975, he received the National Medal of Science.
As described by Ernst Stuhlinger and Frederick I. Ordway III: “Throughout his younger years, von Braun did not show signs of religious devotion, or even an interest in things related to the church or to biblical teachings.
Presiding from July 1960 to February 1970, von Braun became the center's first director.
Von Braun's feelings for the Nazi regime may have changed when he was arrested and accused of being a "communist sympathizer" who had attempted to sabotage or delay the weapons program.
My brother invented the V-2.
After a series of conflicts associated with the truncation of the Apollo program, and facing severe budget constraints, von Braun retired from NASA on May 26, 1972.
Realizing that the matter was of highly political significance for the relation between the SS and the Army, I called immediately on my military superior ..., Dr. Dornberger.
SS General Hans Kammler, who as an engineer had constructed several concentration camps, including Auschwitz, had a reputation for brutality and had originated the idea of using concentration camp prisoners as slave laborers in the rocket program.
He publicly spoke and wrote about the complementarity of science and religion, the afterlife of the soul, and his belief in God.
The group was flown to Nordhausen, and was evacuated  southwest to Witzenhausen, a small town in the American Zone, the next day.
Others claim von Braun engaged in brutal treatment or approved of it.
In June 1937, at Neuhardenberg (a large field about  east of Berlin, listed as a reserve airfield in the event of war), one of these latter aircraft was flown with its piston engine shut down during flight by test pilot Erich Warsitz, at which time it was propelled by von Braun’s rocket power alone.
Von Braun had a charismatic personality and was known as a ladies' man.
More than a decade later, the movie version of ''2001: A Space Odyssey'' would draw heavily on the design concept in its visualization of an orbital space station.
In 1933, von Braun was working on his creative doctorate when the National Socialist German Workers Party (NSDAP, or Nazi Party) came to power in a coalition government in Germany; rocketry almost immediately moved onto the national agenda.
The von Brauns had two more children, Margrit Cécile in 1952 and Peter Constantine in 1960.
On March 1, 1947, having received permission to go back to Germany and return with his bride, he married her in a Lutheran church in Landshut, Germany.
The American high command was well aware of how important their catch was: von Braun had been at the top of ''the Black List'', the code name for the list of German scientists and engineers targeted for immediate interrogation by U.S. military experts.
Martin Luther King Jr..
On June 19, 1945, two days before the scheduled handover of the area to the Soviets, U.S. Army Major Robert B. Staver, Chief of the Jet Propulsion Section of the Research and Intelligence Branch of the U.S. Army Ordnance Corps in London, and Lt Col R. L. Williams took von Braun and his department chiefs by jeep from Garmisch to Munich.
Therefore, I decided to join.
This much less peaceful aspect of von Braun's "drive for space" has been reviewed by Michael J. Neufeld from the Space History Division of the National Air and Space Museum in Washington.
One of those was the "infamous four-inch flight" during which the first unmanned Mercury-Redstone rocket only rose a few inches before settling back onto the launch pad.
NASA was established by law on July 29, 1958.
A few months later, on occasion of the first Moon landing, he publicly expressed his optimism that the Saturn V carrier system would continue to be developed, advocating manned missions to Mars in the 1980s.
In ''Wernher von Braun: Crusader for Space'', numerous statements by von Braun show he was aware of the conditions but felt completely unable to change them.
Even the aspect of corpses did not touch him: On a small area near the ambulance shed, inmates tortured to death by slave labor and the terror of the overseers were piling up daily.
When the 1975 National Medal of Science was awarded to him in early 1977, he was hospitalized, and unable to attend the White House ceremony.
They also developed the long-range A-4 ballistic missile and the supersonic Wasserfall anti-aircraft missile.
I realized that any attempt of reasoning on humane grounds would be utterly futile.
In the Soviet Union, Sergei Korolev and his team of scientists and engineers plowed ahead with several new rocket designs and the Sputnik program, while the American government was not very interested in von Braun's work or views and only embarked on a very modest rocket-building program.
Following World War II, he was moved to the United States, along with about 1,500 other scientists, technicians, and engineers, as part of Operation Paperclip, where he developed the rockets that launched the United States' first space satellite Explorer 1, and the Apollo program manned lunar landings.
His chief design engineer Walther Reidel became the subject of a December 1946 article "German Scientist Says American Cooking Tasteless; Dislikes Rubberized Chicken", exposing the presence of von Braun's team in the country and drawing criticism from Albert Einstein and John Dingell.
In fact that line appears in the film ''I Aim at the Stars'', a 1960 biopic of von Braun.
The May 14, 1950, headline of ''The Huntsville Times'' ("Dr. von Braun Says Rocket Flights Possible to Moon") might have marked the beginning of these efforts.
Between 1952 and 1956, von Braun led the Army's rocket development team at Redstone Arsenal, resulting in the Redstone rocket, which was used for the first live nuclear ballistic missile tests conducted by the United States.
As noted above, his excessive caution likely led to the U.S. losing the race to put a man into space with the Soviets.
The initial broadcast devoted to space exploration was ''Man in Space,'' which first went on air on March 9, 1955, drawing 40 million viewers.
Before 1939, German scientists occasionally contacted Goddard directly with technical questions.
Later in life, he joined an Episcopal congregation, and became increasingly religious.
In 1939, I was officially demanded to join the National Socialist Party.
There were no German rocket societies after the collapse of the VfR, and civilian rocket tests were forbidden by the new Nazi regime.
In 1952, von Braun first published his concept of a manned space station in a ''Collier's Weekly'' magazine series of articles entitled "Man Will Conquer Space Soon!".
He stated, "Through science man strives to learn more of the mysteries of creation.
On December 9, 1948, the von Brauns' first daughter, Iris Careen, was born at Fort Bliss Army Hospital.
A young female dentist who was an SS spy reported their comments.
Von Braun remarked, "...at Peenemünde we had been coddled, here you were counting pennies..." At the age of 38, von Braun had thousands of engineers who answered to him, but was now answering to "pimply" 26-year-old Major Jim Hamill who possessed an undergraduate degree in engineering.
At this time, von Braun also worked out preliminary concepts for a manned mission to Mars that used the space station as a staging point.
I asked Mueller to give me some time for reflection.
At the time, Germany was highly interested in American physicist Robert H. Goddard's research.
Whether von Braun's error with regard to the year was deliberate or a simple mistake has never been ascertained, although Neufeld stated that he might have lied on the affidavit.
There he acquired a copy of ''By Rocket into Planetary Space'' (''Die Rakete zu den Planetenräumen'', 1923) by rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth.
He learned to play both the cello and the piano at an early age and at one time wanted to become a composer.
In an internal memo dated January 16, 1969, von Braun had confirmed to his staff that he would stay on as a center director at Huntsville to head the Apollo Applications Program.
But he is seen in some photographs with the party's swastika pin in his lapel – it was politically useful to demonstrate his membership.
Von Braun joined the SS horseback riding school on 1 November 1933 as an ''SS-Anwärter''.
He later had a succession of affairs within the secretarial and computer pool at Peenemünde.
A V-2 crashed in Sweden and some parts were sent to an Annapolis lab where Goddard was doing research for the Navy.
Two years later, NASA opened the Marshall Space Flight Center at Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, and the ABMA development team led by von Braun was transferred to NASA.
Afraid of the well-known Soviet cruelty to prisoners of war, von Braun and his staff decided to try to surrender to the Americans.
The subsequent flights with the He-112 used the Walter-rocket instead of von Braun's; it was more reliable, simpler to operate, and safer for test pilot Erich Warsitz.
But, Prof. Wernher von Braun passed them so close that he was almost touching the corpses".
Under NASA, he served as director of the newly formed Marshall Space Flight Center and as the chief architect of the Saturn V launch vehicle, the superbooster that propelled the Apollo spacecraft to the Moon.
Von Braun envisaged these expeditions as very large-scale undertakings, with a total of 50&nbsp;astronauts travelling in three huge spacecraft (two for crew, one primarily for cargo), each  long and  in diameter and driven by a rectangular array of 30&nbsp;rocket propulsion engines.
He then told me, that ... the SS would cost me no time at all.
More people died building the V-2 rockets than were killed by it as a weapon.
In spring 1932, he graduated from the ''Technische Hochschule Berlin'' (now Technical University of Berlin), with a diploma in mechanical engineering.
Wanting to learn more about physics, chemistry, and astronomy, von Braun entered the Friedrich-Wilhelm University of Berlin for post-graduate studies and graduated with a doctorate in physics in 1934.
Michael J. Neufeld writes: "As with von Braun's party membership, we have no truly independent account of what happened, but his story is plausible."
His overly cautious nature brought about clashes with other people involved in the program, who argued that MR-2's technical issues were simple and had been resolved shortly after the flight.
He referred to this time as a moment in his life when he felt the strong need to pray, stating "I certainly prayed a lot before and during the crucial Apollo flights".
If this was the so-called Bäckebo Bomb, it had been procured by the British in exchange for Spitfires; Annapolis would have received some parts from them.
His early exposure to rocketry convinced him that the exploration of space would require far more than applications of the current engineering technology.
He belonged to a noble family, inheriting the German title of ''Freiherr'' (equivalent to Baron).
At the same time, Hellmuth Walter's experiments into hydrogen peroxide based rockets were leading towards light and simple rockets that appeared well-suited for aircraft installation.
Former inmate Adam Cabala reported: "... also the German scientists led by Prof. Wernher von Braun were aware of everything daily.
He also was instrumental in the launching of the experimental Applications Technology Satellite.
The goal of the field trip was to determine whether the experience gained by U.S. scientific and technological community during the exploration of Antarctic wastelands would be useful for the manned exploration of space.
However, von Braun managed to convince SS Major Kummer to order the dispersion of the group into nearby villages so that they would not be an easy target for U.S. bombers.
Once “bleached” of their Nazism, the U.S. Government granted the scientists security clearance to work in the United States.
Also the firm of Hellmuth Walter at Kiel had been commissioned by the RLM to build a rocket engine for the He 112, so there were two different new rocket motor designs at Neuhardenberg: whereas von Braun’s engines were powered by alcohol and liquid oxygen, Walter engines had hydrogen peroxide and calcium permanganate as a catalyst.
Following the war, von Braun worked for the United States Army on an intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM) program before his group was assimilated into NASA.
Work on the Redstone led to development of the first high-precision inertial guidance system on the Redstone rocket.
He was awarded a doctorate in physics (aerospace engineering) on July 27, 1934, from the University of Berlin for a thesis entitled "''About Combustion Tests"''; his doctoral supervisor was Erich Schumann.
Dr. von Braun also developed the idea of a Space Camp that would train children in fields of science and space technologies, as well as help their mental development much the same way sports camps aim at improving physical development.
After the flight of Mercury-Redstone 2 in January 1961 experienced a string of problems, von Braun insisted on one more test before the Redstone could be deemed man-rated.
A friend quotes von Braun speaking of a visit to Mittelwerk:
