File:Bust Sappho Musei Capitolini MC1164.jpg|Sappho, Ancient Greek poet
In the meantime however, Greece, under Alexander, had become a capital of the East, and part of an empire.
The Western media refers to the news media of the Western world.
In the time of Alexander the Great and then (the Hellenistic period) the Greek civilization came in contact with the Jewish civilization.
A number of popular modern sports were devised or codified in Britain during the 19th Century and obtained global prominence – these include Ping Pong, modern tennis, Association Football, Netball and Rugby.
The Industrial Revolution marks a major turning point in history; almost every aspect of daily life was influenced in some way.
File:Kijów - Sobór Mądrości Bożej 02.jpg|Saint Sophia Cathedral in Kiev, Ukraine.
New ideas and beliefs spread around Europe and were fostered by an increase in literacy due to a departure from solely religious texts.
The First Industrial Revolution evolved into the Second Industrial Revolution in the transition years between 1840 and 1870, when technological and economic progress continued with the increasing adoption of steam transport (steam-powered railways, boats and ships), the large-scale manufacture of machine tools and the increasing use of machinery in steam-powered factories.
So were the stethoscope, electrocardiograph, and the endoscope.
Rational thinking developed through a long age of change and formation, with the experiments of the Enlightenment, and breakthroughs in the sciences.
The process was accompanied and reinforced by the Age of Discovery and continued into the modern period.
The notion of "Europe" and the "Western World" has been intimately connected with the concept of "Christianity and Christendom" many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity.
This period is commonly referred to as the Renaissance.
The solo piano, symphony orchestra and the string quartet are also important performing musical forms.
During the Great Divergence, a term coined by Samuel Huntington the Western world overcame pre-modern growth constraints and emerged during the 19th century as the most powerful and wealthy world civilization of the time, eclipsing Qing China, Mughal India, Tokugawa Japan, and the Ottoman Empire.
File:Octavio Paz - 1988 Malmö.jpg|Octavio Paz, Mexican writer and poet
And 73.3% in Oceania are self-identify as Christian, and 75.5% in South Africa is Christian and 90% in Philippines.
Since the context is highly biased and context-dependent, there is no agreed definition what the "West" is.
File:Anton_Chekhov_with_bow-tie_sepia_image.jpg|Anton Chekov, Russian playwright and writer
Roman religion was similar to but not the same as Hellenic religion - likewise the same for indigenous Germanic polytheism, Celtic polytheism and Slavic polytheism.
Geographically, the "West" of today would include Europe (especially the European Union countries) together with extraeuropean territories belonging to the Anglosphere, as well as the Hispanidad, the Lusosphere or the Francophonie in the wider context.
Similarly, sports such as cricket, rugby, and netball were exported around the world, particularly among countries in the Commonwealth of Nations, thus India and Australia are among the strongest cricketing nations, while victory in the Rugby World Cup has been shared among the Western nations of New Zealand, Australia, South Africa and England.
From Late Antiquity, through the Middle Ages, and onwards, while Eastern Europe was shaped by the Orthodox Church, Southern and Central Europe were increasingly stabilized by the Catholic Church which, as Roman imperial governance faded from view, was the only consistent force in Western Europe.
The ballroom dance is an important Western variety of dance for the elite.
File:Aqueduct_of_Segovia,_Segovia,_Spain,_April_2015.jpg|Aqueduct of Segovia in Segovia, Spain.
Coming into the modern era, the historical understanding of the East-West contrast – as the opposition of Christendom to its geographical neighbors – began to weaken.
File:Miles franklin.jpg|Miles Franklin, Australian writer and feminist
File:Turkey-3019 - Hagia Sophia (2216460729).jpg|The Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, Turkey.
There are essentially no taboos against depicting a god, or other religious figures, in a representational fashion.
Orthodox Christian Christianity and the Nicene Creed served as a unifying force in Christian parts of Europe, and in some respects replaced or competed with the secular authorities.
File:Xenophon.jpg|Xenophon, Ancient Greek writer and historian
In the Catholic or Frankish west, Roman law became the foundation on which all legal concepts and systems were based.
The discoveries and inventions by Westerners in electromagnetism include Coulomb's law (1785), the first battery (1800), the unity of electricity and magnetism (1820), Biot–Savart law (1820), Ohm's Law (1827), and the Maxwell's equations (1871).
In medicine, the pure antibiotics were created in the West.
The area that had formerly been considered the Orient ("the East") became the Near East, as the interests of the European powers interfered with Qing China and Meiji Japan for the first time, in the 19th century.
Basketball was invented in 1891 by James Naismith, a Canadian physical education instructor working in Springfield, Massachusetts in the United States.
The philosophy and science of Classical Greece was largely forgotten in Europe after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, other than in isolated monastic enclaves (notably in Ireland, which had become Christian but was never conquered by Rome).
File:CHANDOS3.jpg|William Shakespeare, English poet and playwright
File:Sydney Opera House - Dec 2008.jpg|The Sydney Opera House in Sydney, Australia.
A wide range of sports were already established by the time of Ancient Greece and the military culture and the development of sports in Greece influenced one another considerably.
File:Dostoevskij 1863.jpg|Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Russian writer
File:Cervantes Jáuregui.jpg|Miguel de Cervantes, Spanish playwright, poet and novelist
Western culture, for at least the last 1000 years, has been considered nearly synonymous with Christian culture.
Realistic portraiture is especially valued.
The native religions of Europe were polytheistic but not homogenous – however they were similar insofar as they were predominantly Indo-European in origin.
File:Edgar Allan Poe 2 retouched and transparent bg.png|Edgar Allan Poe, American author, poet, editor and literary critic
The soap opera, a popular culture dramatic form, originated in the United States first on radio in the 1930s, then a couple of decades later on television.
Greater Persia and Greater India, but is now used synonymously with: Near East in most languages.
Bullfighting spread from Spain to its Central and South American colonies, and in the 19th century to France, where it developed into a distinctive form in its own right.
Globalism has spread Western ideas so widely that almost all modern cultures are, to some extent, influenced by aspects of Western culture.
The sport of bullfighting is a traditional spectacle of Spain, Portugal, southern France, and some Latin American countries.
Nevertheless, the Greeks felt they were the most civilized and saw themselves (in the formulation of Aristotle) as something between the wild barbarians of most of Europe and the soft, slavish Middle-Easterners.
These transitions began in Great Britain, and spread to Western Europe and North America within a few decades.
The ballet is a distinctively Western form of performance dance.
File:Diego Rivera - The House on the Bridge - Google Art Project.jpg|''The House on the Bridge'', by Diego Rivera
Its influence is found in all Western legal systems, although in different manners and to different extents.
The bat and ball sport of cricket was first played in England during the 16th century and was exported around the globe via the British Empire.
Many important musical instruments used by cultures all over the world were also developed in the West; among them are the violin, piano, pipe organ, saxophone, trombone, clarinet, accordion, and the theremin.
The study of canon law, the legal system of the Catholic Church, fused with that of Roman law to form the basis of the refounding of Western legal scholarship.
Also, Roman culture mixed with Celtic, Germanic and Slavic cultures, which slowly became integrated into Western culture starting, mainly, with their acceptance of Christianity.
Stereotyped views of "the West" have been labelled ''Occidentalism'', paralleling Orientalism — the term for the 19th-century stereotyped views of "the East".
European culture developed with a complex range of philosophy, medieval scholasticism and mysticism, and Christian and secular humanism.
During the Reformation and Enlightenment, the ideas of civil rights, equality before the law, procedural justice, and democracy as the ideal form of society began to be institutionalized as principles forming the basis of modern Western culture, particularly in Protestant regions.
The emergence of news media in the 17th century has to be seen in close connection with the spread of the printing press, from which the publishing press derives its name.
As Europe discovered the wider world, old concepts adapted.
Throughout the Western world there are increasing numbers of people who seek to revive the indigenous religions of their European ancestors, such groups include Germanic, Roman, Hellenic, Celtic and Slavic, polytheistic reconstructionist movements, likewise, Wicca, new age spirituality and other neo-pagan belief systems enjoy notable minority support in Western nations.
File:GiorcesBardo42.jpg|Virgil, Roman poet
In 1054 came the so-called Great Schism that, following the Greek East and Latin West divide, separated Europe into religious and cultural regions present to this day.
The rediscovery of the Justinian Code in Western Europe early in the 10th century rekindled a passion for the discipline of law, which crossed many of the re-forming boundaries between East and West.
File:Christine_de_Pisan_-_cathedra.jpg|Christine de Pizan, French author
Concepts of what is ''the West'' arose out of legacies of the Western Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire.
In physics, the science of mechanics and quantum mechanics, relativity, thermodynamics, and statistical mechanics were all developed by Westerners.
The Celts also created some significant literature in the ancient world whenever they were given the opportunity (an example being the poet Caecilius Statius).
File:George_Charles_Beresford_-_Virginia_Woolf_in_1902_-_Restoration.jpg|Virginia Woolf, English writer
Coinciding with the Age of Enlightenment was the scientific revolution, spearheaded by Newton.
File:George_Gordon_Byron,_6th_Baron_Byron_by_Richard_Westall_(2).jpg|Lord Byron, English poet
The Romans built immense structures such as the Colisseum in Rome to house their festivals of sport.
Thus, the Sino-Japanese War in 1894–1895 occurred in the Far East, while the troubles surrounding the decline of the Ottoman Empire simultaneously occurred in the Near East.
File:Portrait of Terence from Vaticana, Vat.
They also developed a large amount of scientific knowledge themselves, as seen in their Coligny Calendar.
What we think of as Western thought today originates primarily from Greco-Roman and Germanic influences, and includes the ideals of the Middle Ages, the Renaissance and the Enlightenment, as well as Christian culture.
Philosophers of the Enlightenment included Francis Bacon, René Descartes, John Locke, Baruch Spinoza, Voltaire (1694–1778), David Hume, and Immanuel Kant.
The eradication of smallpox, was led by a Westerner, Donald Henderson.
Western culture is characterized by a host of artistic, philosophic, literary, and legal themes and traditions; the heritage of Greek, Roman, Jewish, Celtic, Slavic, Germanic and other ethnic and linguistic groups, as well as Christianity including the Roman Catholic Church, and the Orthodox Church, which played an important part in the shaping of Western civilization since at least the 4th century.
English migrants took antecedents of baseball to America during the colonial period.
This included going from hand production methods to machines, new chemical manufacturing and iron production processes, improved efficiency of water power, the increasing use of steam power, and the development of machine tools.
Most of the elements, were discovered and named in the West, as well as the contemporary atomic theories to explain them.
As with all other cultures it has evolved and gradually changed over time.
Eyeglasses, the telescope, the microscope and electron microscope, all the varieties of chromatography, protein and DNA sequencing, computerised tomography, NMR, x-rays, and light, ultraviolet and infrared spectroscopy, were all first developed and applied in Western laboratories, hospitals and factories.
From these American origins, basketball has become one of the great international participation sports.
In the following century, this process was further enhanced by an exodus of Greek Christian priests and scholars to Italian cities such as Venice after the end of the Byzantine Empire with the fall of Constantinople.
File:Chagall Bella.jpg|"Bella with White Collar'', by Marc Shagall
File:Rietveld Schröderhuis HayKranen-20.JPG|Rietveld Schröder House in Utrecht, Netherlands.
File:Castillo Chapultepec Castle.jpg|The Chapultepec Castle in Mexico City, Mexico.
It is difficult to determine which individuals fit into which category, and the East–West contrast is sometimes criticized as relativistic and arbitrary.
This could include being subjected to violence and/or destruction of property (this may be referred to as a pogrom) as well as being expelled or banned from various polities, hoping to find havens in other places.
Movements in art and philosophy, such as the Humanist movement of the Renaissance and the Scholastic movement of the High Middle Ages, were motivated by a drive to connect Catholicism with Greek and Arab thought imported by Christian pilgrims.
The transistor, integrated circuit, memory chip, and computer were all first seen in the West.
For about five hundred years, the Roman Empire maintained the Greek East and consolidated a Latin West, but an East-West division remained, reflected in many cultural norms of the two areas, including language.
The history of Hellenism and Judaism is a history of interaction between the two cultures that was most influential for the western civilisation.
The Age of Discovery faded into the Age of Enlightenment of the 18th century, during which cultural and intellectual forces in Western Europe emphasized reason, analysis, and individualism rather than traditional lines of authority.
The western media has gradually expanded into developing countries, with significant news coverage focused on various human rights issues in Africa, America, Asia, Europe and Oceania.
It challenged the authority of institutions that were deeply rooted in society, such as the Catholic Church; there was much talk of ways to reform society with toleration, science and skepticism.
Ancient Greek science, philosophy, democracy, architecture, literature, and art provided a foundation embraced and built upon by the Roman Empire as it swept up Europe, including the Hellenic World in its conquests in the 1st century BC.
Much of Western architecture emphasizes repetition of simple motifs, straight lines and expansive, undecorated planes.
Tendencies that have come to define modern Western societies include the existence of political pluralism, prominent subcultures or countercultures (such as New Age movements), and increasing cultural syncretism resulting from globalization and human migration.
The_Nightwatch_by_Rembrandt.jpg |''The Night Watch'', by Rembrandt
File:RothwellMaryShelley.jpg|Mary Shelley, English novelist
File:Victor Hugo by Étienne Carjat 1876.jpg|Victor Hugo, French poet and novelist
Before this time many Europeans from the north, especially Scandinavians, remained polytheistic, though southern Europe was predominantly Christian from the 5th century onwards.
A cornerstone of Western thought, beginning in ancient Greece and continuing through the Middle Ages and Renaissance and into modern times, is a tradition of rationalism in various spheres of life, developed by Hellenistic philosophy, Scholasticism, humanism, the Scientific revolution and the Enlightenment.
Baron Pierre de Coubertin, a Frenchman, instigated the modern revival of the Olympic movement.
In recent years, many Western media outlets have seen their circulation figures stagnate.
Publications include ''Encyclopédie'' (1751–72) that was edited by Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert.
However, this would become the centre of a new West.
Greece was followed by Rome, which made key contributions in law, government and engineering.
Since classical antiquity, sport has been an important facet of Western cultural expression.
The first expedition to circumnavigate the Earth (1522) was by Westerners, as well as the first journey to the South Pole (1911), and the first moon landing (1969).
Despite the slowing of its growth, the mainstream Western media continues to be perceived as a fair, independent and objective medium of news reporting.
As religion became less important, and Europeans came into increasing contact with far away peoples, the old concept of Western culture began a slow evolution towards what it is today.
File:Jane Austen coloured version.jpg|Jane Austen, English novelist
While its dates are disputed, the publication in 1543 of Nicolaus Copernicus's ''De revolutionibus orbium coelestium'' (''On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres'') is often cited as marking the beginning of the scientific revolution, and its completion is attributed to the "grand synthesis" of Newton's 1687 ''Principia''.
Westerners are also known for their explorations of the globe and outer space.
File:Portrait_de_Dante.jpg|Dante Alighieri, Italian (Florentine) poet
Thus, much of the learning of classical antiquity was slowly reintroduced to European civilisation in the centuries following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire.
In a broader sense, the Middle Ages, with its fertile encounter between Greek philosophical reasoning and Levantine monotheism was not confined to the West but also stretched into the old East.
The Romans exhibited a passion for blood sports, such as the infamous Gladiatorial battles that pitted contestants against one another in a fight to the death.
Australian Rules Football, an Australian variation of football with similarities to Gaelic football and rugby evolved in the British colony of Victoria in the mid-19th century.
lat.jpg|Terence, Roman playwright
In mathematics, calculus, statistics, logic, vectors, tensors and complex analysis, group theory and topology were developed by Westerners.
After the fall of Rome much of Greco-Roman art, literature, science and even technology were all but lost in the western part of the old empire.
Religion has waned considerably in Europe, where many are today irreligious, agnostic or atheist and they make up about 18.2% of the European population.
A modern ubiquitous architectural form that emphasizes this characteristic is the skyscraper, first developed in New York, London, and Chicago.
Important Western architectural motifs include the Doric, Corinthian, and Ionic columns, and the Romanesque, Gothic, Baroque, and Victorian styles are still widely recognised, and used even today, in the West.
As in other areas, Judaism is found in the Western world.
Europe fell into political anarchy, with many warring kingdoms and principalities.
Nitrogen fixation and petrochemicals were invented by Westerners.
The Industrial Revolution that began in Britain in the 18th Century brought increased leisure time, leading to more time for citizens to attend and follow spectator sports, greater participation in athletic activities, and increased accessibility.
Folklore and music during 19th and 20th centuries, initially by themselves, but later played and further developed together with White and Black Americans, British people, and Westerners in general.
These include jazz, blues and rock music (that in a wider sense include the rock and roll and heavy metal genres), rhythm and blues, funk, Hip-Hop, techno as well as the ska and reggae genres from Jamaica.
The West was peaceful – it contained only the Mediterranean.
Vitamins, hormonal contraception, hormones, insulin, Beta blockers and ACE inhibitors, along with a host of other medically proven drugs were first utilized to treat disease in the West.
Both Petronius' Satyricon (ca 60 CE) and the ''Tale of Genji'' by Murasaki Shikibu (ca 1000 CE) have been cited as the world's first major novel but they had very limited long-term impact on literary writing beyond their own day until much more recent times.
Ubiquitous materials including concrete, aluminium, clear glass, synthetic rubber, synthetic diamond and the plastics polyethylene, polypropylene, PVC and polystyrene were invented in the West.
Football (also known as soccer) remains hugely popular in Europe, but has grown from its origins to be known as the ''world game''.
Communication devices and systems including the telegraph, the telephone, radio, television, communication and navigation satellites, mobile phone, and the Internet were all invented by Westerners.
Other important diagnostic tools of clinical chemistry including the methods of spectrophotometry, electrophoresis and immunoassay were first devised by Westerners.
From the late 15th century to the 17th century, Western culture began to spread to other parts of the world through explorers and missionaries during the Age of Discovery, and by imperialists from the 17th century to the early 20th century.
File:Winter Palace.jpg|The Winter Palace in St Petersburg, Russia.
influenced society by publishing widely read works.
Jan van Eyck, among other renaissance painters, made great advances in oil painting, and perspective drawings and paintings had their earliest practitioners in Florence.
The modern game of golf  originated in Scotland, where the first written record of golf is James II's banning of the game in 1457, as an unwelcome distraction to learning archery.
The term Middle East, in the mid-19th century, included the territory east of the Ottoman Empire but West of China - i.e.
Justinian's Corpus Juris Civilis Roman civil law code was preserved in the East and Constantinople maintained trade and intermittent political control over outposts such as Venice in the West for centuries.
In authoritarian regimes, exposure to Western media is generally considered to be a measure of political openness.
Sports became such a prominent part of their culture that the Greeks created the Olympic Games, which in ancient times were held every four years in a small village in the Peloponnesus called Olympia.
However, per another survey by Pew Research Center from 2011, Christianity remains the dominant religion in the Western world where 70-84% are Christians, According to this survey, 76% of Europeans described themselves as Christians, and about 86.0% of the Americas population consider themselves Christians, (90% in Latin America and 77.4% in North America).
File:Oblique facade 3, US Supreme Court.jpg|The U.S. Supreme Court Building in Washington, D.C., United States.
The first modern Olympics were held at Athens in 1896.
The precise start and end of the Industrial Revolution is still debated among historians, as is the pace of economic and social changes.
In the 14th century, starting from Italy and then spreading throughout Europe, there was a massive artistic, architectural, scientific and philosophical revival, as a result of an increased interest for Classical antiquity.
It traces its roots to prehistoric bull worship and sacrifice and is often linked to Rome, where many human-versus-animal events were held.
It is mainly characterized by the freedom of the press, and has gradually expanded into developing countries.
These trends continued with the advent of mass media and global communication.
Economic historians are in agreement that the onset of the Industrial Revolution is the most important event in the history of humanity since the domestication of animals, plants and fire.
Later, ideas of the west were formed by the concepts of Latin Christendom and the Holy Roman Empire.
Of course extended prose fiction had existed much earlier; both novels of adventure and romance in the Hellenistic world and in Heian Japan.
File:Neuschwanstein castle.jpg|The Neuschwanstein Castle in Schwangau, Germany.
Until the Age of Enlightenment, Christian culture took over as the predominant force in western civilization, guiding the course of philosophy, art, and science for many years.
In the Roman world one could speak of three main directions; North (Celtic tribal states and Parthians), the East (lux ex oriente), and finally South, which implied danger, historically via the Punic wars (Quid novi ex Africa?)
File:Pablo Neruda 1963.jpg|Pablo Neruda, Chilean poet
File:Mona Lisa, by Leonardo da Vinci, from C2RMF retouched.jpg|''Mona Lisa'', by Leonardo da Vinci
The polka, the square dance, and the Irish step dance are very well known Western forms of folk dance.
The Olympic Games revived many of the sports of Classical Antiquity - such as Greco-Roman wrestling, discus and javelin.
The West as a geographical area is unclear.
While epic literary works in verse such as the Mahabharata and Homer's Iliad are ancient and occurred worldwide, the prose novel as a distinct form of storytelling, with developed, consistent human characters and, typically, some connected overall plot (although both of these characteristics have sometimes been modified and played with in later times), was popularized by the West in the 17th and 18th centuries.
The double-blind study and evidence-based medicine are critical scientific techniques widely used in the West for medical purposes.
The atom, nucleus, electron, neutron and proton were all unveiled by Westerners.
The ''Dictionnaire philosophique'' (Philosophical Dictionary, 1764) and ''Letters on the English'' (1733) written by Voltaire spread the ideals of the Enlightenment.
Western culture continued to develop with the Christianisation of Europe during the Middle Ages, the reform and modernization triggered by the Renaissance, and with globalization by successive European empires, that spread European ways of life and European educational methods around the world between the 16th and 20th centuries.
File:Palacio do Planalto.jpeg|The Palacio do Planalto in Brasilia, Brazil.
Many forms of popular music have been derived from African-Americans, and their innovations of jazz and blues serve as the basis from which much of modern popular music derives.
Depictions of the nude human male and female in photography, painting and sculpture are frequently considered to have special artistic merit.
The ship's chronometer, the screw propeller, the locomotive, bicycle, automobile, and aeroplane were all invented in the West.
The Greek and Roman paganism had been completely replaced by Christianity around the 4th and 5th centuries, since it became the official State religion following the baptism of emperor Constantine I.
The Otto and the Diesel internal combustion engines are products whose genesis and early development were in the West.
File:Acropolis of Athens 01361.JPG|The Acropolis in Athens, Greece.
The electrical motor, dynamo, transformer, and electric light, and indeed most of the familiar electrical appliances, were inventions of the West.
Western culture is neither homogeneous nor unchanging.
Minority groups, and Jews in particular, often had to contend with discrimination and persecution.
File:Colosseum in Rome, Italy - April 2007.jpg|The Colosseum in Rome, Italy.
Photography, and the motion picture as both a technology and basis for entirely new art forms, were also developed in the West.
File:Adam_Mickiewicz_według_dagerotypu_paryskiego_z_1842_roku.jpg|Adam Mickiewicz, Polish poet, dramatist, essayist and publicist
The history of American football can be traced to early versions of rugby football and association football.
The method of preventing Rh disease, the treatment of diabetes, and the germ theory of disease were discovered by Westerners.
In Western dance, music, plays and other arts, the performers are only very infrequently masked.
File:Homer British Museum.jpg|Homer, Ancient Greek epic poet
Art and literature, law, education, and politics were preserved in the teachings of the Church, in an environment that, otherwise, would have probably seen their loss.
File:Caravaggio - Bacco adolescente - Google Art Project.jpg|''Bacchus'', by Caravaggio
