Gorillas choose fruit that is high in sugar for energy, as well as fiber.
The gorillas were shown to quickly learn about receiving rewards as mistakes made by the gorillas in the beginning of the experiments gradually decreased.
While defended as being economically profitable for restaurants and local people, it is a large contributor to the endangered status of the western lowland gorilla.
The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has been working with the local community in the Congo Basin to establish wildlife management programs.
Snowflake presented the typical traits and characteristics of albinism typically seen in humans, including white hair, pinkish skin, light colored eyes, reduced visual perception and photophobia (discomfort in bright light).
The experiment involved one adult male gorilla and three adult female gorillas given five gallon buckets near a standing pool.
The Republic of the Congo has put in place a conservation effort to conserve different species such as chimpanzees, forest elephants, and western gorillas from poaching and deforestation.
to be heard) has been noted to reduce stress behavior as well.
The gorilla became the next-to-last great ape genus to have its genome sequenced.
The western lowland gorillas, like many gorillas, are essential to the composition of the rainforest due to their seed distribution.
These samples came from 4 field sites, all located in southern Cameroon.
Wild western lowland gorillas are known to consume the seeds of the "grains of paradise" plant, apparently conferring healthy cardiovascular conditions from their consumption — the occasionally poor cardiovascular health of lowland gorillas in zoos has been postulated to be due to the lack of availability of the ''Aframomum'' seeds in zoo gorillas' diets.
This pattern is likely to result from selective pressures on females to have males at a time when they can provision them most effectively, as male reproductive success probably varies more than that of females and depends more on the maternal role.
Males in captivity, however, are noted to be capable of reaching weights up to 275&nbsp;kg.
This style of movement requires long arms, which works for western gorillas because the armspan of gorillas is larger than their standing height.
There is a correlation between human intervention in the wild with the destruction of habitats and increase in bushmeat hunting.
One gorilla, Koko, mastered more than 1,000 signs.
It appears they also anticipate the use of the tool since they begin with biggest sticks available and progressively modify it until it is the perfect fit for inserting into a hole that contains food.
The HIV-1 virus exhibits phylogeographic clustering, which is due to large rivers.
This clustering allows us to pinpoint the probable geographic origins of two of the human virus clades.
Logging also destroys gorilla habitats.
Furthermore, in 2013 a study was conducted in order to better understand the genetic variation in gorillas by using reduced representation sequencing.
According to the late John Aspinall a silverback gorilla in his prime has the physical strength of seven or eight Olympic weightlifters, but this claim is unverified.
What should be worth noting is that the environment of the zoo may affect the behavior of the gorillas.
Another of these factors is infertility.
This Ebola outbreak also affected the Maya Nord population (52 kilometers northwest from Lokoué) from 400 individuals to considerably fewer.
If the gorillas did not give them a twig then they would not get their desired object.
Unlike their powerful parents, newborns are tiny—weighing four pounds—and able only to cling to their mothers' fur.
Individual gorillas, particularly those of a more solitary nature, are more likely to self-pluck using their fingers and pick up this behavior if they were exposed to a group member that plucked their hair as a youngster and not yet mature gorilla.
Such factors include deforestation, farming, grazing, and the expanding human settlements that cause forest loss.
In 2002 and 2003, there was an Ebola outbreak in the Lossi sanctuary population, and in 2004, there was an Ebola outbreak in the Lokoué forest clearing in Odzala-Kokoua National Park, both in the Republic of the Congo.
Destruction of gorilla habitat may harm the overall forest ecosystem.
In the northeastern part of the Republic of the Congo, even though poaching is illegal, western lowland gorillas are still being hunted for their bushmeat and the young for pets; five percent of the species is killed each year because of this.
However, gorillas remain vulnerable to Ebola, deforestation, and poaching.
Despite the chimpanzees being the closest extant relatives of humans, 15% of the human genome was found to be more like that of the gorilla.
Three out of four females have been observed to engaged in sexual behavior while pregnant and two out of three females have been observed to engage in sexual behavior while lactating.
Female western lowland gorillas living in a group led by a single male have been observed to  display sexual behavior during all stages of their reproductive cycle and during times of non-fertility.
The '''western lowland gorilla''' (''Gorilla gorilla gorilla'') is one of two subspecies of the western gorilla (''Gorilla gorilla'') that lives in montane, primary and secondary forests and lowland swamps in central Africa in Angola, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Republic of the Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Gabon.
Females are significantly more likely to engage and participate in sexual behavior and activity on a day when another female is sexually active.
Important food species have been divided into three categories.
The hair on the back and rump of males takes on a grey coloration and is also lost as they get progressively older.
In the mid-1970s, researchers turned their attention to communicating with gorillas via sign language.
Males also compete aggressively with each other for contact with females.
In the southern part of Cameroon the populations of western lowland gorillas have had examinations of their feces.
Western gorillas frequently stand upright, but walk in a hunched, quadrupedal fashion, with hands curled and knuckles touching the ground.
Disease has also been a factor in the survival of the western lowland gorilla.
Individual characteristics such as age, sex, personality, and individual histories are essential in understanding that stressors will affect each individual gorilla and their welfare differently.
They have been known to avoid areas with roads and farms that show signs of human activity.
These areas support the gorillas in both the wet and the dry season of the forest.
Most pure (meaning they are not inbred) western lowland gorillas have a hom/het ratio that ranges from 0.5 to 0.7.
The only known albino gorilla – named Snowflake – was a wild-born western lowland gorilla originally from Equatorial Guinea.
Those who challenge this alpha male are apt to be cowed by impressive shows of physical power.
This transporter is also known to be involved in oculocutaneous albinism type 4 in humans.
Western lowland gorillas live in the smallest family groups of all gorillas, with an average of 4 to 8 members in each.
A male standing erect can be  tall and weigh .
The AFS has determined that western lowland gorillas display a deficit of rare alleles.
It was found that it is easier for males to travel alone and move between groups as a result of the solidarity they experienced before finding their own breeding group.
Young gorillas, from three to six years old, remind human observers of children.
These gorillas favor areas where edible plants are more copious.
Female gorillas give birth to one infant after a pregnancy of nearly nine months.
However, when ripe fruit is available, they tend to eat more fruit as opposed to foliage.
When ripe fruit is in scarce supply, they eat leaves, herbs, and bark.
This conservation effort would allow these species to benefit from vegetation and ecologically important resources.
The reason why is that AFS knowledge can help give information regarding demographics and evolutionary processes.
Analysis of the gorilla genome has cast doubt on the idea that the rapid evolution of hearing genes gave rise to language in humans, as it also occurred in gorillas.
The western lowland gorilla is considered to be critically endangered by the IUCN.
Gorillas normally travel  per day.
A particular abnormal behavior is hair-plucking, which occurs across many species of mammals and birds.
Swamp forests are now considered important feeding areas and habitats for the western lowland gorilla.
By increasing the female’s own reproductive success, she then decreases the reproductive success of others female gorillas, regardless of their reproductive state.
In cases where there are more than one silverback males in a group, they are most likely father and son.
Females tend to make bonds with other females in their natal group only, but rather form strong bonds with males.
Snowflake, a male gorilla, was taken from the wild and brought to the Barcelona Zoo in 1966 at very young age.
In terms of manufacturing tools for the use of extracting for western lowland gorillas, gorillas are able to adapt tools to a particular use by selecting branches, remove projections such as leaves and bark, and adapting their length to the depth of the holes.
Despite these displays and the animals' obvious physical power, gorillas are generally calm and nonaggressive unless they are disturbed.
The origin of AIDS has been linked to a virus known to infect more than 40 species of nonhuman primates in Africa.
They have short muzzles, a prominent brow ridge, large nostrils, and small eyes and ears.
The adult will eat around  of food per day.
In addition, 30% of the gorilla genome "is closer to human or chimpanzee than the latter are to each other; this is rarer around coding genes, indicating pervasive selection throughout great ape evolution, and has functional consequences in gene expression.
Larger groups travel greater distances in order to obtain sufficient food.
Gorillas do not display territorial behavior, and neighboring groups often overlap ranges.
These infants ride on their mothers' backs from the age of four months through the first two or three years of their lives.
He may stand upright, throw things, make aggressive charges, and pound his huge chest while barking out powerful hoots or unleashing a frightening roar.
Staple foods which are eaten on a daily/weekly basis throughout the year, seasonal foods which are present in the majority of resources when available and fallback foods which are always available, but eaten only or mainly during fruit-scarce months.
Zoos worldwide have a population of 550 western lowland gorillas, and the Cincinnati Zoo leads the United States in western lowland gorilla births.
This population decreased from 377 individuals to 38 individuals two years after the outbreak, and to 40 individuals six years after the outbreak.
There has been a study examining the ability of western lowland gorillas to give to and exchange with humans.
The Ebola outbreak in the Lokoué forest clearing negatively affected the individuals living in groups and the adult females more than the solitary males, resulting in an increase in the proportion of solitary males to those living in groups.
Therefore, if there are no western lowland gorillas to disperse the needed seeds to other animals, not only will the gorillas become extinct but so will many other animals, which could over time destroy an entire ecosystem.
Of one half of captive females of viable reproductive age, approximately only 30% of those had only a single birth.
The simian immunodeficiency virus infected various African primates such as apes, gorillas and chimpanzees.
It has been found that the female western lowland gorillas participate in non-reproductive sexual behavior in order to increase her reproductive success through sexual competition.
Use of both internal and external privacy screens on exhibit windows has been shown to alleviate stresses from visual effects of high crowd densities, leading to decreased stereotypic behaviors in the gorillas.
The fecundity of females, or capacity of producing young in great numbers, appears to decline by the age of 18.
Western lowland gorillas are not typically observed in areas that are close to human settlements and villages.
Studies made on the topic show that of all the western lowland gorillas housed in the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) population, 15% of the surveyed population displayed hair-plucking behavior with 62% of all institutions housing a hair-plucker.
In the 1980s, a census of the gorilla populations in equatorial Africa was thought to be 100,000.
Adult male gorillas are prone to cardiomyopathy, a degenerative heart disease.
It is common for non-human primates kept in captivity to exhibit behaviors deviating from the normal behavior observed of them in the wilderness.
Varying exposure to different Anopheles mosquitoes transmitting Plasmodium species is known to be the origin of Malaria on Western Lowland Gorillas.
During the rainy months of July and August, fruit is ripe; however, in the dry seasons, ripe fruit is scarce.
Laverania which is a sub genus of plasmodium genus Parasitic Protozoa, was found in these studies.
Western lowland gorilla groups travel within a home range averaging .
This was done in 2012.
The diversity of fruits consumed was higher in the poor fruit year,when favored fruit species, failed to produce large crops.
Playing naturalistic auditory stimuli as opposed to classical music, rock music, or no auditory enrichment (which allows for crowd noise, machinery, etc.
Another example of gorillas' significant intelligence is their ability to comprehend simple sign language.
However, while both sexes leave their birth group, females are never found alone; they just travel from breeding group to breeding group.
Before reaching the age of sexual maturity, males leave their natal group and go through a “bachelor stage” that can last several years either in solitary or in a nonbreeding group.
Their breeding groups consist of one silverback male, three adult females and their offspring.
This species of gorillas exhibits pronounced sexual dimorphism.
HIV-1, is composed of four phylogenetic lineages, which at some point in time have independently gone through cross-species transmission of the SIV (simian immune-deficiency virus).
Stereotypic behaviors are abnormal or compulsive behaviors.
Studies of the mental capacity of western lowland gorillas continue.
Enrichment modifications to feed and foraging, where clover-hay is added to an exhibit floor, decrease stereotypic activities while simultaneously increasing positive food-related behaviors.
Much of their day is spent in play, climbing trees, chasing one another, and swinging from branches.
The WCS is also working in Congo and surrounding countries to limit the bush meat trade by enforcing laws and hunting restrictions and also helping the local people find new sources of protein.
According to the ''Guinness Book of World Records'', the average male is  and stands upright at .
Researchers later adjusted the figure to less than half because of poaching and diseases.
They live in primary and secondary lowland tropical forests that have elevations that extend from sea level up to 1,300 meters.
Groups containing only one male are believed to be the basic unit of the social group, gradually growing in size due to reproduction and new members migrating in.
Once the gorillas would give twigs to the humans they would receive one of these objects.
The presence of western lowland gorillas has allowed humans to further the study of how gorillas compare with humans in regards to human diseases, behavior, linguistic, and psychological aspects of their lives.
This is the first record of gorillas spontaneously using tools to drink in zoos.
The common food item within fibers are the herbaceous stems.
There was also a western lowland gorilla in 2009 at Buffalo zoo that actually used a bucket to collect water.
The SIV or Simian immunodeficiency virus that infects them is similar to a certain strain of HIV-1.
The group usually favours a certain area within the home range but seems to follow a seasonal pattern depending upon the availability of ripening fruits and, at some sites, localised large open clearings (swamps and "bais").
This involved humans holding objects such as fruit, leaves or peanuts in one hand.
Other features are large muscles in the jaw region along with broad and strong teeth.
Females stand  tall and weigh half as much as males.
This demonstrates the gorillas' acquisition of high level sensorimotor intelligence similar to that of young human children.
The western lowland gorilla population in the wild is faced by a number of factors that threaten its extinction.
A study of over 300 births to captive female gorillas revealed that older females tend to give birth to more male offspring as opposed to females under 8 years old.
Such stress reactions could be caused by sounds, light conditions, odors, temperature and humidity conditions, material make-up of enclosures, habitat size constraints, lack of proper hiding areas, forced closeness to humans, routine husbandry and feeding conditions, or abnormal social groups to name a few.
Two of the younger female gorillas were able to successfully fill the buckets with water.
This information revealed the first evidence of inbreeding in western lowland gorillas.
This has given scientists further insight into the evolution and origin of humans.
Finally, the study sought out to analyze the allele frequency spectrum (AFS) in western lowland gorillas.
In the past there has been a gorilla that used a stick to measure how deep water was.
The group of gorillas is led by one or more adult males.
As herbivores, the main diet of western lowland gorilla groups is roots, shoots, fruit, wild celery, tree bark and pulp which is provided for in the thick forests of central and west Africa.
Western lowland gorillas primarily live in rain forests, swamp forest, brush, secondary vegetation, clearing and forest edges, abandoned farming fields, and riverine forests.
Out of 2,934 gorilla samples, 70 reacted with at least one HIV-1 antigen.
The forests of the Republic of Congo are currently considered to host the majority of the western lowland gorilla population.
The average amount of  rainfall in the areas where western lowland gorillas typically reside is about 1,500 millimeters a year with the greatest rainfall between the months of August and November.
While in the dry season, there is a decrease in the consumption of fleshy fruits, but they still continue to eat other kinds of fruits.
In the study done at Lope, gorillas harvest most of their food arboreally, but less than half of their night nests are built in trees.
The population is still slowly recovering, even today, it is hoped towards a population that has the same demographic structure of an unaffected population, because of new births and breeding groups.
The leader (the silverback) organizes group activities, like eating, nesting, and traveling in their home range.
The study found that western lowland gorillas are more likely to be heterozygous than homozygous.
This study consisted of a sample of 12 western lowland gorillas and two eastern lowland gorillas all in captivity.
Surveys conducted by the Wildlife Conservation Society in 2006 and 2007 found about 125,000 previously unreported gorillas have been living in the swamp forests of Lake Télé Community Reserve and in neighboring Marantaceae (dryland) forests in the Republic of the Congo.
Gorillas will climb trees up to 15 meters in height in search of food.
Groups of bachelor gorillas containing young silverbacks have significantly higher levels of aggression and wounding rates than mixed age and sex groups.
They never completely strip vegetation from a single area since the rapid regrowth of the vegetation allows them to stay within a reasonably confined home range for extended periods of time.
In tropical forests, gorillas are hunted to provide meat for the bushmeat trade.
This coloration is the reason why older males are known as "silverbacks".
Stresses have been known to cause both physiological and behavioral chronic issues for captive species including, but not limited to altered reproductive cycling and behavior, reduced immune responses, disrupted hormone and growth levels, reduced body weight, heightened abnormal activities and aggression, and decreased exploratory behavior with increased hiding behaviors.
It is the gorilla most often found in zoos.
The catastrophe led the World Conservation Union to designate the western lowland gorilla a critically endangered species.
The outbreak was monitored in the Republic of Congo by Magdalena Bermejo and other field-based primatologists, as it also spread to humans through contact with bushmeat.
Most notably, an experiment was conducted at Buffalo Zoological Gardens from 17 April 2010 to 26 June 2010 relating to this incident.
Therefore, because of variation in these gorillas it has been concluded that they display a moderate substructure within the western lowland population in general.
Deforestation of this area allows for the trade of bushmeat and even more poaching.
Western lowland gorillas are believed to be one of the zoonotic origins of HIV/AIDS.
It was also found that males like to settle with other male members of their family.
Deforestation and logging allowed for the creation of roads which allowed hunters to hunt deeper into the forests, increasing the amount of poaching and bushmeat trade in the area.
Because of these outbreaks, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) updated the status of western lowland gorillas from "endangered" to "critically endangered".
Out of 51 fecal samples from habituated individuals, 25 have shown to have Plasmodium DNA.
The conservation of the Western Lowland gorilla has been made a priority by many organizations.
Although logging diminishes gorilla habitats, it may also provide for increased herbaceous vegetation as a result of gaps in the tree cover.
Female western lowland gorillas do not produce many offspring due to the fact that they do not reach sexual maturity until the age of 8 or 9.
However, these non-reproductive gorillas may prove to be a valuable resource since the use of assisted reproductive techniques aid in the maintaining of genetic diversity in the limited population(s) in zoos.
From 2003–2004, two epizootics infected the western lowland gorilla, which caused two thirds of their population to disappear.
Western lowland gorillas are seed dispersers, which mean they carry seeds from one place to another, and this trait is beneficial to many of the animals in the forest.
Bush meat hunting and timber harvesting in the western lowland gorilla’s habitat have negatively affected the probability of its survival.
The forests of the Republic of Congo serve as protection to the gorillas with the isolation of the large swampy forest areas.
Malaria Is also an issue that has been arising for the western lowland gorillas.
The long, narrow, bony pelvis of the great apes, which further contributes to the potentially long distance from the apex of the vagina to the ovaries and therefore decreases the chance of successful fertilization.
They are often found on the ground, and are made up of up to 30 gorillas.
Commercial poaching of chimpanzees, forest elephants, and western gorillas in The Republic of the Congo resulted from the increased amount of commercial logging and infrastructure.
The western lowland gorilla eats a combination of fruits and foliage, providing a balance of nutrients, depending on the time of year.
Infants can be dependent on their mother for up to five years.
The genetic variant for Snowflake’s albinism was identified by the scientists as a non-synonymous single nucleotide variant located in a transmembrane region of SLC45A2.
They are also seen as a crop pest in western Africa because they raid native plantations and therefore destroy what would have otherwise been valuable crops.
The Ebola epizootic in western and central Africa has caused more than 90% mortality rate in western lowland gorillas.
The male gorilla takes on the role of the protector.
During the wet season gorillas commonly consume fruits.
The western lowland gorilla is the smallest subspecies of gorilla but nevertheless still a primate of exceptional size and strength.
In gorillas, such common aberrant behaviors include eating disorders—such as regurgitation, reingestion, and coprophagy—self injurious or conspecific aggression, pacing, rocking, sucking of fingers or lip smacking, and overgrooming  Negative vigilance of visitor behaviors have been identified as starting, posturing, and charging at visitors.
Populations feeding on high-energy foods that vary spatially and seasonally tend to have greater day ranges than those feeding on lower-quality but more consistently available foods.
They may also eat insects from time to time.
They are hunted illegally for their skins and meat in Africa and captured to be sold to zoos.
Recent research on captive gorilla welfare emphasizes a need to shift to individual assessments instead of a one size fits all group approach to understanding how welfare increases or decreases based on a variety of factors.
Snowflake was diagnosed by scientists as having non-syndromic albinism.
Their hands are proportionately large with nails on all digits, similar to that of a human's, and very large thumbs.
Human hunters and leopards can also influence the movement patterns.
They possess no tails and have jet black skin along with coarse black hair that covers their entire body except for the face, ears, hands, and feet.
Generally, female gorillas mature at 10–12 years of age (or earlier at 7–8 years) and their male counterparts mature more slowly, rarely strong and dominant enough to reproduce before 15–20 years of age.
