On Vijayadashami, the last day of the festival, the effigies are paraded through the streets with riotous pageantry before being dumped into the rivers.
Asansol is the second largest city & urban agglomeration in West Bengal after Kolkata.
The state's 2001–2011 decennial growth rate was 13.93%, lower than 1991–2001 growth rate of 17.8%, and also lower than the national rate of 17.64%.
The citadel of Gauda served as capital of the Gauda Kingdom, the Pala Empire, the Sena Empire and the Sultanate of Bengal.
The growth rate was 13.35% in 2014–15.
It is India's fourth-most populous state, with over 91 million inhabitants.
West Bengal has a long tradition in folk literature, evidenced by the ''Charyapada'', ''Mangalkavya'', ''Shreekrishna Kirtana'', ''Thakurmar Jhuli'', and stories related to Gopal Bhar.
West Bengal has 3.26% of its geographical area under protected areas comprising 15 wildlife sanctuaries and 5 national parks — Sundarbans National Park, Buxa Tiger Reserve, Gorumara National Park, Neora Valley National Park and Singalila National Park.
These social reforms have eventually led to a cultural atmosphere where practices like sati, dowry, and caste-based discrimination or untouchability, the evils that crept into the Hindu society, were abolished.
Natural resources like tea and jute in and nearby parts has made West Bengal a major centre for the jute and tea industries.
In urban areas, many women and men wear western attire.
The state contributes 7.8% of India's population.
Nepali language also has an official status in the three subdivisions of Darjeeling district.
Much of the vegetation of the western part of the state shares floristic similarities with the plants of the Chota Nagpur plateau in the adjoining state of Jharkhand.
Bengal’s TFR of (1.6) roughly equals to that of Canada.
Sikhism, Christianity, Buddhism and other religions make up the remainder.
The whole city of Kolkata undergoes a transformation during Durga Puja, as it is decked up in lighting decorations and thousands of colourful pandals are set up where effigies of goddess Durga and her four children are worshipped and displayed.
Between 1905 and 1911, an abortive attempt was made to divide the province of Bengal into two zones.
It was followed by a shorter reign of the Hindu Sena dynasty.
Bengal suffered from the Great Bengal famine in 1943, which claimed 3 million lives during World War II.
In 1950, the Princely State of Cooch Behar merged with West Bengal.
Refugee resettlement and related issues continued to play a significant role in the politics and socio-economic condition of the state.
The Bose Institute, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, S.N.
Shashanka is often recorded in Buddhist annals as an intolerant Hindu ruler who is noted for his persecution of the Buddhists.
West Bengal has a rich heritage of handloom weaving, and produces some of the finest varieties of cotton and silk sarees in the country.
The predominant commercial tree species is ''Shorea robusta'', commonly known as the Sal tree.
Many of the schools in Kolkata and Darjeeling are renowned colonial-era establishments and boast of fantastic neo-classical architecture.
There are significant examples of fine arts in Bengal from earlier times such as terracotta art of Hindu temples, Kalighat paintings etc.
One of the earliest foreign references to Bengal is a mention by the Ancient Greeks around 100 BC of a land named Gangaridai, which was located at the mouths of the Ganges.
A major agricultural producer, West Bengal is the sixth-largest contributor to India's net domestic product.
A cold and dry northern wind blows in the winter, substantially lowering the humidity level.
Bengal had overseas trade relations with Suvarnabhumi (Burma, Lower Thailand, Lower Malay Peninsula, and the Sumatra).
Reserves, protected and unclassed forests constitute 59.4%, 31.8% and 8.9%, respectively, of the forest area, as of 2009.
This five-day-long colourful Hindu festival witnesses intense celebration across the state.
After a period of anarchy, the Pala dynasty ruled the region for four hundred years starting from the eighth century.
A hotbed of the Indian independence movement through the early 20th century, Bengal was divided during India's independence in 1947 along religious lines into two separate entities, with West Bengal becoming a predominantly Hindu state of India.
Ferry is a principal mode of transport in the southern part of the state, especially in the Sundarbans area.
of Purulia is a rare form of mask dance.
The Ganges is the main river, which divides in West Bengal.
State industries are localised in the Kolkata region, the mineral-rich western highlands, and Haldia port region.
Besides Buddha Purnima, Dashain or Dusshera, Holi, Diwali, Losar, Namsoong or the Lepcha New Year and Losoong are the other major festivals of the Darjeeling Himalayan region.
Poush mela is a popular festival of Shantiniketan in winter.
The state capital is Kolkata (Calcutta), the third-largest city in India.
West Bengal is on the eastern bottleneck of India, stretching from the Himalayas in the north, to the Bay of Bengal in the south.
NASSCOM–Gartner ranks West Bengal power infrastructure the best in the country.
The region was a part of the Vanga Kingdom, according to the Indian epic ''Mahabharata.''
As of 2015, West Bengal has the fifth highest GSDP in India.
The Bengal Sultanate was interrupted for 20 years by an uprising by the Hindus under Raja Ganesha.
Prominent contemporary directors include veterans like Buddhadev Dasgupta, Tarun Majumdar, Goutam Ghose, Aparna Sen, Rituparno Ghosh and a newer pool of directors like Kaushik Ganguly and Srijit Mukherji.
Following the West Bengal State Assembly Election in 2011, the All India Trinamool Congress and Indian National Congress coalition under Mamata Banerjee of the All India Trinamool Congress was elected to power (getting 225 seats in the legislature).
The origin of the name Bengal (known as ''Bangla'' and ''Bongo'' in Bengali language) is unknown.
Since independence in 1947, Durga Puja has slowly changed into more of a glamourous carnival than a religious festival, where people across diverse religious and ethnic spectrum partake in the festivity.
Shashanka murdered Rajyavardhana, the Buddhist King of Thanesar, and is noted for destroying the Bodhi tree at Bodhgaya, and replacing Buddha statues with Shiva lingams.
The growth rate was 12.62% in 2014–15
Agriculture is the leading occupation in West Bengal.
Men also wear traditional costumes such as the ''panjabi'' with ''dhuti'', often on cultural occasions, while women prefer to wear salwar kameez.
The early and prolonged exposure to British administration resulted in the expansion of Western education, culminating in development of science, institutional education, and social reforms in the region, including what became known as the Bengali renaissance.
The state's cultural heritage, besides varied folk traditions, ranges from stalwarts in literature including Nobel-laureate Rabindranath Tagore to scores of musicians, film-makers and artists.
Despite the Trinamool Congress government’s strong efforts to forge a consensus on the name change resolution, the Congress, the Left Front and the Bharatiya Janata Party opposed the resolution, However it awaits the consent of the Indian Parliament for approval.
The narrow Terai region separates this region from the North Bengal plains, which in turn transitions into the Ganges delta towards the south.
As of 2011, West Bengal has a population density of  making it the second-most densely populated state in India, after Bihar.
It is the gateway to the revolution of European education.
A notable tree from the Sundarbans is the ubiquitous ''sundari'' (''Heritiera fomes''), from which the forest gets its name.
Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose International Airport at Dum Dum, Kolkata, is the state's biggest airport.
In 2011, the Government of West Bengal proposed a change in the official name of the state to ''Poschimbongo'' ( ''Pôshchimbônggô'').
The first recorded independent king of Bengal was Shashanka, who reigned in the early 7th century.
Poila Baishakh, Dolyatra or Holi, Poush Parbon, Kali Puja, Saraswati Puja, Diwali, Lakshmi Puja, Janmashtami, Jagaddhatri Puja, Vishwakarma Puja, Bhai Phonta, Rakhi Bandhan, Kalpataru Day, Shivratri, Ganesh Chathurthi, Maghotsav, Kartik Puja, Akshay Tritiya, Raas Yatra, Guru Purnima, Annapurna Puja, Charak Puja, Gajan, Buddha Purnima, Christmas, Eid ul-Fitr, Eid ul-Adha and Muharram are other major festivals of Bengal.
Rice is the state's principal food crop.
Bengalis, consisting of Bengali Hindus, Bengali Muslims, Bengali Christians and a few Bengali Buddhists comprise the majority of the population.
The University of Calcutta, the oldest public university in India, has 136 affiliated colleges.
As of 2013, recorded forest area in the state is  which is 18.93% of the state's geographical area, compared to the national average of 21.23%.
The state has several higher education institutes of national importance including Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, Indian Institute of Management Calcutta (the first IIM), Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Kolkata, Indian Statistical Institute, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur (the first IIT), Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur (the first IIEST), National Institute of Technology, Durgapur and West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences.
West Bengal receives the Bay of Bengal branch of the Indian ocean monsoon that moves in a northwest direction.
Although Hindus are the predominant community, the state has a large minority Muslim population.
The variety of fruits and vegetables that Bengal has to offer is incredible.
Since mid-2000s, armed activists conducted minor terrorist attacks in some parts of the state, while clashes with the administration took place at several sensitive places over the issue of industrial land acquisition, which became a crucial reason behind the defeat of ruling Left Front government in 2011 assembly election.
Bagdogra Airport near Siliguri is a customs airport that has international services to Bhutan and Thailand besides regular domestic services.
Bengali 24-hour television news channels include ABP Ananda, Tara Newz, Kolkata TV, News Time, 24 Ghanta, Mahuaa Khobor, CTVN Plus, Channel 10 and R Plus.
The main ethnic group are the Bengali people, with Bengali Hindus forming the demographic majority.
The alluvial soil of the Gangetic plain, compounded with favourable rainfall, make this region especially fertile.
The state contributes 42 seats to the Lok Sabha and 16 seats to the Rajya Sabha of the Indian Parliament.
The region was part of several ancient pan-Indian empires, including the Mauryans and Guptas.
The Teesta, Torsa, Jaldhaka and Mahananda rivers are in the northern hilly region.
The state tourism department organises the gala Christmas Festival every year in Park Street.
Christmas, called ''Bôŗodin'' (Great day) is perhaps the next major festival celebrated in Kolkata, after Durga Puja.
Bengal has been the harbinger of modernism in fine arts.
Kolkata has played a pioneering role in the development of the modern education system in India.
Bengal played a major role in the Indian independence movement, in which revolutionary groups such as ''Anushilan Samiti'' and ''Jugantar'' were dominant.
The main players in the regional politics are the All India Trinamool Congress, the Indian National Congress, and the Left Front alliance (led by the Communist Party of India (Marxist) or CPI(M)).
The Bengal famine of 1770 claimed millions of lives due to tax policies enacted by the British company.
Pollution of the Ganges from indiscriminate waste dumped into the river is a major problem.
At nights, a cool southerly breeze carries moisture from the Bay of Bengal.
''Panta bhat'' (rice soaked overnight in water)with onion & green chili is a traditional dish consumed in rural areas.
There is passenger service to Port Blair on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and cargo ship service to ports in India and abroad, operated by the Shipping Corporation of India.
Calcutta Cricket and Football Club is the second-oldest cricket club in the world.
GSDP Percent growth at current prices has varied from a low of 10.3% in 2010–11 to a high of 17.11% in 2013–14.
The gender ratio is 947 females per 1000 males.
It was also a bastion of regional kingdoms.
The secondary schools are affiliated with the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE), the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), the National Institute of Open School (NIOS) or the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education.
Common spices found in a Bengali kitchen are cumin, ajmoda (radhuni), bay leaf, mustard, ginger, green chillies, turmeric, etc.
West Bengal had 505 published newspapers in 2005, of which 389 were in Bengali.
Auxiliary authorities known as ''panchayats'', for which local body elections are regularly held, govern local affairs.
Terms of office run for 5 years, unless the Assembly is dissolved prior to the completion of the term.
Famous handloom sarees woven in the state include tant, jamdani, garad, korial, baluchari, tussar and muslin.
The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, part of NFR, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Notably, many corporate companies are now headquartered in Kolkata include ITC Limited, India Government Mint, Kolkata, Haldia Petrochemicals, Exide Industries, Hindustan Motors, Bata India, Birla Corporation, CESC Limited, Coal India Limited, Damodar Valley Corporation, PwC India, Peerless Group, Berger Paints India, Emami, ABP Group, Bandhan Bank, United Bank of India, UCO Bank and Allahabad Bank.
The railway system is a nationalised service without any private investment.
Most of the people also consume egg, chicken, mutton, shrimps etc.
Armed attempts against the British Raj from Bengal reached a climax when Subhas Chandra Bose led the Indian National Army from Southeast Asia against the British.
In Darjeeling, which is above , temperate-forest trees such as oaks, conifers, and rhododendrons predominate.
In 2010s, events such as adoption of "Look East" policy by the government of India, opening of the Nathu La Pass in Sikkim as a border trade-route with China and immense interest in the South East Asian countries to enter the Indian market and invest have put Kolkata in an advantageous position for development in future, particularly with likes of Myanmar, where India needs oil from military regime.
Dial-up access is provided throughout the state by BSNL and other providers.
During the 1970s and 1980s, severe power shortages, strikes and a violent Naxalite movement damaged much of the state's infrastructure, leading to a period of economic stagnation.
The Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971 resulted in the influx of millions of refugees to West Bengal, causing significant strains on its infrastructure.
However, administration by governors appointed by the court of the Mughal Empire gave way to semi-independence of the area under the Nawabs of Murshidabad, who nominally respected the sovereignty of the Mughals in Delhi.
Pandals are erected in various cities, towns and villages throughout West Bengal.
West Bengal politics underwent a major change when the Left Front won the 1977 assembly election, defeating the incumbent Indian National Congress.
The Farakka barrage over Ganges feeds the Hooghly branch of the river by a feeder canal, and its water flow management has been a source of lingering dispute between India and Bangladesh.
Consequently, the region was ruled by dynasties of Bengal Sultanate and feudal lords under the Delhi Sultanate for the next few hundred years.
Subsequent Muslim conquests helped spread Islam throughout the region.
Kolkata is a major river-port in eastern India.
The Assembly is unicameral with 295 Members of the Legislative Assembly, or MLAs, including one nominated from the Anglo-Indian community.
The Durgapur centre has established a number of industries in the areas of tea, sugar, chemicals and fertilisers.
Winter (December–January) is mild over the plains with average minimum temperatures of .
Durga Puja in September–October is the most popular and most widely celebrated festival in West Bengal.
Images of Jagannath are set upon a chariot and pulled through the streets.
Buddhism remains a prominent religion in the Himalayan region of the Darjeeling hills, and almost the entirety of West Bengal's Buddhist population are from this region.
West Bengal schools are run by the state government or by private organisations, including religious institutions.
In most of the state, cycle rickshaws, and in Kolkata, hand-pulled rickshaws, electric rickshaw are used for short-distance travel.
The Bengali film industry is well known for its art films, and has produced acclaimed directors like Satyajit Ray, Mrinal Sen, Tapan Sinha and Ritwik Ghatak.
Each district is governed by a district collector or district magistrate, appointed either by the Indian Administrative Service or the West Bengal Civil Service.
The famous schools of Darjeeling include St. Paul's, St. Joseph's North Point, Goethals Memorial School and Dow Hill in Kurseong.
Assembly meetings are presided over by the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker in the Speaker's absence.
Their influence increased into the 18th century, when the British East India Company gained rights to collect revenue in Bengal subah (province) in 1765 as per the treaty between the East India company and Mughal emperor following the Battle of Buxar in 1764.
The Lamas chant mantras and sound their bugles, and students as well as people from all communities carry the holy books or ''pustaks'' on their heads.
Musical groups from Darjeeling and other states of North East India are invited by the state to perform choir recitals, carols and jazz numbers.Buddha Purnima, which marks the birth of Gautama Buddha, is one of the most important Hindu/Buddhist festivals and is celebrated with much gusto in the Darjeeling hills.
On this day, processions are taken out of each of the various Buddhist monasteries or ''gumpas'', and these congregate at the Mall, Chowrasta.
While the summer in the delta region is noted for excessive humidity, the western highlands experience a dry summer like northern India, with the highest day temperature ranging from  to .
The official language is Bengali and English.
University of Calcutta (Focus Area - Electro-Physiological and Neuro-imaging studies including mathematical modeling) has also been selected under the scheme '''Centre with Potential for Excellence in Particular Area'''.
The state's economic recovery gathered momentum after economic liberalisations were introduced in the mid-1990s by the central government.
Notable sports persons from West Bengal include former Indian national cricket captain Sourav Ganguly, Pankaj Roy Olympic tennis bronze medallist Leander Paes, and chess grand master Dibyendu Barua.
Vegetarian dishes are mostly without onion and garlic.
Night-flowering jasmine
The distribution of vegetation in northern West Bengal is dictated by elevation and precipitation.
The Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science is the first research institute in Asia.
While the large population of eastern and central Bengal became Muslim during this period, Hinduism remained the dominant religion in southern Bengal due to the strong influence of folk Hindu culture and Vaishnavism.
Years after independence, West Bengal was still dependent on the central government for meeting its demands for food; food production remained stagnant and the Indian green revolution bypassed the state.
Apart from this there is a private university run by Ramakrishna mission named Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda University at Belur Math.
Mir Qasim, the last independent Nawab, was defeated by the British.
Vodafone, Airtel, BSNL, Reliance Communications, Uninor, Aircel, MTS India, Idea Cellular and Tata DoCoMo are available cellular phone operators.
The Kolkata Port Trust manages the Kolkata and the Haldia docks.
In August, 2016, West Bengal Legislative Assembly passed another resolution to change the name of West Bengal to "Bangal" in Hindi, "Bengal" in English and "Bangla" in Bengali.
India's sole Chinatown is in eastern Kolkata.
The state has promoted foreign direct investment, which has mostly come in the software and electronics fields; Kolkata is becoming a major hub for the Information technology (IT) industry.
Notable scholars who were born, worked or studied in the geographic area of the state include physicists Satyendra Nath Bose, Meghnad Saha, and Jagadish Chandra Bose; chemist Prafulla Chandra Roy; statisticians Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis and Anil Kumar Gain; physician Upendranath Brahmachari; educator Ashutosh Mukherjee; and Nobel laureates Rabindranath Tagore, C. V. Raman, and Amartya Sen.
The confectionery industry has flourished because of its close association with social and religious ceremonies.
Tea is produced commercially in northern districts; the region is well known for Darjeeling and other high quality teas.
Islam made its first appearance in Bengal during the 12th century when Sufi missionaries arrived.
Other major Bengali newspapers are ''Bartaman'', ''Sangbad Pratidin'', ''Aajkaal'', ''Jago Bangla'', ''Uttarbanga Sambad'' and ''Ganashakti''.
Although he failed to bring Bengal under his control, the expedition defeated Lakshman Sen. His two sons moved to a place then called Vikramapur (present-day Munshiganj District), where their diminished dominion lasted until the late 13th century.
Private FM stations are available only in cities like Kolkata, Siliguri and Asansol.
Visva-Bharati University at Santiniketan is a central university and an institution of national importance.
Cricket and soccer are popular sports in the state.
It has a total area of , making it similar in size to Serbia.
As part of Greater Bengal, West Bengal has one of most diverse histories of any state in India.
Tollygunj in Kolkata is the location of numerous Bengali movie studios, and the name "Tollywood" (similar to Hollywood and Bollywood) is derived from that name.
Kolkata is one of the major centres for football in India and houses top national clubs such as East Bengal, Mohun Bagan and Mohammedan Sporting Club.
Popular street food includes ''Aloor Chop'', Beguni, Kati roll, biryani and phuchka.
West Bengal was also home to several medieval Hindu principalities, including the Koch Kingdom, the realm of Pratapaditya in the Kingdom of Bhati and Kingdom of Bhurshut.
Recognising its special conservation value, Sundarban area has been declared as a Biosphere Reserve.
The University of Calcutta and Jadavpur University are prestigious technical universities.
Hindu population is 6,43,85,546 in West Bengal while Muslim population is 2,46,54,825 as per 2011 census.
From the 3rd to the 6th centuries CE, the kingdom of Magadha served as the seat of the Gupta Empire.
+ '''State symbols of West Bengal'''
Manufacturing industries playing an important economic role are engineering products, electronics, electrical equipment, cables, steel, leather, textiles, jewellery, frigates, automobiles, railway coaches, and wagons.
The 1974 smallpox epidemic killed thousands.
The Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) plies in the northern parts of the state.
Rabindra Jayanti, Kolkata Book Fair, Kolkata Film Festival and Nazrul Jayanti are important socio-cultural events.
Heavy rainfall of above 250&nbsp;cm is observed in the Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri and Cooch Behar district.
''Ananda Bazar Patrika'', published from Kolkata with 1,277,801 daily copies, has the largest circulation for a single-edition, regional language newspaper in India.
The Darjeeling district also has a large number of Nepali immigrant population, making Nepali a widely spoken language in this region.
Blocks consists of panchayats (village councils) and town municipalities.
West Bengal's total fertility rate was 1.6, way below Bihar's 3.4, which is the highest in the entire country.
Jadavpur University (Focus Area - Mobile Computing and Communication and Nano-Science) and University of Calcutta (Modern Biology) are among two of the fifteen universities selected under the scheme - '''University with Potential for Excellence'''.
Multi system operators provide a mix of Bengali, Nepali, Hindi, English and international channels via cable.
However, the service sector has grown at a rate higher than the national rate.
There are a small number of ethnic minorities primarily in the state capital, including Chinese, Tamils, Maharashtrians, Odias, Assamese, Malayalis, Gujaratis, Anglo-Indians, Armenians, Jews, Punjabis, and Parsis.
Rice and fish are traditional favourite foods, leading to a saying in Bengali, ''machhe bhate bangali'', that translates as "fish and rice make a Bengali".
Later, occasional Muslim raiders reinforced the process of conversion by building mosques, madrasas and khanqahs.
The whole of Park Street is decked up in colourful lights, various food stalls are set up selling cakes, chocolates, Chinese cuisines, momo and various other items.
As of 2011, the total railway route length is around .
The ancient Greeks and Romans identified Bengal as the kingdom of Gangaridai.
When India gained independence in 1947, Bengal was partitioned along religious lines.
Sweets like narkol-naru, til-naru, moa, payesh etc.
The state continues to suffer from regular bandhs (strikes), substandard healthcare services, a lack of socio-economic development, poor infrastructure, political corruption, criminalisation of politics, unemployment, poor education facilities and civil violence.
Some of the renowned schools in the city are La Martiniere Calcutta, St. Xavier's Collegiate School, and Loreto House - which consistently rank amongst the best schools in the country.
In the period 2004–2005 to 2009–2010, the average gross state domestic product (GSDP) growth rate was 13.9% (calculated in Indian rupee term), lower than 15.5%, the average for all states of the country.
Several independent Hindu states were established in Bengal during the Mughal period, like those of Pratapaditya of Jessore District and Raja Sitaram Ray of Bardhaman.
The Hindu College was established in 1817.
