The Polisario forces (of the Sahrawi People's Liberation Army, SPLA) in the area are divided into seven "military regions", each controlled by a top commander reporting to the President of the Polisario proclaimed Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.
All trade and other economic activities are controlled by the Moroccan government (as its de facto southern province).
* Derechos Human Rights
For example, Sahrawi Islam has traditionally functioned without mosques in the normal sense of the word, in an adaptation to nomadic life.
The Polisario Front said Moroccan security forces had killed a 26-year-old protester at the camp, a claim denied by Morocco.
One such exchange program to Spain is Vacaciones en Paz (Vacations in Peace), which is an annual holiday program that was created in 1988 and is organized by the Union of Sahrawi Youth (UJSARIO) in collaboration with 300 other associations throughout Spain.
It also provided further detail on the referendum process in order to make it harder to stall or subvert.
A concentration of forces for the commemoration of the Saharawi Republic’s 30th anniversary were however subject to condemnation by the United Nations, as it was considered an example of a cease-fire violation to bring such a large force concentration into the area.
Morocco controls territory to the west of the berm (border wall) while the Sahrawi Republic controls territory to the east (see map on right).
The portion not under the control of the Moroccan government is the area that lies between the border wall and the actual border with Algeria (for map see  Minurso map).
Women were present, and at times dominant, in both the public and private spheres of Sahrawi life.
The festival provides entertainment and educational opportunities for Sahrawi refugees alongside cultural celebrations for visitors and spectators.
His resignation followed several months of failed attempts to get Morocco to enter into formal negotiations on the plan, but he met with rejection.
Some of the films were made by the refugees themselves.
When Mauritania, under pressure from Polisario guerrillas, abandoned all claims to its portion in August 1979, Morocco moved to occupy that sector shortly thereafter and has since asserted administrative control over the whole territory.
Instead, he proposes, through an appointed advisory body Royal Advisory Council for Saharan Affairs (CORCAS), a self-governing Western Sahara as an autonomous community within Morocco.
The exiled government of the self-proclaimed Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) is a form of single-party parliamentary and presidential system, but according to its constitution, this will be changed into a multi-party system at the achievement of independence.
Western Sahara's much-touted phosphate reserves are relatively unimportant, representing less than two percent of national holdings.
As of January 2007, the plan had not been made public, though the Moroccan government claimed that it was more or less complete.
Major Sahrawi political events, such as Polisario congresses and sessions of the Sahrawi National Council (the SADR parliament in exile) are held in the Free Zone (especially in Tifariti and Bir Lehlou), since it is politically and symbolically important to conduct political affairs on Sahrawi territory.
The new king, Mohammed VI of Morocco, opposes any referendum on independence, and has said Morocco will never agree to one: "We shall not give up one inch of our beloved Sahara, not a grain of its sand."
Morocco extended its control to the rest of the territory.
Both Morocco and Polisario have sought to boost their claims by accumulating formal recognition, essentially from African, Asian, and Latin American states in the developing world.
The NUSW was structured at the local, regional, and national levels and concentrated on four areas: the occupied territories and emigration, information and culture, political and professional development, and foreign affairs.
Every person present in the territory would be allowed to vote, regardless of birthplace and with no regard to the Spanish census.
The indigenous population of Western Sahara is usually known in Western media as Sahrawis, but they are also referred to in Morocco as "Southerners" or "Southern Berbers".
A field assessment in the vicinity of Bir Lahlou, Tifariti and the berms revealed that the densest concentrations of mines are in front of the berms.
The UN has put forth no replacement strategy after the breakdown of Baker II, and renewed fighting has been raised as a possibility.
Sayad's work tells a consistent story, one that draws on his experience of protracted conflict and a life under Moroccan occupation.
Due to the disputed nature of Moroccan sovereignty over the territory, the application of international accords to Western Sahara is highly ambiguous.
The protest coincided with a fresh round of negotiations at the UN.
* World Organization Against Torture
Moroccan officials said five security personnel had been killed in the unrest.
Hostilities ceased in a 1991 cease-fire, overseen by the peacekeeping mission MINURSO, under the terms of a UN Settlement Plan.
Occupied by Spain in the late 19th century, Western Sahara has been on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories since 1963 after a Moroccan demand.
The European Union fishing agreements with Morocco include Western Sahara.
The last elections to the parliament's lower house were deemed reasonably free and fair by international observers.
In November 2010 Moroccan security forces entered Gadaym Izik camp in the early hours of the morning, using helicopters and water cannon to force people to leave.
A number of former Polisario officials who have defected to Morocco accuse the organisation of abuse of human rights and sequestration of the population in Tindouf.
In October 2010 Gadaym Izik camp was set up near Laayoune as a protest by displaced Sahrawi people about their living conditions.
Both parties have been accused of such violations by the UN, but to date there has been no serious hostile action from either side since 1991.
Fuel is sold at half the price, and basic goods are heavily subsidized; businesses operating in the territory do not pay taxes.
The earliest known inhabitants of Western Sahara were the Gaetuli.
It initiated guerrilla warfare and, in 1979, Mauritania withdrew due to pressure from Polisario, including a bombardment of its capital and other economic targets.
Art as embodied in film has been a strong and popular medium that Sahrawi youth have used to express themselves, and share their stories of conflict and exile.
Recently leaked United States diplomatic cables reveal that the territory is somewhat an economic burden for Morocco; the Moroccan US$800 million subsidy program to Western Sahara was said to be one of the larger per-capita aid programs in history.
In 2005, MINURSO lodged a complaint to the Security Council of the United Nations for "military maneuvers with real fire which extends to restricted areas" by Morocco.
It aims to raise awareness of the humanitarian crises in the refugee camps, and expose the Sahrawi people to this medium of art and expression.
In 2003, a new version of the plan was made official, with some additions spelling out the powers of the WSA, making it less reliant on Moroccan devolution.
In more official ways, women were consistently part of the Sahrawi National Liberation Movement, otherwise known as the Frente Polisario, which in 1994 created the National Union of Sahrawi Women (NUSW).
After that, the draft quickly garnered widespread international support, culminating in the UN Security Council's unanimous endorsement of the plan in the summer of 2003.
Over roughly five centuries, through a complex process of acculturation and mixing seen elsewhere in the Maghreb and North Africa, some of the indigenous Berber tribes mixed with the Maqil Arab tribes and formed a culture unique to Morocco and Mauritania.
Both sides blame each other for the stalling of the referendum.
The total size of the Polisario's guerrilla army present in this area is unknown, but it is believed to number a few thousand men, despite many combantants being demobilized due to the cease-fire.
In 1975, Spain relinquished the administrative control of the territory to a joint administration by Morocco (which had formally claimed the territory since 1957) and Mauritania.
The area is patrolled by Polisario forces, and access is restricted, even among Sahrawis, due to the harsh climate of the Sahara, the military conflict and the abundance of land mines.
The importance and prevalence of Spanish has persisted to the present day, even after Spanish withdrawal from Western Sahara in 1976, due to various education exchanges and host programs for Sahrawi children to Spain and Cuba.
Internationally, countries such as the United States and Russia have taken a generally ambiguous and neutral position on each side's claims, and have pressed both parties to agree on a peaceful resolution.
The arrival of Islam in the 8th century played a major role in the development of the Maghreb region.
Algeria, which also bordered the territory, viewed their demands with suspicion, as it also had a long-running rivalry with Morocco.
In a previously confidential legal opinion (published in February 2010, although it was forwarded in July 2009), the European Parliament’s Legal Service opined that fishing by European vessels under a current EU&nbsp;– Morocco fishing agreement covering Western Sahara’s waters is in violation of international law.
It was home to more than 12,000 people.
There is speculation that there may be off-shore oil and natural gas fields, but the debate persists as to whether these resources can be profitably exploited, and if this would be legally permitted due to the Non-Self-Governing status of Western Sahara (see below).
Indeed, shortly after the Houston Agreement (1997), Morocco officially declared that it was "no longer necessary" to include an option of independence on the ballot, offering instead autonomy.
In December 2014 it became known that Seabird Exploration operates controversial seismic surveys offshore Western Sahara, in violation with the 2002 Hans Corell legal opinion.
The Bafour were later replaced or absorbed by Berber-speaking populations which eventually merged in turn with the migrating Beni Ḥassān Arab tribes.
* Human Rights Watch
Highly renowned Spanish filmmakers and actors, such as Javier Bardem, Penelope Cruz, and Pedro Almodóvar have supported and attended the festival.
In May 2006, the remaining company Kerr-McGee also left following sales of numerous share holders like the National Norwegian Oil Fund, due to continued pressure from NGOs and corporate groups.
The stalemating of the Moroccan proposal options has led the UN in the recent "Report of the UN Secretary-General" to ask the parties to enter into direct and unconditional negotiations to reach a mutually accepted political solution.
The number was highly politically significant due to the expected organization of a referendum on self-determination.
The population is primarily made up of nomads who engage in herding camels back and forth between the Tindouf area and Mauritania.
It was rejected by both sides, although it was initially derived from a Moroccan proposal.
The precise size and composition of the population is subject to political controversy.
Annual demonstrations against the Moroccan Wall are staged in the region by Sahrawis and international activists from Spain, Italy, and other mainly European countries.
The official Moroccan government name for Western Sahara is the "Southern Provinces", consisting of the Río de Oro and Saguia el-Hamra regions.
These numbers cover only Sahrawis 'indigenous' to Western Sahara during the Spanish colonial period, not the total number of "ethnic" Sahrawis (i.e., members of Sahrawi tribal groupings), who also extend into Mauritania, Morocco and Algeria.
Meanwhile, Polisario still insisted on a referendum with independence as a clear option, without offering a solution to the problem of who is qualified to be registered to participate in it.
ARTifariti, the International Art and Human Rights Meeting in Western Sahara, is an annual art workshop set up in the Liberated Zone and refugee camps, specifically in Tifariti, that brings artists from all over the world.
The government has encouraged citizens to relocate to the territory by giving subsidies and price controls on basic goods.
It concluded that while the existing exploration contracts for the area were not illegal, "if further exploration and exploitation activities were to proceed in disregard of the interests and wishes of the people of Western Sahara, they would be in violation of the principles of international law."
They are Hassaniya-speaking or Berber-speaking tribes of Berber origin.
Morocco was also allowed to keep its army in the area and retain control over all security issues during both the autonomy years and the election.
Families were broken up by the dispute.
Mauritania withdrew in 1979, and Morocco eventually secured de facto control of most of the territory, including all the major cities and natural resources.
The Beni Hassan then were at constant war with the Lamtuna nomadic Berbers of the Sahara.
FiSahara International Film Festival is an annual film festival that takes place in one of the southwestern refugee camps in Algeria.
After 1939 and the outbreak of World War II, this area was administered by Spanish Morocco.
In 2002, Hans Corell, Under-Secretary General of the United Nations and head of its Office of Legal Affairs issued a legal opinion on the matter.
As personal envoy of the Secretary-General, James Baker visited all sides and produced the document known as the "Baker Plan".
It is presently based at the Tindouf refugee camps in Algeria, which it controls.
Both Morocco and the Polisario additionally accuse each other of violating the human rights of the populations under their control, in the Moroccan-controlled parts of Western Sahara and the Tindouf refugee camps in Algeria, respectively.
These forces are dug into permanent positions, such as gun emplacements, defensive trenches and underground military bases, as well as conducting mobile patrols of the territory.
The territory is otherwise thought to be economically unviable and unable to support its population without the Moroccan subsidies.
The SADR government whose troops also patrol the area have proclaimed a village in the area, Bir Lehlou and Tifariti, as SADR's former and actual temporary factual capitals.
Most food for the urban population comes from Morocco.
The Sahrawis are traditionally nomadic Bedouins with a lifestyle very similar to that of the Tuareg Berbers from whom Sahrawis most likely have descended, and they can be found in all surrounding countries.
Sayad's graffiti depicts aspects of Sahrawi culture, and includes actual Sahrawi people as his subjects.
The program itself allows 7,000 to 10,000 Sahrawi children between the ages of 8 and 12 the opportunity to live in Spain for the summer outside of the refugee camps.
Despite the fact that findings remain inconclusive, both Morocco and the Polisario have signed deals with oil and gas exploration companies.
It is one of the most sparsely populated territories in the world, mainly consisting of desert flatlands.
After reasonably exploitable oil fields were located in Mauritania, speculation intensified on the possibility of major oil resources being located off the coast of Western Sahara.
Demonstrations and protests still occur, even after Morocco declared in February 2006 that it was contemplating a plan for devolving a limited variant of autonomy to the territory but still explicitly refused any referendum on independence.
Pro-independence Sahrawi sources, including the Polisario, have given these demonstrations the name "Independence Intifada", while most sources have tended to see the events as being of limited importance.
* Society for Threatened Peoples
Western Sahara's economy is based almost entirely on fishing and phosphate mining which employs two thirds of its work force.
Polisario has intermittently threatened to resume fighting, referring to the Moroccan refusal of a referendum as a breach of the cease-fire terms, but most observers seem to consider armed conflict unlikely without the green light from Algeria, which houses the Sahrawis' refugee camps and has been the main military sponsor of the movement.
In 2002, the Moroccan king stated that the referendum idea was "out of date" since it "cannot be implemented"; Polisario retorted that that was only because of the King's refusal to allow it to take place.
Among the responsibilities women had were setting up, repairing, and moving the tents of the camp, and participating in major tribal decisions.
By "eligible voter" the UN referred to any Sahrawi over 18 years of age that was part of the Spanish census or could prove their descent from someone who was.
There was a global trend towards complete decolonization.
Morocco has won recognition or support for its position from several African governments and from most of the Arab League.
As time went by, Spanish colonial rule began to unravel with the general wave of decolonization after World War II; former North African and sub-Saharan African possessions and protectorates gained independence from European powers.
The Museum of the Sahrawi People's Liberation Army is located in this refugee camp.
* UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
The UN uses a number of 90,000 "most vulnerable" refugees as basis for its food aid program.
Traditionally, Sahrawi women have played pivotal roles in Sahrawi culture, as well as in efforts to resist colonialism and foreign interference in their territory.
The population is estimated at just over 500,000, of which nearly 40% live in Laayoune, the largest city in Western Sahara.
Together with the Spanish High Commissioner, Belbachir selected from this list.
Landmine Action UK undertook preliminary survey work by visiting the Polisario-controlled area of Western Sahara in October 2005 and February–March 2006.
His canvases, much like MESA, are walls that have been ruined by massive floods in the Sahrawi refugee camps in southwestern Algeria.
Sometimes children return to the same Spanish household year after year while they are still eligible, and forge strong relationships with their host families.
However, mine-laying was not restricted to the vicinity of the berms; occupied settlements throughout the Polisario-controlled areas, such as Bir Lahlou and Tifariti, are ringed by mines laid by Moroccan forces.
The Saharan lords who were already in prominent positions, such as the members of Maa El Ainain family, provided a recommended list of candidates for new governors.
After an agreement among the European colonial powers at the Berlin Conference in 1884 on the division of spheres of influence in Africa, Spain seized control of Western Sahara and established it as a Spanish colony.
The referendum, originally scheduled for 1992, foresaw giving the local population the option between independence or affirming integration with Morocco, but it quickly stalled.
This was discussed by the United Nations Security Council in 2000, and envisioned an autonomous Western Sahara Authority (WSA), which would be followed after five years by the referendum.
, no other member state of the United Nations has recognized Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara.
These types of exchange programs that successfully create cross-border and cross-cultural relationships reinforce the usage of the Spanish language throughout subsequent generations of Sahrawi children.
United Nations MINURSO forces are also present in the area.
In 2005, former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan reported increased military activity on both sides of the front and breaches of several cease-fire provisions against strengthening military fortifications.
Political leadership of trade agreement signatories such as the United States (US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement) and Norway (European Free Trade Association trade accord) have made statements as to these agreements' non-applicability—although practical policy application is ambiguous.
In late 2009, Moroccan troops performed military maneuvers near Umm Dreiga, in the exclusion zone, violating the cease-fire.
It has received vocal support from France and occasionally (and currently) from the United States.
No major powers have expressed interest in forcing the issue, however, and Morocco has shown little interest in a real referendum.
In the 11th century, the Maqil Arabs (fewer than 200 individuals) settled in Morocco (mainly in the Draa River valley, between the Moulouya River, Tafilalt and Taourirt).
These heavy subsidies have created a state-dominated economy in the Moroccan-controlled parts of Western Sahara.
Similarly, the exploitation of phosphate mines in Bou Craa has led to charges of international law violations and divestment from several European states.
Erik Jensen, who played an administrative role in MINURSO, wrote that neither side would agree to a voter registration in which they were destined to lose (see ''Western Sahara: Anatomy of a Stalemate'').
Some lesser extent agriculture and tourism also contribute to the territory's economy.
The Polisario-controlled parts of Western Sahara are barren.
These negotiations would define the exact limits of a Western Sahara autonomy under Moroccan rule but only after Morocco's "inalienable right" to the territory was recognized as a precondition to the talks.
These 86,425 Sahrawis were dispersed between Moroccan-controlled Western Sahara and the refugee camps in Algeria, with smaller numbers in Mauritania and other places of exile.
In both instances, recognitions have, over the past two decades, been extended and withdrawn according to changing international trends.
It acknowledged that Western Sahara had historical links with Morocco and Mauritania, but the population of this territory possessed the right of self-determination.
Several international human rights organizations expressed concern at what they termed abuse by Moroccan security forces, and a number of Sahrawi activists have been jailed.
The accords were based on a bipartite administration, and Morocco and Mauritania each moved to annex the territories, with Morocco taking control of the northern two-thirds of Western Sahara as its Southern Provinces, and Mauritania taking control of the southern third as Tiris al-Gharbiyya.
Protesters in Laayoune threw stones at police and set fire to tires and vehicles.
Demonstrations and riots by supporters of independence or a referendum broke out in the Moroccan-controlled parts of Western Sahara in May 2005 and in parts of southern Morocco (notably the town of Assa).
, negotiations over terms have not resulted in any substantive action.
US and French companies (notably Total and Kerr-McGee) began prospecting on behalf of the Moroccan Office National de Recherches et d’Exploitations Petrolières (ONAREP).
The Spanish press was accused of mounting a campaign of disinformation to support the Saharwi initiative, and all foreign reporters were either prevented from travelling or else expelled from the area.
As a consequence, Ahmed Belbachir Haskouri, the Chief of Cabinet, General Secretary of the Government of Spanish Morocco, cooperated with the Spanish to select governors in that area.
Depending on the century, Roman-era sources describe the area as inhabited by Gaetulian Autololes or the Gaetulian Daradae tribes.
While initial Spanish interest in the Sahara was focused on using it as a port for the slave trade, by the 1700s Spain had transitioned economic activity on the Saharan coast towards commercial fishing.
The Morocco-controlled parts of Western Sahara are divided into several provinces that are treated as integral parts of the kingdom.
Efforts by the UN special envoys to find a common ground for both parties did not succeed.
This appeared to abandon Polisario's previous position of only negotiating based on the standards of voter identification from 1991 (i.e.
The Western Sahara was partitioned between Morocco and Mauritania in April 1976, with Morocco acquiring the northern two-thirds of the territory.
By 2001, the process had effectively stalemated and the UN Secretary-General asked the parties for the first time to explore other, third-way solutions.
Like other Saharan Bedouin and Hassaniya groups, the Sahrawis are mostly Muslims of the Sunni branch and the Maliki fiqh.
During the joint Moroccan–Mauritanian control of the area, the Mauritanian-controlled part, roughly corresponding to Saquia el-Hamra, was known as Tiris al-Gharbiyya.
Women were key for establishing alliances through marriage, being that the Sahrawi culture values monogamy, with their tribe and to others.
It is the most populous territory on that list, and by far the largest in area.
It gradually contained the guerrillas by setting up the extensive sand-berm in the desert (known as the Border Wall or Moroccan Wall) to exclude guerrilla fighters.
According to Baker's draft, tens of thousands of post-annexation immigrants from Morocco proper (viewed by Polisario as settlers but by Morocco as legitimate inhabitants of the area) would be granted the vote in the Sahrawi independence referendum, and the ballot would be split three ways by the inclusion of an unspecified "autonomy", further undermining the independence camp.
Despite this, the area is traveled and inhabited by many Sahrawi nomads from the Tindouf refugee camps of Algeria and the Sahrawi communities in Mauritania.
Morocco has been repeatedly criticized for its actions in Western Sahara by international human rights organizations such as:
According to a NATO delegation, MINURSO election observers stated in 1999, as the deadlock continued, that "if the number of voters does not rise significantly the odds were slightly on the SADR side".
This again brought the process to a halt.
On 15 November 2010, the Moroccan government accused the Algerian secret services of orchestrating and financing the Gadaym Izik camp with the intent to destabilize the region.
War and conflict has led to major population displacement.
The Moroccan government views it as a no-man's land patrolled by UN troops.
'''Western Sahara''' (;  ''''; ) is a disputed territory in the Maghreb region of North Africa, bordered by Morocco to the north, Algeria to the northeast, Mauritania to the east and south, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west.
Morocco disputes this number, saying it is exaggerated for political reasons and for attracting more foreign aid.
Trade developed further, and the territory may have been one of the routes for caravans, especially between Marrakesh and Tombouctou in Mali.
In 2013, the festival screened over 15 films from around the world including comedies, short films, animations, and documentaries.
Sahrawi women could inherit property, and subsist independently from their fathers, brothers, husbands, and other male relatives.
The Polisario has its home base in the Tindouf refugee camps in Algeria, and declares the number of Sahrawi population in the camps to be approximately 155,000.
By 1999 the UN had identified about 85,000 voters, with nearly half of them in the Moroccan-controlled parts of Western Sahara or Southern Morocco, and the others scattered between the Tindouf refugee camps, Mauritania and other places of exile.
They were met by police.
The Moroccan and Mauritanian annexations were resisted by the Polisario Front, which had gained backing from Algeria.
Morocco and organizations such as France Libertés consider Algeria to be directly responsible for any crimes committed on its territory, and accuse the country of having been directly involved in such violations.
During Spanish colonial rule, Sahrawi women actively provided financial and physical support to the resistance movements during the 1930s, 50s, and the late 1960s.
This area has a very small population, estimated to be approximately 30,000 nomads.
One year later, a new resolution was passed by the General Assembly requesting that a referendum be held by Spain on self-determination.
Spanish decolonization proceeded more slowly, but internal political and social pressures for it in mainland Spain built up towards the end of Francisco Franco's rule.
The Polisario Front claims to run this as the Free Zone on behalf of the SADR.
It also controls the part of Western Sahara to the east of the Moroccan Wall, known as the ''liberated territories''.
A war erupted between those countries and the Sahrawi national liberation movement, the Polisario Front, which proclaimed the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) with a government in exile in Tindouf, Algeria.
Aside from its rich fishing waters and phosphate reserves Western Sahara has few natural resources and lacks sufficient rainfall and fresh water resources for most agricultural activities.
In 1997, the Houston Agreement attempted to revive the proposal for a referendum but likewise has hitherto not had success.
* International Federation of Human Rights
There are also berms in the Moroccan-controlled zone, around Dakhla and stretching from Boujdour, including Smara on the Moroccan border.
Throughout the nine decades of Spanish colonial presence, one of the primary spoken languages in Western Sahara came to be Spanish.
Morocco has repeatedly tried to get Algeria into bilateral negotiations, based on its view of Polisario as the cat's paw of the Algerian military.
Berber heritage is still evident from regional and place-name toponymy, as well as from tribal names.
Polisario leaders maintain that they are ideologically opposed to terrorism, and insist that collective punishment and forced disappearances among Sahrawi civilians should be considered state terrorism on the part of Morocco.
Several buildings, including a TV station, were also set on fire.
In the contemporary history of Western Sahara, women have occupied central roles and been highly represented in the political sphere.
