In 1774, the Crown Governor of Virginia John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, led a force over the mountains, and a body of militia under then-Colonel Andrew Lewis dealt the Shawnee Indians, under Hokoleskwa (or "Cornstalk"), a crushing blow during the Battle of Point Pleasant at the junction of the Kanawha and the Ohio rivers.
Although West Virginia's first constitution provided for the assumption of a part of the Virginia debt, negotiations opened by Virginia in 1870 were fruitless, and in 1871, Virginia funded two-thirds of the debt and arbitrarily assigned the remainder to West Virginia.
Many of the tourists, especially in the eastern mountains, are drawn to the region's notable opportunities for outdoor recreation.
An act for the reorganization of the government was passed on June 19.
Thus, there were two state governments in Virginia, one pledging allegiance to the United States and one to the Confederacy.
Huntington's historic Keith-Albee Theatre, built by brothers A.B.
The West Virginia Legislature in March 2014 passed its budget bill, taking $147 million from the Rainy Day Fund to balance the 2015 budget.
The West Virginia Legislature is bicameral.
Alongside outdoor recreation opportunities, the state offers a number of historic and cultural attractions.
Tours of the building, which is a National Historic Landmark and member of the National Civil War Trail, are offered seasonally and by appointment year round.
West Virginia was admitted to the Union on June 20, 1863, and was a key Civil War border state.
At the Constitutional Convention in November 1861, a Mr. Lamb of Ohio County and a Mr. Carskadon claimed that in Hampshire County, out of 195 votes only 39 were cast by citizens of the state; the rest were cast illegally by Union soldiers.
and West Virginia's Marshall University Center for Business and Economic Research estimated that about $61 million was lost by businesses in the first four days alone after the spill.
The first conductor was William R. Wiant, followed by the  conductor Antonio Modarelli, who was written about in the November 7, 1949 ''Time Magazine'' for his composition of the ''River Saga'', a six-section program piece about the Kanawha River according to the ''Charleston Gazette'''s November 6, 1999 photo essay, "Snapshots of the 20th Century".
However, if the C&O and N&W presidents thought they could thus kill the Page project, they were to be proved mistaken.
*Harpers Ferry National Historical Park
*Gauley River National Recreation Area
On the eastern state line with Virginia, high peaks in the Monongahela National Forest region give rise to an island of colder climate and ecosystems similar to those of northern New England and eastern Canada.
The Eastern Panhandle counties were more affected by the war, with military control of the area repeatedly changing hands.
From there it runs east into Maryland.
Harpers Ferry National Historical Park is a historic town situated at the confluence of the Shenandoah and Potomac Rivers.
Even in the 21st century, mining safety and ecological concerns is still challenging to the state whose coal continues to power electrical generating plants in many other states.
Originally, the state capital was in Wheeling (1863 to 1870).
A survey conducted in 2015 by the Pew Research Center found that West Virginia was the 7th most "highly religious" state in the United States.
Because of the mountainous nature of the entire state, West Virginia has several notable tunnels and bridges.
Social conditions in western Virginia were entirely unlike those in the eastern portion of the state.
The "capital" of the Pocahontas coalfield, this city would remain the largest city in the southern portion of the state for several decades.
Highways form the backbone of transportation systems in West Virginia, with over  of public roads in the state.
All but Charleston and Huntington are subsidized by the US Department of Transportation's Essential Air Service program.
All property is reappraised every three years; annual adjustments are made to assessments for property with a change of value.
It is bordered by Virginia to the southeast, Kentucky to the southwest, Ohio to the northwest, Pennsylvania to the north (and, slightly, east), and Maryland to the northeast.
After the War, with the new railroads came a practical method to transport large quantities of coal to expanding U.S. and export markets.
During the French and Indian War the scattered British settlements were almost destroyed.
The state lost 5,600 jobs in its labor force in four critical economic sectors: construction (1,900), manufacturing (1,100), retail (1,800), and education (800), while gaining just 400 in mining and logging.
When the renamed Virginian Railway (VGN) was completed in 1909, no fewer than three railroads were shipping ever-increasing volumes of coal to export from Hampton Roads.
I-70 briefly runs through West Virginia, crossing the northern panhandle through Wheeling, while I-470 is a bypass of Wheeling (making Wheeling among the smallest cities with an interstate bypass).
Each circuit is made up of one or more counties.
Recreational transportation opportunities abound in West Virginia, including hiking trails, rail trails, ATV off road trails, white water rafting rivers, and two tourist railroads (Cass Scenic Railroad, and the Potomac Eagle Scenic Railroad).
Property is assessed according to its use, location and value as of July 1.
The center of population of West Virginia is located in Braxton County, in the town of Gassaway.
'''West Virginia'''  is a state located in the Appalachian region of the Southern United States.
West Virginia abolished slavery and temporarily disfranchised men who had held Confederate office or fought for the Confederacy.
By 1776, however, the Shawnee had returned to war, joining the Chickamauga.
They no longer grew such a variety of seeds but concentrated on growing corn, beans, sunflowers, gourds, and many types of squash including the pumpkin.
An average of  of snow falls annually in Charleston, although during the winter of 1995–1996 more than three times that amount fell as several cities in the state established new records for snowfall.
In 1671, General Abraham Wood, at the direction of Royal Governor William Berkeley of the Virginia Colony, sent a party from Fort Henry led by Thomas Batts and Robert Fallam that discovered Kanawha Falls.
In 1864 a state constitutional convention drafted a constitution, which was ratified by the legislature without putting it to popular vote.
In Ohio County, home to Wheeling, only about one-quarter of the registered voters cast votes.
The composition of the General Assembly was changed; representation in the house of delegates was apportioned on the white basis of the census of 1850, but the Senate was fixed arbitrarily, the west receiving twenty, and the east thirty, senators.
The song mentions the Shenandoah River and the Blue Ridge Mountains, both features traversing the easternmost extremity of the state's "eastern panhandle", in Jefferson County.
The Eastern prickly pear grows well in many portions of the state.
They were carved of stone and they were exceptional works of art.
Counties in the east and south were settled mostly by east Virginians.
Amtrak's Cardinal roughly parallels I-64's path through the state.
Dense fogs are common in many valleys of the Kanawha section, especially the Tygart Valley.
Small farmers, however, had all their assets, animals, and land taxed at full value.
A 2010 analysis of a local stalagmite revealed that Native Americans were burning forests to clear land as early as 100BC.
The total tax rate is a combination of the tax levies from four state taxing authorities: state, county, schools and municipal.
MARC trains serve commuters in the eastern panhandle.
This is expected to also help bring economic growth to the southern half of the state.
Another group progressed to the more time-consuming, advanced companion crop fields method of gardening.
The karst lands contribute to much of the state's cool trout waters.
A September 2011 Public Policy Polling survey found that 19% of West Virginia voters thought that same-sex marriage should be legal, while 71% thought it should be illegal and 10% were not sure.
It was then moved to Charleston, a more central city (1870 to 1875).
Particularly notable was a latecomer, the Virginian Railway (VGN).
West Virginia ranked 48th in the CNBC "Top States for Business 2013" based on measures of competitiveness such as economy, workforce and cost of living – ranking among the bottom 5 states for the last six years running.
At the I-68 terminus in Morgantown, it meets I-79, which enters from Pennsylvania and runs through the state to its southern terminus in Charleston.
In 2006 Norfolk Southern along with the West Virginia and U.S. Government approved a plan to modify many of the rail tunnels in West Virginia, especially in the southern half of the state, to allow for double stacked cars (see inter-modal freight).
Residents of the western and northern counties set up a separate government under Francis Pierpont in 1861, which they called the "restored" government.
Hyman, was originally opened to the public on May 7, 1928, and hosts a variety of performing arts and music attractions.
Many settlers crossed the mountains after 1750, though they were hindered by Native American resistance.
In 1865, the Wheeling government found it necessary to strip voting rights from returning Confederates in order to retain control.
The interstates are supplemented by roads constructed under the Appalachian Corridor system.
Oak, cherry, poplar, maple, and pine are just a few of the various trees often harvested in the state.
Personal income growth in West Virginia during 2013 was only 1.5% – the lowest in the nation – and about half the national average of 2.6%.
Geologists such as Dr. David T. Ansted surveyed potential coal fields and invested in land and early mining projects.
A characteristic of religion in Appalachian communities is the abundance of independent, non-affiliated churches, which "remain unnoted and uncounted in any census of church life in the United States."
West Virginia is crossed by six interstate highways.
The Wheeling Convention, which had taken a recess until August 6, reassembled on August 20 and called for a popular vote on the formation of a new state and for a convention to frame a constitution if the vote should be favorable.
Farming is also practiced in West Virginia, but on a limited basis because of the mountainous terrain over much of the state.
As coal mining and related work became major employment activities in the state, there was considerable labor strife as working conditions, safety issues and economic concerns arose.
Most of West Virginia lies within the Appalachian mixed mesophytic forests ecoregion, while the higher elevations along the eastern border and in the panhandle lie within the Appalachian-Blue Ridge forests.
The local Indians made corn bread and a flat rye bread called "banick" as they emerged from the protohistoric era.
The second largest Protestant Church was the American Baptist churches in the USA with 88,000 members and 381 congregations.
West Virginia is also one of the cloudiest states in the nation, with the cities of Elkins and Beckley ranking 9th and 10th in the U.S. respectively for the number of cloudy days per year (over 210).
I-64 and I-77 between Charleston and Beckley are merged as toll road known as the West Virginia Turnpike, which continues as I-77 alone from Beckley to Princeton.
The state constitution allows for the creation of an intermediate court of appeals, but the Legislature has never created one.
James Ferguson, who proposed the law, said that if it was not enacted he would lose election by 500 votes.
The trail stretched from Pendleton County to the western terminus of the route in the town of Union, Monroe County.
In addition, the Gallup Well-Being Index for 2013 ranked Charleston, the state capital, and Huntington last and next-to-last out of 189 U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas.
The state's consumer sales tax is levied at 6 percent.
The Greenbrier hotel and resort, originally built in 1778, has long been considered a premier hotel frequented by numerous world leaders and U.S. Presidents over the years.
The bridge is also pictured on the West Virginia state quarter.
West Virginia's capital and seat of government is the city of Charleston, located in the southwest area of the state.
During the remainder of the year, monthly interim sessions are held in preparation for the regular session.
In addition to persistent cloudy skies caused by the damming of moisture by the Alleghenies, West Virginia also experiences some of the most frequent precipitation in the nation, with Snowshoe averaging nearly 200 days a year with either rain or snow.
An Institute for Health Policy Research study determined that mortality rates in Appalachia are correlated with coal production.
A convention that met in 1829 to form a new constitution for Virginia, against the protest of the counties beyond the mountains, required a property qualification for suffrage and gave the slave-holding counties the benefit of three-fifths of their slave population in apportioning the state's representation in the U.S. House of Representatives.
Many West Virginians who self-identify as Irish are actually Scots-Irish Protestants.
The Center also hosts the West Virginia Dance Festival, which features classical and modern dance.
As the anthracite mines of northwestern New Jersey and Pennsylvania began to play out during this same time period, investors and industrialists focused new interest in West Virginia.
West Virginia borders Pennsylvania and Maryland in the northeast, Virginia in the southeast, Ohio in the northwest, and Kentucky in the southwest.
The Fort Steuben Bridge (Weirton-Steubenville Bridge) was at its time of construction one of only three cable-stayed steel girder trusses in the United States.
The Second Wheeling Convention met as agreed on June 11 and declared that, since the Secession Convention had been called without the consent of the people, all its acts were void and that all who adhered to it had vacated their offices.
One of the silent partner investors Page had enlisted was millionaire industrialist Henry Huttleston Rogers, a principal in John D. Rockefeller's Standard Oil Trust and an old hand at developing natural resources and transportation.
West Virginia was originally part of the British Virginia Colony from 1607 to 1776 and the western part of the state of Virginia (which was commonly referred as ''Trans-Allegheny Virginia'' before the formation of West Virginia) from 1776 to 1863.
Also continuing from ancient indigenous people of the state, field space and time was given to tobacco growing through to early historic.
Few Native Americans lived permanently within the present limits of the state, but the region was a common hunting ground, crossed by many trails.
Property taxes are paid to the sheriff of each of the state's 55 counties.
Although the Department of Tax and Revenue plays a major role in the administration of this tax, less than one-half of 1 percent of the property tax collected goes to state government.
Some sources state that Governor Alexander Spotswood's 1716 Knights of the Golden Horseshoe Expedition (for which the state's Golden Horseshoe Competition for 8th graders was named) had penetrated as far as Pendleton County, however original accounts of the excursion suggest to modern historians that none of his horsemen ventured much farther west of the Blue Ridge Mountains than Harrisonburg, Virginia.
The artifacts uncovered in these give evidence of village societies.
West Virginia does not impose an inheritance tax.
The next day Francis H. Pierpont was chosen by other delegates at the convention to be governor of Virginia, other officers were elected, and the convention adjourned.
West Virginia ranked last in the Gallup Economic Index for the fourth year running.
Its longest border is with Virginia at 381 miles, followed by Ohio at 243 miles, Maryland at 174 miles, Pennsylvania at 118 miles, and Kentucky at 79 miles.
The Wheeling Conventions, and the delegates themselves, were never actually elected by public ballot to act on behalf of western Virginia.
During 2010–2013, about 21,000 babies per year were born in West Virginia, but over 3 years West Virginia had 3,000 more deaths than births.
At the October 24, 1861 election, 18,408 votes were cast for the new state and only 781 against.
The climate of West Virginia is  generally a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification ''Cfa'', except ''Dfb'' at the higher elevations) with warm to hot, humid summers and chilly winters, increasing in severity with elevation.
While per capita income fell 2.6% nationally in 2009, West Virginia's grew at 1.8%.
In the 2012 presidential election Republican Mitt Romney won the state defeating Democrat Barack Obama with 62% of the vote to 35% for Obama.
Commercial air travel is facilitated by airports in Charleston, Huntington, Morgantown, Beckley, Lewisburg, Clarksburg, and Parkersburg.
West Virginia was the only state in the Union to separate from a Confederate state (Virginia) during the American Civil War.
A project known as the "Coalfields Expressway" is also ongoing, and will carry US 121 from Beckley west across Raleigh, Wyoming, and McDowell counties, entering Virginia near Bishop.
These were sent by a local historian and frontier soldier Colonel John Stuart to Thomas Jefferson.
By 1900, only a large area of the most rugged terrain of southern West Virginia was any distance from the existing railroads and mining activity.
The convention began on November 26, 1861 and finished its work on February 18, 1862; the instrument was ratified (18,162 for and 514 against) on April 11, 1862.
The Presbyterian Church  had 200 congregations and 20,000 members.
After the 2014 midterm elections, Democrats controlled the governorship, the majority of statewide offices, and one U.S. Senate seat, while Republicans held one U.S. Senate seat, all three of the state's U.S. House seats, and a majority in both houses of the West Virginia Legislature.
Soon, the N&W was also shipping from new coal piers at Hampton Roads.
Long discontented with electoral malapportionment and underrepresentation in the state legislature, its residents became sharply divided over the issue of secession from the Union during the Civil War.
The Woodland Indians grew sunflowers, gourds, squash and several seeds such as lambsquarter, may grass, sumpweed, smartweed and little barley."
Several surveys have been made in recent years, in 2008 by the American Religion Identity Survey, in 2010 by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life.
The VGN and the N&W ultimately became parts of the modern Norfolk Southern system, and the VGN's well-engineered 21st-century tracks continue to offer a favorable gradient to Hampton Roads.
I-68's western terminus is in Morgantown.
There were 22 births to American Indians (0.11% of the births and 0.54% of the population), 177 births to Asians (0.85% of the births and 0.68% of the population), 219 births to Hispanics (1.05% of the births and 0.88% of the population) and 753 births to Blacks and others (3.60% of the births and 3.56% of the population).
In 2012, West Virginia's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 3.3%.
Effective January 1, 2004, calculation of WV consumer sales tax has been converted to a calculated figure from the bracket system, and remains at 6 percent for most goods (non-prepared foods are not taxed).
In 2012, according to the Census Bureau, West Virginia was the only state where death rates exceeds birth rates.
The primary beneficiaries of the property tax are county boards of education.
Other significant rail carriers of coal were the Western Maryland Railway (WM), Southern Railway (SOU), and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad (L&N).
Saltpeter caves had been employed throughout Appalachia for munitions; the border between West Virginia and Virginia includes the "Saltpeter Trail", a string of limestone caverns containing rich deposits of calcium nitrate that were rendered and sold to the government.
Located in the Appalachian Mountain range, West Virginia covers an area of , with  of land and  of water, making it the 41st-largest state in the United States.
Pierpont moved his pro-Union Virginia capital to Union-occupied Alexandria, where he asserted and exercised jurisdiction over all of the remaining Virginia counties within the federal lines.
As of 2013, a section from Weston to Elkins, and another section from Wardensville to near Scher are complete.
Corridor G, carrying US 119, runs from Charleston to the Kentucky border at Williamson.
*George Washington National Forest
When this First Wheeling Convention met, 425 delegates from 25 counties were present, though more than one-third of the delegates were from the northern panhandle area, but soon there was a division of sentiment.
Since 2000, state elections have become more competitive at both the state and federal levels.
Municipalities may levy license and gross receipts taxes on businesses located within the city limits and a hotel occupancy tax on lodging places in the city.
Corridor D, carrying US 50, runs from the Ohio River, and I-77, at Parkersburg to I-79 at Clarksburg.
This number included some hold-over Senators from 1859 and as such had vacated their offices to convene in Wheeling.
"Fort Ancient Indians lived in much larger square or rectangular houses ...
Counties may also impose a hotel occupancy tax on lodging places not located within the city limits of any municipality that levies such a tax.
The other members "were chosen even more irregularly—some in mass meetings, others by county committee, and still others were seemingly self-appointed" This irregular assembly met on June 20 and appointed Unionists to hold the remainder of the state offices, organized a rival state government, and elected two United States senators who were promptly recognized by the federal government in Washington, D.C.
At the Treaty of Camp Charlotte concluding Dunmore's War, Cornstalk agreed to recognize the Ohio as the new boundary with the "Long Knives".
Though the relief is not high, the plateau region is extremely rugged in most areas.
The Augusta Heritage Center sponsored by Davis & Elkins College in Elkins in Randolph County produces the annual Augusta Heritage Festival, which includes intensive week-long workshops in the summer that help preserve Appalachian heritage and traditions.
The Wheeling Suspension Bridge was the first bridge built across the Ohio River in 1849 and for a time was the longest suspension bridge in the world.
The program also travels to other venues in the state such as the West Virginia University Creative Arts Center in Morgantown.
The Mountaineer Opera House in Milton hosts a variety of musical acts.
The Annie E. Casey Foundation's National Index of Children's Progress ranked West Virginia 43rd in the nation for all kids, and last for white kids.
West Virginia counties administer and collect property taxes, although property tax rates reflect levies for state government, county governments, county boards of education and municipalities.
West Virginia is an alcoholic beverage control state.
"Nothing is known about Paleo-Indian and Archaic houses in the Kanawha Valley, but archeologists have found evidence of Woodland and Fort Ancient houses."
West Virginia was only one of ten states in 2009 that grew economically.
Former West Virginia Governor William A. MacCorkle described him as a man who knew the land "as a farmer knows a field."
Almost immediately after the vote to proceed with secession from the Union prevailed in the Virginia General Assembly, a mass meeting at Clarksburg recommended that each county in northwestern Virginia send delegates to a convention to meet in Wheeling on May 13, 1861.
In 2013, West Virginia ranked last in the nation with an employment-to-population ratio of only 50%, compared to the national average of 59%.
Also, those in the Eastern Panhandle feel a connection with the Washington, D.C. suburbs in Maryland and Virginia, and southern West Virginians often consider themselves Southerners.
On March 8, 2014, West Virginia Governor Earl Ray Tomblin signed House Concurrent Resolution 40 naming "Take Me Home, Country Roads" the fourth official state song of West Virginia.
* 3.4% non-Hispanic Black or African American
Votes recorded from pro-secession counties were mostly cast elsewhere by Unionist refugees from these counties.
The state is regarded as a "deep red" state at the federal level.
5.6% of West Virginia's population were reported as under 5, 22.3% under 18, and 15.3% were 65 or older.
"The Veterans Memorial Bridge was designed to handle traffic from the Fort Steuben Bridge as well as its own traffic load", to quote the ''Weirton Daily Times'' newspaper.
Some delegates favored the immediate formation of a new state, while others argued that, as Virginia's secession had not yet been passed by the required referendum, such action would constitute revolution against the United States.
West Virginia's population is expected to decline by more than 19,000 residents by 2030, and West Virginia could lose one of its three seats in the United States House of Representatives.
The cities of Charleston, Huntington, Beckley, Wheeling, Morgantown, Clarksburg, Parkersburg and Fairmont have bus-based public transit systems, and the Huntington and Charleston systems jointly operate a twice per weekday interconnecting service.
A protégé of Dr. Ansted was William Nelson Page (1854–1932), a civil engineer and mining manager in Fayette County.
The Center is also home to Mountain Stage, an internationally broadcast live-performance music radio program established in 1983 that is carried by many affiliates of National Public Radio.
Many old tracks have been converted to rail trails for recreational use, although the coal producing areas still have railroads running at near capacity.
The state's Northern Panhandle, and North-Central region feel an affinity for Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The diary kept by the surveyor indicates that there were already many squatters, largely of German origin, along the South Branch Potomac River.
* 0.1% from some other race (non-Hispanic)
Most voted to separate from Virginia and the new state was admitted to the Union in 1863.
The average elevation of West Virginia is approximately  above sea level, which is the highest of any U.S. state east of the Mississippi River.
There had also been a series of operatic style concerts performed in Wheeling during mid-century as well.
But the east also gave itself a tax advantage in requiring a property tax at true and actual value, except for slaves.
The West Virginia legislature sets the rate of tax of county boards of education.
The Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1850–51, the Reform Convention, addressed a number of issues important to western Virginians.
The proportion of West Virginia's adult population with a bachelor's degree is the lowest in the U.S. at 17.3%.
West Virginia produces a surplus of electricity and leads the Nation in net interstate electricity exports.
The Democratic party secured control in 1870, and in 1871, the constitutional amendment of 1866 was abrogated.
West Virginia was the only state to form by separating from a Confederate state, the first to separate from any state since Maine separated from Massachusetts, and was one of two states formed during the American Civil War (the other being Nevada).
Wisconsin Population Health Institute annual "Health Rankings" for 2012 showed West Virginia spends $9,671 per capita on health care annually.
The Southern Baptist church had 44,000 members and 287 congregations.
However, in the second half of the 19th century, there was an even greater treasure not yet developed: bituminous coal.
The Pew survey results admit to a 6.5% margin of error plus or minus, while the ARIS survey states that "estimates are subject to larger sampling errors in states with small populations."
