The CDU/CSU fell just short of an absolute majority, due to the entry into the Bundestag of the Greens, who received 5.6% of the vote.
Its five post-war states ('''') were reconstituted along with the reunited Berlin, which ended its special status and formed an additional ''''.
Until 1977 a married woman had to have the permission of her husband if she wanted to take on a job or open a bank account.
Supporters of the Shah (later known as ''''), armed with staves and bricks attacked the protesters while the police stood by and watched.
A key event in the development of open democratic debate occurred in 1967, when the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, visited West Berlin.
This helped Germany to more than double the value of its exports during the war.
The former capital, Berlin, had been divided into four sectors, with the Western Allies joining their sectors to form West Berlin, while the Soviets held East Berlin.
These agreements were the basis for a rapid improvement in the relations between east and west and led, in the long-term to the dismantlement of the Warsaw Treaty and the Soviet Union's control over Eastern Europe.
Erhard was not enthusiastic, and to everybody's surprise, Adenauer decided at the age of 83 that he would take on the position.
As a result, in 1979 the Greens were able to reach the 5% minimum required to obtain parliamentary seats in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen state election, and with the foundation of the national party in 1980 developed into one of the most politically successful green movements in the world.
Anger over the treatment of demonstrators following the death of Benno Ohnesorg and the attack on Rudi Dutschke, coupled with growing frustration over the lack of success in achieving their aims led to growing militance among students and their supporters.
First, the British and American zones were combined into the quasi-state of Bizonia.
The outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 led to U.S. calls to rearm West Germany to help defend Western Europe from the perceived Soviet threat.
The Greens' share rose to 8.3% from their 1983 share of 5.6%.
In fact, the amount of monetary aid (which was in the form of loans) received by Germany through the Marshall Plan was far overshadowed by the amount the Germans had to pay back as war reparations and by the charges the Allies exacted from the Germans for the ongoing cost of occupation (about $2.4 billion per year).
Former German areas east of the rivers Oder and Neisse were put under Polish administration.
Chancellor Adenauer proclaimed in the  that the article was tantamount to high treason and that the authors would be prosecuted.
He apparently believed that this would allow him to dominate the scene for up to ten more years in spite of the growing mood for change.
These organisations and teams in turn mostly continued the traditions of those that represented Germany before the Second World War, and even the First World War, thus providing a century-old continuity despite political changes.
Had that been the case, other countries such as the United Kingdom and France (which both received higher economic assistance from the plan than Germany) should have experienced the same phenomenon.
In 1949 with the continuation and aggravation of the Cold War (witness the Berlin Airlift of 1948–49), the two German states that were originated in the Western Allied and the Soviet Zones became known internationally as West Germany and East Germany.
Relations with the Soviet bloc improved during the era of "" around 1970, and West Germany began taking the line of "two German states within one German nation", but formally maintained the exclusive mandate.
Konrad Adenauer was 73 years old when he became chancellor, and for this reason he was initially reckoned as a caretaker.
Other means then had to be found to allow West German rearmament.
As in 1957, when the Saarland acceded, East German sport organisations ceased to exist in late 1990 as their subdivisions and their members joined their Western counterparts.
In the 1969 election, the SPD—headed by Willy Brandt—gained enough votes to form a coalition government with the FDP.
Just before Easter 1968, a young man tried to kill Dutschke as he bicycled to the student union, seriously injuring him.
As demand for consumer goods increased after WWII, the resulting shortage helped overcome lingering resistance to the purchase of German products.
(France withdrew from the collective military command structure of NATO in 1966.)
The press, especially the tabloid '''' newspaper, launched a vast campaign against the protesters and in 1968, believed by some as a result, there was an attempted assassination of one of the top members of the German socialist students' union, Rudi Dutschke.
Both West Germany and East Germany followed along traditional paths of the common German culture, but West Germany, being obviously more affected by influences from western Europe and North America, became more cosmopolitan.
The parts of this zone lying east of the Oder-Neisse were in fact annexed by the Soviet Union and communist Poland; the remaining central part around Berlin became the communist German Democratic Republic (abbreviated GDR; in German '''' or '''') with its '''' capital in East Berlin.
Conversely, East Germany, while remaining more conservative than West Germany in its adherence to some aspects of the received tradition, was strongly moulded by the dictates of a state socialist ideology of predominantly Soviet inspiration.
Hans-Dietrich Genscher, a leading FDP official, was Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister in the same years.
However, when his advisers informed him that the powers of the president were almost entirely ceremonial, he quickly lost interest.
With the exception of 55,000 French troops, Allied forces were under NATO's joint defense command.
From 1973 onward, East Germany recognised the existence of two German countries '''', and the West as both '''' and '''' foreign country.
In the wakes of these demonstrations, in which the question of America's role in Vietnam began to play a bigger role, came a desire among the students to find out more about the role of the parent-generation in the Nazi era.
SPD leader and Chancellor Willy Brandt remained head of government until May 1974, when he resigned after the Guillaume Affair, in which a senior member of his staff was uncovered as a spy for the East German intelligence service, the .
In response, at the London and Paris Conferences, the Brussels Treaty was modified to include West Germany, and to form the Western European Union (WEU).
However, at that time, the role of Berlin had not yet been decided upon.
The UK and the USA retained an especially strong presence in West Germany, acting as a deterrent in case of a Soviet invasion.
Leading up to the passing of the laws, there was fierce opposition to them, above all by the FDP, the rising German student movement, a group calling itself  ("Democracy in a State of Emergency") and the labour unions.
(Moscow Agreement, August 1970, Warsaw Agreement, December 1970, Four Power Agreement over the status of West Berlin in 1971 and an agreement on relations between West and East Germany, signed in December 1972.)
The colloquial term "West Germany" or its equivalent was used in many languages. ""
In 1962 growth rate was 4.7% and the following year, 2.0%.
During the time leading up to the passing of the laws, there was fierce opposition to them, above all by the Free Democratic Party, the rising German student movement, a group calling itself '''' ("Democracy in Crisis") and members of the Campaign against Nuclear Armament.
The goals of SPD and FDP however drifted apart in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The WEU, however, would regulate the size of the armed forces permitted to each of its member states.
The Federal Republic of Germany claimed an exclusive mandate for all of Germany, considering itself to be the democratically reorganised continuation of the 1871–1945 German Reich.
Another result of the unrest in the 1960s was the founding of the Red Army Faction (RAF).
Since the 1950s, Germany at the Olympics had been represented by a united team led by the pre-war German NOC officials as the IOC had denied East German demands for a separate team.
Further reforms in  1979 to parental rights law gave equal legal rights to the mother and the father, abolishing the legal authority of the father.
The processes set in motion by the Auschwitz trial reverberated decades later.
In contrast, for East Germans the scale of change has been sweeping in all aspects of life from that before ''''.
In 1987 the FRG held a 7.4% share of total world production.
Whilst East Germany was divided into 15 administrative districts (''''), which were merely local branches of the national government, West Germany was divided into states ('''') with independently elected state parliaments and control of the , the second legislative chamber of the Federal Government.
Evidence that the groups had been infiltrated by German Intelligence undercover agents has since emerged, partly through the insistence of the son of one of their prominent victims, the State Counsel Buback.
He served as Chancellor from 1974 to 1982.
He not only secured a membership in NATO but was also a proponent of agreements that developed into the present-day European Union.
The Federal Republic and the GDR agreed that neither of them could speak in the name of the other.
Millions of Germans were expelled and replaced by Poles.
The East German economy showed a certain growth, but not as much as in West Germany, partly because of continued reparations to the USSR in terms of resources.
This was important for the introduction of new emergency acts: the grand coalition gave the ruling parties the two-thirds majority of votes required for their ratification.
In East Germany usage, the terms '''' (West Germany) or '''' (West German Federal Republic) were preferred during the 1950s and 1960s.
At the time Germany had a large pool of skilled and cheap labour, partly as a result of the flight and expulsion of Germans from Central and Eastern Europe, which affected up to 16.5 million Germans.
In the 1969 election, the SPD gained enough votes to form a coalition government with the FDP.
Instead, Brandt, dogged by scandal relating to alcohol and depression as well as the economic fallout of the 1973 oil crisis, almost seems simply to have had enough.
The conference agreed to split Germany into four occupation zones: a French Zone in the far west; a British Zone in the northwest; an American Zone in the south; and a Soviet Zone in the east.
Though the EDC treaty was signed (May 1952), it never entered into force.
While legally not part of the Federal Republic of Germany, as Berlin was under the control of the Allied Control Council, West Berlin aligned itself politically with West Germany and was directly or indirectly represented in its federal institutions.
However, he stayed in power for 14 years.
Daily newspaper reports and visits by school classes to the proceedings revealed to the German public the nature of the concentration camp system and it became evident that the  was of vastly greater dimensions than the German population had believed.
On 4–11 February 1945 leaders from the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union held the Yalta Conference where future arrangements as regards post-war Europe and strategy against Japan in the Pacific were negotiated.
His successor was to be Ludwig Erhard.
With the process of unification in full swing in the summer of 1990, the Germans won a third World Cup, with players that had been capped for East Germany not yet permitted to contribute.
With the reunification of West and East Germany, the Federal Republic of Germany, enlarged now to sixteen states, became known simply as "Germany".
In 1973, West Germany—home to roughly 1.26% of the world's population—featured the world's fourth largest GDP of 944 billion (5.9% of the world total).
Hans-Dietrich Genscher, a leading FDP official, became Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister.
In the early 1960s the rate of economic growth slowed down significantly.
Following national elections in March 1983, Kohl emerged in firm control of both the government and the CDU.
Also, the German constitution prohibited any military action, except in case of an external attack against Germany or its allies ('''').
An alternative candidate was needed and eventually the Minister of Agriculture, Heinrich Lübke took on the task and was duly elected.
Wolfgang Borchert, a former soldier who died young in 1947, is one of the best known representatives of the .
European championships have been won too, in 1972, 1980 and 1996.
Heinrich Böll is considered an observer of the young Federal Republic from the 1950s to the 1970s, and caused some political controversies because of his increasingly critical view on society.
Exemplary for West Germany's literature are – among others – Siegfried Lenz (with ''The German Lesson'') and Günter Grass (with ''The Tin Drum'' and ''The Flounder'').
The West German Constitution ('''', "Basic Law") provided two articles for the unification with other parts of Germany:
In the early 1970s, starting in the East German '''', the initialism "" (FRG) for the "Federal Republic of Germany" began to prevail.
Apart from these factors, hard work and long hours at full capacity among the population and in the late 1950s and 1960s extra labour supplied by thousands of '''' ("guest workers") provided a vital base for the economic upturn.
The Adenauer era (1949–63) was followed by a brief period under Ludwig Erhard (1963–66) who, in turn, was replaced by Kurt Georg Kiesinger (1966–69).
On 1 October 1982 the FDP joined forces with the CDU/CSU to elect CDU Chairman Helmut Kohl as Chancellor in a constructive vote of no confidence.
The West German government was known to be much more decentralised than its state socialist East German counterpart, the former being a federal state and the latter a unitary one.
He announced that he would step down in the Fall of 1963.
Between 1946 and 1949, three of the occupation zones began to merge.
In November 1979 the federal government informed the  that the West German public broadcasters  and  had agreed to refuse to use the initialism.
The RAF was active from 1968, carrying out a succession of terrorist attacks in West Germany during the 1970s.
The last action took place in 1993 and the group announced it was giving up its activities in 1998.
The calling in question of the actions and policies of government led to a new climate of debate.
In October 1982 the SPD–FDP coalition fell apart when the FDP joined forces with the CDU/CSU to elect CDU Chairman Helmut Kohl as Chancellor in a constructive vote of no confidence.
Brandt was a gifted speaker and the growth of the Social Democrats from there on was in no small part due to his personality.
Germany had split into two places in 1945, after the end of World War Two.
At the time, the intention was not to split Germany, only to designate zones of administration.
During the 40 years of separation some divergence occurred in the cultural life of the two parts of the severed nation.
Though the GDR did hold regular elections, these were not free and fair.
For the majority of Germans in present-day Germany who lived in pre-reunification West Germany, there has been minimal change in daily life stemming from German reunification as the reunified country is essentially West Germany incorporating East Germany on a West German base.
The Social Democrats concluded that not only were the Greens unlikely to form a coalition, but also that such a coalition would be far from a majority.
Kiesinger's 1966–69 "Grand Coalition" was between West Germany's two largest parties, the CDU/CSU and the Social Democratic Party (SPD).
Neither condition changed until 1998.
When distinguishing between former West Germany and former East Germany as parts of present-day unified Germany, it has become most common to refer to the '''' (old states) and the '''' (new states), although '''' and '''' are still heard as well.
After a brief recovery, the growth rate slowed again into a recession, with no growth in 1967.
The first chancellor Konrad Adenauer, who remained in office until 1963, had worked for a full alignment with the West rather than neutrality.
A demonstration in the centre was being forcibly dispersed when a bystander named Benno Ohnesorg was shot in the head and killed by a plainclothes policeman.
Demonstrations and protests grew in number, and in 1967 the student Benno Ohnesorg was shot in the head by a policeman.
Finance Minister Helmut Schmidt (SPD) formed a coalition and he served as Chancellor from 1974 to 1982.
East Germany voted to dissolve itself and accede to the Federal Republic in 1990.
* Article 146 provided the possibility for unification of all parts of Germany under a new constitution.
Erhard stepped down in 1966 and was succeeded by Kurt Georg Kiesinger.
Brandt's contributions to world peace led to his nomination for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1971.
Kohl's CDU and its Bavarian sister party, the CSU, slipped from 48.8% of the vote in 1983 to 44.3%.
Chancellor Brandt was forced to resign in May 1974, after Günter Guillaume, a senior member of his staff, was uncovered as a spy for the East German intelligence service, the .
In the 20th century association football became the largest sport in Germany.
The Allies confiscated intellectual privileges of huge value, such as all German patents, both in Germany and abroad, and used them to strengthen their own industrial competitiveness by licensing them to Allied companies.
Although Chancellor for only just over four years, Willy Brandt was one of the most popular politicians in the whole period.
Schmidt, a strong supporter of the European Community (EC) and the Atlantic alliance, emphasized his commitment to "the political unification of Europe in partnership with the USA".
Trucks carrying newspapers were set on fire and windows in office buildings broken.
Under the new arrangements, the Allies stationed troops within West Germany for NATO defense, pursuant to stationing and status-of-forces agreements.
In the 1960s environmentalism and anti-nationalism became fundamental values among left-wing Germans.
This would have implications later on for successive German governments as they tried to assimilate this group of workers.
Several groups set as their objective the aim of radicalising the industrial workers and taking an example from activities in Italy of the Red Brigades (''''), many students went to work in the factories, but with little or no success.
Old and new forms coexisted next to each other, and the American influence, already strong in the 1920s, grew.
After 1961 West Berlin was physically separated from East Berlin as well as from East Germany by the Berlin Wall.
On 31 May 1974 the heads of German federal and state governments recommended to always use the full name in official publications.
Finance Minister Helmut Schmidt (SPD) then formed a government, continuing the SPD–FDP coalition.
The only differences were a larger membership and a different name used by some foreigners.
In the 1990s attacks were still being committed under the name "RAF".
France's Gaullists rejected it on the grounds that it threatened national sovereignty, and when the French National Assembly refused to ratify it (August 1954), the treaty died.
Earlier, the German team was not considered part of the international top.
The FDP members of Adenauer's cabinet resigned from the government, demanding the resignation of Franz Josef Strauss, Defence Minister, who had decidedly overstepped his competence during the crisis.
In July/August 1990 the East German parliament enacted a law for the re-establishment of '''' on the territory of the German Democratic Republic.
From 3 October 1990, after the reformation of the GDR's '''', the East German states joined the Federal Republic.
In 1953 it was decided that Germany was to repay $1.1 billion of the aid it had received.
The proceedings of the War Crimes Tribunal at Nuremberg had been widely publicised in Germany but until a new generation of teachers, educated with the findings of historical studies, could begin to reveal the truth about the war and the crimes committed in the name of the German people.
Schmidt, a strong supporter of the European Community (EC) and the Atlantic alliance, emphasized his commitment to "the political unification of Europe in partnership with the USA".
The student movement began to split into different factions, ranging from the unattached liberals to the Maoists and supporters of direct action in every form—the anarchists.
This changed once East Germany considered West Germans and West Berliners foreigners under its 1968 constitution, where the idea of a single German nation was abandoned.
In 1952 West Germany became part of the European Coal and Steel Community, which would later evolve into the European Union.
The foundation for the influential position held by Germany today was laid during the '''' (economic miracle) of the 1950s when West Germany rose from the enormous destruction wrought by World War II to become the world's third largest economy.
Brandt began a policy of rapprochement with West Germany's eastern neighbours, a policy opposed by the CDU.
From the late 1950s onwards, West Germany had one of the strongest economies in the world, almost as strong as before the Second World War.
At the onset of the Cold War, Germany (and, indeed, Europe) was divided among the Western and Eastern blocs.
Parallel to this, a gay movement began to grow in the larger cities, especially in West Berlin, where homosexuality had been widely accepted during the twenties in the Weimar Republic.
On the non-political level, East Germany was also influenced by the Eastern Bloc's Slavic cultures that manifested in art, culinary scene, and sports.
The most notorious of the underground groups was the "", later known as the Red Army Faction which began by making bank raids to finance their activities and eventually went underground having killed a number of policemen, several bystanders and eventually two prominent West Germans, whom they had taken captive in order to force the release of prisoners sympathetic to their ideas.
They formally joined the Federal Republic on 3 October 1990, raising the number of states from 10 to 16, ending the division of Germany.
This was important for the introduction of new emergency acts—the Grand Coalition gave the ruling parties the two-thirds majority of votes required to see them in.
The FDP's share rose from 7% to 9.1%, its best showing since 1980.
Several thousand demonstrators gathered outside the Opera House where he was to attend a special performance.
The Treaty of Moscow (August 1970), the Treaty of Warsaw (December 1970), the Four Power Agreement on Berlin (September 1971), the Transit Agreement (May 1972), and the Basic Treaty (December 1972) helped to normalise relations between East and West Germany and led to both German states joining the United Nations.
The British, French and U.S. militaries remained in the country, just as the Soviet Army remained in East Germany.
At the same time, new federal states ('''') were formed in the Allied zones, replacing the pre-war states.
A new coalition was formed to deal with this problem.
This made a quick unification possible.
However the affair is widely considered to have been merely a trigger for Brandt's resignation, not a fundamental cause.
In similar fashion, the Soviet Union took over areas of eastern Poland and East Prussia.
Protests against the US intervention in Vietnam, mingled with anger over the vigour with which demonstrations were repressed led to mounting militance among the students at the universities in Berlin.
In January 1987 the Kohl–Genscher government was returned to office, but the FDP and the Greens gained at the expense of the larger parties.
The city of Bonn was its '''' capital city (Berlin was symbolically named the '''' capital city in the West German Basic Law).
Ten days after publication, the offices of '''' in Hamburg were raided by the police and quantities of documents were seized.
was also a widespread colloquial form used in German-speaking countries, usually without political overtones.
During this Cold War era, NATO-aligned West Germany and Warsaw Pact-aligned East Germany were divided by the Inner German border.
The Hallstein Doctrine was relinquished, and West Germany ceased to claim an exclusive mandate for Germany as a whole.
The editor/owner of the magazine, Rudolf Augstein spent some time in jail before the public outcry over the breaking of laws on freedom of the press became too loud to be ignored.
The Germany national football team, established in 1900, continued its tradition based in the Federal Republic of Germany, winning the 1954 FIFA World Cup in a stunning upset dubbed the miracle of Bern.
West Germany became a focus of the Cold War with its juxtaposition to East Germany, a member of the subsequently founded Warsaw Pact.
Also of great significance was the steady growth of a feminist movement in which women demonstrated for equal rights.
(The term "Holocaust" for the systematic mass-murder of Jews first came into use in 1979, when an American mini-series with that name was shown on German television.)
Four days after obtaining the "authority of a sovereign state" in 1955, West Germany joined NATO.
Adenauer was still wounded by his brief run for president, and this episode damaged his reputation even further.
Thus, the present German organisations and teams in football, Olympics and elsewhere are identical to those that had been informally called "West German" before 1991.
The CDU/CSU fell just short of an absolute majority, because of the entry into the Bundestag of the Greens, who received 5.6% of the vote.
The Federal Republic of Germany was established from eleven states formed in the three Allied Zones of occupation held by the United States, the United Kingdom and France (the "Western Zones").
Germany was '''' divided into two countries and two special territories, the Saarland and divided Berlin.
The last repayment was made in June 1971.
The official German reunification ceremony on 3 October 1990 was held at the  building, including Chancellor Helmut Kohl, President Richard von Weizsäcker, former Chancellor Willy Brandt and many others.
All over West Germany, thousands demonstrated against the Springer newspapers which were seen as the prime cause of the violence against students.
'''West Germany''' is the common English name for the '''Federal Republic of Germany''' or '''FRG''' (;  or ''RFD'') in the period between its creation on 23 May 1949 to German reunification on 3 October 1990.
One day later, the parliament of the united Germany would assemble in an act of symbolism in the Reichstag building.
This period is also referred to as the '''Bonn Republic''' (''Bonner Republik'') by historians, alluding to the interwar Weimar Republic and the post-reunification Berlin Republic.
Although movements like '''' exist attempting to celebrate and preserve parts of the GDR culture, since reunification the former East Germany has been converging towards the western part of the country in most parts of daily life.
Protest demonstrations continued, and calls for more active opposition by some groups of students were made, which was declared by the press, especially the tabloid '''' newspaper, as a massive disruption to life in Berlin, in a massive campaign against the protesters.
In 1976 West Germany became one of the founding nations of the Group of Six (G6).
Contrary to popular belief, the Marshall Plan, which was extended to include the newly formed West Germany in 1949, was not the main force behind the ''''.
In 1979 the environmental party, the Greens, reached the 5% limit required to obtain parliamentary seats in the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen provincial election.
After both Olympic Games of 1936 had been held in Germany, Munich was selected to host the 1972 Summer Olympics.
Also, Germans could reject military service on grounds of conscience, and serve for civil purposes instead.
On 5 May 1955 West Germany was declared to have the "authority of a sovereign state".
The conclusion was that there were several weaknesses in the system.
The issue of improving relations with Poland, Czechoslovakia and East Germany made for an increasingly aggressive tone in public debates but it was a huge step forward when Willy Brandt and the Foreign Minister, Walther Scheel (FDP) negotiated agreements with all three countries.
When the G6/G8 was established in 1975, there was no question whether the Federal Republic of Germany would be a member as well.
