It maintained Roman religion, language, and culture, and was far more concerned with fighting the Germanic tribes than other Romans.
Constantine was far more interested in conquering the whole empire.
Meanwhile, another usurper, Constantine (406–411), had stripped Roman Britain of its defenses when he crossed over to Gaul in 407, leaving the Romanized population subject to invasions, first by the Picts and then by the Saxons, Angli, and the Jutes who began to settle permanently from about 440 onwards.
Alaric's men sacked Rome in 410.
As Rome was invaded by Germanic tribes, many assimilated, and by the middle of the medieval period (c.9th and 10th centuries) the central, western, and northern parts of Europe had been largely converted by the Roman Catholicism and acknowledged the Pope as the Vicar of Christ.
The Western Court was periodically abolished and recreated for the next two centuries until final abolition by the Emperor Zeno in 480, by which time there was little effective central control left in the area legally administered by the Western Court.
Controlling the western border of Rome was reasonably easy because it was relatively close and also because of the disunity between the Germanic foes, however, controlling both frontiers altogether during wartime was difficult.
Flavius Orestes was killed by revolting Germanic mercenaries.
Julian was killed in 363 in the Battle of Samarra against the Persian Empire and was succeeded by Jovian, who ruled only until 364.
In a full-blown military campaign, the legions, under generals such as Vespasian, were far more numerous.
On 1 May 305, the two senior Augusti stepped down, and their respective Caesars were promoted to Augusti and appointed two new Caesars, thus creating the Second Tetrarchy.
To ensure a commander's loyalty, a pragmatic emperor might hold some members of the general's family hostage.
The view that the Empire was impossible to govern by one emperor was established by Diocletian following the disastrous civil wars and disintegration of the Crisis of the 3rd century, and was instituted in Roman law by his introduction of the Tetrarchy in AD 285, a form of government which was legally to endure in one form or another for centuries.
His eldest son and heir-apparent, Gallienus, succeeded and took up the fight on the eastern frontier.
Roman numerals continue to be used, but were mostly replaced by Arabic numerals.
The Vandals took advantage of the unrest and sailed up to Rome, which they plundered in 455.
For this reason, provincial governors had de facto rule in the name of the Roman Republic.
He was the third son of Constantine the Great, and second by his second wife Fausta, the daughter of Maximian.
The Vandal fleet became a constant danger to Roman sea trade and the coasts and islands of the western and central Mediterranean.
During the next twenty years, several Western Emperors were installed by Constantinople, but their authority relied upon barbarian commanders (Ricimer (456–472), Gundobad (473–475)).
The Holy Roman Empire continued to regard itself as the successor state of the Western Roman Empire until its downfall in 1806.
Roman Law, particularly the Corpus Juris Civilis collected by order of Justinian I, is the ancient basis on which the modern Civil law stands.
The Western Empire's resources were much limited, and the lack of available manpower forced the government to rely ever more on confederate barbarian troops operating under their own commanders, where the Western Empire would often have difficulties paying.
Starting on 18 March 235, with the assassination of the Emperor Alexander Severus, the Roman Empire sank into a 50-year civil war, known today as the Crisis of the Third Century.
In 475, Orestes, a former secretary of Attila, drove Emperor Julius Nepos out of Ravenna and proclaimed his own son Romulus Augustus as emperor.
In contrast, Common law is based on the Germanic Anglo-Saxon law.
In the confusion that followed, an independent state known as the Gallic Empire emerged.
As the central power weakened, the State gradually lost control of its borders and provinces, as well as control over the Mediterranean Sea.
The Emperor Leo III restored order, but his doctrinal reforms, known as the Iconoclastic Controversy, proved extremely unpopular in the West, and led to the final breakdown in imperial rule over Rome itself.
In the 6th century, the Eastern Roman Empire managed to reconquer large areas of the former Western Roman Empire.
Both were still minors and neither was capable of ruling effectively.
Lastly, a Roman-Moor realm survived in north Africa, resisting Vandal incursions, and becoming a part of the Eastern Roman Empire c.533 when Belisarius defeated the Vandals.
Throughout Late Antiquity and the early Middle Ages, the Eastern Roman Empire, or the Byzantine Empire, laid claims on areas of the West which had been occupied by several tribes.
In many cases the only source of law and civil administration was the local bishop, often himself a former governor like St. Ambrose of Milan and St. Germanus of Auxerre.
Doctrinal issues in the eighth century saw a major breakdown in relations between the Eastern Emperor and the Pope, eventually leading the latter to unilaterally declare the Frankish King Charlemagne to be the true successor of the Western Emperors in 800.
The murder of Julius Nepos in 480 prompted Odoacer to invade Dalmatia, annexing it to his Kingdom of Italy.
News of invasion, revolt, natural disasters, or epidemic outbreak was carried by ship or mounted postal service, often requiring much time to reach Rome and for Rome's orders to be realized in the province of origin.
To this end, Nero effectively held Domitian and Quintus Petillius Cerialis, governor of Ostia, who were respectively the younger son and brother-in-law of Vespasian.
Although isolated pockets of Roman rule continued even after 476, the city of Rome itself was under the rule of the barbarians, and the control of Rome over the West had effectively ended.
While this process was simple in peacetime, it could be considerably more complicated in wartime, as for example in the Great Jewish Revolt.
Minor rebellions and uprisings were fairly common events throughout the Empire.
Meanwhile, pressure from the Visigoths and a rebellion by Bonifacius, the governor of Africa, induced the Vandals under their king Gaiseric to cross over from Spain in 429.
It had its own senate, and a partial list of its consuls still survives.
Although some eastern emperors occasionally attempted to campaign in the West, none were as successful as Justinian.
Remaining as emperor after the death of Stilicho in 408, Honorius reigned until his own death in 423.
Alaric himself tried to establish a long-term territorial and official base, but was never able to do so.
The loss of the African provinces might have been the worse reversal on the West's fortunes, since they were among its wealthiest territories and supplied the essential grain imports to Italy.
Roman Emperors tried to maintain control of the sea, but, once the Vandals conquered North Africa, imperial authorities had to cover too much ground with too few resources.
Aetius was able to stabilize the Western Empire's military situation somewhat, relying heavily on his Hunnic allies.
Upon the defeat of Mark Antony, a victorious Octavian controlled a united Roman Empire.
The Vandal-occupied former Roman territory in North Africa was regained, particularly the territory centered around the city of Carthage.
In 476, Orestes refused to grant Odoacer and the Heruli federated status, prompting an invasion.
They quickly converted to official imperial Christianity, gaining more loyalty from the local Roman populations, as well as the recognition and support of the powerful Bishop of Rome.
The whole region, especially the major cities, had been largely assimilated into Greek culture, Greek often serving as the lingua franca.
In 444, the Huns, who had been employed as Roman allies by Aetius, were united under their ambitious king Attila.
Attila unexpectedly died a year later (453).
Constantius II focused most of his power in the East and is regarded as the first emperor of the Byzantine Empire.
While the East began a slow recovery and consolidation, the West began to collapse entirely.
The title of the Western Roman Emperor was revived when Charlemagne, King of the Franks and Lombards, was crowned as Emperor of the Romans of the West by Pope Leo III in 800.
Byzantine rule continued in Sicily throughout the eighth century, with the island slowly being overrun by the Arabs over the course of the ninth century.
The status of the Holy Roman Emperor as the rightful Western Roman Emperor in the medieval era was further legitimated by the recognition as "co-emperor" from the Eastern Roman Emperor, who was in direct succession to the ancient Roman Emperors.
Theodosius I divided the Empire upon his death (in 395) between his two sons.
The instability caused by usurpers throughout the Western Empire helped these tribes in their conquests, and by the 450s the Germanic tribes had become usurpers themselves.
Prior to the establishment of the Empire, the territories of the Roman Republic had been divided in 43 BC among the members of the Second Triumvirate: Mark Antony, Octavian  and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus.
Although they initially continued to recognize indigenous tribal laws, they were more influenced by Roman Law and gradually incorporated it as well.
The Roman Empire was under the rule of a single Emperor, but, with the death of Constantine in 337, civil war erupted among his three sons, dividing the Empire into three parts.
Both "Western Roman Empire" and "Eastern Roman Empire" (or "Byzantine Empire") are modern terms describing ''de facto'' independent entities; however, at no point did Romans consider the Empire split into two, but rather considered it a single state governed by two separate Imperial courts out of administrative expediency.
The Church slowly began to replace Roman institutions in the West, even helping to negotiate the safety of Rome during the late 5th century.
Augustus had tried to conquer them but ultimately pulled back after the Teutoburg reversal.
Because of a secret deal between Aurelian and Gallic Emperor Tetricus I and his son Tetricus II, the Gallic army was swiftly defeated.
Constantine emerged victorious in 324 after the surrender and murder of Licinius following the Battle of Chrysopolis.
Three rump states continued under Roman rule in some form or another after 476: Julius Nepos controlled Dalmatia until his murder in 480.
In historiography, the '''Western Roman Empire''' consists of the western provinces of the Roman Empire at any one time during which they were administered by a separate independent Imperial court, coequal with (or only nominally subordinate to) that administering the eastern half.
Honorius' death in 423 was followed by turmoil until the Eastern Roman government with the force of arms installed Valentinian III as Western Emperor in Ravenna, with Galla Placidia acting as regent during her son's minority.
The economic power remained focused on Rome and its hyper-rich senatorial aristocracy which dominated much of Italy and Africa in particular.
In 383, a powerful and popular general named Magnus Maximus seized power in the West and forced Gratian's half-brother Valentinian II to flee to the East for aid; in a destructive civil war, the Eastern Emperor Theodosius I restored him to power.
The rise of the bellicose Sassanid dynasty in Parthia posed a major threat to Rome in the east.
This event made a great impression on contemporaries, as this was the first time since the Gallic invasions of the 4th century BC that the city had fallen to a foreign enemy.
These lands had previously been conquered by Alexander the Great; thus, much of the aristocracy was of Greek origin.
In contrast, the Western Empire was more fragmented.
Today, more than 900 million people are native speakers worldwide.
After the civil war in 394 between Theodosius I and Eugenius, the new Western government installed by Theodosius I increasingly had to divert military resources from Britain and the Rhine to protect Italy.
Majorian was the last emperor to campaign in Gaul and Spain in 458-460 before being deposed and murdered by Ricimer.
However, in the reign of Claudius Gothicus (268 to 270), large expanses of the Gallic Empire were restored to Roman rule.
Nevertheless, Marcus Cassianius Latinius Postumus - the local governor of the German provinces&nbsp;— rebelled; his assault on Colonia Agrippina resulted in the deaths of Saloninus and the prefect.
Odoacer accepted this condition and issued coins in the name of Julius Nepos throughout Italy.
If the emperor was near the border in the East, chances were high that an ambitious general would rebel in the West and vice versa.
The rise of Odoacer of the Foederati to rule over Italy in 476 was popularized by eighteenth-century historian Edward Gibbon as a demarcating event for the end of the Western Empire and is sometimes used to mark the transition from Antiquity to the Middle Ages.
Neither half of the Empire could raise forces sufficient even to subdue Alaric's men, and both tried to use Alaric against the other half.
Communications and transportation were especially problematic given the vast extent of the Empire.
A very visible legacy of the Western Roman Empire is the Roman Catholic Church.
In some regions, such as Gaul and Italy, the settlement of barbarians on former Roman lands seems to have caused relatively little disruption.
Finally, eighty-five years later, Emperor Zeno of the Eastern Court recognized the reality of the Western Empire's reduced domain (Imperial control had been lost over even the Italian Peninsula) after the death of Western Emperor Julius Nepos, and proclaimed himself sole emperor of the Roman Empire.
A Western Roman Empire existed intermittently in several periods between the 3rd and 5th centuries, after Diocletian's Tetrarchy and the reunifications associated with Constantine the Great and Julian the Apostate (331/2–363).
Demonstrating the increased danger, Emperor Valerian was captured by Shapur I in 259.
A crisis followed as several claimants attempted to rule the Western half.
In the West, the capitals were Maximian's Mediolanum (now Milan) and Constantius' Trier.
The Parthian Empire, in the East, on the other hand, was too remote and powerful to be conquered.
In the early 5th century the wealthy landowning elite of the Roman Senate largely barred its tenants from military service, but it also refused to approve sufficient funding for maintaining a sufficiently powerful mercenary army to defend the entire Western Empire.
As the Western Roman Empire crumbled, the new Germanic rulers who conquered the provinces upheld many Roman laws and traditions.
Zeno, however, insisted that Odoacer had to pay homage to Julius Nepos as the Emperor of the Western Empire.
Again Theodosius I won, and he briefly ruled a united Empire until his death in 395.
It remained the language of medicine, law, diplomacy (most treaties were written in Latin), of intellectuals and scholarship.
Latin also influenced Germanic languages such as English, German, and Dutch; all surviving Celtic languages, Albanian, and  such Slavic languages as Polish and Czech, and even the non-Indo-European Hungarian.
Aetius was slain in 454 by Valentinian, who was then himself murdered by the dead general's supporters a year later.
Later that century, as Roman power faded away, the Burgundians extended their rule to the Rhone valley.
In 376, the Visigoths, fleeing before the Ostrogoths, who in turn were fleeing before the Huns, were allowed to cross the river Danube and settle into the Balkans by the Eastern government.
In 410, Rome was sacked by Alaric's forces.
For a while, the West remained important, with the Emperor Constans II ruling from Sicily a Roman Empire that still stretched from North Africa to the Caucasus in the 660s, but thereafter imperial attention declined rapidly, with Constantinople itself being besieged in the 670s, renewed war with the Arabs in the 680s, and then a period of chaos between 695 and 717, during which time Africa was finally lost to the Romans once and for all.
The political situation was unstable.
While the predominantly Greek culture of the East and the predominantly Latin culture of the West functioned effectively as an integrated whole, political and military developments would ultimately realign the Empire along those cultural and linguistic lines.
With their help, he defeated the Burgundians, who had occupied part of southern Gaul after 407, and settled them in Savoy as Roman allies (433).
The West was unified in 340 under Constans, who was assassinated in 350 under the order of the usurper Magnentius; after Magnentius lost the Battle of Mursa Major and committed suicide, a complete reunification of the whole Empire occurred in 353, with Constantius II.
In certain cases deals were struck with the leaders of barbaric mercenaries rewarding them with land, which led to the Empire's decline as less land meant there would be less tax revenue to support the military.
The West, less urbanized with a spread-out populace, may have experienced an economic decline throughout the Late Empire in some provinces.
More than in the East, there was also opposition to the Christianizing policy of the Emperors in the western half of the Empire.
Mistreatment caused a full-scale rebellion, and in 378 they inflicted a crippling defeat on the Eastern Roman field army in the Battle of Adrianople, in which Valens also died.
Rufinus and Stilicho were rivals, and their disagreements were exploited by the Gothic leader Alaric I who again rebelled following the death of Theodosius I.
Rome and the Italian peninsula began to experience an economic slowdown as industries and money began to move outward.
In Italy, a few strongholds in Calabria ultimately provided a base for modest imperial expansion, which reached its peak in the early eleventh century, with most of southern Italy under "Roman" rule of a sort.
In exchange, Aurelian spared their lives and gave the two former rebels important positions in Italy.
Following the death of Jovian, Valentinian I emerged as Emperor in 364.
In 361, Constantius II became ill and died, and Constantius Chlorus' grandson Julian, who had served as Constantius II's Caesar, assumed power.
While the Roman Empire featured many distinct cultures, all were often said to experience gradual ''Romanization''.
They temporarily halted in Numidia (435) before moving eastward and capturing Carthage, from where they established an independent state with a powerful navy (439).
This wartime opportunism plagued many ruling emperors and indeed paved the road to power for several future emperors.
This, however, was mainly an empty political gesture, as Odoacer never returned any real power or territories to Julius Nepos.
Honorius was placed under the tutelage of the half-Roman/half-barbarian ''magister militum'' Flavius Stilicho while Rufinus became the power behind the throne in the east.
Its capital was Augusta Treverorum (modern Trier), and it quickly expanded its control over the German and Gaulish provinces and over all of Hispania and Britannia.
As a result, the Eastern Empire could afford large numbers of professional soldiers and augment them with mercenaries, while the Western Roman Empire could not afford this to the same extent.
This system effectively divided the Empire into four major regions and created separate capitals besides Rome as a way to avoid the civil unrest that had marked the 3rd century.
With the end of the Theodosian dynasty, a new period of dynastic struggle ensued.
His reign was filled with usurpations and invasions.
While in principle Theodoric was a subordinate, a viceroy of the Emperor of the East, in fact he was his equal.
The ideal of the Roman Empire as a mighty Christian Empire with a single ruler continued to appeal to many powerful rulers.
The East was not so destitute, especially as Emperors like Constantine the Great and Constantius II had invested heavily in the eastern economy.
This new imperial line would evolve in time into the Holy Roman Empire, which revived the imperial title but was otherwise in no meaningful sense an extension of Roman traditions or institutions.
The campaigns to subdue them were only partly successful, and they officially became semi-independent foederati under their own leaders.
In 272, Emperor Aurelian finally managed to reclaim Palmyra and its territory for the empire.
Turning against their former ally, the Huns became a formidable threat to the Empire.
In 394 the forces of the two halves of the Empire again clashed with great loss of life.
Southern Italy, northern Gaul (except for large towns and cities) to some extent Spain and the Danubian areas may have suffered.
In 392, the Frankish and pagan ''magister militum'' Arbogast assassinated Valentinian II and proclaimed an obscure senator named Eugenius as Emperor.
The system of the Tetrarchy quickly ran aground when the Western Roman Empire's Constantius died unexpectedly in 306, and his son Constantine the Great was proclaimed Augustus of the West by the legions in Britain.
Many of the invading Germanic tribes were already Christianized, although most were followers of Arianism.
At roughly the same time, several eastern provinces seceded under the Palmyrene Empire, under the rule of Queen Zenobia.
Odoacer proclaimed himself ruler of Italy and began to negotiate with Zeno.
Lepidus received the minor province of Africa (roughly modern Tunisia).
The West's most important military area had been northern Gaul and the Rhine frontier in the 4th century, when Trier frequently served as the capital of the Empire and many leading Western generals were Barbarians.
Even in major defeats, the East could, certainly not without difficulties, buy off its enemies with a ransom.
These lands also included Greek and Carthaginian colonies in the coastal areas, though Celtic tribes such as Gauls and Celtiberians were culturally dominant.
The Praetorian Guard, a figurative "sword of Damocles", were often perceived as being of dubious loyalty.
It combined with neighboring Germanic and Celtic languages, giving rise to many modern Romance languages such as Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Romanian and a large number of minor languages and dialects.
With the East secure, his attention was turned to the West, taking the Gallic Empire a year later.
This, in turn, led to further rebellions and civil wars because the Western imperial government was not providing the military protection the northern provinces expected and needed against the barbarians.
Very strong emperors would reunite it under their single rule, but with their death the Roman Empire would be divided again and again between the East and the West.
Latin as a language never really disappeared.
This, however, was undone by further Byzantine civil war, and the slow conquest of the region by the Byzantines' former mercenaries, the Normans, who finally put an end to imperial rule in Western Europe in 1071.
Antony received the provinces in the East: Achaea, Macedonia and Epirus (roughly modern Greece, Albania and the coast of Croatia), Bithynia, Pontus and Asia (roughly modern Turkey), Syria, Cyprus, and Cyrenaica.
The next year, Attila invaded Italy and proceeded to march upon Rome, but an outbreak of disease in his army, Pope Leo's plea for peace, and reports of a campaign of Marcianus directed at his headquarters in Pannonia induced him to halt this campaign.
The rule of Nero ended only with the revolt of the Praetorian Guard, who had been bribed in the name of Galba.
The last hope for a reunited Empire came in 493, as Odoacer was replaced by Theodoric the Great, king of the Ostrogoths.
Under his rule, the city of Byzantium - only recently re-founded as Constantinople - was fully developed as a capital.
After 600, events conspired to drive the Western provinces out of Constantinople's control, with imperial attention focused on the pressing issues of war with Sasanian Iran and then the rise of Arab power.
As the Roman Republic expanded, it reached a point where the central government in Rome could not effectively rule the distant provinces.
Under Alaric's successors, the Goths then settled in Gaul (412–418), from where they operated as Roman allies against the Vandals, Alans, and Suevi in Spain, and against the usurper Jovinus (413).
Following their example, the legions at the borders increased participation in the civil wars.
Theodoric had been forced to appear subservient to Zeno in order to deal with a dangerous Odoacer.
Stilicho tried to defend Italy and bring the invading Goths under control, but to do so he stripped the Rhine frontier of troops and the Vandals, Alans, and Suevi invaded Gaul in large numbers.
Economic problems increased in strength and frequency.
Gallienus' son, Saloninus, and the Praetorian Prefect Silvanus were residing in Colonia Agrippina (modern Cologne) to solidify the loyalty of the local legions.
In many places, the Roman institutions collapsed along with the economic stability.
Attila then received a plea for help and the ring of Honoria, the Emperor's sister.
Stability was not achieved for long in either half, as the conflicts with outside forces (tribes) intensified.
Only three years after Justinian had died, the Lombards had invaded Italy, but the wealthiest parts of the province remained securely in Roman hands throughout the seventh century.
From the 460s onwards, imperial control was effectively restricted to Italy and southern Gaul as the remaining Western provinces refused to accept Ricimer's appointment of Libius Severus in 461.
The political, economic and military control of the Eastern Empire's resources remained safe in Constantinople, which was well fortified and located at the crossroads of several major trade and military routes.
Minor territories were taken as far west as the southern coast of the Iberian Peninsula.
The main enemy in the West was arguably the Germanic tribes behind the rivers Rhine and Danube.
After a violent struggle with several rivals, and against Placidia's wish, Aetius rose to the rank of ''magister militum''.
He was the last Emperor to rule both parts of the Roman Empire; his older son Arcadius inherited the eastern half while the younger Honorius got the western half.
While the East would make some attempts to recapture the West, the Roman Empire was never reunited.
By the beginning of the 2nd century AD, the economic stagnation of Italia was seen in the provincial-born Emperors, such as Trajan and Hadrian.
The campaign eventually moved into Italy and the Byzantines reconquered it completely.
Octavian obtained the Roman provinces of the West: Italia (modern Italy), Gaul (modern France), Gallia Belgica (parts of modern Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg), and Hispania (modern Spain and Portugal).
In the East, the capitals were Sirmium and Nicomedia.
In 308, the Augustus of the East, Galerius, arranged a conference at Carnuntum which revived the Tetrarchy by dividing the West between Constantine and a newcomer named Licinius.
The French King Louis XIV, as well as French Emperor Napoleon I, and the Italian Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, among others, also tried to resurrect the Empire, albeit unsuccessfully.
Orestes was killed and Odoacer deposed Romulus Augustus, installed himself as ruler over Italy and sent the Imperial insignia to Constantinople.
Under Diocletian, the political division of the Roman Empire began.
After Gallienus banned senators from army commands in the mid-3rd century, the senatorial elite lost all experience of—and interest in—military life.
Constantius was born in 317 at Sirmium, Pannonia.
Its capital was transferred to Ravenna in 402 largely for defensive reasons, and it had easy access to the imperial fleet of the Eastern Empire but was isolated in other aspects as it was surrounded by swamps and marshes.
Their chieftain, Odoacer, assumed control of Italy as a de jure representative of Julius Nepos and Eastern Roman Emperor Zeno.
Octavian soon took Africa from Lepidus, while adding Sicilia (modern Sicily) to his holdings.
In 285, he promoted Maximian to the rank of Augustus (Emperor) and gave him control of the Western regions of the Empire.
Constantius was made Caesar by his father on 13 November 324.
In 379, Valentinian I's son and successor Gratian declined to wear the mantle of Pontifex Maximus, and in 382 he rescinded the rights of pagan priests and removed the Altar of Victory from the Roman Curia, a decision which caused dissatisfaction among the traditionally pagan aristocracy of Rome.
Following Theodoric's death in 526, the Western half of the Empire was now fully controlled by Germanic tribes (though many of them continued to recognize Roman law and made claims to continuity), while the Eastern half had established itself under the Justinian dynasty.
In 293, Galerius and Constantius Chlorus were appointed as their subordinates (Caesars), creating the First Tetrarchy.
