In contrast, the whaling industry, with the moratorium in place, generates US$31 million (UK£20 million) per year.
They have a pair of blowholes side-by-side and lack teeth, which renders them incapable of catching larger prey; they instead have baleen plates which is a sieve-like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin, which it uses to filter plankton and other food from the water; this forces them to follow krill or plankton migrations.
This distinction is being questioned as these aboriginal groups are using more modern weaponry and mechanized transport to hunt with, and are selling whale products in the marketplace.
The two parvorders of whales, baleen whales (Mysticeti) and toothed whales (Odontoceti), are thought to have split apart around 34 million years ago.
Odontocetes, as a whole, mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, and then followed by crustaceans and bivalves.
Upon striking an object in the water, the sound waves bounce back at the whale.
Walt Disney's film ''Pinocchio'' features a giant whale named Monstro as the final antagonist.
These animals, along with the cetotheriids, rely on their throat pleats to gulp large amounts of water while feeding.
By 1853, U.S. profits turned to US$11,000,000 (UK£6.5m), equivalent to US$348,000,000 (UK£230m) today, the most profitable year for the American whaling industry.
These animals rely on their well-developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water; they swim by moving their fore-flippers and tail fin up and down.
People from Norway started hunting whales around 2000 B.C., and people from Japan began hunting whales in the Pacific at least as early.
Overall, they tend to dwarf other cetartiodactyls; the blue whale is the largest creature on earth.
Whale watching lobbyists are concerned that the most inquisitive whales, which approach boats closely and provide much of the entertainment on whale-watching trips, will be the first to be taken if whaling is resumed in the same areas.
Captive whales have occasionally been known to mimic human speech.
Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers; for example, Grey whales may be as numerous as they were prior to harvesting, but the North Atlantic population is functionally extinct.
Whales continue to be prevalent in modern literature.
Whale watching generated US$2.1 billion (UK£1.4 billion) per annum in tourism revenue worldwide, employing around 13,000 workers.
Environmentalists speculate that advanced naval sonar endangers some whales.
The success of belugas turned attention to maintaining their relative, the narwhal, in captivity.
Whales swim by moving their tail fin and lower body up and down, propelling themselves through vertical movement, while their flippers are mainly used for steering.
This adaptation allows the chest to compress during deep dives as opposed to resisting the force of water pressure.
in South Korea, had a very high dependency on whales.
Iceland, Japan and Norway have both whaling and whale watching industries.
Polar bear attacks on belugas and narwhals are usually successful in winter, but rarely inflict any damage in summer.
In Inuit creation myths, when 'Big Raven', a deity in human form, found a stranded whale, he was told by the Great Spirit where to find special mushrooms that would give him the strength to drag the whale back to the sea and thus, return order to the world.
18th and 19th century whalers hunted down whales mainly for their oil, which was used as lamp fuel and a lubricant, baleen or whalebone, which was used for items such as corsets and skirt hoops, and ambergris, which was used as a fixative for perfumes.
Some show particular detail in which there are throat pleats, typical of rorquals.
Whales are known to teach, learn, cooperate, scheme, and grieve.
With streamlined fusiform bodies and two limbs that are modified into flippers, whales can travel at up to 20 knots, though they are not as flexible or agile as seals.
Rules and codes of conduct have been created to minimize harassment of the whales.
Whale vocalization is likely to serve several purposes.
They have blowholes (modified nostrils) located on top of their heads, through which air is taken in and expelled in the form of vapour.
The sperm whale is the largest toothed predator on earth.
The IWC has designated two whale sanctuaries: the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary, and the Indian Ocean Whale Sanctuary.
Whaling was at that time a sizeable European industry with ships from Britain, France, Spain, Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany, sometimes collaborating to hunt whales in the Arctic, sometimes in competition leading even to war.
Initially, moving organisms such as sharks and hagfish, scavenge the soft tissues at a rapid rate over a period of months, and as long as two years.
Whales are creatures of the open ocean; they feed, mate, give birth, suckle and raise their young at sea.
Some whales, such as the humpback, reside in the polar regions where they feed on a reliable source of schooling fish and krill.
They are bottom feeders, mainly eating crustaceans and benthic invertebrates.
Whales have also played a role in sacred texts such as the Bible.
Mysticetes have two blowholes, whereas Odontocetes contain only one.
This is an efficient method of hunting, in which the whale has no major competitors.
Only in larger whales, where the cementum is worn away on the tip of the tooth, does enamel show.
As of 2015, aboriginal communities are allowed to take 280 bowhead whales off of Alaska and two from the western coast of Greenland, 620 gray whales off of Washington state, three common minke whales off of the eastern coast of Greenland and 178 on their western coast, 10 fin whales from the west coast of Greenland, nine humpback whales from the west coast of Greenland and 20 off of St. Vincent and the Grenadines each year.
For most of the 20th century, Canada was the predominant source of wild belugas.
The differences between families of odontocetes include size, feeding adaptations and distribution.
The North Atlantic right whales nearly became extinct in the twentieth century, with a population low of 450, and the North Pacific gray whale population is ranked Critically Endangered by the IUCN.
Another, unsuccessful, attempt was made by the U.S.  One stranded humpback whale calf was kept in captivity for rehabilitation, but died days later.
Larger whales are also thought, to some degree, to engage in play.
The Old Testament contains the Book of Jonah and in the New Testament, Jesus mentions this story in Matthew 12:40.
Between 1960 and 1992, the Navy carried out a program that included the study of marine mammals' abilities with sonar, with the objective of improving the detection of underwater objects.
The Pacific Islanders and Australian Aborigines viewed whales as bringers of good and joy.
The term "whale" is sometimes used interchangeably with dolphins and porpoises, acting as a synonym for Cetacea.
Balaenids have heads that can make up 40% of their body mass to take in water.
Brain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal.
An estimated 13 million people went whale watching globally in 2008, in all oceans except the Arctic.
Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end, but do not form a rigid rib cage.
Whales can also be threatened by humans more indirectly.
Commercial whaling was historically important as an industry well throughout the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries.
Since then, yearly profits for these "subsistence" hunters have been close to US$31 million (UK£20m) per year.
Comparison of a particular animal's brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an encephalisation quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence.
There were three attempts to keep minke whales in captivity in Japan.
Whales split into two separate parvorders around 34 mya - the baleen whales (Mysticetes) and the toothed whales (Odontocetes).
Niki Caro's film the ''Whale Rider'' has a Māori girl ride a whale in her journey to be a suitable heir to the chieftain-ship.
Mothers of some species fast and nurse their young for a relatively long period of time.
Before going on long dives, many whales exhibit a behaviour known as sounding; they  stay close to the surface for a series of short, shallow dives while building their oxygen reserves, and then make a sounding dive.
As of 2006, 30 belugas were in Canada and 28 in the United States, and 42 deaths in captivity had been reported up to that time.
Belugas were the first whales to be kept in captivity.
Whales are adapted for diving to great depths.
As well as this, the eyes of a whale are placed on the sides of its head, so their vision consists of two fields, rather than a binocular view like humans have.
Other species were too rare, too shy, or too big.
This nitrogen input in the Gulf of Maine is "more than the input of all rivers combined" emptying into the gulf, some  each year.
Odontocetes are known as toothed whales; they have teeth and only one blowhole.
Six are considered at risk, as they are ranked Critically Endangered (the North Atlantic right whale), "Endangered" (blue whale, fin whale, North Pacific right whale, and sei whale), and "Vulnerable" (sperm whale).
They also have fundic and pyloric chambers.
Whales have two flippers on the front, and a tail fin.
This allows them to take in large amounts of water into their mouths, letting them feed more effectively.
In humans, the middle ear works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air's low impedance and the cochlear fluid's high impedance.
Unlike human teeth, which are composed mostly of enamel on the portion of the tooth outside of the gum, whale teeth have cementum outside the gum.
Balaenids are the right whales.
'''Whale''' is the common name for a widely distributed and diverse group of fully aquatic placental marine mammals.
All whales have a thick layer of blubber.
The meat, blubber and baleen of whales have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic.
Instead of sound passing through the outer ear to the middle ear, whales receive sound through the throat, from which it passes through a low-impedance fat-filled cavity to the inner ear.
This mode of reproduction produces few offspring, but increases the survival probability of each one.
Other archaic English forms include ''wal, wale, whal, whalle, whaille, wheal'', etc.
Females, referred to as "cows", carry the responsibility of childcare as males, referred to as "bulls", play no part in raising calves.
Examples include the blue whale, which eats almost exclusively krill, the minke whale, which eats mainly schooling fish, the sperm whale, which specialize on squid, and the gray whale which feed on bottom-dwelling invertebrates.
Flipper movement is continuous.
It can constitute as much as 50% of a whales body weight.
The word "whale" comes from the Old English ''whæl'', related to the High German ''wal''.
Whale spindle neurons are found in areas of the brain that are homologous to where they are found in humans, suggesting that they perform a similar function.
Whales are also known to produce bubble-nets for the purpose of foraging.
Whales are also affected by marine pollution.
The "sea monsters" in Lamentations 4:3 have been taken by some to refer to marine mammals, in particular whales, although most modern versions use the word "jackals" instead.
Humpback whales, among others, are also known to display this behaviour.
One exception is with the sperm whale, which has males larger than the females.
Whales emit two distinct kinds of acoustic signals, which are called whistles and clicks:
When large amounts of prey are available, whales such as certain mysticetes hunt cooperatively in small groups.
Around 40 mya, a common ancestor between the two branched off into cetacea and anthracotheres; nearly all anthracotheres became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene 2.5 mya, eventually leaving only one surviving lineage - the hippo.
Clicks are quick broadband burst pulses, used for sonar, although some lower-frequency broadband vocalizations may serve a non-echolocative purpose such as communication; for example, the pulsed calls of belugas.
As marine creatures that reside in either the depths or the poles, humans knew very little about whales over the course of history; many feared or revered them.
A pair of pygmy right whales were retained in an enclosed area (with nets); they were eventually released in South Africa.
Eschrichtiids have one living member: the gray whale.
This blubber can help with buoyancy (which is helpful for a 100-ton whale), protection to some extent as predators would have a hard time getting through a thick layer of fat, and energy for fasting when migrating to the equator; the primary usage for blubber is insulation from the harsh climate.
As such they must breathe air regularly, though they can remain submerged for long periods.
Six species of dolphins have the word "whale" in their name, collectively known as blackfish: the killer whale, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins).
All toothed whales are opportunistic, meaning they will eat anything they can fit in their throat because they are unable to chew.
The Inuit hunted whales in the Arctic Ocean.
The whales comprise eight extant families: Balaenopteridae (the rorquals), Balaenidae (right whales), Cetotheriidae (the pygmy right whale), Eschrichtiidae (the gray whale), Monodontidae (belugas and narwhals), Physeteridae (the sperm whale), Kogiidae (the dwarf and pygmy sperm whale), and Ziphiidae (the beaked whales).
These animals rely on their well-developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water; they swim by moving their fore-flippers and tail fin up and down.
The first beluga was shown at Barnum's Museum in New York City in 1861.
This functions as an upward biological pump, reversing an earlier presumption that whales accelerate the loss of nutrients to the bottom.
Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world.
Unlike most animals, whales are conscious breathers.
Baleen whales have no teeth; instead they have plates of baleen, a fringe-like structure used to expel water while retaining the krill and plankton which they feed on.
Most mysticetes reside at the poles.
All mammals sleep, but whales cannot afford to become unconscious for long because they may drown.
Females deliver a single calf with gestation lasting about a year, dependency until one to two years, and maturity around seven to ten years, all varying between the species.
The hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus are the whale's closest terrestrial living relatives.
The story of Jonah being swallowed by a great fish is told both in the Qur'an and in the Bible.
To subdue and kill whales, orcas continuously ram them with their heads; this can sometimes kill bowhead whales, or severely injure them.
Several species have female-biased sexual dimorphism, with the females being larger than the males.
So, to prevent the unborn calf from dying of frostbite, they migrate to calving/mating grounds.
Whales, dolphins and porpoises belong to the order Cetartiodactyla with even-toed ungulates and their closest living relatives are the hippopotamuses, having diverged about 40 million years ago.
They can also be poisoned by swallowing litter, such as plastic bags.
Most captive belugas are caught in the wild, since captive-breeding programs are not very successful.
Whistles are narrow-band frequency modulated (FM) signals, used for communicative purposes, such as contact calls.
They have no dorsal fin to prevent collision with pack ice.
The whale eye is relatively small for its size, yet they do retain a good degree of eyesight.
In Vietnam and Ghana, among other places, whales hold a sense of divinity.
Species commonly entangled include beaked whales.
Their skeletal anatomy allows them to be fast swimmers.
Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of recent and ongoing climate change, particularly the time when pack ice forms and melts.
Russia has become the largest provider since it had been banned in Canada.
Sperm whales have the largest brain mass of any animal on earth, averaging  and  in mature males, in comparison to the average human brain which averages  in mature males.
There were three attempts to keep gray whales in captivity.
Some anthropologists argue that the term "subsistence" should also apply to these cash-based exchanges as long as they take place within local production and consumption.
The fusing of the neck vertebrae, while increasing stability when swimming at high speeds, decreases flexibility; whales are unable to turn their heads.
They both reside in the frigid arctic and both have large amounts of blubber.
Since most of the brain is used for maintaining bodily functions, greater ratios of brain to body mass may increase the amount of brain mass available for more complex cognitive tasks.
There are six species, sometimes referred to as "blackfish", that are dolphins commonly misconceived as whales: the killer whale, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins).
Since they are unable to go onto land to calve, they deliver the baby with the  fetus positioned for tail-first delivery.
It was thought that Sowerby's beaked whale evolved to swim fast in a straight line, and a  was not big enough.
In water, a whale can see around  ahead of itself, but, of course, they have a smaller range above water.
One exception is French Polynesia, where in many parts, cetaceans are met with great brutality.
Their features became adapted for living in the marine environment.
Whales are fast swimmers in comparison to seals, which typically cruise at 5–15 kn, or ; the fin whale, in comparison, can travel at speeds up to  and the sperm whale can reach speeds of .
They use a suction technique, aided by a pair of grooves on the underside of their head, not unlike the throat pleats on the rorquals, to feed.
Calves are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear all the responsibility for raising them.
In 1946, the IWC placed a moratorium, limiting the annual whale catch.
The IWC is a voluntary organization, with no treaty.
All species are generalist and opportunistic feeders.
In 1585, Alessandro Farnese, 1585, and Francois, Duke of Anjou, 1582, were greeted on his ceremonial entry into the port city of Antwerp by floats including "Neptune and the Whale", indicating at least the city's dependence on the sea for its wealth.
Balaenopterids consist of two genera and eight species.
They rely on their well-developed sonar to find their way in the water.
Once relentlessly hunted for their products, whales are now protected by international law.
The elaborate baleen "teeth" of filter-feeding species, mysticetes, allow them to remove water before they swallow their planktonic food by using the teeth as a sieve.
Some species, such as sperm whales, are well adapted for diving to great depths to catch squid and other favoured prey.
National and international authorities have given special treatment to aboriginal hunters since their methods of hunting are seen as less destructive and wasteful.
Whales do, however, lack short wavelength sensitive visual pigments in their cone cells indicating a more limited capacity for  colour vision than most mammals.
They are so respected in their cultures that they occasionally hold funerals for beached whales, a throwback to Vietnam's ancient sea-based Austro-Asiatic culture.
They feed by turning on their sides and taking in water mixed with sediment, which is then expelled through the baleen, leaving their prey trapped inside.
In whales, and other marine mammals, there is no great difference between the outer and inner environments.
Current whaling nations are Norway, Iceland, and Japan, despite their joining to the IWC, as well as the aboriginal communities of Siberia, Alaska, and northern Canada.
The whale faeces are liquid and instead of sinking, they stay at the surface where phytoplankton feed off it.
Petroglyphs off a cliff face in Bangudae, South Korea show 300 depictions of various animals, a third of which are whales.
Rudyard Kipling's ''Just So Stories'' includes the story of "How the Whale got in his Throat".
Belugas, being white, hunt in large pods near the surface and around pack ice, their coloration acting as camouflage.
High levels of organic chemicals accumulate in these animals since they are high in the food chain.
Most will travel from the Arctic or Antarctic into the tropics to mate, calve, and raise during the winter and spring; they will migrate back to the poles in the warmer summer months so the calf can continue growing while the mother can continue eating, as they fast in the breeding grounds.
Scientists have suggested this indicates a strong desire on behalf of the whales to communicate with humans, as whales have a very different vocal mechanism, so imitating human speech likely takes considerable effort.
Lactating mothers can pass the toxins on to their young.
The beluga's popularity is due to its unique colour and its facial expressions.
Allometric analysis indicates that mammalian brain size scales at approximately the ⅔ or ¾ exponent of the body mass.
Conversely, the North Atlantic right whale was extirpated from much of its former range, which stretched across the North Atlantic, and only remains in small fragments along the coast of Canada, Greenland, and is considered functionally extinct along the European coastline.
Whales defecate at the ocean's surface; their excrement is important for fisheries because it is rich in iron and nitrogen.
Narwhals, being black, hunt in large pods in the aphotic zone, but their underbelly still remains white to remain camouflaged when something is looking directly up or down at them.
The scale of whale harvesting decreased substantially after 1982 when the International Whaling Commission (IWC) placed a moratorium which set a catch limit for each country, excluding aboriginal groups until 2004.
The whale ear is acoustically isolated from the skull by air-filled sinus pockets, which allow for greater directional hearing underwater.
Cetaceans and artiodactyls now are classified under the order Cetartiodactyla, often still referred to as Artiodactyla, which includes both whales and hippopotamuses.
Whales range in size from the  and  dwarf sperm whale to the  and  blue whale, which is the largest creature that has ever lived.
Small whales are known to engage in complex play behaviour, which includes such things as producing stable underwater toroidal air-core vortex rings or "bubble rings".
Pulses in a click train are emitted at intervals of ~35–50 milliseconds, and in general these inter-click intervals are slightly greater than the round-trip time of sound to the target.
The polar bear is well adapted for hunting Arctic whales and calves.
Some scientists suggest that sonar may trigger whale beachings, and they point to signs that such whales have experienced decompression sickness.
Mysticetes have large whalebone, as opposed to teeth, made of keratin.
The throat pleats extend from the mouth to the navel and allow the mouth to expand to a large volume for more efficient capture of the small animals they feed on.
Most whales have slightly flattened eyeballs, enlarged pupils (which shrink as they surface to prevent damage), slightly flattened corneas and a  tapetum lucidum; these adaptations allow for large amounts of light to pass through the eye and, therefore, a very clear image of the surrounding area.
The Nords and various arctic tribes revered the whale as they were important pieces of their lives.
Primitive cetaceans, or archaeocetes, first took to the sea approximately 49 million years ago and became fully aquatic 5–10 million years later.
When swimming, whales rely on their tail fin propel them through the water.
When out at sea, whales dive out of the reach of surface-hunting orcas.
However, in repeated attempts in the 1960s and 1970s, all narwhals kept in captivity died within months.
In an Icelandic legend, a man threw a stone at a fin whale and hit the blowhole, causing the whale to burst.
Until then, the calves will feed on the mother's fatty milk.
These sounds may be extremely loud, depending on the species.
When belugas surface, their lens and cornea correct the nearsightedness that results from the refraction of light; they contain both rod and cone cells, meaning they can see in both dim and bright light, but they have far more rod cells than they do cone cells.
The olfactory lobes are absent in toothed whales, suggesting that they have no sense of smell.
This prevents the baby from drowning either upon or during delivery.
